


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

GP and others (South Korean citizenship) North Korea CG  [2014]  UKUT  00391
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 8 April and 2 July 2013                    |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


                                   Between


                                     gp
                                     JJ
                                     JP
                                     MP

                           [ANONYMITY ORDERS MADE]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For Appellants GP, JJ and JP:     Miss C Hulse, instructed by Duncan
Moghal, solicitors
For Appellant MP:                 Mr M Karnik, instructed by Jackson &
Canter, solicitors
For the Respondent:               Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
      (1)    The  Upper  Tribunal's  country  guidance  in  KK  and   others
      (Nationality: North Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC) stands,  with
      the exception of paragraphs 2(d) and 2(e) thereof.    Paragraphs  (2),
      (3) and (4) of this guidance replace that given in paragraphs 2(d) and
      2(e) respectively of KK.


      (2)   South Korean law makes limited provision  for  dual  nationality
      under the Overseas Koreans Act and the Nationality Act (as amended).


      (3)   All North Korean citizens are  also  citizens  of  South  Korea.
      While absence from the Korean Peninsula for more  than  10  years  may
      entail fuller enquiries as to whether a person  has  acquired  another
      nationality or right of residence before a travel document is  issued,
      upon return to South Korea all persons from the Korean  Peninsula  are
      treated as returning South Korean citizens.


      (4)   There is no evidence that North Koreans returned to South  Korea
      are sent back to North Korea or anywhere else, even if they  fail  the
      'protection' procedure, and however long they have  been  outside  the
      Korean Peninsula.


      (5)   The process of returning North Koreans to South Korea is now set
      out in the  United  Kingdom-South  Korea  Readmission  Agreement  (the
      Readmission Agreement) entered into between the two  countries  on  10
      December 2011.  At present, the issue of  emergency  travel  documents
      under  the  Readmission  Agreement  is  confined  to  those  for  whom
      documents and/or fingerprint evidence establish that they are  already
      known to South Korea as citizens, or who have registered as such  with
      the South Korean Embassy in the United Kingdom.


      (6)   Applying MA  (Ethiopia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2009] EWCA Civ  289,  North  Koreans  outside  the  Korean
      Peninsula who object to return to South Korea must cooperate with  the
      United Kingdom authorities in seeking to establish  whether  they  can
      avail themselves of the protection of another country,  in  particular
      South Korea. Unless they can demonstrate that in all of the  countries
      where they are entitled to citizenship they have a  well-founded  fear
      of persecution for a Refugee Convention reason, they are not refugees.




      (7)   If they are not refugees, it remains open  to  such  persons  to
      seek to establish individual factors creating a risk for them in South
      Korea  which  would  engage   the   United   Kingdom's   international
      obligations under the EU Qualification Directive or the ECHR.


      (8)   There is no risk of refoulement of any  North  Korean  to  North
      Korea from South Korea, whether directly or  via  China.  South  Korea
      does not return anyone to North Korea at all and it  does  not  return
      North Koreans to China.  In a small number of cases, Chinese nationals
      have been returned to China.  A small number of persons identified  by
      the South Korean authorities as North Korean intelligence agents  have
      been prosecuted in South Korea.  There is no evidence that  they  were
      subsequently required to leave South Korea.


      (9)   Once the 'protection' procedure has been completed, North Korean
      migrants have the same rights as other South Korean citizens save that
      they are not required to perform military  service  for  South  Korea.
      They  have  access  to  resettlement  assistance,  including  housing,
      training and financial assistance.   Former  North  Koreans  may  have
      difficulty  in  adjusting  to  South  Korea  and  there  may  be  some
      discrimination in social integration, employment and housing, but  not
      at a level which requires international protection.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. In this  appeal,  the  appellants,  who  are  all  citizens  of  the
       Democratic People's Republic of Korea, whom the respondent considers
       also to be citizens of the Republic of  Korea,  appeal  against  the
       First-tier  Tribunal's  dismissal  of  their  appeals  against   the
       respondent's setting of removal directions to South Korea  following
       her refusal to grant them refugee status, humanitarian protection or
       leave to remain on human rights grounds.  In this decision, we refer
       to the Republic of Korea as South Korea and the Democratic  People's
       Republic of Korea as North Korea.

    2. The respondent accepts that if North Korea is the  appellants'  only
       citizenship, they are refugees and cannot be removed from the United
       Kingdom.  She relies on their entitlement to the protection of South
       Korean citizenship.

    3. In the case of MP, the respondent's removal directions were  set  in
       the  alternative  to  either  North  Korea  or  South  Korea.    The
       respondent accepted at the hearing that none of the  appellants  can
       be returned to North Korea and it is clear from the  refusal  letter
       accompanying her removal directions that she  did  not  then  intend
       removal to North Korea.  We approach these appeals on the basis that
       the only country to which removal is contemplated, for  all  of  the
       appellants, is South Korea.

    The appellants

    4. The appellants in these proceedings all entered the  United  Kingdom
       unlawfully from China and have been here for  less  than  10  years.
       The husband and wife  in  the  GP  family  arrived  together  on  11
       November 2007, and  have  had  two  children  while  in  the  United
       Kingdom. The citizenship of those children is determined by that  of
       their parents: they are not British citizens. MP, an unmarried  man,
       arrived on 21 October 2008.

    5. All the appellants challenge decisions  by  the  respondent  to  set
       removal directions to  South  Korea  on  the  basis  that  they  are
       citizens of that country.   None of them has  approached  the  South
       Korean authorities in the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to  establish
       whether they would in fact be admitted to South  Korea,  or  whether
       South  Korea  recognises  them  as  its  citizens.    However,   the
       respondent has established that MP's fingerprints are on  the  South
       Korean database.

    6. The first three appellants are members of the same  family  and  are
       referred to in this decision as 'GP' or 'the GP family'  unless  the
       context requires consideration of the  individual  members  of  that
       family; the fourth appellant, MP,  has  no  dependants.    They  all
       originally came from North Korea and assert that they have not lived
       in South Korea. The material facts in each appeal are as follows:

             1)  GP and JP grew up in North Korea and  their  North  Korean
                origin is not disputed.  They left North  Korea  for  China
                together for the first time in 2004,  but  were  unable  to
                find work in China: they returned to North Korea after less
                than a month. They were arrested on return, and  were  both
                detained and beaten by the North Korean authorities.   When
                the husband developed diarrhoea and 'bad lungs', they  were
                released from detention  and  given  a  show  trial,  which
                caused them to be shunned and abused in public.  They  then
                left North Korea for a second time,  again  via  the  Tuman
                River:  the  husband  had  been   diagnosed   with   spinal
                tuberculosis.  Their journey to the United Kingdom was paid
                for by their church pastor, in return for  free  work  done
                for him by the husband.   GP  and  JP  entered  the  United
                Kingdom on false passports in November 2007.  They now have
                two children, the third  appellant  who  was  born  in  the
                United Kingdom in 2008, and a  younger  daughter,  born  in
                2010.  The respondent proposes to remove the GP  family  to
                South Korea.  She has never suggested that she would remove
                them to North Korea, where she accepts that they  would  be
                at risk of persecution or serious harm, or to China,  where
                there is a risk of refoulement.

             2) MP left North Korea illegally to  go  to  China,  in  2006,
                travelling with his mother, who now lives in  South  Korea.
                MP came to the United Kingdom in 2008,  travelling  with  a
                South Korean pastor on a false South Korean  passport.   It
                is the respondent's case that MP is already  a  citizen  of
                South Korea and that he is not at risk  of  persecution  or
                serious harm if returned  there.    His  fingerprints  have
                been found on the South Korean database and his account  of
                having given them at Shenyang  South  Korean  Consulate  in
                China in 2006 as part of an unsuccessful attempt  to  apply
                for  a  South  Korean  visa  there  was  rejected  by   the
                respondent.

                On  8  September  2011,  the  respondent   served   removal
                directions in which she stated that she proposed to  remove
                him  either  to  North  Korea  or  South  Korea.   In   the
                accompanying letter of  refusal,  the  respondent  accepted
                that he has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  in  North
                Korea following his illegal exit  and  cannot  be  returned
                there.  There therefore is not, and in practice  never  has
                been, any intention on the part of the respondent to return
                him to North Korea.

    Existing country guidance

    7. The Upper Tribunal last gave country guidance in relation  to  South
       Korea and North Korean migrants in KK and others (Nationality: North
       Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC), which was promulgated in March
       2011, as follows:

           "1. Law
           (a) For the purposes of determining whether a person is "of"  or
           "has" a nationality within the meaning of Article 1A(2)  of  the
           Refugee Convention, it  is  convenient  to  distinguish  between
           cases where a person (i) is (already) of that nationality;  (ii)
           is not of that nationality but is entitled to  acquire  it;  and
           (iii) is not of that nationality but may be able to acquire it.
           (b) Cases within (i) and (ii) are cases where the person is "of"
           or "has" the nationality in question;  cases  within  (iii)  are
           not.
           (c)  For  these  purposes  there  is  no  separate  concept   of
           "effective"  nationality;  the  issue  is  the  availability  of
           protection in the country in question.
           (d) Nationality of any State is a matter for that  State's  law,
           constitution and (to a limited extent) practice, proof of any of
           which is by evidence, the assessment of which is for  the  court
           deciding the protection claim.
           (e) As eligibility for Refugee Convention protection  is  not  a
           matter of choice, evidence going to  a  person's  status  within
           cases (i) and (ii) has  to  be  on  "best  efforts"  basis,  and
           evidence of the attitude of the State in question  to  a  person
           who seeks reasons for not being removed to that State may be  of
           very limited relevance.
           2. Korea
           (a) The law and the constitution of South  Korea  (ROK)  do  not
           recognise North Korea (DPRK) as a separate State.
           (b) Under South Korean law, most nationals of  North  Korea  are
           nationals of South Korea as  well,  because  they  acquire  that
           nationality at birth by descent from a  (North)  Korean  parent,
           and fall therefore within category (i) in 1(a) above.
           (c) South Korea will make rigorous enquiries to ensure that only
           those who are its nationals  are  recognised  as  such  but  the
           evidence does not show that it has a  practice  of  refusing  to
           recognise its nationals  who  genuinely  seek  to  exercise  the
           rights of South Korean nationals.
           (d) South Korean law does not generally permit dual  nationality
           (North Korean nationality being ignored for this purpose).
           (e) South Korean practice appears to presume that those who have
           been absent from the Korean Peninsula for  more  than  10  years
           have acquired another nationality displacing their South  Korean
           nationality; such persons therefore move from category  (i),  in
           1(a) above, to category (iii)."

    Need for further country guidance

    8. Since the publication of KK, there have been two relevant changes in
       relation to removal of North Korean migrants to South Korea.

          i) In December 2011, the United Kingdom and the Republic of  Korea
             entered into a  bilateral  Readmission  Agreement  intended  to
             address the difficulties in  documenting  and  returning  North
             Korean migrants to South Korea.
         ii) In July 2012, South Korea incorporated the  Refugee  Convention
             into its domestic law.

    9. The appellants contend that KK should be re-examined because:

          i) They consider that the  Upper  Tribunal's  guidance  in  KK  is
             erroneous as to  the  nationality  of  persons  who  have  been
             outside the Korean Peninsula for less than 10 years,  and  that
             the  Tribunal  should  find  that  such  person   fall   within
             categories 1(a)(ii) and 1(a)(iii) of the KK guidance, that  is,
             that they either are not yet South  Korean  citizens,  but  are
             entitled to acquire such  citizenship  (category  1(a)(ii))  or
             only may be so entitled (category 1(a)(iii)),
         ii) Alternatively, they argue that the Upper Tribunal's findings on
             the  position  of  those  who  have  been  outside  the  Korean
             Peninsula for less  than  10  years  is  not  binding  and  the
             discussion of that point was obiter dicta in KK, in  which  all
             the appellants had been outside the Korean Peninsula for longer
             than 10 years;
        iii) South Korea will not grant them protection or travel  documents
             to enter the 'protection' procedure in South Korea because they
             have sought asylum in the United  Kingdom,  thereby  indicating
             that they do not really want to go to South Korea; and
         iv) South Korean nationality is not  'effective'  nationality.   In
             seeking to reopen the finding in KK at 1(c) in the guidance  on
             this  point,  the  appellants  rely  on  the  decision  of  the
             International Court of Justice  in  Liechtenstein  v  Guatemala
             (Second Phase) [1955] ICJ 4 ('the Nottebohm case').

       In addition,  the  appellants  consider  that  country  guidance  is
       required on:

          v) The risk of refoulement from China  to  North  Korea,  or  from
             South Korea to North Korea via  China,  having  regard  to  the
             Repatriation Agreement between  China  and  North  Korea  which
             expressly disapplies UNHCR  procedures  for  North  Koreans  in
             China; and
         vi) Whether the process applied by the South Korean authorities  to
             returning North Korean migrants  (the  'protection'  procedure)
             breaches the  Refugee  Convention,  alternatively  their  human
             rights, such that it is unlawful to return them to South  Korea
             because of that procedure and/or offends against  international
             norms in that it lacks  judicial  supervision  and  amounts  to
             unlawful detention;  or
        vii)  Whether   levels   of   societal,   employment   and   housing
             discrimination for former North Koreans living in  South  Korea
             are such that they cannot be expected to go and live there.

       The appellants also asserted (but the evidence  before  us  did  not
       establish) that on the completion  of  the  'protection'  procedure,
       persons who had been outside the Korean Peninsula for more  than  10
       years would  not  be  given  any  financial  support  or  settlement
       assistance by the South Korean  authorities.   This  point  was  not
       directly engaged in these appeals, since none  of  these  appellants
       has been outside the Korean Peninsula for more than 10 years.

   10. The respondent also seeks to reopen  the  country  guidance  in  KK,
       contending that the Upper Tribunal erred  in  fact  and  in  law  in
       finding that persons who had been outside the Korean  Peninsula  for
       more than 10 years would have  lost  their  right  to  South  Korean
       nationality by reason of the length of such absence.  She made  that
       challenge in the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department v SP (North Korea) & Ors [2012] EWCA Civ 114,  in  which,
       while concurring with the decision to dismiss  the  appeals  of  the
       particular appellants, the Court of Appeal expressed  some  concerns
       as to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  reasoning  on  this  point  (see,  in
       particular, paragraphs [36]-[28] in the concurring judgment of  Lord
       Justice Davis).

    Refoulement to North Korea

   11. The appellants argued that those who failed to establish entitlement
       to South Korean citizenship during the 'protection'  procedure  were
       at real risk of refoulement by the South Korean authorities to North
       Korea either directly, or via China.  On  the  evidence  before  us,
       both representatives accepted that this argument was  not  made  out
       and that South Korea does not return North Koreans either  to  North
       Korea or to China.

   12. The question of refoulement from China to North Korea is outside the
       scope of this  determination,  since  the  respondent  has  not  set
       removal directions to China for any of these appellants.   We  note,
       however, that the latest  in  a  series  of  Bilateral  Repatriation
       Agreements was signed between China and North Korea in 1986 whereby,
       as recorded by  the  European  Parliament  in  Resolution  2012/2655
       (RSP), UNHCR asylum procedures are not  available  to  North  Korean
       refugees in China and each country is required to  prevent  'illegal
       border crossings of residents' from the other country.  The European
       Parliament's Resolution recorded that the Chinese authorities return
       several thousand North Koreans to China each year.

   13. The evidence before us establishes that South Korean  embassies  and
       Consulates  in  China  are  unwilling  to  accept  and   process   a
       'protection' visa applications to  South  Korea  for  North  Koreans
       within China.  North Koreans who cross the  border  into  China  and
       then wish to apply for a 'protection' visa to enter South Korea must
       do so from a third country, making a further journey after  reaching
       China.

    Procedural history of these appeals

   14.  These appeals were originally listed to be heard and determined  on
       8 April  2013.   The  appellants  produced  most  of  their  country
       evidence late at that  hearing,  in  particular  the  second  expert
       report of Professor Bluth relating  to  the  GP  family,  an  expert
       report from Professor Guy Goodwin-Gill and certain  other  items  of
       country evidence.  Professor Bluth had attended the hearing and  was
       ready to give his evidence.

   15. On behalf of MP, Mr Karnik sought an adjournment to  enable  him  to
       adduce the evidence of a  recently-identified  witness,  Dr  Pillkyu
       Hwang, a South Korean lawyer with some experience of  the  operation
       of  the  'protection'  procedure  and  of  both  habeas  corpus  and
       compensation litigation before the South Korean courts  arising  out
       of that procedure.  We accepted Mr  Karnik's  submission  that  such
       evidence was likely to be of considerable assistance  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal in determining the country point in these appeals and  that
       at least part of the hearing  should  be  adjourned  to  enable  the
       evidence to be put before the Upper Tribunal.

   16. For the respondent, Mr Norton stated that at such  short  notice  he
       could not deal adequately with the expert report  of  Professor  Guy
       Goodwin-Gill and other items of country evidence.   In  relation  to
       Professor Bluth's report on the GP family, the parties agreed  after
       discussion that his report was substantially the same as his  report
       in relation to MP, which had been prepared and served in good  time,
       and on which Mr Norton had prepared cross-examination. We  adjourned
       for a  short  time  to  enable  Mr  Norton  to  prepare  his  cross-
       examination  on  the  GP  family  report  and  then  proceeded  with
       Professor Bluth's oral evidence in the afternoon.   At  the  end  of
       Professor Bluth's evidence, Mr Norton confirmed to us that  did  not
       consider that he had been disadvantaged in his cross-examination  by
       not being granted an  adjournment  in  relation  to  the  GP  family
       report.

   17. The hearing was then adjourned to 2 July 2013.  In the event,  there
       was no further oral evidence  and  we  proceeded  on  the  basis  of
       written and oral submissions, with the additional assistance  of  Dr
       Hwang's report and all of the other evidence produced at  the  April
       hearing.   We have considered all of the oral and  written  evidence
       and arguments placed before us during the hearings of these appeals.
       We have had regard also to MP's Key  Passages  Index,  which  refers
       only to the Upper Tribunal's previous decision in  KK  and  the  ICG
       report. We  reserved  our  determination,  to  which  we  have  both
       contributed.

    Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

   18. The documents before us are listed at Appendix A.  At Appendix B, we
       summarise the material provisions of the South Korean  constitution,
       the 1948 Nationality Act  (as  amended),  the  1997  Protection  and
       Settlement Act, the Overseas  Koreans  Act  (passed  in  2000,  last
       amended in 2013), the 2003  Military  Service  Act  (as  amended  in
       2006),  and  the  2012  Refugee  Act,  which  brought  the   Refugee
       Convention into the law of South Korea.

   19. At Appendix C, we summarise  the  evidence  of  Professor  Christoph
       Bluth, Professor Guy Goodwin-Gill, Dr Pillkyu Hwang, and  Dr  Young-
       hae Chi, so far as relevant  to  our  decision.  At  Appendix  D  we
       summarise the relevant material for this  decision  from  the  other
       country documents listed in Appendix A.

    The 'protection' procedure

   20. The Protection and Settlement Act contains a scheme for support  and
       reintegration  for  North  Koreans,   consisting   of   an   initial
       investigation phase by the JIC, following which individuals  receive
       social adaptation training in  Hanawon  (a  government  resettlement
       centre) and thereafter, access to further training,  recognition  of
       existing qualifications, accommodation, and other financial support.
       Protection may be suspended or terminated for a number  of  reasons,
       including attempting to return to North Korea.

   21. South Korean law now incorporates  the  provisions  of  the  Refugee
       Convention.  Its Refugee Act 11298/2012 incorporated the  Convention
       into South Korean law with effect from July 2013.   By  passing  the
       Refugee Act, South Korea recognised its  non-refoulement  obligation
       under Article 33 of the Refugee Convention.   However, the  evidence
       before us was clear: the South Korean authorities and courts do  not
       consider the Refugee Act to be  relevant  to  the  status  of  North
       Korean migrants, who are considered to be South Korean by birth  and
       are therefore not 'outside the country of their nationality'.

    The Readmission Agreement

   22. The United Kingdom-South Korea  Readmission  Agreement  was  entered
       into on 20 December 2011, following  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
       guidance in KK.  It lists the primary and secondary documents  which
       are required to support a request by either the  United  Kingdom  or
       South Korea for the other to accept the return of  a  citizen,  with
       appropriate travel documents and without difficulty  (a  readmission
       request).  A consular interview may  be  required,  particularly  if
       only secondary documents are available.  Where individuals are being
       returned to South Korea, a fingerprint check is  undertaken  to  see
       whether the applicant is  already  on  the  South  Korean  database,
       indicating that they have lived in South Korea and  been  recognised
       as South Korean citizens.   Personal  particulars  to  be  disclosed
       during the removal process are exhaustively defined at Article 6  of
       the  Readmission  Agreement.  If  the  request  is  successful,   an
       emergency travel document (ETD)  will  be  provided  to  enable  the
       person to return to South Korea.

   23. At our request, the respondent provided details of the operation  in
       practice of that agreement from December 2011 to July 2013.   During
       that period, the United Kingdom requested ETDs from the South Korean
       authorities for a total of 20 applicants  purporting  to  come  from
       North Korea.  In 14 cases, the applicants  were  fingerprint-matched
       to the South Korean database and were, therefore, already  known  to
       the South Korean authorities  and  accepted  as  its  citizens.  The
       respondent indicated that she would  now  arrange  for  them  to  be
       interviewed at the South Korean Embassy in London  and  returned  to
       South Korea.  Four individuals were rejected as  not  known  to  the
       South Korean authorities.  During the first  year,  three  ETDs  had
       been issued and two persons had actually been returned.

    Country expert evidence

   24. Professor Christoph Bluth is Professor of International  Studies  at
       the  Faculty  of  International  Studies  and  Politics   of   Leeds
       University.  He has assisted the Upper Tribunal  in  previous  cases
       concerning Korea, in particular KK.  He has  considerable  knowledge
       of the practice of the South Korean government in relation to  North
       Korean migrants and nationality issues.  His focus  on  South  Korea
       began in 2004 and has included a period in 2005  when  he  lived  in
       South Korea as a visiting Professor at Yonsei University, Seoul, and
       a visiting Research Fellow at the South Korean Ministry of  National
       Defence's Institute for Defence Analysis. He  provided  reports  for
       all of the appellants:  his report on MP  incorporates  all  of  the
       material and opinion in his report for the GP  family  and  we  have
       therefore begun our consideration with the MP report.

   25. Professor Bluth does not read  Korean,  and  his  spoken  Korean  is
       basic, but he can depend on help from  his  students  where  he  has
       difficulty in understanding  the  English  version  of  the  various
       legislative materials.  Professor Bluth's summary of those materials
       accords with our understanding, set out above and in Appendix B.  In
       preparing his reports, Professor Bluth consulted individual  experts
       known to him at Kookmin University, the International  Crisis  Group
       in Seoul, the North Korean refugee community in West Yorkshire,  and
       officials in the Unification Ministry in Seoul as  well  as  in  the
       South Korean Embassy in London.

   26. Professor Bluth's evidence, summarised at Appendix C, does not  take
       account  of  the  Readmission  Agreement  and  the  provisions   for
       readmission thereunder.  The parts of his reports  which  deal  with
       the return procedures are not therefore of assistance to  us,  since
       South  Korea  has  committed  itself  now  to  the  readmission   of
       individuals  who  can  meet  the  documentary  provisions   of   the
       Readmission Agreement and demonstrate that they previously lived  on
       the Korean Peninsula or are the children of parents who were  Korean
       citizens.

   27. Professor Bluth confirmed that he was  aware  that  staff  at  South
       Korean embassies and Consulates in China were reluctant to deal with
       North Koreans applying for a 'protection' visa to enter South Korea.
         In his oral evidence, Professor Bluth stated  that  the  issue  of
       defectors from North Korea  seeking  to  enter  South  Korea  was  a
       serious irritant in North-South Korean relations, since South  Korea
       was trying to improve relations with the North.  Professor Bluth had
       never heard of anyone's fingerprints being taken in China by a South
       Korean Embassy or  Consulate  which  had  refused  to  entertain  an
       application from a North Korean for a  'protection'  visa  to  enter
       South  Korea.   The  question  of  surveillance   by   the   Chinese
       authorities of South Korean Embassies and Consulates was politically
       sensitive, but he was aware of at least some  instances  where  such
       surveillance had occurred.

   28. Professor Bluth explained that there had been a change in  the  type
       of North Korean applicant  for  protection  in  South  Korea.  Early
       defectors  had   been   high-status   individuals,   bringing   both
       intelligence and propaganda value, but  now  North  Korean  migrants
       were not high-status individuals and the increasing numbers of  such
       migrants  had  led  to  a  tougher  approach  by  the  South  Korean
       government. The  South  Korean  authorities  would  make  their  own
       decisions about nationality: a status or  nationality  determination
       by a third country was of no relevance in this respect.

   29. There was a perception in South Korea that should large  numbers  of
       North Koreans be admitted, they would be a security risk, since they
       might be North Korean intelligence agents, or intelligence  targets.
       Also, there was resentment among native South Koreans of the cost to
       the public purse in providing for North Korean migrants; they were a
       financial burden on the South Korean  state,  albeit  an  affordable
       one.  Poor integration of former North  Koreans  into  South  Korean
       society was perceived as threatening social cohesion.

   30. Professor Bluth had been told by a previous South Korean  ambassador
       to the United Kingdom that he believed most of those claiming to  be
       North Koreans were Chinese Koreans, that is to say, Chinese citizens
       of Korean descent.  Chinese Koreans could  be,  and  were,  deported
       from South Korea to China.  Professor Bluth's opinion was that there
       was a risk that despite their Chinese citizenship,  Chinese  Koreans
       removed to China might be refouled to North Korea and put  at  risk.
       He did not identify any source documents for that opinion.

   31. Professor Bluth  set  out  his  understanding  of  the  'protection'
       procedure.  North Korean migrants were initially taken to the JIC at
       Sindaebang in South Seoul, a South Korean government facility run by
       the  Institute  of   National   Intelligence.    Professor   Bluth's
       understanding was that everyone would  be  detained  for  120  days.
       Professor Bluth was aware of one individual who  had  been  detained
       for over three years. Shorter periods of JIC  investigation  applied
       before  2010,  when  two  North  Korean  intelligence  agents   were
       identified who had infiltrated the 'protection' procedure  with  the
       intention of assassinating North Korea's  most  prominent  defector,
       Hwang Jang-hy?p, a former Secretary of  the  North  Korean  Workers'
       Party and Chairman of the North Korean Supreme People's Assembly.

   32. On 21 April 2010, the South Korean government announced an  increase
       in the period of detention from 90-120 days, to give more  time  for
       them to identify and filter out North Korean spies.   On  completion
       of the JIC phase, Professor Bluth stated that North Korean  migrants
       were debriefed by the Ministry of Unification and then provided with
       three months' residential integration classes at a Hanawon centre in
       Anseong.  The Hanawon training was compulsory; it  was  intended  to
       prepare them for life in capitalist South Korea.

   33. At the end of about seven months  of  debriefing  and  reintegration
       training, North Korean migrants were offered  a  document  to  sign,
       applying  formally  for  recognition  as  South   Korean   citizens.
       Professor Bluth stated that all North Korean migrants were  required
       to take an oath of loyalty  to  South  Korea  after  completing  the
       'protection' procedure; native South Koreans were not required to do
       that.  He considered that it would be difficult for a  former  North
       Korean to take the South  Korean  loyalty  oath,  which  they  would
       consider a renunciation of North  Korean  citizenship,  although  no
       such renunciation was formally required of them.

   34. New South Koreans of North Korean origin receive full  South  Korean
       citizenship, indistinguishable in law and rights from that of  other
       South Koreans.  They are given 'settlement money'  of  about  �5650:
       they usually owed that amount of  money,  or  slightly  less  (about
       $6000) to the brokers who had organised their departure  from  North
       Korea. New South Koreans are allocated housing, often outside  Seoul
       for a short time; thereafter they were required to  find  their  own
       accommodation.  A further �5650 was available for  a  deposit  on  a
       flat if  required.  Monthly  support  of  about  �113  a  month  was
       available for vocational training and a further �1150  was  paid  at
       the end of a six- or twelve-month course.  Another  grant  of  �1150
       was available when they were appointed to an employment position.

   35. Professor Bluth's evidence was that new South Koreans from communist
       North Korea struggled to adapt to capitalism and to fit in  socially
       in South Korea.  They experienced significant  language  and  social
       difficulties.  South Korea as a  whole  was  a  dynamic,  prosperous
       economy with high earnings and very low  unemployment,  but  figures
       from January 2011 suggested that only 50% of North  Korean  migrants
       had found employment, mostly in manual labour because they tended to
       be manual workers or  farmers  with  poor  educational  backgrounds.
       Only just over half of those surveyed had finished high school  and,
       in contrast with the migrants of the 1990s,  only  1%  had  been  to
       university.  80% of those who defected now were  women,  often  with
       children.  Their children were teased at school  and  their  marital
       prospects poor.  They were on low incomes, about � of  the  national
       average.  Nevertheless, it was Professor Bluth's  opinion  that  new
       South Koreans from North Korea were  considerably  better  off  than
       they would be in either China or North  Korea:  however,  they  were
       much worse off than if they would be if they  could  settle  in  the
       United Kingdom.

   36. Professor Guy Goodwin-Gill is Professor of International Refugee Law
       at Oxford University and a former  Professor  of  Law  at  Amsterdam
       University, as well as  a  Senior  Research  Fellow  at  All  Souls'
       College Oxford.  Professor Goodwin-Gill is  the  joint  author  with
       Jane McAdam of 'The Refugee in International Law' (Oxford University
       Press, 3rd edition, 2007).  His expert  evidence  has  assisted  the
       Upper Tribunal on many occasions.

   37. Professor Goodwin-Gill's report concerned the international legality
       of the Readmission Agreement, together with an examination of recent
       interpretations of the Refugee Convention  in  United  Kingdom  law.
       His  evidence  is  not,  therefore,   country   evidence,   properly
       understood,  but  offers  assistance  to  the  Tribunal   in   legal
       interpretation.

   38. Professor  Goodwin-Gill  was  concerned  about  the  effect  of  the
       Readmission Agreement on individuals making  a  readmission  request
       who lacked any documentary  evidence  of  their  birth  or  previous
       residence in the Korean Peninsula.  He argued that the effect of the
       Readmission Agreement in such cases was that even if a South  Korean
       travel document were issued  following  a  readmission  request,  an
       individual's presumptive  South  Korean  citizenship  would  not  be
       finally established until after the  person  had  been  returned  to
       South Korea and the 'protection' procedure completed.

   39. His concern was that in such a case, the Readmission Agreement would
       allow for the involuntary return to  South  Korea  of  North  Korean
       citizens, who had a well-founded fear of persecution in North Korea,
       but  who  might  be  found  not  to  be  entitled  to  South  Korean
       citizenship or protection, by operation  of  certain  statutory  and
       Presidential  exceptions  to  the  recognition   of   South   Korean
       citizenship.  There would then be no legal obstacle to their  return
       to North Korea from South Korea.   Professor Goodwin-Gill considered
       that the Tribunal should not derive any reassurance from Article  10
       of the  Readmission  Agreement,  which  expressly  states  that  its
       provisions are in addition to the international obligations  of  the
       Contracting States, both of whom  are  signatories  to  the  Refugee
       Convention.

   40. Professor  Goodwin-Gill  in  his  report  compared  the  Readmission
       Agreement between the United Kingdom and South  Korea  with  another
       similar agreement  entered  into  between  the  United  Kingdom  and
       Algeria in 2006, the operation of which was expressly limited to the
       return of Algerian citizens and had no effect on citizens  of  other
       states.  In contrast, the Readmission Agreement entered into between
       the United Kingdom and South Korea was not confined to South  Korean
       citizens and he observed that it contained no guarantee  as  to  the
       treatment of returnees  in  South  Korea.  He  considered  that  the
       'protection'   procedure   was   a   process   of    'investigation,
       interrogation and detention' which was potentially incompatible with
       the United Kingdom's international obligations in respect of liberty
       and security of the person.

   41. Dr Pillkyu Hwang is a human  rights  lawyer  at  the  Gonggam  Human
       Rights Law Foundation in South Korea.  He has worked with  a  number
       of international NGOs and human rights organisations in South  Korea
       and is currently Chair of the Asia Pacific  Refugee  Rights  Network
       and the Asian Consortium for Human Rights-based Access  to  Justice.
       He is a former President of the Korean Society of International Law,
       a co-author of the first Korean refugee law book 'The meaning  of  a
       Refugee and its Recognition  Protection'  (Seoul  University  Press,
       2010), and he was the principal author of the South  Korean  Refugee
       Act 2011.

   42. In his report, Dr Hwang explained  the  'protection'  procedure  and
       stated that any North Korean worldwide could make an application for
       recognition as a South Korean citizen under that  procedure,  unless
       they were a North Korean spy or an undesirable person,  as  set  out
       from time to time by Presidential decree as  unfit  for  protection,
       currently as follows:

           "1.   Persons who are expected to bring about serious  political
           and diplomatic difficulties to the Republic of Korea  if  it  is
           decided that they are subject to protection;
           2.    Persons who, during  the  provisional  protection  period,
           used violence  and  destroyed  facilities  such  that  there  is
           concern that they will cause  serious  harm  to  other  people's
           personal security; or
           3.    Persons who obtained the legal right to reside in a  third
           country after escaping from North Korea."

   43. Dr Hwang stated that no constitutional provision  existed  in  South
       Korean law which excluded from the 'protection' procedure  a  person
       who had been outside the Korean Peninsula for more  than  10  years.
       Article 9(1)(4) of the Protection and Settlement Act  provided  that
       South Korean 'protection' was not available  to  'persons  who  have
       earned their living for not less than 10 years in  their  respective
       countries of sojourn': however, in discussion with successive Deputy
       Directors of the Settlement Support Division  of  the  South  Korean
       Ministry of Unification, Dr Hwang had been told that no North Korean
       migrant who applied for South Korean protection  and  completed  the
       'protection' procedure successfully would be  refused  and  that  in
       principle, the period of such a person's  stay  outside  the  Korean
       Peninsula would not affect such protection. The Presidential  Decree
       also disapplied the 10-year restriction  where  the  individual  had
       been detained or in hiding during all or part of that period in  the
       third country, and in 'other similar circumstances  acknowledged  by
       the Ministry of Unification'.

   44. Dealing with the JIC phase, Dr Hwang recognised  that  there  was  a
       legal basis and that it  was  not  formally  a  detention,  but  his
       evidence was that in practice North Koreans  were  held  in  custody
       during the JIC investigation, to enable the South Korean authorities
       to determine whether they were North Korean, and if so, whether they
       were  North   Korean   spies.   The   'protection'   procedure   was
       administrative and lacking in due process: there  was  no  right  to
       counsel during the procedure.  There was no public information about
       the 'protection' procedure; Dr Hwang had tried to obtain information
       and been rebuffed in 2010,  and  a  journalist  and  member  of  the
       National Assembly had both been equally unsuccessful in 2013.

   45. Dr Hwang confirmed that the Hanawon part of the process  took  place
       after the JIC phase was complete:  both phases were required of  all
       members of an applicant family, even children. He had not  heard  of
       any case where one family member had been rejected  and  the  others
       accepted.

   46. New South Koreans who had completed the 'protection' procedure could
       be asked to  participate  in  anti-North  Korean  publicity  and  he
       considered it likely that some had been asked to work for the  South
       Korean National Intelligence  Service  (NIS)  as  informants.   Once
       accepted as a South Korean citizen, if  a  person  then  left  South
       Korea  they  could  return  without  difficulty,  unless  they   had
       travelled to North Korea or met a North  Korean  who  had  not  gone
       through the 'protection' procedure, in which case, on  return,  they
       might be prosecuted under national security provisions.

   47.  Dr  Hwang's  experience  of  the  'protection'  procedure  in   his
       professional practice was limited to  two  high-profile  cases,  the
       'compensation case' which he handled between 1999-2002, concerning a
       one-month period of detention in 1999, and another, a habeas  corpus
       case in 2010 which was still pending before the South Korean courts.
        Both of his clients alleged illegal detentions, beatings, and other
       degrading treatment in the JIC phase.  In the compensation case,  Dr
       Hwang's client was a North Korean man who had arrived in South Korea
       with a 'protection' visa to enter South Korea, obtained in  Vietnam.
       The man had left North Korea via China  and  was  accompanied  by  a
       woman who claimed to be North Korean, but then admitted that she was
       Chinese.  The compensation  case  failed  before  the  South  Korean
       courts for lack of evidence.  It had been appealed right up  to  the
       South Korean Supreme Court.   Dr Hwang could  not  say  whether  the
       Chinese woman had been deported or was still in South Korea.

   48. The habeas corpus case concerned a female Chinese  citizen  who  had
       posed as a North Korean migrant but admitted  her  nationality,  two
       weeks into the JIC phase. Her brother was  in  South  Korea,  having
       passed the 'protection' procedure: she had  been  asked  to  confirm
       that he also was a Chinese citizen.  Following  that  evidence,  her
       brother was arrested and prosecuted.  The  habeas  corpus  case  had
       attracted much publicity, and the press had revealed that where  the
       Chinese woman was detained.  The Chinese  woman's  family  asked  Dr
       Hwang to apply for her release into South Korea despite her  Chinese
       citizenship.  The application failed for lack of  evidence  and  she
       appealed. After three years, in 2013  the  habeas  corpus  case  was
       still pending before the South Korean courts and she  was  still  in
       South Korea.

   49. Dr Hwang's  evidence  was  that  in  South  Korea,  it  was  general
       knowledge  that  the  Chinese  authorities  monitored  South  Korean
       Embassies and Consulates and that such Embassies and Consulates were
       therefore reluctant openly to receive North Koreans wishing to  make
       an application for a 'protection' visa to  enter  South  Korea.   Dr
       Hwang had no knowledge of any practice of fingerprints  being  taken
       in China by South Korean embassies which had refused to entertain an
       application for such a visa.

   50. Dr Hwang stated that he knew of no evidence  that  South  Korea  had
       sent anyone at all from the Korean Peninsula to China without  their
       consent and that of the Chinese  authorities.  North  Korean  spies,
       when discovered, were prosecuted under  the  South  Korean  National
       Security Act but were not returned to North  Korea.   There  was  no
       public information regarding anyone being refused protection at  the
       end of the 'protection' procedure.

   51. Dr Young-hae Chi is a university instructor  at  the  Department  of
       Korean Studies at Oxford University.  On 2 July 2008, in the context
       of the First-tier Tribunal proceedings, he provided expert  evidence
       on GP's origin.  His opinion, which is fully set out in his  report,
       was that GP was born, brought up and lived in North Korea before his
       final escape, and that he was not a native Chinese or  a  member  of
       the Korean diaspora (the Joseonjok) who live in  the  Yenben  Korean
       Autonomous District in Jirin  Province,  China,  near  the  Chinese-
       Korean border, and who are descendants of Koreans  who  migrated  to
       China in the early 20th century, long before the division of  China.
       Dr Young-hae Chi's report was based on an  interview  lasting  seven
       and a half  hours.   His  assessment  takes  full  account  of  both
       linguistic evidence and the appellant's knowledge of the  region  in
       North Korea where he lived.

    Other country materials

   52. The other country evidence before us is summarised in Appendix D, so
       far as it is relevant in the consideration of the  issues  in  these
       appeals.  The following are the  principal  points  in  the  various
       source documents.

   53. European Parliament.  In its 'Resolution on the situation  of  North
       Korean refugees'  (Resolution 2012/2655 (RSP)), adopted  on  24  May
       2012,  the  European  Parliament  recorded  its  acceptance  of  the
       following relevant facts and matters: in 1986, China entered into  a
       Repatriation  Agreement  with  North  Korea  whereby  UNHCR   asylum
       procedures were not available to North  Korean  citizens  in  China;
       most North Korean refugees in China were women, who were at risk  of
       trafficking, forced marriage, or being forced into the sex industry;
       and that children of North Korean migrants living illegally in China
       were stateless and were either abandoned or suffered their  mothers'
       fate.

   54. The European Parliament took into account the following documents: a
       Report by the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in
       the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, presented on 21  February
       2011;  Human Rights Council  Resolution  A/HRC/19/L.29,  adopted  on
       19 March 2012; UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/66/174, adopted
       on 29 March 2012; the May 2012 report by the South Korean  National
       Human Rights Commission; a North Korean Ministry of Public  Security
       decree in 2010 making defection a crime of  'treachery  against  the
       nation';  and  a  December  2011  statement  by  the  North   Korean
       authorities that they would 'annihilate' up to three generations  of
       a family in which any member fled North  Korea  during  the  100-day
       mourning period for Kim Jong-il.

   55. The recitals to the Parliament's Resolution acknowledged  the  grave
       situation in North Korea:

           "A.    Whereas  the  aforementioned  UN  Human  Rights   Council
           resolution deplores the grave, widespread and  systematic  human
           rights abuses in North Korea, in particular the use  of  torture
           and labour camps against  political  prisoners  and  repatriated
           citizens  of   the   DPRK;   whereas   the   state   authorities
           systematically carry  out  and  enable  extrajudicial  killings,
           arbitrary detention and enforced disappearances;
           B.    Whereas large parts of the population are  suffering  from
           starvation, and whereas the World  Food  Programme  reported  in
           September 2009 that a third of North Korean women  and  children
           were malnourished;
           C.    Whereas, as a direct result of the policies  of  the  DPRK
           Government and despite the dangers, it is  estimated  that  over
           the years up to 400 000 North Koreans have  fled  the  country,
           many of whom  are  living  in  neighbouring  China  as  'illegal
           migrants';
           D.    Whereas most refugees from the DPRK have no  intention  of
           staying in China, but have to pass through the country in  order
           to make their way to South Korea or to other parts of the world;
           E.    Whereas, on the basis of its 1986  repatriation  agreement
           with North Korea, China  prevents  North  Korean  citizens  from
           accessing UNHCR asylum procedures, in violation of the  1951  UN
           Convention on Refugees and the 1967 Protocol thereto,  to  which
           the People's Republic  of  China  (PRC)  has  acceded;  whereas,
           according to NGO estimates, the PRC arrests and forcibly returns
           up to 5 000 North Korean refugees to the DPRK every year;
           F.    Whereas a large number of the  North  Korean  refugees  in
           China are women, many of whom are victims of human  trafficking,
           sex slavery and forced marriage, and whereas children  conceived
           through such violations are considered stateless  in  China  and
           are abandoned or left to the same fate as their mothers;
           G.    Whereas on 29 March 2012 Kim Young-hwan and  three  other
           activists  from  the  Seoul-based  Network  for   North   Korean
           Democracy and Human Rights were arrested in the Chinese city  of
           Dalian (Liaoning Province) and are facing allegations  of  being
           'a threat to China's national security', while reportedly trying
           to help North Korean defectors;
           H.    Whereas, according to eye-witness  reports,  refugees  who
           are  forcibly  returned  to  North  Korea   are   systematically
           subjected to torture, imprisoned in concentration camps and  may
           even be executed, pregnant women are allegedly forced to  abort,
           and babies of Chinese fathers  are  at  risk  of  being  killed;
           whereas the state practice of guilt by  association  results  in
           entire  families  being  imprisoned,  including   children   and
           grandparents;
           I.    Whereas satellite images and various accounts  from  North
           Korean defectors substantiate allegations that the DPRK operates
           at least six concentration  camps  and  numerous  're-education'
           camps, possibly housing up to 200 000 prisoners, most  of  them
           political;"

   56. The Resolution called on North Korea to 'put an immediate end to the
       ongoing grave, widespread and  systematic  human  rights  violations
       perpetrated against its own people, which are causing North  Koreans
       to flee their country' and to  allow  the  inspection  of  detention
       facilities by independent  international  experts.   It  also  urged
       greater cooperation by  member  states  in  providing  international
       protection for North Korean migrants, and in particular,  called  on
       China to grant South Korea full consular  access,  to  release  four
       detained North Korean activists facing the death penalty for being a
       'threat to national  security',  to  honour  its  obligations  under
       international law, in particular  the  Refugee  Convention  and  the
       Convention against Torture, and to stop deporting North Koreans back
       to North Korea.  Articles 6-8 of the Resolution  are  of  particular
       interest:

           "The European Parliament ...
           6.  Urges the PRC, therefore, to end the  1986  agreement  with
           North Korea on the repatriation of refugees, and welcomes recent
           reports that China may intend a policy shift; recalls that North
           Korean citizens are  considered  to  be  full  citizens  of  the
           Republic of Korea, and calls on  the  PRC  to  grant  them  safe
           passage to South Korea or other third countries;
           7.  Appeals to the Chinese authorities to  treat  North  Korean
           defectors as refugees 'sur place', to allow the UNHCR access  in
           order  to  determine  their  status  and   assist   their   safe
           resettlement, to release all such defectors  who  are  currently
           being detained, to decriminalise those who try to help  refugees
           on humanitarian grounds, and to grant North Korean women married
           to Chinese citizens legal resident status;
           8.  Also calls on China to stop cooperating with  North  Korean
           security agents in tracing North Korean refugees with the aim of
           arresting  them;  urges  the  PRC  instead  to  allow  NGOs  and
           community service providers humanitarian access to North  Korean
           refugees  and  asylum-seekers  in  China,  including   for   the
           provision of food, medical treatment, education  and  legal  and
           other services; ..."

   57. Home Office materials.  The UKBA Country of Origin service  has  not
       produced a report on South Korea since a Key Documents report  of  3
       September 2009.  The passage concerning North Koreans is set out  at
       [3.36]-[3.40] in the Key Documents report and is in  line  with  the
       evidence we heard from the  experts.  In  relation  to  the  Hanawon
       resettlement training, at paragraph 3.37 it states:

           "3.37  The  website  of  the  Republic  of  Korea,  Ministry  of
           Unification, accessed on 31 July 2009, advised as follows:

                 "The South Korean government  operates  support  facilities
                 called Hanawon for newcomers from North Korea to help  them
                 resettle in South Korean society. Hanawon  was  established
                 under the Act on the Protection and Settlement  Support  of
                 Residents  Escaping  from  North  Korea  of  1997.  Hanawon
                 includes  a  main  center  and  one  branch  facility  that
                 together can  accommodate  400  people  simultaneously  and
                 2,400 in one year ... The resettlement program  at  Hanawon
                 is an eight-week course for social adjustment in the South.
                 The  ultimate  objective  of  the  course  is  to   instill
                 confidence in the newcomers, narrow the cultural  gap,  and
                 motivate them to achieve sustainable livelihoods in  a  new
                 environment ... Furthermore, the government  provides  them
                 with a variety of financial and  non-financial  support  to
                 assist them with resettlement. The newcomers  receive,  for
                 example, an initial cash  payment,  incentives  related  to
                 employment and education, medical  support,  and  favorable
                 terms for leasing apartments. The government also creates a
                 new family registry as they are South Korean citizens  with
                 all rights and privileges under the Constitution."

                 The Ministry of Unification website sets out a flow  chart
         for  the  settlement  of  North  Koreans,   from   their   initial
         application onwards, and gives details of support  provided  after
         the initial eight-week course, both by the state and by  NGOs.   A
         BBC News article of 9  July  2009  noted  that  all  North  Korean
         refugees "are debriefed by  the  South  Korean  security  services
         before admission [to Hanawon], to ensure that they are  not  North
         Korean secret agents."

   58. US State Department Reports.  The State Department Report for  2013,
       published in February 2014, recorded that by that  date,  the  South
       Korean government had resettled about 24,000  refugees  since  2002,
       with 970 in the first half of 2012 alone.

           "The law provides for freedom of movement  within  the  country,
           foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government
           generally respected these rights. The government cooperated with
           the Office of the UN High Commissioner for  Refugees  and  other
           humanitarian   organizations   in   providing   protection   and
           assistance to internally displaced persons, refugees,  returning
           refugees, asylum seekers, stateless persons, and  other  persons
           of concern. ...


           Access to Asylum: The law provides for the granting of asylum or
           refugee status. The government  considers  refugees  from  North
           Korea under a separate legal  framework  and  does  not  include
           refugees from North Korea in refugee or asylum  statistics.  The
           government has an established system for providing protection to
           refugees, but the government does not  routinely  grant  refugee
           status  or  asylum  in  most  non-North  Korean  cases.  A   new
           independent law, the Refugees Act, took effect  July  1  [2013].
           ...

           The government continued its longstanding  policy  of  accepting
           refugees, or  defectors,  from  North  Korea,  who  by  law  are
           entitled to citizenship in South Korea. The government resettled
           970 such refugees during the first half of the year, raising the
           total to slightly more than 25,400 since 2002.


           Many refugees from North Korea alleged  societal  discrimination
           by South Koreans  and  cultural  differences  that  resulted  in
           adjustment  difficulties.  The  government  provided  adjustment
           assistance services  to  recently  settled  refugees,  including
           rental aid, exemption from education fees for middle- and  high-
           school  students,  medical  assistance,  business   loans,   and
           employment  assistance.  The  government  also   operated   Hana
           Centers,  or  Centers  to  Adjust  to  Regions,  which  educated
           refugees about adapting to specific geographic  areas,  provided
           counseling services, and aided social adjustment."

   59. The report noted two examples under 'refoulement', the first being a
       Chinese Falun Gong practitioner who was released in 2013 after being
       in detention pending the outcome of court  proceedings  since  2011,
       and the second, a Mongolian student returned to  Mongolia  in  2011,
       whose parents were not returned because the immigration  authorities
       could not locate them.    We  note  in  particular  that  the  State
       Department accepts that North Korean migrants are by law entitled to
       South Korean citizenship.

   60. Amnesty International noted a successful challenge through the South
       Korean courts by Professor Oh Se-chul, who was wrongfully accused of
       'enemy-benefiting' activities.

   61. International Crisis Group.    ICG's  report,  'Strangers  at  Home:
       North Koreans in the South', published on  14  July  2011,  recorded
       that the Korean peninsula had a population of 72 million people,  of
       whom 500,000-750,000 had been separated from family members when the
       country was divided.  The number of North Korean migrants living  in
       South Korea as at December 2010 was over 20,000, with a further 2500-
       3000 expected each year.  The  report  spelled  out  the  change  in
       migrant profiles over the years:  the early defectors had  been  men
       from the North Korean elite, who were valuable propaganda  tools  in
       South Korea;  nowadays,  North  Korean  migrants  were  mostly  ill-
       educated, poorly nourished women, many of them single  mothers  with
       dependent children, who were not.   They  were  said  to  experience
       social discrimination in South Korea.

   62. South Korea was aware of the risk of  total  failure  of  the  North
       Korean state in the future, which might create a massive outflow  of
       refugees to South Korea and China.   Delicate  negotiations  between
       North Korea and South Korea about the question of migrants were made
       more fragile by that risk. South Korea's treatment of  North  Korean
       intelligence agents, even those who had plotted to kill Hwang  Jang-
       hy?p, was to prosecute and sentence them to  imprisonment  in  South
       Korea, not to refoule them to North Korea.

   63. Freedom House. In its 2012 report on South Korea, Freedom House  was
       generally optimistic about that country's democratic  status,  while
       noting that there  were  some  problems  with  corruption  (bribery,
       influence and extortion) which were the subject of prosecutions  and
       punishment by the South Korean  authorities.  In  general,  privacy,
       press  freedom,  freedom  of  religion,  and  academic  freedom  are
       protected,  both  constitutionally   and   in   practice,   although
       exceptions occurred.  South Korea had entered  into  a  Korea-United
       States Free Trade Agreement;  South  Korea,  Japan  and  the  United
       States were committed to cooperation in dealing with North Korea.

   64. IPI Global Observatory.  An article dated 23 August 2012 written  by
       Kim Cheong-ju, an inspector with the South  Korean  National  Police
       agency engaged as a graduate student on Columbia University's Master
       of International Affairs course, reported that China's  attitude  to
       North Korean refugees  was  hostile  and  that  North  Koreans  were
       particularly vulnerable once in China.  The writer  considered  that
       there was a real risk of refoulement from China to North Korea:   up
       to 5000 migrants  were  arrested  by  the  Chinese  authorities  and
       returned to North Korea each year.

   65. Some  Chinese  human  trafficking  organisations  were  said  to  be
       persuading young women to travel from North Korea to China, only  to
       sell them on for $500 to Chinese farmers, who needed  wives  due  to
       the shortage of young marriageable women in China.

   66. South Korea had been seeking  to  persuade  China  to  take  a  more
       relaxed stance.  The article contained a  table  obtained  from  the
       Ministry of Unification in South Korea showing the numbers of  North
       Koreans arriving in South  Korea  in  recent  years.  After  varying
       figures in the  range  of  2500-3000  migrants  arriving  each  year
       between 2007 and 2011, there was a sharp drop to about 750  migrants
       arriving in 2012, reflecting what now appears to have been misplaced
       optimism in the first few months of Kim Jong-un's leadership.

   67. Press reports.  A BBC News article of 9 July  2009  noted  that  all
       North Korean refugees 'are debriefed by the  South  Korean  security
       services before admission [to Hanawon], to ensure that they are  not
       North Korean secret agents'.

   68. United Nations News Service.  The UN News service on 25 January 2008
       recorded praise by Special  Rapporteur  Vitit  Muntarbhorn  for  the
       support given  by  the  South  Korean  government  to  'over  10,000
       nationals  from  the  DPRK  it  has  accepted  for  settlement'  but
       recommended increased  support  and  longer-term  care  for  torture
       victims and older North Koreans who had escaped to South Korea.

   69. Other press reports.  The bundle contains a number  of  other  press
       reports from 2010, dealing with the rise in tension between the  two
       countries when North  Korea  sank  the  South  Korean  warship,  the
       Cheonan, and two North Korean intelligence agents were arrested  for
       plotting  to  assassinate  Hwang  Jang-hy?p.   In  a   round   table
       discussion with students  later  that  year,  former  North  Koreans
       expressed embarrassment and concern at the constant  questioning  by
       their  classmates  as  to  the  motivations  of  the  North   Korean
       government, but stated that other students had been  supportive  and
       understanding, on  the  whole.   There  was  no  evidence  that  any
       hostility to North Korean migrants  had  endured  once  the  Cheonan
       incident was past.  At the time of the hearings in  April  and  July
       2013, there were fresh tensions  between  the  two  Koreas  but  the
       tension did not break out into a further civil war.

   70. Quality Solicitors letter (14 October 2011). A letter from Charlotte
       Buckley,  a  senior  caseworker  with   Quality   Solicitors   (MP's
       solicitors) asserted her understanding that an application for South
       Korean citizenship must be made in person to the Embassy,  requiring
       two personal attendances, the  first  time  to  receive  a  list  of
       required documents, and the second time, to be  interviewed.    That
       letter predates the Readmission Agreement  in  December  2011  which
       changed the relevant procedures.

    Submissions

   71. We received and have had  regard  to  skeleton  arguments  and  oral
       submissions from Mr Norton for the respondent, Ms Hulse for  the  GP
       family, and Mr Karnik for MP.  We summarise the position adopted  by
       each of the parties in their skeleton arguments and  submissions  as
       follows.

    Respondent's submissions

   72. At the beginning of the hearing, Mr Norton sought permission to rely
       upon an acknowledgement of service on behalf of the respondent which
       had  been  settled  by  Counsel  in  an  unrelated  judicial  review
       application before the High Court, by  way  of  submissions  on  the
       'effective' nationality question and the Nottebohm case.  Given  the
       lack of apparent nexus between that case and these  proceedings  and
       Mr Norton's very limited knowledge of  the  facts  of  the  judicial
       review application, we refused  to  admit  that  document  in  these
       appeals.  Mr Norton  did  not  make  any  further  oral  submissions
       concerning the Nottebohm Case.

   73. The respondent's case was that the Readmission Agreement plainly was
       intended to, and did, provide for  re-documentation  and  return  to
       South Korea of all 'citizens of Korea' as defined  by  South  Korea,
       including those originally from North Korea.  In practice,  however,
       ETDs under the Readmission Agreement were presently issued by  South
       Korea  only  where  documents  and/or   fingerprint   evidence   had
       established that the individual was already on record in South Korea
       as a citizen of that country, or had  registered  as  such  with  by
       application to a South Korean Embassy or Consulate.  Individuals who
       had never lived in South Korea would be invited to apply to register
       as South Korean citizens at the South Korean Embassy in London.  The
       South Korean Embassy had informed the UKBA that  no  Korean  citizen
       would lose their nationality while abroad, even  for  more  than  10
       years, unless they had acquired another nationality.   If  they  had
       lost their nationality, they could apply to reacquire it, and  would
       be given preference as former South Korean citizens.

   74. In  general,  the  respondent  understood  that  male  South  Korean
       citizens could not legally travel abroad between the ages of 25  and
       30, because they were liable to military service.  That was not  the
       case for South Koreans originating from North Korea:   the  Military
       Service  Act  Article  64(1)(3)  expressly  excluded  from  military
       service 'persons who have immigrated from the northern area  of  the
       Military Demarcation Line' (the standard  South  Korean  description
       referring to North  Korean  defectors),  and  they  would  never  be
       required  to  undertake  military  service  for  South  Korea.    No
       distinction was made in the Military Service Act  for  North  Korean
       migrants in third countries who had not yet lived in South Korea.

   75. Mr Norton asked us to give weight to,  and  to  prefer,  Dr  Hwang's
       evidence as to the practice on nationality within South Korea  since
       it was based on Dr  Hwang's  professional  experience  as  a  lawyer
       practising before the South Korean courts and living in South Korea.
        In contrast, he  contended  that  Professor  Bluth's  evidence  was
       inconsistent in some respects and was based on third party data  and
       hearsay. Mr Norton submitted that Professor Goodwin-Gill's  evidence
       was more in the nature of a legal submission and  added  nothing  of
       substance to the evidence before us.

    Submissions on behalf of the GP family

   76. On behalf of the GP family, Miss Hulse acknowledged that  the  adult
       appellants had entered the United Kingdom illegally on  16  November
       2007, as all asylum seekers always, or nearly always, did, and  were
       not entitled to the wider protection provided in Article 32  of  the
       Refugee Convention for those lawfully in the United Kingdom.   There
       were  now  four  family  members,  the  first,  second   and   third
       appellants, and another daughter who was three.  None  of  them  had
       United Kingdom or European Union citizenship:  they had North Korean
       citizenship.  As such, her submission was that they were all at risk
       of persecution or  serious  harm  in  North  Korea.    That  is  not
       disputed by the respondent.

   77. Ms Hulse did not  accept  that  the  GP  family  were  South  Korean
       citizens or could be expected to return there. For the GP family  to
       be returned to South Korea would require the consent  of  the  South
       Korean authorities, which would not be forthcoming. Her instructions
       were that the GP family would refuse to apply for entry to the South
       Korean 'protection' procedure even at the  risk  of  refoulement  to
       North Korea or China.  Ms Hulse  reminded  us  that  thus  far,  the
       Readmission Agreement was being used to return only  those  who  had
       already been to South Korea and were known to  be  citizens  of  the
       Republic of Korea.  The GP family did not claim to have done so  and
       the respondent's assertion to the contrary should be rejected.

   78. Ms Hulse accepted that the evidence did not suggest that refoulement
       to China from South Korea  was  reasonably  likely  on  the  general
       evidence, or in the light of the factual matrix applicable to the GP
       family.

   79. Ms Hulse acknowledged  that  there  appeared  to  be  some  conflict
       between the expert evidence of Professor Bluth and Dr  Hwang  as  to
       the length of detention during the JIC  phase  of  the  'protection'
       procedure.  She  asked  the  Tribunal  to  prefer  the  evidence  of
       Professor Bluth, whose evidence she contended was more measured than
       that of Dr Hwang.  Professor Bluth's evidence was that JIC detention
       lasted for at least 120 days.

   80. If the GP family were permitted to enter the procedure, they (or  at
       least the parents), Ms Hulse contended that they would  be  detained
       separately during  both  the  JIC  and  Hanawon  stages.   Ms  Hulse
       submitted  that  parents  were  routinely   separated   during   the
       'protection' procedure, but was unable to identify any  evidence  in
       the country materials  which  supported  that  submission,  nor  any
       evidence suggesting that children were separated from their  parents
       during either phase of the 'protection' procedure.   However  benign
       the family's  treatment  in  the  two  phases  of  the  'protection'
       procedure, Ms Hulse submitted that taken as a whole, it amounted  to
       a deprivation of the family's  liberty  for  a  substantial  period,
       which she contended amounted to inhuman treatment.

   81. Those in the 'protection' procedure were completely in the hands  of
       the South Korean  authorities,  with  no  monitoring  or  complaints
       procedure.  There was no access to the courts until after the end of
       the 'protection' procedure.  Amnesty International and Human  Rights
       Watch (HRW) had sought, and been refused, access to South Korean JIC
       and Hanawon centres. The authorities published notices of successful
       completion of the 'protection' procedures, but no notices  of  those
       who did not successfully complete them.   The  Tribunal  should  not
       consider that as an indicator that nobody  failed  the  'protection'
       procedure:  rather, we should be prepared to imply  that  the  South
       Korean authorities had something to hide and that  their  reluctance
       to admit international observers was  an  adverse  indication.   She
       commented that most countries preferred to 'show  off'  when  things
       were going well.

   82. Ms Hulse accepted that the GP family  had  not  raised  private  and
       family life under Article 8 ECHR in their grounds of appeal  to  the
       Upper Tribunal.  Article 8 had been formally raised in  the  grounds
       of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal but in extremely  vague  terms.
       There was no suggestion that Article 8 arguments had  been  made  to
       the First-tier Tribunal judge, or that any such  argument  had  been
       overlooked.   No new evidence had been provided to her for the Upper
       Tribunal hearing.  For those reasons,  Ms  Hulse  did  not  rely  on
       Article 8 ECHR before the Upper Tribunal: any Article 8 issue  which
       did exist could be put to the respondent separately by the GP family
       at a later time.

    Submissions on behalf of MP

   83. Mr Karnik reminded us of MP's accepted history.  He left North Korea
       in 2006, travelled to China, and reached the United Kingdom in 2008.
        He has been outside the Korean  Peninsula  for  eight  years.   The
       respondent had accepted that  he  was  at  risk  of  persecution  or
       serious harm if returned to North Korea.  MP  was  refused  consular
       assistance by the South Korean Consulate in Shenyang; MP's evidence,
       which he invited us to accept, was that the Consulate had taken  his
       fingerprints, and that  was  why  they  were  on  the  South  Korean
       database.

   84. Mr Karnik reminded us that South Korea was not obliged to  recognise
       third country nationality determinations:   every  country  has  the
       right to determine who  are  its  citizens  and  any  State  may  be
       expected to examine a nationality claim with rigour and care.  Where
       a person was entitled to the nationality of more than  one  country,
       he accepted that all relevant citizenships must be  excluded  before
       Refugee Convention protection was available, as a last  resort.   MP
       had chosen not to make an application to the  South  Korean  Embassy
       for a 'protection' visa to enter South Korea, giving good subjective
       reasons why he did not wish to  accept  the  'protection'  of  South
       Korea as his country of nationality, even if it  were  available  to
       him.  He would prefer to become a British citizen.

   85. There was no reason to suppose that  the  South  Korean  authorities
       would not follow a rational process in determining nationality.  The
       'protection' procedure was more akin to  a  naturalisation  process,
       despite the South Korean constitutional position that all  those  on
       the Korean Peninsula were its citizens. Its outcome was anything but
       certain. In particular, there was a separate  step  of  'asking  for
       protection'  to  which  paragraphs  23-26  of  Nottebohm  might   be
       relevant. The South Korean citizenship expressed in its Constitution
       was therefore not 'effective' nationality in  the  Nottebohm  sense.
       Mr Karnik did not seek to argue that  the  position  of  the  German
       citizen in the Nottebohm judgment was on all fours with the position
       of North Korean migrants who might be able  to  claim  South  Korean
       citizenship.

   86. Mr Karnik contended that the Upper  Tribunal  should  disregard  the
       effect of the Readmission Agreement in assessing  MP's  case,  since
       the UKBA's use of it had so far been limited to re-documenting North
       Koreans who had established  South  Korean  citizenship  and/or  had
       lived in South Korea already.  The Upper  Tribunal  should  approach
       the position of MP as though there were no such  agreement  and  the
       factual position had not changed since KK in 2011.  He  reminded  us
       of the July 2010 letter written  by  the  South  Korean  Embassy  in
       London to the respondent on the day of the KK hearing and set out at
       [28] of that determination:

           "The Embassy of the Republic of Korea to the United  Kingdom  of
           Great Britain and Northern Ireland presents its  compliments  to
           the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  and  has  the  honour  of
           informing the latter of the Republic of Korea's  Policy  towards
           North Korean defectors.

           1.    The Government of the Republic  of  Korea,  in  principle,
           accepts all North Korean defectors, who, of their own free will,
           wish to resettle  in  the  Republic  of  Korea.  However,  their
           application may be rejected in  exceptional  circumstances;  for
           example, applicants who, once the screening process is complete,
           are  determined  to  be  or  have  been  spies,  drug   dealers,
           terrorists, or other serious criminals  may  have  their  asylum
           claims rejected.

           2.     The  first  and   most   important   criterion   in   the
           determination of offering protection and settlement  support  to
           North Koreans is to ascertain whether  the  person  in  question
           desires to live in  the  Republic  of  Korea.  This  is  clearly
           articulated in the "Act on the Protection and Settlement Support
           of Residents Escaping from North Korea". As such, the protection
           of the Government of the Republic of  Korea  for  North  Koreans
           does not apply to those North Koreans who wish to seek asylum in
           a country other than the Republic of Korea.

           3.    When a North Korean expresses his or her wish to  resettle
           in the Republic of Korea, there will be a screening  process  in
           order to verify whether the person  in  question  is  a  genuine
           North Korean.

           4.    Once screening is complete  and  the  asylum  claimant  is
           verified as being North Korean, a  further  determination  takes
           place to see  whether  he  or  she  is  entitled  to  receive  a
           settlement package under the domestic law  of  the  Republic  of
           Korea. A typical  settlement  package  comprises  accommodation,
           financial  support,  remedial  education   and   job   training.
           Claimants who have lived for  a  considerable  period  in  other
           countries may be excluded from receiving a settlement package.

           The Embassy of the Republic  of  Korea  avails  itself  of  this
           opportunity to renew the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of  the
           United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland  the
           assurances of its highest consideration."     [Emphasis added]

   87. Mr Karnik argued that South Korea's  practice  in  relation  to  the
       admission of North Koreans  differed  from  its  public  statements,
       relying on the evidence of Professor Bluth to that effect, and on Dr
       Hwang's  evidence,  which  he  considered  should  be  regarded   as
       particularly helpful since the diplomatic and governmental personnel
       of both North Korea and South Korea spoke freely to Dr  Hwang.   The
       Upper Tribunal should find that in reality, South  Korea  adopted  a
       narrow approach to return, both to  discourage  North  Koreans  from
       coming to South Korea, and to weed  out  North  Korean  intelligence
       agents before return took place, to avoid having to deal  with  them
       in South Korea.

   88. Since the Readmission Agreement was not presently being used to  re-
       document and return North Koreans who had not lived in South  Korea,
       those, like MP, who had claimed  asylum  in  a  third  country  were
       unlikely to be re-admitted and allowed  to  enter  the  'protection'
       procedure because their action in claiming asylum  meant  that  they
       did not genuinely wish to become South Koreans.   Mr  Karnik  argued
       that the  Upper  Tribunal's  findings  in  KK  on  the  position  of
       individuals who had been outside Korea for less than 10  years  were
       obiter dicta since all those appellants had been outside  Korea  for
       much longer.

   89. A North Korean migrant in the position of MP should not be  expected
       to act bona fide nor to take all  reasonably  practicable  steps  to
       obtain the requisite documents to enable  him  to  return  to  South
       Korea.  MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289, which held  that  it  was
       lawful to require a person in the United Kingdom to take  reasonable
       steps to apply for a passport or travel document,  or  to  establish
       their nationality, unless they could show that an application  to  a
       foreign Embassy would place at risk  relatives  or  friends  in  the
       country  of  origin,  should  be  distinguished.    MP   had   never
       previously lived in South Korea, nor could he demonstrate a  genuine
       desire to live there:  the contrary was the position.

   90. Mr Karnik reminded us of the evidence that during the JIC  phase  of
       the 'protection' procedure, there was, in general, no access to  the
       South Korean courts and no provision  for  legal  challenge  of  any
       citizenship status determination.  There was at least some risk that
       adverse events might occur during the JIC and Hanawon phases of  the
       'protection'  procedure   which   could   further   contravene   the
       appellant's protected ECHR rights.   In  particular,  the  appellant
       would rely on Article 6 ECHR rights  and  on  the  decision  of  the
       European Court of Human Rights in Othman (Abu Qatada) v  The  United
       Kingdom - 8139/09 [2012] ECHR 56.  Dr  Hwang's  evidence  about  the
       difficulties inherent in the 'protection' procedure should be  given
       weight in the absence of published information.  Mr Karnik  accepted
       that the international reports before the Tribunal made  no  mention
       of any  difficulty  during  returns  to  South  Korea  from  Western
       countries, arguing that this might be because such returns  did  not
       occur.

   91. South Korea regarded North  Korean  defectors  as  potential  spies;
       acknowledging that there was no published record and no evidence  of
       anyone being found to be a North Korean spy and refouled, Mr  Karnik
       reminded the  Tribunal  that  while  such  information  was  readily
       available in the United Kingdom through publication and  Freedom  of
       Information requests, South Korea did not do the same.   Information
       on what occurred in the JIC phase was not  publicly  available,  and
       although South Korea did have freedom  of  information  legislation,
       the national security restrictions  therein  made  such  information
       much more difficult to access.

   92. Mr Karnik acknowledged that, since MP was not a  Korean  Chinese  or
       Chinese Korean, there was no risk of his  being  refouled  by  South
       Korea to North Korea via China  in  breach  of  Article  33  of  the
       Refugee Convention.

   93. Dealing next with Article 8 ECHR, Mr Karnik relied on  the  evidence
       of Professor Bluth of social difficulties for  'new  South  Koreans'
       who were successful North Korean migrants.   They  were  treated  as
       second class citizens, had high levels  of  unemployment,  were  not
       integrated into South Korean society as a whole and had no  ties  to
       the community. Mr Karnik  acknowledged  that  MP  had  not  produced
       evidence of private life from his friends in the United Kingdom, but
       nevertheless, given the length of time he had been here,  the  Upper
       Tribunal should be prepared to imply some  degree  of  private  life
       during the six years he had spent in the  United  Kingdom,  studying
       for  at  least  part  of  the  time.   Although  MP  was  not  in  a
       relationship at the moment, he had had personal relationships during
       that period.

   94. MP had some family  members,  in  South  Korea,  in  particular  his
       mother, but would prefer to acquire United Kingdom citizenship.   It
       appeared that MP regarded application for refugee status as  a  path
       to such citizenship in due course.

    Discussion

    The expert evidence

   95. We have been  greatly  assisted  by  the  evidence  of  the  country
       experts. Professor Bluth's experience and knowledge of the situation
       in South  Korea,  derived  both  from  living  and  holding  various
       academic  posts  in  that  country  over  10  years,  and  from  his
       international and Embassy contacts, enabled him to give us a helpful
       overview  of  the  approach  of  the  South  Korean  government  and
       authorities to North Korean migrants returning from third countries,
       which he was able to expand in cross-examination.

   96. Dr Hwang has a high profile in South Korea as a human rights  lawyer
       and was the principal drafter of the South Korean Refugee Act  which
       brought the Refugee Convention into South Korean  law.   His  report
       confirmed that South Korea did not consider  that  the  Refugee  Act
       applied to North Koreans, who are considered not as  aliens  but  as
       citizens of the Republic of Korea.   We were particularly interested
       in his account of two cases which he  had  litigated  on  behalf  of
       clients, one of whom was a female Chinese citizen and  one  of  whom
       had been travelling with a  Chinese  woman.   However,  despite  his
       human rights knowledge and practice, Dr Hwang was unable to identify
       any statistical evidence or press reports of  refoulement  of  North
       Koreans, or even of Chinese citizens posing  as  North  Koreans,  to
       China.

   97. The evidence of Professor Goodwin-Gill was more in the nature  of  a
       submission   on   the   United    Kingdom's    Refugee    Convention
       responsibilities than country evidence  in  the  usual  sense.   Two
       points emerged as the core of his arguments: first,  that  that  the
       Readmission Agreement exposes to involuntary removal to South  Korea
       persons who are not  South  Korean  citizens  or  entitled  to  such
       citizenship; and second, that the Readmission Agreement is therefore
       unlawful, with particular reference to the different  terms  in  the
       2006 UK-Algerian Readmission Agreement which is confined to Algerian
       citizens and contains guarantees as to treatment on return.

   98. As to the risk that persons may be involuntarily returned  to  South
       Korea who are entitled only to  North  Korean  citizenship  and  are
       therefore refugees, we consider that Professor Goodwin-Gill has  not
       given sufficient weight to the  provisions  of  Article  10  of  the
       Readmission Agreement, which  states  that  the  provisions  of  the
       Readmission  Agreement  are  in  addition   to   the   international
       obligations of the Contracting  Parties,  nor  to  the  respondent's
       express  recognition  that  those  who  have   only   North   Korean
       citizenship are refugees, which means that they have  the  right  to
       remain in the United  Kingdom.  Both  South  Korea  and  the  United
       Kingdom are signatories to the Refugee Convention,  South  Korea  as
       recently as 2012, and nothing in the evidence  before  us  indicates
       that they would  not  meet  the  international  obligations  arising
       therefrom.

   99. The  purpose  of  the  South  Korean  Readmission  Agreement  is  to
       establish whether a person is South Korean, either by  documents  or
       consular interview,  with  fingerprint  verification  in  the  South
       Korean database, to enable the issue of return  documents  to  South
       Korea. If any person is a citizen only of North Korea  (and  on  the
       evidence before us,  no  such  person  exists  because  South  Korea
       accepts as its citizens  all  those  who  are  born  on  the  Korean
       Peninsula or to Korean parents from  either  North  Korea  or  South
       Korea), then they will not be issued with a travel document to South
       Korea. The country evidence does not  support  a  finding  that  any
       person who has to make a readmission  request  and  is  successfully
       returned to  South  Korea  on  travel  documents  issued  under  the
       Readmission Agreement will fail the  'protection'  procedure  or  be
       refused full South Korean citizenship  under  any  circumstances  at
       all, unless they are North Korean spies or Chinese citizens.   North
       Korean spies are prosecuted in South Korea; the evidence  before  us
       does not support a finding that they are required to return to North
       Korea thereafter.

  100. We do not consider that comparison  with  the  Algerian  Readmission
       Agreement assists us.  There is only  one  citizenship  in  Algeria,
       whereas  in  the  Korean  Peninsula  there  are   two,   overlapping
       citizenships, with each country asserting that all those born on the
       Korean Peninsula are its citizens. It is  right  that  the  Algerian
       document contains  some  provisions  about  treatment  of  returning
       Algerians and the South Korean document does not, but  since  we  do
       not find that there is a real risk of ill-treatment or serious  harm
       in South Korea, nothing turns on that difference.

     'Effective nationality' and the Nottebohm case

  101. In relation to 'effective' nationality, the position remains as  set
       out in KK at paragraph 1(c):   there  is  no  separate  question  of
       'effective'  nationality  and  the  issue  is  the  availability  of
       protection in the receiving State.  We  are  not  persuaded  by  the
       appellants'  contention  that  South  Korean  citizenship   is   not
       'effective' nationality for North Korean migrants.

  102. The Nottebohm case was a restitution case brought by  the  state  of
       Lichtenstein  concerning  the  detention  and  the  property  of  Mr
       Nottebohm who had acquired citizenship of  Lichtenstein  before  the
       Second World War but had always lived and traded in  either  Germany
       or  Guatemala,  spending  hardly  any  time  in  Lichtenstein.   The
       question  in  Nottebohm  was  whether,  as  a  country  claiming  Mr
       Nottebohm as its citizen, Lichtenstein had locus standi  before  the
       International Court of Justice to pursue such proceedings.  That  is
       not the issue here and  Nottebohm  'effective'  nationality  is  not
       relevant.

  103. In any event, the nationality to which these appellants have  access
       in  South  Korea  is  'effective'.   According  to   South   Korea's
       perspective, all of these appellants had lived in  the  Republic  of
       Korea (because they lived on the Korean Peninsula) for most of their
       lives before coming to the United Kingdom.  There  was  very  little
       evidence  of  anyone  failing  the  'protection'  procedure  and  no
       evidence at all that anyone was returned to North Korea even if they
       did not succeed.

    Readmission Agreement and South Korean nationality

  104. As stated at paragraph 1(d) of the KK guidance, 'the attitude of the
       State in question to a  person  who  seeks  reasons  for  not  being
       removed to that  State  may  be  of  very  limited  relevance'.  The
       question of the South Korean  authorities'  unwillingness  to  issue
       travel documents to North Korean migrants who  could  not  establish
       that they genuinely wished to  live  in  South  Korea  must  now  be
       answered in two ways: first, by  the  Readmission  Agreement,  which
       provides a mechanism for the issue of such documents  which  is  not
       dependent on the genuineness of the individual's  wish  to  live  in
       South  Korea;  and  second,  applying  MA  (Ethiopia),  because  the
       question of refugee status is an objective one, requiring  a  person
       to demonstrate that they have cooperated  by  seeking  to  establish
       whether they can avail themselves of protection from  another  State
       of which they may be a citizen.  Only if they have done so can  they
       begin to argue that the second State  will  not  provide  them  with
       protection and seek to establish refugee status based on nationality
       of a State where they may be at risk.

  105. In entering into the Readmission Agreement, South Korea undertook to
       accept everyone who meets the conditions set  out  therein.   It  is
       right to say that the Readmission Agreement does not  mention  North
       Korea:  as drafted, it applies to all those  who  originate  on  the
       Korean Peninsula, which South Korea regards as  its  territory,  and
       that  territory  includes  North  Korea.  It  is  not  open  to  the
       appellants now to argue that they  can  defeat  removal,  either  as
       failed asylum seekers who would be unwelcome in South Korea for that
       reason, or by asserting that they  are  unwilling  to  go  to  South
       Korea,  for  example,  because  they  would  prefer  United  Kingdom
       citizenship.  Such preference is irrelevant to the question  whether
       they are refugees.  Refugee status is not in  itself  a  citizenship
       route; that is not its purpose.

  106. There is a general obligation on asylum claimants to cooperate  with
       authorities  in  the  receiving  country.   In  MA  (Ethiopia),  the
       appellant, an Ethiopian citizen of Eritrean descent,  was  reluctant
       to return to Ethiopia; her evidence was that when she  attended  the
       Ethiopian Embassy she was refused  a  travel  document  to  Ethiopia
       after she told them that she was  an  Eritrean  citizen,  which  the
       Tribunal found to be factually incorrect.

  107. The Court of Appeal held that asylum applicants who have  reached  a
       safe country are expected to apply to the relevant Embassy  or  High
       Commission to exercise any nationality which they may possess before
       seeking international protection as refugees.  In  his  judgment  at
       [49]-[52] Elias LJ, with whom the other members of the Court agreed,
       held that an applicant was required to act bona fide and to make  an
       application at the relevant Embassy before international  protection
       could be sought.  There was normally  no  risk  in  the  country  of
       refuge to an appellant in doing so, although  exceptionally  such  a
       risk might arise, for example where identification of the  applicant
       at the Embassy put at risk their  family members in the  country  of
       origin.  At [52] he said this:

           "52.  Furthermore, this approach  to  the  issue  of  return  is
           entirely consistent with the  well-established  principle  that,
           before an applicant for asylum can claim  the  protection  of  a
           surrogate state, he or she must first take all steps  to  secure
           protection from the home state. That was the approach adopted in
           Bradshaw [[1994] Imm AR 359], to which I have made reference. It
           can be seen as an aspect of the duty placed on an  applicant  to
           co-operate in the asylum process. Paragraph  205  of  the  UNHCR
           handbook expressly states that an applicant for asylum must,  if
           necessary, make an effort  to  procure  additional  evidence  to
           assist the decision maker. Bradshaw is  an  example  of  such  a
           case. The issue was whether the applicant  was  stateless.  Lord
           MacLean  held  that  before  a  person  could  be  regarded   as
           stateless, she should make an application for citizenship of the
           countries with which she was most closely connected."

       We are not persuaded that we should depart from MA, or  that  it  is
       properly distinguishable.

  108. The Readmission Agreement procedures set out at paragraph  24  above
       provide a complete answer to the asserted  difficulty  of  returning
       North Koreans to South Korea, providing for an  individual's  origin
       in the Korean Peninsula to be established by the  use  of  documents
       (even  out  of  date  or  photocopy  documents),   and/or   consular
       interviews, together with fingerprint checks  in  the  South  Korean
       database, on  completion  of  which  process,  South  Korean  return
       documents must be issued by the South Korean authorities.   Until  a
       South Korean travel document is issued, of course,  removal  is  not
       possible.

  109. The evidence from the  respondent  that,  of  20  individuals  whose
       fingerprints were checked on the South Korean database, 14  sets  of
       fingerprints  were  matched  as  recognised  South  Korean  citizens
       supports the evidence of Professor Bluth that  an  official  at  the
       South Korean Embassy in London told him that most of those  claiming
       to be from North Korea were South Korean citizens.

  110. The respondent's evidence was that at least in the  initial  stages,
       the Readmission Agreement was used only to  re-document  individuals
       recognised by South Korea as its citizens or who had lived in  South
       Korea.  The legal  effect  of  the  Readmission  Agreement  is  not,
       however, limited by the respondent's  current  practice,  which  may
       change from  time  to  time,  subject  to  the  constraints  of  the
       Readmission Agreement.

    The 'protection' procedure

  111. Those returned to South Korea who have not previously asserted their
       South Korean citizenship or lived in South Korea must  complete  the
       'protection'  procedure  before  being  given  access  to  the  full
       citizenship benefits and resettlement facilities available to  'new'
       South Koreans originally from North Korea.  South Korea has absorbed
       over 20,000 such migrants since the division of the country, and  is
       a modern, prosperous country in which solid support is available for
       resettling them.  As recorded in  particular  in  the  International
       Crisis Group report 'Strangers at Home: North Koreans in the  South'
       on 14 July 2011,  new South Korean  citizens  who  emerge  from  the
       'protection' procedure are not  high-level  propaganda  assets,  but
       ordinary North Koreans, who tend to be in poor health,  ill-educated
       and have difficulty adapting to capitalist society in  South  Korea.



  112.  Strikingly, there are almost no reports of any human rights  abuses
       during the JIC procedure, save for Dr Hwang's two  cases,  one  from
       1999 and one from 2000.  There are  none  at  all  for  the  Hanawon
       training phase.  We are not persuaded that if  harm  were  occurring
       during the 'protection' procedure,  or  family  members  were  being
       separated, there would not be international NGO evidence  reflecting
       such ill-treatment, whether or  not  the  information  is  published
       within South Korea.  Remedies are available before the South  Korean
       courts both for claims of ill-treatment during the  JIC  phase,  and
       for unlawful detention, as evidenced by the two cases  in  which  Dr
       Hwang acted.  We reminded ourselves of the evidence in the US  State
       Department Report that a Chinese citizen had been able to access the
       South Korean courts in a suspensive appeal against deportation,  and
       was detained in South Korea pending the outcome of his appeal.

    Duration of the 'protection' procedure

  113. There was an apparent conflict between  the  evidence  of  Professor
       Bluth and of Dr Hwang regarding the duration of the JIC phase of the
       'protection'  procedure,  but  the  conflict  is  not,   we   think,
       significant nor their evidence irreconcilable: Dr Hwang's experience
       predated the South Korean government's increased  security  concerns
       in 2010, and appears to consist of only two clients whose JIC  phase
       was in 1999/2000.  We approach these  appeals  on  the  basis  that,
       while in general the JIC phase of  the  'protection'  procedure  now
       lasts up to 120 days, in some cases it may be longer,  but  normally
       not  significantly  longer.   Suspected  North  Korean  intelligence
       agents may have been detained for longer periods, up to three  years
       in one case.

  114. Dealing next with the  Hanawon  reorientation  training,  the  final
       hurdle before full citizenship rights and benefits are available  to
       new South Koreans coming from North  Korea,  we  note,  first,  that
       there is no evidence of any abuse or harm during the Hanawon  phase;
       second, that the purpose of the  training  offered  is  benign;  and
       third, that substantial housing, training and employment grants  are
       made available once the Hanawon phase  is  complete,  with  a  bonus
       payable once employment is  obtained.  Although  migrants  who  have
       lived for a time in  the  West  may  find  Hanawon's  training  less
       necessary because they have some experience of  capitalist  society,
       all new South Koreans must spend three months in Hanawon.

  115. Overall, therefore, it is right to say that it  will  normally  take
       approximately seven months before a 'new' South Korean citizen  from
       North Korea can move freely and  benefit  fully  from  South  Korean
       citizenship and the financial and social support it  offers.   Those
       in the 'protection' procedure are treated differently from  refugees
       because, despite  the  JIC  examination  and  the  Hanawon  training
       centres, the South Korean authorities accept that all persons coming
       from North Korea are South Korean citizens.

    Article 33 of the Refugee Convention: 'refoulement'

  116. Ms Hulse and Mr Karnik accepted that the appellants in these appeals
       are not lawfully in the United Kingdom and that the wider protection
       from expulsion in Article 32  of  the  Refugee  Convention  was  not
       available to them.   They would only be  in  a  position  to  resist
       return to South Korea under Article 33 of  the  Refugee  Convention,
       that is to say, if their life or  freedom  would  be  threatened  in
       South Korea for a Convention reason:

           "Article 33. PROHIBITION of expulsion or return ("refoulement")


           1. No Contracting State shall expel  or  return  ("refouler")  a
           refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories
           where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of  his
           race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
           group or political opinion. ..."

       There is no evidence at all that there is a risk to life or  freedom
       for a Refugee Convention reason for North Korean migrants  in  South
       Korea.

  117. Nor is there any evidence at all that  on  return  to  South  Korea,
       North Korean migrants are  at  real  risk  of  torture,  inhuman  or
       degrading treatment or punishment capable of engaging the very  high
       standard required for Article 3 ECHR.  At worst,  there  will  be  a
       period of restriction of freedom  and  some  social  and  employment
       difficulties  thereafter,  despite  the  solid   support   programme
       available for resettlement of North Korean migrants.   The  evidence
       does not indicate that there is a real  risk  of  adverse  treatment
       during either phase of the 'protection'  procedure.  Many  countries
       detain  for  a  time  those  seeking  entry  and  settlement.   Such
       restriction on the freedom of these appellants as occurs  under  the
       'protection' procedure is for  a  relatively  short  period  and  in
       benign circumstances.

    What happens after the 'protection' procedure is complete?

  118. There is no evidence in the  material  before  us  of  anyone  being
       refused access to the benefits of South Korean  citizenship  at  the
       end of the 'protection' procedure, save where they had  admitted  to
       being Chinese citizens.  A small number  of  self-confessed  Chinese
       citizens may have been removed to China, with others benefiting from
       delays while they pursue lengthy appellate  processes,  against  the
       background of  removal  directions  to  China.   South  Korea  is  a
       signatory to the Refugee Convention,  which  has  been  incorporated
       into South Korean national law, and  is  aware,  therefore,  of  its
       responsibilities under Articles 32 and 33 of the Refugee Convention.
       North Korean Intelligence agents, even those seeking to do  harm  in
       South Korea, have not been returned to North Korea or  refouled  via
       China; rather, they are prosecuted and sentenced within South Korea.
        There is no evidence that they are  removed  when  their  sentences
       have been served.

  119. The evidence is that financial and social  support  is  provided  to
       enable reintegration of 'new' South Koreans after Hanawon  has  been
       completed, including help with housing,  employment,  and  financial
       inducements.  North Korean migrants do find the adjustment difficult
       and there is some discrimination  in  employment  and  housing,  but
       nevertheless, as Professor Bluth accepted, their situation  is  much
       better than it was in North Korea.  Those who have spent  some  time
       in capitalist countries such as the United Kingdom may make a better
       adjustment:  the evidence before us did not address any differential
       for that group in contrast to those who travelled to South Korea via
       communist China.  Nothing in the evidence before us comes  close  to
       the  Article  3  standard  in  relation  to  the  reintegration  and
       subsequent life of former North Korean migrants in South Korea.

    Conclusions

  120. When all of the evidence and submissions are  considered,  there  is
       much in the original list of issues that is no  longer  in  dispute.
       The respondent has no intention of returning North  Korean  migrants
       to North Korea and there are no removal directions to China for  any
       of these appellants.  There was no evidence before us to  support  a
       finding  that  the  United  Kingdom  returns   anyone   whose   sole
       citizenship is of North Korea to South Korea, or anywhere else.   On
       the  contrary:  the  respondent  accepts  that  under  the   Refugee
       Convention, North Koreans who have left the Korean Peninsula  cannot
       be returned to North Korea, and that anyone entitled only  to  North
       Korean citizenship, if such a person exists, is a refugee.  For  the
       reasons set out at paragraph 122 below, we consider that  there  are
       in reality no such persons:  South Korea considers all North Koreans
       to be South Korean citizens.

  121. The arguments considered in KK regarding the treatment of those  who
       are unwilling to live in South Korea fall away, having regard to  MA
       (Ethiopia)  and   the   Readmission   Agreement.    Applicants   for
       international protection in the United  Kingdom  must  cooperate  in
       establishing whether any other country of which they are  a  citizen
       can offer them protection;  the  Readmission  Agreement  provides  a
       mechanism by which that is achieved, and travel documents for  those
       who can show that they have the required family or  residence  links
       to the Korean Peninsula. The  position  on  'effective'  nationality
       remains  as  in  KK:   the  Nottebohm  case  does  not  assist   the
       appellants.

  122. The South Korean Refugee Act is of  some  importance.   Given  South
       Korea's apparent intention to comply with  the  Refugee  Convention,
       its exclusion of North Koreans  from  the  definition  of  'refugee'
       makes it clear that a North Korean in South  Korea  cannot,  in  the
       view of South Korea, be 'outside the  country  of  his  nationality'
       because he is, and always has been, a  South  Korean  citizen.   The
       evidence as to nationality is clear: South Korea regards all persons
       born on the Korean Peninsula as South Korean,  and  on  that  basis,
       there is no group of persons whose only nationality is North Korean.



  123. There is no evidence in the materials before us that  anyone,  other
       than Chinese citizens, has been returned from South Korea to  China.
       The return by South Korea to China  of  Chinese  citizens  in  South
       Korea who have claimed to be North Korean does not create a risk  of
       refoulement to North Korea of such  individuals,  because  they  are
       Chinese. The evidence is that South Korea  prosecutes  North  Korean
       spies and that they are then punished according to law within  South
       Korea, not returned to North  Korea.   There  is  no  evidence  that
       anyone other than North Korean spies and Chinese citizens  has  ever
       failed the 'protection' procedure.

  124. The  subsequent  treatment  of  North  Koreans  whose  South  Korean
       citizenship is confirmed after the  'protection'  procedure  is  not
       such as to require  international  protection:   they  receive  full
       South Korean citizenship with all its benefits  and  duties  (except
       that military service is not required of  them)  and  although  they
       there  may  be  some  difficulty   adjusting   and   some   hardship
       discrimination, a support package is in place and  their  lives  are
       much better than they would have been in North Korea.

  125. The challenge to the Upper Tribunal's finding that  those  who  have
       been outside the Korean Peninsula for more than 10 years would  lose
       their South Korean citizenship is made out.  The  wider  expert  and
       country evidence before  us  in  these  appeals  indicates  that  in
       practice South Korea will not reject any returning person  from  the
       Korean Peninsula unless they have acquired another nationality since
       leaving the Korean Peninsula.  The Readmission  Agreement  makes  no
       distinction based on length of absence.  To that extent, the country
       guidance in KK is wrong and we have amended it.

  126. The finding in KK at paragraph 2(d) that South Korean law  does  not
       generally permit dual  nationality  requires  revision.   Under  the
       Overseas Koreans Act (as  amended  in  2013),  former  South  Korean
       citizens who have not yet reacquired their South Korean  nationality
       ('Overseas Koreans') are entitled to  return  and  reside  in  South
       Korea for a maximum of  two  years  without  resuming  South  Korean
       citizenship and, pursuant  to  the  amended  Nationality  Act  (last
       amendment 2010), to retain another, dual nationality for a time,  as
       long as such nationality is never used to  enter  South  Korea,  nor
       relied upon when living in South Korea.  Other conditions limit  the
       time for which dual nationality can be maintained.

    Country guidance

  127. We therefore give the following updated country guidance:

       1)  The  Upper  Tribunal's  country  guidance  in  KK   and   others
          (Nationality: North Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC)  stands,
          with  the  exception  of  paragraphs  2(d)  and   2(e)   thereof.
          Paragraphs (2), (3) and (4) of this guidance replace  that  given
          in paragraphs 2(d) and 2(e) respectively of KK.

       2) South Korean law makes limited  provision  for  dual  nationality
          under the Overseas  Koreans  Act  and  the  Nationality  Act  (as
          amended).

       3) All North Korean citizens  are  also  citizens  of  South  Korea.
          While absence from the Korean Peninsula for more  than  10  years
          may entail fuller enquiries as to whether a person  has  acquired
          another  nationality  or  right  of  residence  before  a  travel
          document is issued, upon return to South Korea all  persons  from
          the Korean  Peninsula  are  treated  as  returning  South  Korean
          citizens.

       4) There is no evidence that North Koreans returned to  South  Korea
          are sent back to North Korea or anywhere else, even if they  fail
          the 'protection' procedure,  and  however  long  they  have  been
          outside the Korean Peninsula.

       5) The process of returning North Koreans to South Korea is now  set
          out in the United Kingdom-South Korea Readmission Agreement  (the
          Readmission Agreement) entered into between the two countries  on
          10 December 2011.  At present,  the  issue  of  emergency  travel
          documents under the Readmission Agreement is  confined  to  those
          for whom documents and/or  fingerprint  evidence  establish  that
          they are already known to South Korea as citizens,  or  who  have
          registered as such with the South Korean Embassy  in  the  United
          Kingdom.

       6) Applying  MA  (Ethiopia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
          Department [2009] EWCA Civ 289, North Koreans outside the  Korean
          Peninsula who object to return to South Korea must cooperate with
          the United Kingdom authorities in seeking  to  establish  whether
          they can avail themselves of the protection of  another  country,
          in particular South Korea. Unless they can  demonstrate  that  in
          all of the countries where they are entitled to citizenship  they
          have a well-founded fear of persecution for a Refugee  Convention
          reason, they are not refugees.

       7) If they are not refugees, it remains open to such persons to seek
          to establish individual factors creating a risk for them in South
          Korea which  would  engage  the  United  Kingdom's  international
          obligations under the EU Qualification Directive or the ECHR.

       8) There is no risk of refoulement of  any  North  Korean  to  North
          Korea from South Korea, whether  directly  or  via  China.  South
          Korea does not return anyone to North Korea at all  and  it  does
          not return North Koreans to China.  In a small number  of  cases,
          Chinese nationals have been returned to China.  A small number of
          persons identified by  the  South  Korean  authorities  as  North
          Korean intelligence agents have been prosecuted in  South  Korea.
          There is no evidence that  they  were  subsequently  required  to
          leave South Korea.

       9) Once the 'protection' procedure has been completed, North  Korean
          migrants have the same rights as other South Korean citizens save
          that they are not required to perform military service for  South
          Korea.  They have access to  resettlement  assistance,  including
          housing, training and financial assistance.  Former North Koreans
          may have difficulty in adjusting to South Korea and there may  be
          some  discrimination  in  social  integration,   employment   and
          housing,  but  not  at  a  level  which  requires   international
          protection.

    Application of the country guidance to the individual appellants

    Appellant GP

  128. GP and his wife are both North Koreans, born in 1986  and  therefore
       27 years old. It  is  accepted  that  they  both  left  North  Korea
       illegally and were each returned once by the Chinese authorities  to
       North Korea before managing to escape and  make  their  way  to  the
       West.  They do not wish to go to South Korea and it is accepted that
       they have never been there. They now have two young children born in
       the United Kingdom. The respondent accepted that the GP family would
       be at risk if returned to North Korea and that if  that  were  their
       sole nationality, they would be entitled to refugee status.

  129. In February 2010, their appeals were dismissed.    Designated  Judge
       Phillips found that  they  were  South  Korean  citizens  who  could
       lawfully be returned there.  The appellants appealed  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal, arguing that they had no ties to South  Korea,  either  by
       family or residence.   They asserted that they could not  reasonably
       be expected to avail themselves of the protection  of  South  Korea,
       arguing that the First-tier Tribunal had misunderstood the effect of
       the  Protection  Act,  which  would  not  provide  them  with   full
       citizenship of South Korea.

  130. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan  on
       two grounds:

             1) That the First-tier Tribunal had arguably  failed  to  deal
                adequately with the provisions of the  Protection  Act  and
                its effect on these appellants; and
             2)  That  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  arguably  failed  to
                consider whether there was discrimination  in  South  Korea
                against North  Koreans  of  a  type  sufficient  to  render
                unlawful the removal  of  North  Koreans  from  the  United
                Kingdom.
             3) Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan also granted permission on  the
                question whether there was a risk of refoulement for  these
                appellants from South Korea to North Korea via China.

  131. None of those arguments can succeed, in the light of the guidance we
       have given.  These appellants are South Korean  citizens  and  their
       asylum appeal must  fail.   Article  3  ECHR  is  not  engaged:  the
       evidence does not establish any real risk of persecution or  serious
       harm to them in  South  Korea,  either  in  general  or  during  the
       'protection' procedure, and no individual risk has been established.



  132. Article 8 of the ECHR (private and family life) was not relied  upon
       in these appeals and there was no evidence of private  life  outside
       the family circle.  Ms Hulse specifically reserved her  position  on
       Article 8 for a later application.  We are not required,  therefore,
       to deal with Article 8, within or without the Immigration Rules.

  133. Pursuant to s.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
       2009, we have  had  regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the  third
       appellant and of GP and JP's three year old daughter, who is not  an
       appellant in these proceedings.  The children  are  three  and  five
       years old:  they are both of an age where their main connections are
       to their parents and there is no evidence before us to indicate  any
       other reason why these children  should  not  be  removed  from  the
       United Kingdom and live in a country of which  all  of  the  family,
       including these children, are citizens.  There is no evidence before
       us  which  establishes  that  the  appellants'  children  would   be
       separated from their parents during the  'protection'  procedure  or
       that there exists any other factor making it inappropriate to return
       these particular children to South Korea with their parents.

  134. It follows, therefore, that there was no material error  of  law  in
       the First-tier Tribunal determination and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       determination dismissing the appeals of the GP family stands.


    Appellant MP

  135. MP was born in 1981 in North Korea and is currently  33  years  old.
       He is unmarried.  He appeals against the  respondent's  decision  to
       remove him from the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under
       paragraphs 8-10 of Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   His
       North Korean citizenship is  not  disputed  in  the  refusal  letter
       accompanying  that  decision;  again,  if   that   were   his   only
       citizenship, on the appellant's North Korean history the  respondent
       accepts that he would be a refugee.

  136. MP left North Korea for China in September 2006, travelling with his
       mother, who in 2007 went to South Korea and lives there.  MP  stayed
       in China, then came to  the  United  Kingdom  on  21  October  2008,
       travelling on a Korean passport to which he was  not  entitled.   He
       has never been lawfully in the  United  Kingdom.   He  has  a  liver
       problem which he also had in North Korea, but for which he has never
       received or sought any medical treatment. MP claimed  asylum  on  30
       June 2010.

  137. In October 2011, Immigration Judge  Birrell  dismissed  MP's  appeal
       against the removal directions on the basis that he was both a North
       Korean and a South Korean citizen, that  he  had  left  North  Korea
       illegally and would be at risk of persecution if returned there, but
       that the appellant had  not  demonstrated  a  well-founded  fear  of
       persecution in South Korea and  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the
       appellant would not tell the South Korean authorities  that  he  did
       not wish to settle in South Korea.   She  dismissed  the  appeal  on
       Refugee  Convention,  humanitarian  protection  and   human   rights
       grounds.

  138. The basis of the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  that
       his presence in the United Kingdom as an  asylum  claimant  and  his
       previous residence in China would cause the South Korean authorities
       to treat him with suspicion and that after removal to South Korea it
       was unlikely that he would be  able  to  satisfy  the  South  Korean
       authorities that he was a North  Korean  migrant  and  he  would  be
       removed to China, putting him at risk of refoulement to North  Korea
       where he was at risk or persecution.   In November  2011,  when  the
       grounds were drafted, South Korea had not  yet  signed  the  Refugee
       Convention.

  139. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge had arguably erred in her approach to the  evaluation
       of the risk of refoulement via China  and  may  have  erred  in  her
       application of KK (North Korea), ST (Ethiopia) or MSS v Belgium  and
       Greece 30696/09 [2011] ECHR 108. On 16 January 2012, Upper  Tribunal
       Judge King ordered that the questions of the application of  KK  and
       the risk of refoulement should be dealt with at a rolled up  hearing
       and gave  directions  for  the  submission  of  expert  and  country
       background evidence.  By a Rule 24 reply, the  respondent  indicated
       that she did not  oppose  the  application  and  invited  the  Upper
       Tribunal to determine the appeal by way of a fresh oral  continuance
       hearing to consider the appellants' asylum appeal.

  140. MP has been outside the Korean Peninsula  for  eight  years,  having
       travelled first to China. His  mother  lives  in  South  Korea.   In
       December 2006, while in China,  MP  approached  the  Shenyang  South
       Korean Consulate-General.  He  told  them  he  was  a  North  Korean
       defector living in hiding in China and asked for help to move on  to
       South Korea.   Embassy officials told him they could not assist  him
       and that he would have to approach the main South Korean Embassy  in
       Beijing.   MP considered that to be too  dangerous  because  he  was
       living in China illegally, so he did not  go.   He  claims  to  have
       worked as a lumberjack in China and seeks  to  retract  a  statement
       apparently made at interview that he was detained in China for  some
       time. In October 2008, using a South Korean  passport  to  which  he
       claims not to have been entitled, MP left  China  and  came  to  the
       United Kingdom, claiming asylum on arrival.   He  was  screened  but
       never had a formal asylum interview.

  141. MP's fingerprints are on the South Korean database  and  his  mother
       already lives in South Korea.   MP has expressed himself as  willing
       to apply to enter South Korea under the 'protection' procedure,  but
       has not made such an application yet.  He would  prefer  to  receive
       United Kingdom citizenship but such preference has no bearing on his
       entitlement to international protection as  a  refugee,  by  way  of
       humanitarian protection or on human rights grounds.

  142. We reject MP's assertion that the reason the South Korean government
       has his fingerprints  is  that  they  were  taken  at  the  Shenyang
       Consulate-General in China, which refused to process his application
       for  a 'protection' visa to enter South Korea.  There is evidence to
       support the refusal of Chinese South Korean embassies and Consulates
       to assist North Koreans to enter South Korea,  but  no  evidence  to
       support the taking of fingerprints in the course of  such  refusals:
       both Professor Bluth and Dr Hwang were specifically asked about this
       point and stated that they had no knowledge of such a practice.

  143. We treat the fingerprint recognition as a clear indication  that  MP
       has already been accepted  as  a  South  Korean  citizen,  like  his
       mother.   That being the case, he already has the  full  benefit  of
       South Korean citizenship and would not  be  required  to  enter  the
       'protection' procedure. As a South Korean citizen, MP is entitled to
       come and go from South Korea as he wishes, and he will  be  able  to
       return  without  significant  difficulty,  using   the   Readmission
       Agreement to renew his travel documents if he needs to do so. We are
       not satisfied on the evidence before us that in South Korea there is
       any risk to MP of persecution or serious harm engaging  the  Refugee
       Convention, the Qualification Directive, or Article 3 ECHR.   He  is
       not a refugee and he is not irremovable on Article 3 grounds.

  144. We turn to consider Article 8  ECHR.   The  evidence  before  us  is
       slight:  the appellant has not explained how he  has  been  spending
       his time in the United Kingdom,  save  that  he  has  been  learning
       English and studying.  There was no evidence from  friends  or  from
       any colleges where he may have studied.  While  there  may  be  some
       limited degree of private life and Article 8 ECHR may be engaged, we
       consider that the First-tier Tribunal  was  unarguably  entitled  to
       conclude on the evidence before it that any such interference  would
       not be of sufficient gravity to outweigh the United Kingdom's  right
       to  control  immigration.   We  find  that  the  appellant  has  not
       established that his removal to  South  Korea,  of  which  he  is  a
       citizen, would be disproportionate.

  145. In this appeal, the respondent in  her  rule  24  notice  in  effect
       conceded that there was an error of law.  We therefore set aside the
       determination and remake it by dismissing it on all grounds.

    Anonymity

  146. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008, the appellants have been granted  anonymity  throughout  these
       proceedings and after their conclusion,  absent  any  order  to  the
       contrary by the Upper Tribunal or any other Court seised of relevant
       proceedings. Unless an application to the contrary  is  made  within
       seven days of receipt of this determination, we consider that  there
       is no need to maintain  that  order  and  we  revoke  the  anonymity
       direction.
|                                      |                                     |
|Date:  3 September 2014               |Signed:                              |
|                                      |Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson         |


                                 APPENDIX A

                     Documents before the Upper Tribunal


   |Date         |Source                |Description                       |
|             |                      |                                  |
|1997         |                      |                                  |
|13 December  |Republic of Korea     |Nationality Act (as amended)      |
|             |                      |                                  |
|2003         |                      |                                  |
|Undated      |Republic of Korea     |Military Service Act (as amended) |
|             |                      |                                  |
|2005         |                      |                                  |
|11 March     |US State Department   |"The Status of North Korean Asylum|
|             |                      |Seekers and U.S. Government Policy|
|             |                      |Towards Them"                     |
|             |                      |                                  |
|2006         |                      |                                  |
|11 July      |United Kingdom -      |Cm 7921 - Agreement on the        |
|             |Algeria               |Circulation of Persons and        |
|             |                      |Readmission between the Government|
|             |                      |of the United Kingdom of Great    |
|             |                      |Britain and Northern Ireland and  |
|             |                      |the Government of the People's    |
|             |                      |Democratic Republic of Algeria    |
|             |                      |[ratified 25 February 2007, in    |
|             |                      |force  27 March 2007]             |
|19 December  |United Kingdom IND    |OGN: North Korea                  |
|             |                      |                                  |
|2008         |                      |                                  |
|11 March     |US State Department   |"Country reports on human rights  |
|             |                      |practices 2007: Korea, Democratic |
|             |                      |People's Republic of"             |
|6 May        |US State Department   |"The importance of human rights   |
|             |                      |for North Korea"                  |
|28 May       |Amnesty International |"Amnesty International report     |
|             |                      |2008:  Korea (Democratic People's |
|             |                      |Republic of)"                     |
|2 July       |Dr Young-hae Chi      |Expert Report for GP              |
|28 November  |Amnesty International |"South Korea: repeal or           |
|             |                      |fundamentally reform the National |
|             |                      |Security Law"                     |
|             |                      |                                  |
|2009         |                      |                                  |
|16 July      |Freedom House         |Freedom in the World 2009:  South |
|             |                      |Korea                             |
|21 July      |UKBA                  |Country of Origin Report on       |
|             |                      |Democratic People's Republic of   |
|             |                      |Korea (excerpt)                   |
|11 September |UKBA                  |Key documents Republic of Korea   |
|             |                      |(South Korea)                     |
|             |                      |                                  |
|2010         |                      |                                  |
|             |                      |                                  |
|20 May       |Radio Free            |"South Korea blames North Korea   |
|             |Europe/Radio Liberty  |for sinking of warship, promises  |
|             |                      |retaliation"                      |
|25 May       |Voice of America News |"North Korea breaks relations with|
|             |                      |South Korea"                      |
|11 June      |Radio Free Asia       |"Cheonan fallout hits Defectors"  |
|12 June      |Voice of America News |"North Korea threatens South"     |
|             |                      |                                  |
|             |                      |                                  |
|2011         |                      |                                  |
|14 July      |International Crisis  |"Strangers at Home:  North Koreans|
|             |Group                 |in the South"                     |
|18 October   |Travel China Guide    |"Embassy and Consulates of South  |
|             |                      |Korea in China"                   |
|20 December  |The Stationery Office |Agreement between the Government  |
|             |                      |of the United Kingdom of Great    |
|             |                      |Britain and Northern Ireland and  |
|             |                      |the Government of the Republic of |
|             |                      |Korea concerning the Readmission  |
|             |                      |of Persons (Cm 8392)              |
|             |                      |                                  |
|2012         |                      |                                  |
|undated      |Professor Christoph   |Supplemental Expert Report        |
|             |Bluth                 |prepared for GP                   |
|24 May       |European Parliament   |"Resolution on the situation  of  |
|             |                      |North Korean refugees"            |
|             |                      |(2012/2655(RSP))                  |
|23 August    |IPI Global Observatory|"Human rights of North Korean     |
|             |                      |defectors in dire straits"        |
|27 September |UKBA                  |Operational Guidance Note:  North |
|             |                      |Korea (DPRK)                      |
|25 October   |Professor Christoph   |Expert Report prepared for GP     |
|             |Bluth                 |                                  |
|4 December   |Andrew Wolman         |"North Korean Asylum Seekers and  |
|             |                      |Dual Nationality"                 |
|             |                      |                                  |
|2013         |                      |                                  |
|20 March     |BBC News              |"North Korea enters 'state of war'|
|             |                      |with South"                       |
|27 March     |Professor Christoph   |Expert report prepared for MP     |
|             |Bluth                 |                                  |
|April 2013   |Professor Guy         |Expert report prepared for GP     |
|             |Goodwin-Gill          |                                  |
|24 May       |Dr Pillkyu Hwang      |Expert report prepared for MP     |


                                 APPENDIX B
                        South Korean Legal Materials

    1. The statutory South Korean materials relevant to these  appeals  are
       as follows:

|Description             |Statute                   |Website link           |
|South Korean            |Constitution of the       |http://www.refworld.org|
|Constitution            |Republic of Korea [1948]  |/docid/3ae6b4dd14.html |
|                        |(last amended 1987)       |                       |
|Nationality Act         |No. 16: Nationality Act   |http://www.refworld.org|
|                        |[1948] (amended 2010)     |/docid/3fc1d8ca2.html  |
|Protection and          |No. 5259: Act on the      |http://www.refworld.org|
|Settlement Act          |Protection and Settlement |/docid/3ae6b4ef28.html |
|                        |Support of Residents      |                       |
|                        |Escaping From North       |                       |
|                        |Korea, [1997]:            |                       |
|Overseas Koreans Act    |No. 6328: Act on the      |http://korea.na.go.kr/r|
|                        |Immigration and Legal     |es/low_03_read.jsp?boar|
|                        |Status of Overseas Koreans|did=1000000037&boardite|
|                        |[2000] (amended 2013)     |mid=1000000425         |
|Military Service Act    |Military Service Act      |http://korea.na.go.kr/r|
|                        |[2003] and Amendment to   |es/tra_read.jsp?boardid|
|                        |Military Service Act      |=1000000024&boarditemid|
|                        |[2006]                    |=1000005158            |
|Refugee Act             |No. 11298: Refugee        |http://www.refworld.org|
|                        |Act [2012]                |/docid/4fd5cd5a2.html. |


   South Korean Constitution

2. The Constitution provides as follows:

      "Article 1
      (1)The Republic of Korea shall be a democratic republic.
      (2)The sovereignty of the Republic of Korea shall reside in the people
      and all state authority shall emanate from the people.
      Article 2
      (1)Nationality in the Republic of Korea shall be prescribed by law.
      (2)It shall be the duty of the  State  to  protect  citizens  residing
      abroad as prescribed by law.
      Article 3
      The territory of the Republic of Korea shall  consist  of  the  Korean
      peninsula and its adjacent islands.
      Article 4
      The Republic of Korea shall seek unification and shall  formulate  and
      carry out a policy of peaceful unification based on the principles  of
      freedom and democracy."

   Nationality Act

3. The Nationality Act provides that the following  are  citizens  of  South
   Korea by birth: persons whose father or mother was  a  citizen  of  South
   Korea at the time of the person's birth; persons  whose  deceased  father
   was a citizen of South Korea, if  he  died  before  the  person's  birth;
   persons 'born in the Republic of Korea' if the parents' nationalities are
   unknown or they have no nationality, and any child found abandoned in the
   Republic of Korea.  For these purposes, 'born in the Republic  of  Korea'
   means born anywhere on the Korean peninsula, following Article 3  of  the
   South Korean Constitution.  Article 3 of  the  Nationality  Act  provides
   that where a Korean citizen who is still  a  minor,  but  who  is  not  a
   citizen of the Republic of Korea (a 'foreigner') reports to the  Minister
   of Justice and establishes that his father or mother is a Korean  citizen
   and recognises him as their child, he  shall  attain  Korean  citizenship
   when such report is made, subject  to  procedures  to  be  determined  by
   Presidential decree.  If the minor is under 15, Article 19 provides  that
   he shall be legally represented for the making of any nationality report.



4. Articles 4-8 of the Nationality Act deal with  naturalisation  provisions
   for foreigners, including provision for the naturalisation of spouses and
   minor children.  Article 9 provides a procedure whereby a person who  has
   lost their Korean nationality can apply to the Minister of Justice for it
   to be reinstated, subject to procedures to be set out in  a  Presidential
   decree, and to four exceptions set out at Article 9(2):

    "Article  9  (Attainment  of  Nationality  through   Reinstatement   of
    Nationality)
    (1)    A foreigner who was a national of  the  Republic  of  Korea  may
    attain the nationality of the Republic of Korea by obtaining permission
    for the reinstatement of nationality from the Minister of Justice.
    (2)    The Minister of Justice shall not  allow  the  reinstatement  of
    nationality  to  a  person  who  falls  under  any  of  the   following
    subparagraphs, after screening such person  who  has  applied  for  the
    reinstatement of nationality:

           1. A person who has inflicted harm on the State or society;
           2. A person whose conduct is disorderly;
           3. A person who lost or renounced  his/her  nationality  of  the
              Republic of Korea in order to evade military service;
           4. A person  for  whom  the  Minister  of  Justice  regards  the
              reinstatement of his/her nationality  as  inappropriate,  for
              the purposes of national security, sustainment  of  order  or
              public welfare."

5. Articles 10-15 deal with multiple nationalities and the  length  of  time
   for which persons may have dual nationality and  when  they  must  elect.
   Article 15(1) provides for automatic loss of nationality, where a  person
   has voluntarily attained the nationality of another country, which  takes
   place at the time when the  foreign  nationality  is  obtained.   Article
   15(2) provides for  deemed  loss  of  nationality  retroactively,  unless
   within six months the Korean citizen  declares  an  intention  to  retain
   Korean citizenship, where another nationality has been  acquired  in  the
   following circumstances:  by marriage to a foreigner; by  adoption  by  a
   foreigner; by acknowledgment by a foreign father or mother  resulting  in
   acquisition of such parent's nationality; or in the case of  a  minor  or
   spouse of a person who has lost nationality in any such circumstances.

6. Persons who lose their nationality are  required  to  immediately  report
   such loss to the Minister of Justice.  If a public official finds that  a
   person has lost nationality, he must also report it to the Minister,  who
   will notify the family registration office and the resident  registration
   office of the loss of nationality.  Other procedures are to be set out in
   a Presidential decree, as before.

7. Article 17 provides for all acquisitions and losses of nationality to  be
   published in the Official Gazette by the Minister of Justice.  Article 18
   specifies the loss of rights  accruing  to  South  Korean  citizens  when
   nationality  is  lost,  subject  to  a  proviso  for  transfer   of   any
   transferable rights to another South Korean citizen within 3 years.

8. Articles 20-22 provide:

           "Article 20 (Adjudication of Nationality)
               1) Where it is unclear whether a person has attained  or  is
                  holding the nationality of the  Republic  of  Korea,  the
                  Minister of Justice may determine such fact upon review.
               2)  Procedures  for  screening   and   determination   under
                  paragraph (1) and any other necessary  matters  shall  be
                  determined by Presidential decree.

           Article 21 (Revocation of Permission, etc)
               1)  The  Minister  of  Justice  may  revoke   permission   or
                  adjudication of a person who has  obtained  permission  of
                  naturalisation,   reinstatement    of    nationality    or
                  adjudication of nationality by  false  or  other  wrongful
                  means.
               2) Standards and procedures for  revocation  under  paragraph
                  (1), and other necessary matters shall  be  determined  by
                  Presidential decree.

           Article 22 (Delegation of Authority)
              1) The authority of the Minister of Justice may  be  partially
                 delegated to the head  of  an  immigration  office  or  its
                 branch office, as prescribed by Presidential decree."

   Protection and Settlement Act

9. The Protection and Settlement  Act  defines  its  terms  and  purpose  in
   Articles 1-4:

           "Article 1 (Purpose)
           The purpose of this Act is to specify such matters  relating  to
           protection and support as are necessary  to  help  North  Korean
           residents  defecting  from  the  area  north  of  the   Military
           Demarcation Line (hereinafter  referred  to  as  "North  Korea")
                 and desiring protection from the  Republic  of  Korea,  to
           adapt themselves to, and settle down as quickly as possible  in,
           all spheres of their life, namely, political,  economic,  social
           and cultural life.


           Article 2 (Definitions)
           For the purpose of this Act,
           1.         "Defecting North Korean residents" mean  persons  who
           have their residence, lineal descendants, spouses and workplaces
           in North Korea and who have not acquired any foreign nationality
           after defecting from North Korea.
           2.          "Protected  persons"  mean  defecting  North   Korea
           residents who are provided care and  support  pursuant  to  this
           Act.
           3.         "Settlement support facilities" mean  facilities  set
           up and operated to provide protection of and settlement  support
           for protected persons pursuant to the provision of  Article  10,
           Paragraph 1.
           4.         "Protection money or articles" mean  money  or  goods
           paid, delivered or lent to protected persons  pursuant  to  this
           Act


           Article 3 (Scope of Application)
           This Act shall apply to defecting  North  Korean  residents  who
           have expressed their intention to be protected by  the  Republic
           of Korea.


           Article 4 (Basic Principles)
           (1)        The Republic of Korea shall provide protected persons
           with special care on the basis of humanitarianism.
           (2)        Protected persons shall strive to lead a healthy  and
           cultural life by adapting themselves to the free and  democratic
           legal order of the Republic of Korea."

10. Article 5 provides that in general, settlement support is  available  in
   special facilities for a year and at  home  for  two  years  after  that,
   although there is  discretion  to  extend  or  curtail  it  for  'special
   grounds'. Normally, under  Article  5(2),  protection  is  given  to  the
   individual but it  may  be  given  on  a  household  basis  where  deemed
   necessary.  Under Article 5(1), support 'shall reasonably  be  determined
   in consideration of [the migrant's] age, composition  of  the  household,
   school  education,  personal  career,  self-supporting  ability,   health
   conditions and personal possessions.'

11. Article 6 set up a consultative  council  to  determine  protection  and
   support questions.  Article 7 requires an application for  protection  to
   be made by the migrant to the head of an overseas diplomatic or  consular
   mission, who shall without delay inform both  the  Minister  of  National
   Unification  and  the  Director  of  the  Agency  for  National  Security
   Planning.   The  National  Security  Director   is   required   to   take
   'provisional protective steps' immediately and report to the  Unification
   Ministry. Article 8 (1) sets out their respective responsibility  in  the
   protection decision:

           "(1)        The Minister of National Unification shall, when he
           receives such a notice as  stipulated  under  the  provision  of
           Article 7, Paragraph 3,  decide  on  the  admissibility  of  the
           application for protection following the  deliberations  of  the
           Consultative Council. However, in the case of a  person  who  is
           likely to attest national security to a considerable extent, the
           Director of the Agency  for  National  Security  Planning  shall
           decide on the admissibility of the application,  and  inform  or
           notify the Minister of National Unification and  the  protection
           applicant of the decision without delay."

   The protection decision is a shared responsibility of the  Ministries  of
   Unification and Security.

12. Article 9 excludes certain categories of migrant from  protection  (that
   is to say, from the benefits of South Korean citizenship):

      "Article 9 (Criteria for a Protection decision)
      (1)   In determining whether or not to provide protection pursuant  to
      the provision of the text of Article 8, Paragraph 1, such  persons  as
      stipulated in the following Subparagraphs may  not  be  determined  as
      protected persons.
      1.    International criminal offenders involved in aircraft hijacking,
      drug trafficking, terrorism or genocide, etc.
      2.    Offenders of non-political, serious crimes such as murder, etc.
      3.    Suspects of disguised defection
      4.    Persons who have for a considerable period earned  their  living
      in their respective country of domicile; and
      5.    Such other persons as recognized by the Presidential  Decree  as
      unfit for the designation as protected persons."

13. In addition,  pursuant  to  Article  27,  protection  and/or  settlement
   support may be withdrawn in  certain  circumstances  by  the  Unification
   Ministry of its own motion, or on the application of a  local  government
   head via the Home Affairs Ministry:

           "Article 27 (Alteration in Protection)
           (1)      The Minister  of  National  Unification  may,  where  a
           protected  person  is  involved  in   one   of   the   following
           Subparagraphs, suspend of terminate  protection  and  settlement
           support  subject  to  the  deliberations  of  the   Consultative
           Council.
           1.    In cases where he is sentenced to penal servitude not less
                than one year and his sentence has been made irrevocable.
           2.    In cases where he intentionally provides false information
                contrary to the interest of the state
           3.    In cases where he is judicially declared dead or missing
           4.    In cases where he attempts to go back to North Korea
           5.    In cases where he violates this Act  or  an  order  issued
                under this Act; or
           6.    Such other cases as coming under such  grounds  prescribed
                by the Presidential Decree."

14. Articles 10-22 set out the protection scheme. In particular, Article  15
   provides:

           "Article 15 (Social Adaptation Education)
           The Minister  of  National  Unification  may,  pursuant  to  the
           determination  of  the  Presidential  Decree,  offer   protected
           persons with such education as  deemed  necessary  for  them  to
           settle down in the Republic of Korea."

15. The social adaptation education is provided  in  Hanawon,  a  government
   resettlement centre,  where they will spend three months learning how  to
   live in the capitalist society of South Korea.

16. The rest of the protection scheme  includes  provision  for  a  personal
   identification register (Article 12); for  recognition  of  academic  and
   other qualifications (Articles 13-14); for vocational  training  (Article
   16); for employment assistance, including in agriculture (Article 17, 17-
   1, 17-2, and 17-3); and for discretionary appointment to  public  service
   or the South Korean military by way of special appointment,  for  persons
   who held similar  posts  in  the  north,  on  terms  to  be  set  out  by
   Presidential decree.

17.  Other  Articles  deal  with  accommodation  support,  compensation  for
   valuable materials brought into South Korea on arrival, settlement money,
   adjudication of housing disputes, educational support, medical  care  and
   support for minimum living  standards,  including  pensions.  Article  30
   establishes an Association  of  Supporters  for  Defecting  North  Korean
   Residents to execute the various resettlement provisions already set out.



   Overseas Koreans Act

18. An 'overseas Korean' is defined in Article 2 of the statute:

           "Article 2 (Definitions)
           The term "overseas Korean" in this Act means a person who  falls
           under any of the following subparagraphs:

            1.  A national of the Republic of Korea who  has  acquired  the
           right of permanent residence in a foreign country or is residing
           in a foreign country with a view  to  living  there  permanently
           (hereinafter  referred  to  as  a  "Korean   national   residing
           abroad"); and
            2. A person, prescribed by Presidential Decree, of  those  who,
           having held the nationality of the Republic of Korea  (including
           those who had emigrated abroad  before  the  Government  of  the
           Republic  of  Korea  was  established)  or   as   their   lineal
           descendants, have acquired the nationality of a foreign  country
           (hereinafter referred to as a "foreign nationality Korean")."

19. Article 3 states that the Act regulates the  entry  into  and  departure
   from the Republic of Korea of overseas Koreans as so defined.  Article  4
   requires the South Korean government to give 'necessary support...lest he
   or she should suffer unfair regulation or treatment in  the  Republic  of
   Korea'.

20. Article 5 sets out the discretionary power of the  Minister  of  Justice
   to grant permission to live in South Korea who applies to do  so  on  the
   basis that he is a 'foreign nationality Korean' who is going to engage in
   activities in the Republic of Korea.  However, permission to sojourn  may
   not be granted under the age of 38 years where Article 5(2)  such  person
   has acquired a foreign nationality  'without  any  purpose  of  permanent
   residence in a foreign country' or in order to avoid military service, or
   where the Minister of Justice is 'apprehensive that  he  may  impair  the
   interests  of  the  Republic  of  Korea,  such  as   national   security,
   maintenance of public order, public welfare and diplomatic  relations  of
   the Republic of Korea.'

21.  Articles  6-9   deal   with   reporting   conditions,   residence   and
   documentation whilst in South Korea  for  overseas  Koreans.  Article  10
   limits such sojourn to three  years,  subject  to  a  discretion  to  the
   Minister of Justice to extend the period.  An overseas Korean  may  enter
   South Korea  on  any  occasion  during  that  period  without  a  further
   application  for  sojourn.  Employment  or  other  occupation  is  freely
   permitted, 'to the extent that he/she does not  impair  social  order  or
   economic stability'.  Under Article 14, for visits of less than 90  days,
   health insurance is not required.

   Military Service Acts

22. The 2003 Military Service Act at  Article  64(1)(3)  expressly  excludes
   from such service 'persons who have immigrated from the northern area  of
   the Military Demarcation Line'.  That is the description used in  Article
   1 of the Protection and Settlement Act to describe North Korean migrants.



23. The 2006 amendment had for its objective to set up a  permission  system
   for those intending to travel overseas 'to prevent persons who are  under
   obligation to serve in the military from staying abroad  to  dodge  their
   military duty'.  It notes  that  the  State  can  impose  active  service
   between the ages of 18-30 and provides for persons less than 25 years old
   who are not in active  military  service  to  go  abroad  freely  without
   permission.  A provision at Article 70(5) of the 2003 Act requiring those
   called up for military service to report within 30 days was deleted.

   Refugee Act

24. The Republic of Korea acceded to  the  1951  Convention  on  3  December
   1992, and the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons
   on 22 August 1962. Pursuant to Article  6  of  the  Constitution  of  the
   Republic of Korea, these treaties  are  considered  to  be  part  of  the
   domestic law of the Republic of Korea and  are  the  primary  source  for
   regulating the rights and obligations of refugees and  stateless  persons
   in the Republic of Korea.

25. The  Refugee  Act  formally  incorporated  into  South  Korean  law  the
   provisions of the Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol, and came into
   force on 1 July 2013.

26. It was common ground at the hearing before us that the  Refugee  Act  is
   concerned only with non-Korean refugees  arriving  in  South  Korea  from
   states outside the Peninsula and has no bearing on the present appeals.

   United Kingdom-South Korea Readmission Agreement

27. Following the Tribunal's decision  in  KK,  on  20  December  2011,  the
   United Kingdom and the Republic  of  Korea  entered  into  a  Readmission
   Agreement ('the Readmission Agreement').  The Readmission Agreement  came
   into force on 1 July 2012.

28. The Readmission Agreement aims to enable readmission applications to  be
   processed efficiently and effectively in the territory of the  requesting
   Contracting  Party,  and  for  recognised  nationals  of  the   requested
   Contracting Party to be returned with appropriate documents  and  without
   difficulty.   The expressed purpose of the Readmission  Agreement  is  to
   facilitate the return to their country of nationality of citizens of  the
   United Kingdom or Republic of Korea who do not, or no  longer,  meet  the
   applicable entry or  residence  requirements  of  the  other  Contracting
   Party, in order to 'effectively counteract illegal immigration into their
   territories in the spirit of international efforts'.

29. Article 1 of the Readmission Agreement provides for the  readmission  by
   each Contracting Party of its own nationals, upon request  by  the  other
   Contracting Party, subject to proof or prima  facie  evidence  that  such
   persons possess the nationality of the requested Contracting Party.

30. Article 2 sets  out  the  documents  which  are  required  to  establish
   nationality.    The   primary   proofs   contemplated   are   citizenship
   certificates, passports of any kind, ETDs, and children's  passports  and
   if any of these documents are available, the person  concerned  shall  be
   readmitted without any formalities.  Secondary documents  identified  are
   listed as copies of  the  primary  proofs;  driving  licences  or  copies
   thereof,  birth  certificates  or  copies  thereof;  the  results  of  an
   interview  with  the  person  concerned,  conducted  by   the   competent
   diplomatic representatives of the requested Contracting  Party,  or  'any
   other document which may help to establish the nationality of the  person
   concerned'.  The documents, and their copies, suffice even if expired.

31. Where no such document is available, and absent the  interview  provided
   for by Article 2, Article 3 provides  for  a  readmission  request.   The
   request is to be supported by an original set of  finger  prints  of  the
   person concerned, his or her gender and claimed date of birth; in default
   of fingerprints, their surname, given names,  date  of  birth,  place  of
   birth where possible, and last place of residence in the territory of the
   requested Contracting Party; indication of the means by which of evidence
   of nationality will be furnished; a statement, with the person's consent,
   indicating that they may need assistance, help or care, owing to sickness
   or old age; and details of any protection or security measures which  may
   be necessary in the individual return case.

32. At Article 6, the Readmission Agreement sets out an exhaustive  list  of
   information which may be communicated to  the  receiving  state  for  the
   purpose of a readmission request:   the  personal  particulars  (surname,
   given names, resident registration number or equivalent);  identity  card
   or passport (all particulars);  other  details  needed  to  identify  the
   person; stopping places and itineraries; any  other  information  at  the
   request of the receiving state 'which it needs in order  to  examine  the
   readmission requirements pursuant to this  agreement'.   Data  protection
   provisions are set out at length and the Readmission Agreement emphasises
   at Article 10 that  the  Readmission  Agreement  'shall  not  affect  the
   obligations of the Contracting Parties arising from  other  international
   agreements to which they are party.'  There  is  no  time  limit  on  the
   Readmission Agreement, which can  be  terminated  by  either  Contracting
   Party on 90 days' written notice, or  suspended  for  reasons  of  public
   security, order or health.

33. The respondent gave  details  of  its  operation  in  practice,  in  her
   'Korean Country Guidance Case Position Statement'  of  7  December  2012,
   which exhibits a copy  of  the  Readmission  Agreement,  and  in  further
   evidence provided for the July 2013 hearing.

34. A total of 14 requests for readmission were submitted  by  UKBA  between
   July and September 2012.  Two individuals received ETDs; one of those had
   already been returned when the  respondent  prepared  her  December  2012
   Position Statement; four were rejected as unknown  to  the  South  Korean
   authorities, based on fingerprint  evidence;  and  10  received  positive
   fingerprint checks showing that they  were  known  to  the  South  Korean
   authorities and were already South Korean citizens.  There was one child,
   whose parents were registered but  the  child  not;  those  parents  were
   required to complete the relevant forms register the  child  before  that
   readmission could be further processed. Those whose fingerprints had been
   found on the South Korean database, and who were therefore already  South
   Korean citizens, would be returned after a face to  face  interview  with
   the South Korean Embassy officials.

35. The period covered by the December 2012 position  statement  represented
   only the first two months of its operation, between  July  and  September
   2012: we therefore asked Mr Norton to provide further information for the
   hearing in July 2013.  In an email dated 1 July 2013 sent to  Mr  Norton,
   the  respondent  stated  that  in  the  first  year  of  the  Readmission
   Agreement's operation,  three  ETDs  had  been  issued  and  two  returns
   effected.  A further 20 ETDs had been requested.  There were 14  positive
   fingerprint  matches,  indicating  that  those  individuals  had  already
   received South Korean citizenship before coming to  the  United  Kingdom;
   such individuals were awaiting further consideration or a  face  to  face
   interview.



                                 APPENDIX C
                               Country Experts

   Professor Christoph Bluth

1. Professor Bluth teaches strategic studies and terrorism as  Professor  of
   International Studies  at  the  Faculty  of  Politics  and  International
   Studies in Leeds.  His doctorate is  from  King's  College  London.   His
   research interests are  in  international  security  studies,  especially
   nuclear weapons policies and the prevention of the spread of  weapons  of
   mass destruction.  His  general  regional  expertise  is  in  Russia  and
   Eurasia, Pakistan, Iraq, Germany, and North East Asia (especially Korea).
    He has considerable knowledge  of  the  practice  of  the  South  Korean
   government in relation to its treatment of North Korean migrants  and  to
   nationality issues.

2. Since 2004, Professor Bluth's research has focused on  the  South  Korean
   national security policy, and he has spent several months  each  year  in
   South Korea since then.  During 2005, he was  both  a  visiting  Research
   Fellow at the Korea Institute for Defense Analysis (a research  institute
   of the  South  Korean  Ministry  of  National  Defense)  and  a  visiting
   Professor  at  Seoul's  Yonsei  University.   He  has  published  various
   academic and newspaper articles on Korean affairs  and  also  two  books,
   Korea (published by Polity Press  in  2008)  and  Crisis  on  the  Korean
   Peninsula (published by Potomac Books in August 2011).   He has  assisted
   the Upper Tribunal in previous country guidance cases, notably in KK.

3.  Professor  Bluth's  evidence  and  reports  refer   interchangeably   to
   'refugees' and 'defectors' from North Korea to South  Korea.   The  words
   used in South Korea are 'migrants' and 'refugees'.  In this summary,  for
   clarity, we have used 'North Korean migrants' throughout

   Professor Bluth's reports

4. Professor Bluth provided reports for GP and MP.  There were two  reports,
   one for GP and his family, and one for MP.  The earlier report for GP and
   family was consolidated into the later report for MP.  The following is a
   summary of the MP report which constituted Professor Bluth's evidence-in-
   chief and he adopted it as such.

5. After setting out his research interests  and  qualifications,  Professor
   Bluth's report noted his connections with the various levels of the South
   Korean government including many contacts in the Unification Ministry and
   the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.  He also  has  connections  in
   the North Korean refugee communities in South Korea  and  in  the  United
   Kingdom.

6. He  prepared  for  his  report  by  reading  the  relevant  South  Korean
   legislation in English and  seeking  clarification  in  relation  to  the
   interpretation of certain paragraphs in the Korean original  version,  as
   well as wider reading set out in paragraph 4.2 of his report.    His  own
   understanding of the Korean language is basic, but he is able  to  access
   materials in Korean through students of his who are Korean speakers.   He
   consulted various experts, notably Professor Andrei Lankov  from  Kookmin
   University, Dr Daniel Pinkston from the  International  Crisis  Group  in
   Seoul, Professor Lim Eul-chul, the North Korean refugee community in West
   Yorkshire, and officials at the South Korean Embassy in  London  and  the
   Unification Ministry in Seoul.

7. Professor Bluth's  opinion  is  that  the  appellants  do  not  meet  the
   criteria for admission to South Korea and the South Korean  Embassy  will
   refuse to deal with them.  The  South  Korean  government  maintains  its
   public 'one-Korea' policy but in practice takes a very selective approach
   to refugees, with a view to discouraging North-South defection as far  as
   possible.   The  approach  was  normally  'maintained  by  stealth'   but
   sometimes publicly expressed.  Professor Bluth gave a 1999 example.

8. He noted the reluctance of South Korean staff in China  to  assist  North
   Koreans wishing to enter South Korea. It was necessary for such defectors
   to make use of professional people smugglers, and  often,  to  go  via  a
   third South East Asian country where  they  could  obtain  a  ticket  and
   travel document from the local South Korean Consulate.   Even  then,  the
   policy of discouraging North Korean migrants  meant  that  not  all  such
   'defectors' would be accepted.

9. Former South Korean Presidents Kim Dae-jung and  Roh  Moo-hyun  had  been
   cautious in their approach to defectors; the issue was a serious irritant
   in North-South relations.  He was not aware of any change in  the  policy
   of the current President Lee Myung-bak. South Korea was  endeavouring  to
   improve relations with the North and wished to  avoid  hostile  reactions
   from North Korea.

10. Early defectors brought intelligence and propaganda value which was  not
   the case with current  migrants,  and  the  increasing  numbers  of  such
   migrants had led to a tougher approach by the South Korean government.

11. Native South Koreans resented the cost to the public purse of  providing
   for North Korean migrants.   Large numbers of North Koreans  arriving  in
   the South would be a security risk because they  might  be  North  Korean
   agents, or be targets for such agents; they were a  financial  burden  on
   the South  Korean  state,  albeit  an  affordable  one;  and  their  poor
   integration into South Korean society threatened social cohesion.

12. Access to South Korean citizenship by North  Koreans  was  exercised  by
   following  procedures;  citizenship  could  be  refused   under   certain
   conditions, set out in Article 9  of  the  Protection  Act.    The  basic
   requirements were that the person could meet the requirements of  Article
   2 of the Nationality Act, had lived in Korea, and had  not  been  outside
   North Korea for a period longer than  10  years,  and  that  such  person
   wished to become a citizen of South Korea.

13. The procedure required for a  North  Korean  was  to  approach  a  South
   Korean Embassy and seek permission to enter South  Korea,  by  requesting
   'protection' under the Protection Act. The  Embassy  or  Consulate  would
   then transmit that request promptly to the Minister  of  Unification  and
   the Director of the National Intelligence Service in  Seoul.   Candidates
   are interviewed by trained officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
   and Trade, to determine whether they are indeed North Korean citizens and
   whether their account of their life and circumstances  is  credible.   If
   their North Korean credentials are established and no Article  9  reasons
   found to deny them leave to enter South  Korea,  they  are  then  granted
   permission to enter South Korea at the South Korean Embassy.

14. On arrival, North Koreans are the subject  of  an  in-depth  review  and
   further interviews, with the decision  on  whether  to  grant  protection
   (that is to say, whether to recognise them as South Koreans)  made  on  a
   case by case basis. The South Korean government is concerned to establish
   whether applicants for protection are in  fact  North  Korean,  have  not
   spent sufficient time in a third country to acquire status there, are not
   criminals or North Korean government agents, or fail to meet the criteria
   in some other way.

15. North Koreans are initially taken to Sindaebang in South Seoul,  to  the
   Government Joint Intelligence Centre  (JIC),  run  by  the  Institute  of
   National Intelligence.  They have no  recourse  to  South  Korean  courts
   during what Professor Bluth considers amounts to a period of  extra-legal
   detention at the JIC.  Professor Bluth was aware of  one  case  where  an
   individual had been detained for over three years while his claim to be a
   North Korean migrant was examined. On 21 April  2010,  the  South  Korean
   government had announced an increase in the period of questioned  in  the
   JIC from 90 days to 120 days, in response to infiltration of the  process
   by two North Korean agents who entered South Korea  for  the  purpose  of
   assassinating the prominent  defector  Hwang  Jang-hop.  Professor  Bluth
   stated that in practice everyone was detained for the full period.

16. After the JIC, North Koreans usually were debriefed by the  Ministry  of
   Unification and attended three months' residential integration classes at
   a Hanawon centre in Anseong, to prepare them for  life  in  South  Korea.
   Residence at the Hanawon centre was compulsory and again, Professor Bluth
   regarded it as a form of detention. The Hanawon phase was not subject  to
   any legal means of challenge. At the end of this total  period  of  seven
   months, the North Korean migrant was required to sign a document applying
   for citizenship of South Korea.

17. In the case of the present appellants, Professor Bluth  considered  this
   process to be irrelevant.  They would not be considered for admission  to
   South Korea while an asylum application was pending and in the last  four
   years, every case of which he was aware in which a North Korean contacted
   the South Korean Embassy had been  unsuccessful  for  that  reason.   The
   South Korean Embassy had made it clear  on  more  than  one  occasion  to
   Professor Bluth that if a person did not wish to reside in  South  Korea,
   he would be denied refuge.   Even if a person had acquired  South  Korean
   nationality at birth they would be deemed to have lost it and  would  not
   have  a  subsisting  or  demonstrable   entitlement   to   South   Korean
   nationality.

18. The Protection Act, in terms, applied only to those  who  had  expressed
   their intention to be  protected  by  the  Republic  of  Korea.    Having
   applied  for  asylum  or  refugee  status  in  another  country  was  now
   considered  to  be  sufficient  evidence  to  exclude  the  person   from
   consideration for admission to South Korea:  South Korean officials would
   'respect the wish' of such a person to remain outside  South  Korea.   It
   was the unstated policy of the South Korean government to find any reason
   it could to reject North Koreans wishing to enter South Korea.

19. Dealing with the risk of refoulement  to  China,  and  thence  to  North
   Korea, Professor Bluth stated that he had been told  by  a  South  Korean
   ambassador to the United Kingdom in the past that  he  believed  most  of
   those claiming to be refugees from North Korea in the United Kingdom were
   not North  Korean  but  Chinese  citizens  of  Korean  descent  ('Chinese
   Koreans'). Chinese Koreans could be, and had been,  deported  from  South
   Korea to China.  In his opinion, there was  an  ongoing  risk  of  double
   refoulement, resulting in the appellants  being  returned  eventually  to
   North Korea and persecuted there.

20.  The  South  Korean  authorities  would  not  recognise  a   nationality
   determination by the United Kingdom but would make  their  own  decision,
   including an assessment by interview of the applicant's regional  accent,
   information about childhood and upbringing,  geographical,  cultural  and
   social references, and so forth' the South Korean  National  Intelligence
   Service had a high level of knowledge of North Korean geography, history,
   social and political facts. The question of accent  was  more  difficult,
   since even native Korean speakers found it difficult to  distinguish  the
   accents of a Chinese Korean and of a North Korean who had lived in China.
    The appellant MP in particular had been in China from a relatively young
   age and the South Korean authorities might conclude that he was a Chinese
   Korean.

21. The South Korean authorities considered many of  those  claiming  to  be
   North Koreans in the United Kingdom to be Chinese Koreans, and the  South
   Korean authorities were very concerned to ensure that no Chinese  Koreans
   were granted citizenship on the basis of a claim to be North Korean.

22. Moving to the conditions  of  North  Korean  refugees  in  South  Korea,
   Professor Bluth's evidence  is  that  at  the  end  of  the  'protection'
   procedure, they received full South Korean citizenship, indistinguishable
   in law, and in terms of rights, from that of other South  Koreans.  North
   Koreans received 'settlement money' in three instalments of South  Korean
   Won (SKW) 10,000,000 (about �5650) and  could  be  given  a  further  SKW
   10,000,000 to enable them to put a deposit down on a flat.   Their  first
   place of residence was allocated by the South  Korean  government,  often
   outside Seoul; after that they were on their own.   Hanawon  studies  did
   not equip North Korean refugees for even very  low  level  employment  in
   South Korea, although it did  have  a  good  success  rate  on  religious
   studies, with many North Koreans joining Protestant  Churches,  the  only
   social group in South Korea which actively supported and  welcomed  them.
   However, his evidence was that  a  monthly  scholarship  of  SKW  200,000
   (approximately �113 in March 2014) was available for vocational  training
   between six and twelve months, and SKW 2,000,000 was paid  on  completing
   the course.  In addition, North Koreans received SKW  2,000,000  if  they
   secured an appointment to a position (approximately �1130 in March 2014).

23. There was however 'all  manner  of  informal  discrimination';  the  two
   Koreas had diverged dramatically since their separation in 1945  and  the
   culture in South Korea was 'largely alien' and 'practically foreign'  for
   North Koreans.   Coming  from  a  communist  culture  with  close  social
   relations, it was difficult for them to adapt  to  the  individualism  of
   capitalist South Korea and they were often socially ostracised.  Even the
   language presented difficulties; it  was  not  just  a  question  of  the
   southern dialect, but also of the absorption of a large number of English
   words into South Korean.  Further, North  Koreans  were  prohibited  from
   using Chinese characters, which were in use in South Korea, so they found
   it difficult to master South Korean speech well enough for  white  collar
   jobs.

24. About 80% of North Koreans arriving in South Korea  owed  money  to  the
   'brokers' who had arranged their journey, which they paid about seven  or
   eight months after their arrival (that is to say, presumably,  when  they
   completed the 'protection' procedure and became  entitled  to  settlement
   money).  Some 'brokers' extorted money by gaining control  of  the  North
   Korean refugees' South Korean bank  accounts.  The  fee  payable  to  the
   brokers is described by Professor Bluth as amounting to about $6000.

25. In the  1990s,  the  early  refugees  were  educated,  often  university
   graduates, and sometimes members of the North Korean elite, but found  it
   very hard to make a good living in South Korea, a free market  democratic
   society where success depended on informal connections based on  regional
   origins and certain educational institutions, a hierarchical  'old  boys'
   network'.  North Koreans were by definition outsiders to this system.  In
   January 2011, only 50% of North Korean defectors were in employment,  77%
   of them doing manual labour, and only 4% in skilled jobs, up from 38%  in
   2004.  Recent defectors had been manual workers  or  farmers,  with  very
   poor education, only 1% of whom had been to  university,  and  only  just
   over half had finished high school.  In South Korea, they remained manual
   workers, in fulltime or part-time work. South Korea as  a  whole  had  an
   unemployment rate of only 2-4%.  It was a  dynamic,  prosperous  country.
   According to a survey conducted by the  Korean  Institute  of  Labour  in
   2004, 46% of respondents considered they were in work which did not  suit
   their skills, 37% agreed they had no ability for the work, 40% considered
   their future in the work to  be  uncertain,  27%  considered  there  were
   problems with discrimination against defectors, and 21%  said  they  were
   not earning  enough.    Including  government  benefits,  nearly  80%  of
   defectors earned less than SKW  1,000,000  a  month.    South  Korea  has
   experienced a steep rise in income between 2004 and 2012:  in March 2014,
   the Ministry of  Strategy  and  Finance  reported  that  average  monthly
   household income in 2012 was SKW 4,077,000 (�2300).

26. Marriage prospects for  defectors  were  poorer  because  of  their  low
   perceived status and the reluctance of South Korean parents to see  their
   children marry North Koreans.  Many refugees turned to  crime,  at  twice
   the national average rate, and poorly educated women suffered  employment
   discrimination, had difficulty accessing social services, and often ended
   up in abusive relationships or as sex workers.   80%  of  defectors  were
   now women, making 'desperate efforts' for themselves and their  children.
   If they disclosed their North Korean origin on a CV  or  if  they  had  a
   northern accent, their job  prospects  were  worse.   Children  of  North
   Koreans were teased at school.

27. Nevertheless, from a material point of view, Professor Bluth  recognised
   that North Koreans in South Korea were considerably better off than  they
   would be either in China or North Korea.  However, in comparison to  life
   in the United Kingdom, they could be described as existing in  a  'social
   ghetto with considerably reduced life chances'.

28. Professor Bluth had been asked  to  comment  both  on  the  Home  Office
   Position Paper and on the Readmission Agreement.  At section 8 his report
   he makes observations about legal interpretation which, since he is not a
   lawyer, cannot assist us.  At paragraph 8.1.4, he reminds us  that  North
   Korean defectors are specifically exempted  from  South  Korean  military
   service.

   Oral evidence

29. Mr Karnik asked Professor Bluth  some  supplementary  questions  on  his
   relationship with the embassies of North and South Korea in  London.   He
   told us that he frequently participates in meetings at the  South  Korean
   Embassy and with London and  international  organisations,  where  he  is
   known for his specialisations in national security for both Koreas.    He
   was an expected and recognised participant at all  such  gatherings.   He
   also acted as an advisor to a prominent member of the  National  Assembly
   in South Korea, who was a former Chairman of the Parliamentary  Committee
   on Trade  and  Unification.   He  was  a  visiting  Professor  at  Yonsei
   University in Seoul.  He knew or had close  contacts  with  most  of  the
   people in Seoul who were experts on North Korea.

30. Professor Bluth clarified that he had developed a specialism  in  Soviet
   nuclear policy.  He is a  German  citizen  and  studied  German  security
   policy, with particular reference  to  German  integration.   There  were
   differences between the situation of West Germany before integration  and
   South Korea now:  West Germany had been much better off and had  taken  a
   policy decision to accept as many East Germans as possible.  South  Korea
   was under-resourced and a much smaller country; there  was  a  much  more
   serious threat of collapse if large numbers of  North  Koreans  relocated
   simultaneously to South Korea.

31. In addition to his links to the South Korean  Embassy,  Professor  Bluth
   had contacts with three different North Korean ambassadors to the  United
   Kingdom.  That had assisted  him  to  check  his  interpretation  of  the
   situation when possible, and to confirm his general view of the  kind  of
   state which North Korea was:  however, he was not able  to  discuss  with
   the North Koreans the issue of North Korean migrants.

32. Professor Bluth stated that North Korea did not recognise the  existence
   of South Korea, and vice versa.  There was a  frozen  civil  war  in  the
   Korean peninsula which had been going on for many decades, with each side
   considering  itself  the  one  true  Korea  and  that  the  other  should
   disappear.  In particular, North Korea considered South Korea its  enemy.
   Neither of the Koreas accepted that the other was a  legally  constituted
   entity.   South Korea's naturalisation procedure reflected  this:   North
   Korean citizens were required to swear allegiance to  South  Korea,  thus
   becoming part of what they had been brought up to regard as the enemy.

33. There had been a change in relations between the two Koreas:   for  many
   decades, there had been no contact at all, but since 1990, it  was  South
   Korean policy to engage with North Korea and bring about  gradual  change
   leading to reunification.  The flow of North Korean migrants  from  North
   to South Korea was a political irritant for both Koreas.  North Korea did
   not want citizens to relocate to the South.  A massive influx would  have
   a huge, potentially catastrophic effect on both Koreas,  so  South  Korea
   had a policy of seeking to limit the number of North Korean  migrants  it
   received from North Korea.   He drew our attention  to  a  graph  in  his
   report concerning this.

34. A considerable number of North Koreans crossed into  China.  There  were
   camps on the Chinese side of the border, where migrants were detained for
   repatriation.   China and North Korea were allies of sorts but there were
   problems between them.  China saw North Korea as a buffer  state  between
   it and South Korea which was perceived  as  a  United  States  ally.   It
   considered that the collapse of North Korea would result in a huge influx
   into China by armed North Koreans and China's objective was to keep  them
   in North Korea.

35. Professor Bluth was  aware  that  some  asylum  seekers  in  the  United
   Kingdom who claimed to have arrived from China or from  North  Korea  had
   already undergone the South Korean citizenship process  in  South  Korea,
   and had come to the United Kingdom  from  there.   There  would,  in  his
   understanding, be no difficulty with their  readmission  to  South  Korea
   under the Readmission Agreement.

36. Professor Bluth was asked to comment on the  report  of  Andrew  Walman.
   He agreed with much of it.  South  Korea  did  not  automatically  accept
   North Koreans as citizens:  the 'not wishing to go to South  Korea'  test
   was based on national  security,  to  enable  South  Korea  to  keep  out
   undesirables such as these appellants and those  with  low  tolerance  of
   South Korea's values.  The South Korean government had a right to  choose
   its citizens.

37. In answer to questions from Miss Hulse, Professor  Bluth  repeated  that
   there had been a change in relations between China  and  the  two  Koreas
   over the last few years.  There was a real fear that  North  Korea  would
   collapse, which he considered might well happen. In that case, the region
   could see a lot of internal fighting and millions of heavily armed  North
   Koreans relocating to China and South Korea.  In North Korea they already
   had little to eat and nothing to lose.  There was a  definite  threat  to
   both China and South Korea.

38. North Korean migrants  from  North  Korea  had  enormous  difficulty  in
   integrating in South Korea.  Women tended to end up in the sex  industry;
   male and female North Korean migrants  were  legally  accepted  in  South
   Korea but socially rejected, and it was extremely difficult for  them  to
   form relationships with South Koreans.

39. In cross-examination, Professor Bluth stated that he was  aware  of  and
   had read the Upper Tribunal country guidance in KK.  He was not an expert
   on British law.  His own opinion was that there were people outside North
   Korea who would not be accepted as citizens by Republic of Korea. When  a
   North Korean came to the United Kingdom and was refused asylum,  if  that
   person then went to the South Korean Embassy to seek admission  to  South
   Korea, a very thorough interview would be conducted.

40. The South Korean Embassy would  not  even  discuss  admission  while  an
   asylum claim was pending, and according to the  reports  Professor  Bluth
   had read, even after asylum procedures were concluded, they would not  be
   accepted for South Korean citizenship; such a person was regarded as  not
   really wanting to go to South Korea and  they  would  suggest  they  seek
   admission to a third country.  An application for asylum was regarded  as
   a clear indication that they did not wish to seek the protection of South
   Korea.

41. South Korea only  wanted  to  accept  North  Korean  migrants  who  very
   clearly  wanted  to  live  in  South  Korea  and  integrate  there.   Any
   indication to the contrary would be used as a reason not to accept  them.
   In fact, South Korea wanted to discourage North Koreans  from  taking  up
   their legal right to South Korean citizenship; it was a matter  not  just
   of law but of national security policy.  There  was  no  legal  means  by
   which North Koreans could enforce their  right  to  assert  South  Korean
   nationality if they were outside South Korea. His opinion was informed by
   a political rather than a legal perspective.

42. North Korean migrants who reached South Korea  were  detained  initially
   in Sindaebang without access to legal Counsel.   He  had  interviewed  at
   length someone who had been through the process.  Some of those with whom
   this person was detained had been there for over a year; others had  been
   deported to China.  Quite a few NGOs working with North  Korean  refugees
   in China had tried to estimate the scale  of  the  North  Korean  problem
   there:  there were approximately 300,000 North Korean refugees  in  China
   and 20,000 North Korean migrants in South Korea.

43. The South Korean Constitutional  Court  had  become  involved  with  the
   decisions of the National Assembly to impeach President Roh, which it had
   reversed, since the majority of  people  did  not  agree,  but  had  then
   nullified his plan to move South Korea's capital city to  the  middle  of
   the country.  Border security had been reduced.

44. The ten-year rule was a policy not a regulation: in  effect,  the  South
   Korean government considered that a person who  had  been  outside  North
   Korea for so long must have established a legal entity elsewhere.   There
   was no way of challenging that assumption for a person  who  was  outside
   South Korea.  He was unaware of any litigation within South Korea against
   the government in relation to this policy, or any  moves  to  change  the
   position.  There was a procedure available but to his  knowledge  it  had
   have been used and could not be accessed from  outside  the  country.  It
   arose under Article 20 of the South Korean Nationality Act which provided
   a nationality adjudication procedure administered  by  the  South  Korean
   Minister of Justice.  In addition, North Korean migrants could in  theory
   obtain a declaratory judgment from the South Korean courts, as set out in
   a 2010  study  entitled  The  Treatment  of  Stateless  Persons  and  the
   Reduction of Statelessness: Policy Suggestions for the Republic of  Korea
   by In-seop Chung, Chul-woo Lee, Ho-taeg Lee and Jung  Hae,  published  by
   the Korea  Research  Institute  in  Issue  13  of  the  Korea  Review  of
   International Studies.

45. North Korean migrants could  not  necessarily  force  the  South  Korean
   government to accept them.  However,  a  North  Korean  migrant  who  was
   willing to go through the process and wanted to go to South Korea  had  a
   good chance of being accepted as a  South  Korean  citizen.  The  act  of
   protection was part of South Korean law but its operation  was  primarily
   based in policy rather than law; his clients were always those  who  were
   in the process of seeking asylum.  He had  no  experience  of  those  who
   really wanted admission to South Korea and were not  seeking  asylum.  It
   was a sensitive question: the South Korean government  was  committed  to
   receiving and accepting North Korean migrants and did not  wish  to  make
   public statements on its policy.

46.  The  ten-year  rule  was  an  official  policy;  South  Korea  did  not
   distinguish between those who had spent the time lawfully  in  a  country
   and those whose residence was unlawful.

47. There was a pattern  of  migration  from  China  by  North  Koreans  and
   Chinese, posing as North Koreans,  with  ships  and  agents  taking  them
   directly to South Korea.   The embassies of both Koreas in  Beijing  were
   under police surveillance.

48. Professor Bluth was unable to  state  whether  North  Koreans  in  China
   would have their fingerprints  taken  in  the  South  Korean  Consulates-
   General, in particular the one in Shenyang,  which  handled  applications
   for admission  to  South  Korea  from  persons  in  Jilin,  Liaoning  and
   Heilongjiang Provinces.  (During re-examination, he clarified that  those
   provinces together constitute the area known in the west as Manchuria and
   were the home of the Korean diaspora in China).

49. The South Korean authorities would  refuse  to  accept  for  readmission
   those who  had  spent  ten  years  in  China;  one  former  South  Korean
   ambassador to the United Kingdom had told him that "we  think  they  [the
   claimed North Korean migrants] are all Chinese".  Nevertheless,  he  very
   much doubted that the South Korean authorities would knowingly return  to
   North Korea a migrant who had reached South Korea via China. His evidence
   on this point was based on interviews with persons in Sindaebang who  had
   been accepted as North Korean migrants and who had told him about  others
   who had been sent back to China.

50. Professor Bluth's understanding was that the time that people  spent  in
   Sindaebang was normally up to 120 days, and a minimum of  90  days.   The
   people he had spoken to had spent  less  than  120  days  in  Sindaebang.
   However, if the authorities were  not  satisfied,  the  person  would  be
   detained for longer:  one of his interviewees in Sindaebang was aware  of
   a single individual who had been detained there for more than a year,  in
   fact, for more than three years.  Where  they  determined  that  a  North
   Korean migrant was really Chinese, even if of North Korean family origin,
   such persons were deported to China.  The final decision on admissibility
   to South Korea was made in Sindaebang.

51. He was not aware of any case where  a  person  had  changed  their  mind
   about applying for South Korean citizenship while in Sindaebang.  He  did
   not think that if they did they would be forced to live in  South  Korea:
   it was much more likely that the South Korean authorities  would  try  to
   send them back to where they came from. The only accounts  he  had  heard
   concerned people who had left Sindaebang for a Hanawon centre.  There was
   no reason to suspect foul play.

52. Once a person had been cleared by Sindaebang, they were  transferred  to
   the Hanawon centre in Anseong, where they were given classes  in  aspects
   of South Korean life and society over a period of three months  and  then
   could make an application for citizenship.  They were not  free  to  move
   outside the Hanawon  centre  until  their  acclimatisation  training  was
   complete: some people were very bored there because there was not much to
   do.  Once that training was complete,  they  were  able  to  enter  South
   Korea.

53. There were, however, some  restrictions:   male  North  Korean  migrants
   were excluded from South Korean military service after admission.

54. In answer to questions from  the  Tribunal,  Professor  Bluth  confirmed
   that the two Koreas had been engaging across the internal  Korean  border
   since about 1990, before which the border was particularly  impenetrable.
   It was now much more porous: the civil war had been  defrosting  but  had
   not ceased.  North Korea was losing control of its  territory.   However,
   everyone realised that  unification  could  not  happen  overnight.   The
   border between the two Koreas would be  needed  for  a  period  of  10-20
   years, to allow for gradual integration.  It  was  almost  impossible  to
   leave North Korea other than via the Chinese border.  There  was  extreme
   poverty and hardship in North Korea:  the North Korean border  guards  on
   the Chinese border were much more susceptible to bribery.

55. The two Koreas had distorted views of each other:   North  Koreans  were
   taught that South  Koreans  lived  in  abject  poverty  and  people  were
   starving to death there.  They had a lot of learning to do; that was much
   more true of North Korea.  We asked whether it was his understanding that
   taking South Korean citizenship  excluded  a  person  from  North  Korean
   nationality, Professor Bluth replied that if a person had defected to the
   South from North Korea and sought to return, he believed that they  would
   be arrested on return as an escapee from North Korea.

56. South Koreans considered the government of North Korea to be a  criminal
   organisation committing gross human rights abuses against its own  people
   who were living in poverty.  The North Korean government, in the eyes  of
   South Koreans, had  usurped  power  which  did  not  belong  to  it,  but
   nevertheless, North Koreans were their  people  too,  however  misguided.
   Human rights were very important to the South Korean  government  and  to
   return a North Korean to the hellish conditions considered to exist there
   was regarded as a betrayal.

57. Professor Bluth explained that there was  a  demilitarised  zone,  4  km
   wide, between North Korea and South Korea, with no mines, the borders  of
   which were virtually  impenetrable  and  which  had  wonderful  wildlife.
   There was also Kaesong, a special commercial zone built by South Korea in
   North Korea, which employed North Korean and South Korean  staff.   South
   Koreans could not go there at present because of the tensions between the
   two countries.  Approximately 500  South  Korean  companies,  principally
   textiles and manual labour, operated in Kaesong.  He  confirmed  that  it
   was near the border and that South Koreans reached it by bus.

58. Chinese people of Han ethnicity  look  like  Koreans  and  some,  if  of
   Korean descent, are also Korean speakers.   Koreans in both parts of  the
   peninsula were a very homogeneous people; the separation of the two parts
   of Korea dated back only 50 or 60 years, but there were  now  significant
   cultural and linguistic divergences.

59. South Koreans referred to North Koreans in their country  as  'refugees'
   or 'migrants'; the vast majority of North Koreans  did  not  leave  North
   Korea.  North Koreans called themselves 'Cho Song' (a  reference  to  the
   Cho Song dynasty).  South Koreans called themselves 'Korean persons', but
   used the description 'North Koreans' for the 15 million or so Koreans  in
   the North; they regarded them as brethren but did not  consider  them  as
   citizens of South Korea while still in the North. North  Korean  migrants
   in South Korea were an irritant and  were  therefore  restricted.   There
   were, nevertheless, about 20,000 North Korean migrants in South Korea  at
   the present time.

60. Most of  the  migrants  arriving  in  South  Korea  from  China,  either
   directly or via south-east Asia, were women, sponsored by churches, often
   trafficked as brides for Chinese men, due  to  the  shortage  of  Chinese
   women for them to marry.  The majority of those who reached  South  Korea
   came via South-east  Asia,  in  particular  Thailand  and  Vietnam.   The
   process of asserting South Korean nationality in Vietnam or Thailand  for
   the purpose of readmission to South Korea was the same as in  the  United
   Kingdom.

61.  North Koreans who had never been to  South  Korea  were  regarded  with
   caution. If the South Korean Embassy or Consulate abroad sensed  that  an
   applicant for citizenship was doing so only pro forma, without  any  real
   desire to be readmitted, they would not accept them.  The  same  attitude
   was not  taken  to  South  Korean  citizens  being  deported  from  third
   countries such as the United Kingdom, who had  been  born  and  lived  in
   South Korea before travelling overseas.  The  authorities  tried  to  use
   readmission procedures at the embassies  and  Consulates  to  'weed  out'
   those whom they did not wish to admit to South Korea.

62. The South Korean authorities identified three  groups  among  those  who
   sought recognition as South Korean citizens:  those who were  Korean  and
   entitled to citizenship; those who were not Korean; and  those  who  were
   from North Korea but not entitled to  protection  in  South  Korea  under
   Article 9 of South Korea's Protection and Settlement Act.  The  'support'
   provisions in the Act  covered  all  of  the  migrants'  needs  including
   citizenship.

63. When applying for South Korean citizenship, North Korean  migrants  were
   required to take an oath of  allegiance  to  the  constitution  of  South
   Korea, which was important as an  implicit  renunciation  of  loyalty  to
   North Korea, although there was no explicit renunciation  ritual.   South
   Koreans were not required to take any oath of loyalty.  Any North  Korean
   who was not prepared to take that oath would be regarded as still a North
   Korean and therefore an enemy likely to do harm to South Korea. All North
   Korean migrants were required to go through Hanawon, even those  who  had
   been in the west before returning to South Korea.

64. The Sindaebang processing facility was very  secretive;  there  were  no
   public reports of its activity, nor of a perceptible group of people  who
   were kept there for a long time.  Its main purpose was to weed out  North
   Korean agents and spies, with its secondary purpose being to  reduce  the
   numbers of migrants coming to South Korea.

65.  In  re-examination,  Professor  Bluth  explained  that  the  period  of
   detention in  Sindaebang  had  been  extended  because  of  South  Korean
   authorities' concerns about their inability to identify  and  'weed  out'
   spies in time.  There was a surveillance culture in North Korea such that
   everyone was a spy and  security  was  organised  down  to  neighbourhood
   levels, and there must be many  of  those  now  among  the  South  Korean
   citizens who had originally been North Korean migrants.

66. Mr Karnik asked about  Chinese  surveillance  of  Korean  embassies  and
   Consulates.  Professor Bluth explained that the source of  his  knowledge
   was Lankev's report and his own experience.  The  issue  was  politically
   sensitive for China but it had occurred.   After  reaching  China,  North
   Koreans seeking to enter South Korea were taken to another  country  such
   as Thailand or Vietnam to approach the embassies there  instead.    There
   was a risk that if a person was identified as a North Korean  seeking  to
   enter South Korea, while in China, that  the  Chinese  authorities  would
   refoule them to North Korea.

67. Professor Bluth said that he had no knowledge  about  fingerprinting  at
   South Korean embassies save that the South Korean government  had  agreed
   to share its fingerprint database with  the  United  Kingdom  government.
   The South Korean authorities would not remove people to North Korea,  but
   if they found them to be Chinese, they would remove them  to  China.   He
   was unable to say whether that would need the cooperation of the  Chinese
   authorities; that was not his area of expertise.

68. If the South Korean  government  believed  an  individual  was  Chinese,
   although they really were North Korean, there was a risk of  their  being
   deported  to  China  because  even  expert  linguists  could  not  always
   distinguish Chinese Koreans from North Koreans.

   Professor Goodwin-Gill

69. Professor Guy Goodwin-Gill is Professor of International Refugee Law  at
   Oxford University and a former  Professor  of  Asylum  Law  at  Amsterdam
   University.  He is a Senior Research Fellow of All  Souls  College.   His
   work is well known internationally and to the Upper Tribunal,  which  has
   often benefited from expert evidence, in writing  and  sometimes  orally,
   from  Professor Goodwin-Gill.  He submitted his report in his capacity as
   an international lawyer,  based on his research, experience and knowledge
   of refugee protection,  the  negotiation  and  drafting  of  the  Refugee
   Convention  and  its  1967  protocol,  jurisprudence  relating   to   the
   interpretation  of  that  Convention  and  Protocol  in   a   number   of
   jurisdictions, and human rights and international law in general.

70. His instructions were to assist the Upper Tribunal as  to  the  legality
   in international law of the December  2011  Readmission  Agreement  which
   came into force in June 2012.  He understood it to  be  the  respondent's
   position that North Koreans fall outside refugee protection because  they
   either are South Korean citizens by operation of South Korean law or  may
   be entitled to claim such citizenship, and therefore can be sent to South
   Korea without violating the United Kingdom's  international  obligations.
   His  opinion  also  dealt  with  recent  interpretation  of  the  Refugee
   Convention in MA (Ethiopia) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
   [2009] EWCA Civ 289; KK and  ors  (Nationality:  North  Korea)  Korea  CG
   [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC); and Secretary of State for the Home Department v SP
   and ors (North Korea) [2012] EWCA Civ 114.  We  heard  no  oral  evidence
   from Professor Goodwin-Gill.

71. It can  be  seen  from  the  above  summary  of  his  instructions  that
   Professor Goodwin-Gill's evidence to the Upper Tribunal  is  not  country
   evidence, properly understood.  Rather it  is  a  combination  of  expert
   opinion on the proper interpretation to the Refugee  Convention  and  its
   Protocols, and an analysis of the reasoning in  three  recent  decisions.
   We summarise the parts which deal with the status and  operation  of  the
   United Kingdom-South Korea Readmission  Agreement  and  matters  relating
   thereto.  Despite  Professor  Goodwin-Gill's  recognised  expertise,  the
   interpretation of the Refugee Convention and  its  Protocols  before  the
   Upper Tribunal and the Court of Appeal  is  a  matter  of  argument,  not
   evidence.

72.  After  setting  out  the  relevant  international  law   (the   Refugee
   Convention,  the  EU  Qualification  Directive,  and  the   1969   Vienna
   Convention on the  Law  of  Treaties,  Article  31),  discussion  of  the
   Readmission Agreement begins at  section  4  of  the  Report.   Professor
   Goodwin-Gill notes that Article 10 of the Readmission Agreement  provides
   that it 'shall not affect the  obligations  of  the  Contracting  Parties
   arising from other agreements to which they are party'.  South Korea  and
   the United Kingdom are both now parties to the Refugee Convention.

73.  Professor  Goodwin-Gill's  report  then  sets   out   the   readmission
   obligation and where in the document the means of proof of nationality is
   to be found.  He notes that  those  who  can  prove  their  South  Korean
   nationality are to be readmitted without formalities, whereas where there
   is an 'absence of proof of nationality' a readmission request is required
   under Article 3(1).    He  draws  the  conclusion  that  the  Readmission
   Agreement therefore contemplates the readmission of  those  who  are  not
   citizens  either  in  fact  or  in  law  and  whose  nationality  remains
   undetermined. Article 3(4) provides after 20 days from  such  application
   for deemed agreement to readmission without consideration of the evidence
   presented if no decision has been made by the  requested  state,  and  in
   Article 4, for return to the requesting state if within a period of three
   months  after  readmission,  the  requirements  for  readmission  by  the
   requested party are not met.

74. At section 4.1 Professor Goodwin-Gill compares this  agreement  to  that
   which the United Kingdom entered into in 2006 with Algeria. There are, he
   says, marked differences, since the South  Korean  agreement  exposes  to
   involuntary  removal  individuals  who  have  a  well-founded   fear   of
   persecution in North Korea but are not South Korean citizens or have  not
   been so determined.    He  considers  that  the  extended  scope  of  the
   agreement is incompatible with the United  Kingdom's  Refugee  Convention
   obligations.

75. Section 4.2 of the report  deals  with  treatment  on  return  to  South
   Korea.  Professor Goodwin-Gill states that he is not an expert  in  South
   Korean law or the treatment in South Korea  of  North  Korean  defectors.
   This part of his report derives from other reports which are  before  the
   Upper Tribunal and adds nothing to that evidence.

76. Section 5 sets out the writer's conclusions.  He considers that  despite
   the reservation in Article 10 that  the  agreement's  provisions  are  in
   addition to any international obligations of the contracting states,  its
   operation is nevertheless incompatible with the United Kingdom's  Refugee
   Convention obligations since North Koreans are to be required  to  return
   to South Korea even when they are not accepted as South Korean  citizens.
    He does not consider that  the  return  provision  at  Article  4  is  a
   solution consistent with the United Kingdom's  international  obligations
   for those who, after such  return,  are  not  accepted  as  South  Korean
   citizens.

77. Professor Goodwin-Gill notes  that  the  evidence  suggests  that  birth
   within the Korean peninsula to parents, at least one of whom is a  Korean
   citizen,  may  establish  a  presumptive  entitlement  to  South   Korean
   citizenship but that exceptions exist.  In  contrast  with  the  Algerian
   Readmission Agreement, the South Korean agreement does  not  confine  its
   readmission provisions to nationals, as required  by  international  law,
   and specifically the Refugee Convention.  He criticises  the  process  of
   'investigation, interrogation and  'detention''  after  return  to  South
   Korea, based on other expert evidence before  us,  as  potentially  going
   further than is proper in the circumstances and being  incompatible  with
   international requirements for liberty and security of the person, noting
   that there is no guarantee in the agreement as to the treatment of  those
   readmitted to South Korea.

   Dr Pillkyu Hwang

78. Pillkyu Hwang is a human rights lawyer at the Gonggam Human  Rights  Law
   Foundation, the only non-profit full-time public interest lawyers'  group
   in South Korea. He specialises in  international  human  rights  law  and
   human rights issues concerning migrants and refugees. He  holds  LLB  and
   PhD degrees in law from Seoul  National  University.     He  has  a  high
   profile in human rights law in South Korea, having  worked  with  various
   international organizations such as the  International  Organization  for
   Migration (IOM) Seoul Office,  the  UN  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees
   (UNHCR) Representation in Korea, and the UNESCO Beijing Office,  as  well
   as numerous  national  institutions/NGOs  including  the  National  Human
   Rights Commission of Korea, the Korean Bar  Association,  Minbyun-Lawyers
   for a Democratic Society, and the People's Solidarity  for  Participatory
   Democracy (PSPD).  In 2009, he was the first recipient of the  Seoul  Bar
   Association's Young Lawyer Award and for the last two years he  has  been
   Chair of the Asia Pacific Refugee Rights Network and the Asian Consortium
   for Human Rights Based Access to Justice.

79. Dr Hwang was the principal drafter of the South Korean Refugee Act  2011
   which came into force in July 2012, and was also joint author and  editor
   with Professor In-seop Chung of Seoul National University Law  School  of
   the first Korean book on refugee law, 'The Meaning of a Refugee  and  its
   Recognition Procedure', published by Seoul National University  Press  in
   2010. Professor Cheung is the former President of the Korean  Society  of
   International Law.

80. Dr Hwang's evidence was sourced in detail to the relevant  South  Korean
   law and relevant national and international commentary.

   Political history of Korean peninsula

81. Dr Hwang set out briefly the political history of the Korean  peninsula.
   Until 1910, the Chosan Dynasty ruled a unified Korea.  Between  1910  and
   1945, the peninsula was occupied by Japan.  The peninsula was effectively
   partitioned after the end of the Second World War, with the Soviet  Union
   occupying what is now North Korea, and the United States occupying  South
   Korea.  In 1948, North Korea declared itself to be an  independent  state
   and the only legitimate government of the Korean peninsula.  South  Korea
   responded by declaring that the Korean peninsula was  its  territory  and
   that the North should be restored to its government.

82. In 1950, the Korean War broke out.  In 1953, the conflict ended with  an
   armistice but there has never been a final treaty and the  two  countries
   are still theoretically at war, each country regarding the  nationals  of
   the other as 'their nationals to be rescued'.  Both  Koreas  continue  to
   claim all residents of the Korean peninsula as their citizens.

   The 'protection' procedure

83. Dr Hwang summarised the 'protection' procedure (paragraph 5.19.1 of  his
   report) as follows:

      "A North Korean escapee's right to enter and reside in South Korea and
      protection and support measures is contingent upon the following:
     1. Application for protection under the Protection and Settlement Act
     2. The expression of a desire to obtain protection in South Korea.
     3. Denunciation of North Korean sovereignty.
     4. Confirmation of North Korean nationality; and
     5. Completion of the prescribed protection procedures, comprising of:
           i) detention without grounds for a period of up  to  six  months
              during which a  joint  investigation  will  be  conducted  by
              government  agencies  including  the  South  Korean  National
              Intelligence Service (NIS); and
          ii) a further three month social assimilation in  quasi-detention
              conditions [Hanawon]."

84. For North Koreans to exercise their right to South  Korean  nationality,
   they had  to  defect  from  North  Korea  by  what  was  now  called  the
   'protection determination  procedure'  set  out  in  the  Protection  and
   Settlement Act 1997.  Any North Korean outside South Korea, wherever they
   were in the world, was entitled to  make  a  protection  application  for
   recognition as a  South  Korean  citizen,  unless  they  were  a  spy  or
   undesirable  person  as  set  out  in   the   Presidential   Decree.   No
   constitutional provision excluded any person who had been  outside  North
   Korea for more than 10 years from making such an application.

85. Article 4(3) of the Protection  Act  required  such  persons  to  pledge
   loyalty  to  South  Korea,  and  to  'adapt  themselves  to  the  liberal
   democratic legal order of the Republic of Korea', implicitly denying that
   North Korea is a sovereign  nation  and  that  North  Korean  nationality
   existed.  Dual nationality was not an option.  For such a person,  in  Dr
   Hwang's opinion, until the  'protection'  procedure  was  complete  South
   Korea could not be 'the country of his nationality' in Article 1A Refugee
   Convention terms.

86. His evidence was that while any North Korean national who was  a  Korean
   before the establishment of the Republic of Korea on 9 September 1948, or
   who has at least one North Korean or South Korean parent, is  a  national
   of South Korea, on the basis that under the  South  Korean  constitution,
   North Korea is included within the territory of South Korea.

87.  The  right  to  enter  and  reside  in  South  Korea  does  not  accrue
   automatically to North Koreans, who are required to apply for  protection
   under Article 7 of the Protection Act  and  submit  to  the  'protection'
   procedure, in order to be subject to  the  rights  and  duties  of  South
   Korean nationals, including the right to enter and reside in South Korea.
    There is no other legal means by which North  Koreans  can  enter  South
   Korea and only the completion of the  'protection'  procedure  enables  a
   North Korean migrant to enjoy the right of residence in South  Korea.  In
   South Korea it was generally accepted that the South  Korean  Embassy  in
   China and its satellite offices were monitored by the Chinese authorities
   and do not openly receive North Koreans, to  avoid  diplomatic  conflict.
   He was unable to say whether those attempting to apply for protection  at
   North Korean diplomatic offices in China would be  fingerprinted.   Given
   the absence of facilities to make the application in  China,  many  North
   Korean escapees travelled  on  to  a  third  country  such  as  Thailand,
   Vietnam, or the United Kingdom, to make their protection applications.

88. Under Article 9(1)(4)  of  the  Protection  and  Settlement  Act,  South
   Korean protection is not available to  'persons  who  have  earned  their
   living for not less than  10  years  in  their  respective  countries  of
   sojourn'.  Dr Hwang had discussed the  meaning  of  this  provision  with
   successive Deputy Directors of the Settlement  Support  Division  of  the
   South Korean Ministry of Unification, by telephone with Mr Gihwan Yoo  on
   13 January 2010, and in person with Mr Jong-wook Han, at a round table on
   the treatment of North  Korean  migrants,  at  the  Korea  Institute  for
   National Unification on 28 February 2013.  In both cases, he was  advised
   that a North Korean migrant who applied for protection  and  successfully
   went through the 'protection' procedure would  be  accepted  to  live  in
   South Korea, and that in principle, the period of his or her  stay  in  a
   third country would not affect that protection.  However,  there  was  no
   accessible public information to support those statements.

   The 'joint investigation' procedure

89. In order to successfully  complete  the  'protection'  procedure,  North
   Korean migrants must undergo the joint investigation procedure,  pursuant
   to Article 7(3) of the Protection Act and Article 12 of the  Presidential
   Decree relating thereto.  The joint investigation was lead  by  the  NIS,
   with other government agencies.  Under Article 12(2) of the  Presidential
   Decree, the NIS decides the contents,  method,  duration,  establish  and
   operation of facilities for the joint investigation process.  The NIS  is
   the principal security agency in  South  Korea  with  responsibility  for
   information collection and counter-intelligence.

90. The joint investigation was not a detention, and was to be conducted  in
   accordance  with  the  relevant   laws.    In   practice,   those   under
   investigation were held in custody:  Articles  12(2)  and  15(2)  of  the
   Presidential Decree stated that the investigation could last  up  to  six
   months, and that the protection decision should be taken within one month
   thereafter, or longer if there were 'inevitable  reasons'  for  a  longer
   period.  During  the  joint  investigation,  the  NIS  would  review  the
   contents of the protection application and investigate first, whether the
   applicant was North Korean; second, whether the  applicant  was  a  North
   Korean spy;  and in the light of  these  investigations,  it  would  then
   review and determine  the  applicant's  eligibility  for  protection  and
   settlement support measures.

91. The joint investigation is an administrative procedure, which  Dr  Hwang
   considered lacked due process.  There was no right to counsel during  the
   process, and he was unaware of any individual who had been  permitted  to
   see a lawyer during the 'protection' procedure.

92. The NIS decision on a joint  investigation  was  confidential,  but  the
   Ministry of National Defence was one of the bodies involved in the  joint
   investigation, and its Instruction on the  Operation  of  Military  Joint
   Investigation Facilities was a publicly available document.   Article  13
   of that document state that the  Intelligence  Commander  can  use  North
   Korean migrants  in  press  coverage,  press  conferences  and  welcoming
   assemblies; Article 14 provides that heads of any government  agency,  at
   any level, may continue to do so even after the 'protection' procedure is
   complete, subject to the prior permission of  the  Minister  of  National
   Defence.   There  is  no  reference  to  consent  by  the  North  Koreans
   themselves.  Some North Koreans had been used for anti-communism lectures
   to military personnel, civil servants and the general public.   Dr  Hwang
   considered it likely that at least some had been asked to  work  for  the
   NIS as informants.

93.  Dr  Hwang's  attempts  to  obtain  further  information  on  the  joint
   investigation  procedure  from  the  NIS  in  2010,  during   the   state
   compensation case, had been refused on national security grounds and  the
   court had accepted the NIS explanation.   A weekly journal  reporter  had
   made a similar request in May 2013 but could get no more information than
   the relevant law, presidential  decree  and  ministerial  regulation.   A
   member of the National Assembly had been similarly rebuffed.

94. The only supervision of the NIS was the  Information  Committee  of  the
   National Assembly and that  Committee  could  be  required  to  keep  the
   information it received confidential, on national security grounds. South
   Korea did have a Freedom of Information Act but it  was  clear  that  any
   attempt to find out more about the joint investigation would always  come
   within the national security exception in that statute.

95. All family members, and  all  applicants  underwent  the  process,  even
   minors.  Dr Hwang had tried  to  find  out  whether  there  were  special
   arrangements for families.  According to his two clients, and a couple of
   senior researchers of the Korean Institute for  National  Unification  (a
   South Korean government think tank), there were no  special  arrangements
   for families. Men and women  were  separated  both  in  the  JIC  and  in
   Hanawon.    He was not aware of any case where only one family member was
   rejected and considered it unlikely that such information would  be  made
   public.

   Social Adjustment Education programme (Hanawon centres)

96. Once the  'protection'  procedure  was  successfully  completed,  and  a
   person had  been  found  to  be  North  Korean,  not  a  spy,  and  given
   protection, they were required to undergo social integration training, to
   re-educate them as South  Koreans.  The  programme  was  administered  by
   Hanawon, a settlement support facility established under Article 10(1) of
   the Protection Act.

97. The process took three months in a Hanawon facility, during  which  time
   the North Korean migrants were not allowed to leave  and  go  into  South
   Korean society.  It was often suggested that this was a final attempt  to
   weed out North  Korean  spies  and  remove  them  from  the  'protection'
   procedure.

98. HRW had  been  refused  access  to  Hanawon  for  unspecified  'security
   reasons'.

   The grant of protection

99. Article 6 of the Protection Act  authorised  the  Consultative  Council,
   whose members are drawn from the government sector, to deliberate on  the
   grant of protection but the  final  decision  is  made  by  the  Director
   General of the NIS (Article 7(3) Protection Act and  Articles  12(2)  and
   15(2) of the Presidential Decree).  In  practice,  the  Director  General
   usually made such decisions without the  need  to  ask  the  Consultative
   Council to deliberate; the Council was not a decision making body.

100. Criminals were not in principle  denied  such  protection  unless  they
   came within the exclusions in Article 9(1) and the  Presidential  Decree.
   It was unclear whether all escapees whose North  Korean  nationality  was
   confirmed were actually given the right to exercise  their  South  Korean
   nationality.

101. Where a person was outside South Korea but  had  already  been  granted
   protection through the 'protection' procedure, there was  no  barrier  to
   their re-entry, unless they had travelled to North Korea or met  a  North
   Korean who had not gone through  the  'protection'  procedure.   In  that
   case, on return they would be subject to prosecution under any or all  of
   the National Security Act, Inter-Korean Exchange and Cooperation Act, and
   other national provisions.

102. On the successful  completion  of  the  investigation  and  integration
   processes, North Koreans had the right  to  exercise  fully  their  South
   Korean nationality.   There  was  no  procedure  for  relinquishing  that
   nationality when obtained, save for those who  voluntarily  acquired  the
   nationality of a foreign country (Article 15).  North  Korea  was  not  a
   'foreign country' for this purpose since South Korea did not  accept  its
   existence.  Where nationality of a  'foreign  country'  was  acquired,  a
   person could be returned to that country.

   Refusal of protection

103. Article 9(1) of the Protection Act  excludes  from  protection  certain
   criminal offenders; persons 'who have earned a living  overseas  for  not
   less than 10 years'; persons who apply for protection more  than  a  year
   after their arrival in South Korea, which Dr Hwang considered would  only
   be possible by  people  smuggling;  and  other  persons  specified  in  a
   Presidential Decree as unfit for protection, currently as follows:

       "1.  Persons who are expected to bring about serious  political  and
       diplomatic difficulties to the Republic of Korea if  it  is  decided
       that they are subject to protection;

       2.   Persons who, during the  provisional  protection  period,  used
       violence and destroyed facilities such that there  is  concern  that
       they will cause serious harm to other people's personal security; or

       3.   Persons who obtained the legal  right  to  reside  in  a  third
       country after escaping from North Korea."

104. The ten year provision  is  disapplied  in  'inevitable  circumstances'
   which are also stipulated in the Presidential Decree:  those for whom  it
   was  'impossible  to  enjoy  free  activities  due   to   detention   and
   imprisonment against their will', long-term detention  in  a  country  of
   sojourn  before  coming  to  South  Korea;  and  those  for  whom  it  is
   'recognised that it was impossible to lead normal or stable lives due  to
   hiding or absconding in their respective countries of sojourn'; and other
   similar circumstances acknowledged by  the  Minister  of  Unification  as
   such.

105. There exists a theoretical  right  to  challenge  the  conduct  of  the
   'protection' procedure but it is in practice unenforceable because  those
   undergoing the procedure are  held  incommunicado  and  no  contact  with
   lawyers or the outside world is permitted  until  the  process  has  been
   completed.

106. Unless a person was successful in  their  application  for  protection,
   there was no recourse against the South Korean  authorities'  conclusions
   except  through  a  general  administrative  appeal  process  under   the
   Administrative Appeals Act or the Administrative Litigation Act.  He  was
   not aware of any case brought under either provision; in any  event,  the
   effect of such applications would not be to suspend deportation.  Refusal
   of visa or entry denial in South Korea was not subject to  administrative
   appeal or litigation.

107. No public information was available  about  the  number  of  applicants
   whose protection applications were rejected under Article 9(1)(6) of  the
   Protection Act, although there  were  published  figures  for  successful
   applications.  He was unable to say whether, in the case  of  a  rejected
   application, reasons are given.

   Refoulement risk

108. Dr Hwang was unaware of any statistical evidence regarding  the  return
   of Chinese Koreans to China. To the best of his knowledge, there  was  no
   evidence that South Korea had refouled any Korean, whether  North  Korean
   or South Korean, to China without both the permission of the returnee and
   the assent of the Chinese authorities.   However, the joint investigation
   was an 'extremely clandestine' process which lacked any  due  process  or
   monitoring.

109. Where persons were discovered to be North Korean  intelligence  agents,
   Dr Hwang's understanding was that they would still not  be  refouled  but
   would be indicted and prosecuted under the South Korean National Security
   Act.  A number of cases of such prosecutions had been publicised  by  the
   NIS but he did not know whether the list  was  exhaustive  or  selective.
   There was just no accessible public information  about  how  many  people
   unsuccessfully sought protection, what happened to them, and  where  they
   were now.

   Dr Hwang's clients

110. Dr Hwang has represented a number of  applicants  in  the  'protection'
   procedure in South Korea, in proceedings at all  levels  from  the  Seoul
   Administrative Court through the South Korean Supreme Court,  from  2005-
   2013.   In  particular,  he  represented  8  successful  Burmese  and   3
   successful Chinese applicants, both cases taking place in 2008.

111.  Dr Hwang had personally handled cases for two clients arising  out  of
   the 'protection' procedure and the JIC.   His  clients  alleged  'illegal
   detentions, beatings and other degrading treatments'.  The information on
   these cases appears in various places in the report.  For convenience, we
   summarise them as follows:

   a) The habeas corpus case, which  lasted  from  2010-2013,  concerned  an
      admitted Chinese  citizen,  but  of  Korean  ethnic  origin,  who  was
      detained for six months in the JIC after arriving in South Korea on  a
      Chinese passport and applying  for  protection  at  the  airport.   Dr
      Hwang's client was not permitted to make any  family  telephone  calls
      during her six-month investigation in the JIC.

      Two weeks into the joint investigation, she admitted that she was  not
      North Korean but a  Chinese  citizen.   The  NIS  asked  her  to  give
      information concerning her brother, who was already in South Korea but
      was the subject of charges of espionage on behalf of North Korea.   He
      was also Korean-Chinese.

      Based on the sister's evidence, the brother was arrested and  indicted
      and the ensuing publicity  revealed  the  sister's  whereabouts.   Her
      family asked him to try to secure her release on the  basis  that  the
      detention and investigation was illegal and lacked due process.  As at
      20 May 2013, Dr Hwang's case  was  still  pending  before  the  Korean
      courts.  A removal order to China had been made.

   b) The compensation case, which lasted from 1999-2002  and  went  to  the
      South Korean Supreme Court.  Dr  Hwang's  client  travelled  to  South
      Korea via China and  Vietnam,  with  entry  clearance  for  protection
      purposes granted in Vietnam.  He was accompanied by a woman, a Chinese
      citizen purporting to be a North Korean escapee.  That client had been
      detained in the JIC for one month, where he had been ill-treated.  His
      companion's real nationality was discovered but Dr Hwang did not  know
      whether she had been deported to China or was still in South Korea.

112. In each case, judgment had been in favour of  the  Republic  of  Korea,
   mainly for lack of evidence. During  the  progress  of  the  cases,  both
   clients had attempted suicide because of the psychological  pressure  and
   degrading treatment in the joint investigation.

113. Dr Hwang had no direct experience of successful  protection  applicants
   who might have subsequently sought protection in a third country, but his
   understanding was that as a matter of law they were free to do  so,  just
   like any other South Korean.

   Dr Young-hae Chi

114. Dr Young-hae Chi is an university instructor  with  the  Department  of
   Korean Studies at Oxford University.  On 2 July 2008, in the  context  of
   the First-tier Tribunal proceedings, he provided expert evidence on  GP's
   origin.  His report was based on an interview lasting seven  and  a  half
   hours.  His assessment  is  based  on  linguistic  evidence  and  on  the
   appellant's knowledge of North Korea.  Describing that lengthy interview,
   Dr Young-hae Chi said this:

      "The interviewer's first impression of [the appellant GP] was that  he
      lacked confidence and was a reluctant speaker.  This impression turned
      out to be only half-true.  In some situations, he was a proactive  and
      spontaneous speaker, such as when he described frustration  about  the
      interview at the Home Office, or the sense of fear when  he  faced  an
      angry North Korean mob after being extradited to North Korea following
      an unsuccessful escape.  During the interview the voice was  sometimes
      feeble, and the expression of thoughts suffered unclear  articulation.
      There were occasional hints that he is intellectually less than  fully
      motivated, and the  judgment  and  understanding  of  the  events  and
      situations that may affect him potentially was slow."

115. Dr Young-hae Chi's opinion, which is fully set out in his  report,  was
   that GP was born, brought up and lived in North Korea  before  his  final
   escape, and that he was not a native Chinese or a member  of  the  Korean
   diaspora (the  Joseonjok)  who  live  in  the  Yenben  Korean  Autonomous
   District in Jirin Province, China, near the  Chinese-Korean  border,  and
   who are descendants of Koreans who migrated to China in  the  early  20th
   century, long before the division of China. He noted that  the  appellant
   had 'a rather unusual linguistic aptitude with the Chinese language'  and
   had omitted a few days from the  list  of  national  holidays,  but  that
   nevertheless, his description of  his  home  city  in  the  North  Korean
   province of Hamgyeonbuk-do was wholly convincing, his account  internally
   coherent, and that his evidence contained some pieces of  evidence  which
   nobody who had not lived there would know.  His accent was typical of his
   home city.
                                 APPENDIX D

                              Country Materials

   UKBA Reports

   1. The most recent country information produced by the  UKBA  is  in  its
      'Key Documents' report of 3 September 2009.  The earlier 21 July  2009
      Country of Origin Report has been removed from the UKBA website and we
      only have an excerpt from it in our  bundle.   In  the  Key  Documents
      report, the UKBA deals with the question of North Koreans  at  [3.36]-
      [3.40].  The passage is not long and is worth citing in full:

           "North Koreans

           3.36   The  USSD  Report  2008  recorded  that  "The  government
           continued its longstanding policy of accepting refugees from the
           [Democratic People's Republic of Korea - North Korea] DPRK,  who
           are  entitled  to  [Republic  of  Korea]  ROK  citizenship.  The
           government resettled 2,809 North Koreans during the year [2008],
           resulting in 15,057 North Koreans resettled in the country." The
           Human Rights Watch World Report 2009, North Korea,  released  on
           15 January 2009, noted  that  "South  Korea  accepts  all  North
           Koreans as citizens under  its  constitution.  South  Korea  has
           admitted more than 13,000 North Koreans..."

           Treatment of North Korean refugees

           3.37   The  website  of  the  Republic  of  Korea,  Ministry  of
           Unification, accessed on 31 July 2009, advised as follows:

                 "The South Korean government  operates  support  facilities
                 called Hanawon for newcomers from North Korea to help  them
                 resettle in South Korean society. Hanawon  was  established
                 under the Act on the Protection and Settlement  Support  of
                 Residents  Escaping  from  North  Korea  of  1997.  Hanawon
                 includes  a  main  center  and  one  branch  facility  that
                 together can  accommodate  400  people  simultaneously  and
                 2,400 in one year ... The resettlement program  at  Hanawon
                 is an eight-week course for social adjustment in the South.
                 The  ultimate  objective  of  the  course  is  to   instill
                 confidence in the newcomers, narrow the cultural  gap,  and
                 motivate them to achieve sustainable livelihoods in  a  new
                 environment ... Furthermore, the government  provides  them
                 with a variety of financial and  non-financial  support  to
                 assist them with resettlement. The newcomers  receive,  for
                 example, an initial cash  payment,  incentives  related  to
                 employment and education, medical  support,  and  favorable
                 terms for leasing apartments. The government also creates a
                 new family registry as they are South Korean citizens  with
                 all rights and privileges under the Constitution."

           The Ministry of Unification website sets out a  flow  chart  for
           the settlement of North Koreans, from their initial  application
           onwards, and gives details of support provided after the initial
           eight-week course, both by the state and by  NGOs.  A  BBC  News
           article of 9 July 2009 noted that all North Korean refugees "are
           debriefed by the South Korean security services before admission
           [to Hanawon], to ensure that they are not  North  Korean  secret
           agents."

           3.38  The BBC News article of 9 July 2009 commented  that  North
           Koreans had arrived in South Korea "after months, or  years,  of
           hardship and trauma, only to face another hurdle: how to  adjust
           to what must seem like an alien landscape, with its bewildering,
           free-wheeling free market, and its strong emphasis on individual
           responsibility ... Compared to the old North Korean  certainties
           of a command economy and family networks, capitalism can be very
           lonely." The BBC article recorded that since July 1999, when the
           first centre opened, the Hanawon project  has  provided  medical
           treatment, psychological counselling and  practical  support  to
           almost 16,000 refugees from the North.

           3.39  The UN News Service reported on 25 January 2008  that  the
           UN Special Rapporteur on  the  human  rights  situation  in  the
           Democratic People's Republic of  Korea  (DPRK  -  North  Korea),
           Vitit Muntarbhorn, "welcomed" the efforts of  the  South  Korean
           Government has made to assist people  fleeing  North  Korea.  Mr
           Muntarbhorn praised  the  support  given  by  the  South  Korean
           Government to "... over 10,000 nationals from the  DPRK  it  has
           accepted for settlement."

           3.40  UN Special Rapporteur, quoted in  the  same  source,  also
           recommended that the  government  should  provide  "'longer-term
           facilities to help them adapt to their new  lives,  and  social,
           educational, employment and psychological back-up,  with  family
           and community based networks; more family reunion possibilities;
           more protection to be afforded to those who do not  receive  the
           protection of other countries; and  a  more  active  information
           campaign using success stories of those who have settled in  the
           Republic of Korea to ensure a positive image and nurture a sense
           of empathy for those who exit from the DPRK in search of  refuge
           elsewhere.'" The article recorded that the UN Special Rapporteur
           "...praised increased support for these persons, such as through
           longer term protection periods, the provision of  pensions,  and
           employment and  other  opportunities."  He  was  "encouraged  by
           educational and training programmes  for  the  young  generation
           from the DPRK, complemented by caring neighbours who  help  them
           adapt to society." Mr Muntarbhorn also highlighted the need  for
           longer-term care for torture victims and older North Koreans who
           had escaped. He further called for more attention to be given to
           mixed marriages, where a North Korean  has  a  relationship  and
           child with a national of a third country (i.e. neither North nor
           South Korea) on the way to South Korea, but the child is left in
           the third country."

   US State Department

   2. A number of US State Department publications are before us,  including
      in particular its 11 March 2005 publication as to the status of  North
      Korean asylum seekers in the United States, and general commentary  on
      the importance of human rights in North Korea.  For present  purposes,
      the US State Department Reports on conditions in South Korea  are  the
      most relevant.  The reports in the bundle concern conditions in  North
      Korea, which are not in issue:  it is accepted that  these  appellants
      and all North Korean migrants are refugees in relation  to  return  to
      North Korea.

   3. The South Korean reports are  not  included  in  the  bundle  but  are
      publicly available.  The latest such report is for 2013, published  in
      February 2014.  The  report  records,  in  relation  to  North  Korean
      migrants, that:

           "The law provides for freedom of movement  within  the  country,
           foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government
           generally respected these rights. The government cooperated with
           the Office of the UN High Commissioner for  Refugees  and  other
           humanitarian   organizations   in   providing   protection   and
           assistance to internally displaced persons, refugees,  returning
           refugees, asylum seekers, stateless persons, and  other  persons
           of concern. ...


           Access to Asylum: The law provides for the granting of asylum or
           refugee status. The government  considers  refugees  from  North
           Korea under a separate legal  framework  and  does  not  include
           refugees from North Korea in refugee or asylum  statistics.  The
           government has an established system for providing protection to
           refugees, but the government does not  routinely  grant  refugee
           status  or  asylum  in  most  non-North  Korean  cases.  A   new
           independent law, the Refugees Act, took effect  July  1  [2013].
           ...


           Refoulement: In July authorities granted Jin  Jingzhe,  a  self-
           proclaimed Chinese practitioner of Falun Gong, temporary refugee
           status, based on his appeal of a  previous  court  decision  and
           released him from custody. Jin, who arrived in  South  Korea  in
           2008, was arrested in 2011 and detained at  Hwasung  Foreigner's
           Protection Center under threat of  deportation.  In  2011  Seoul
           Immigration Office officials deported  a  17-year-old  Mongolian
           student after police found he was not in  the  country  legally.
           His parents were not deported because officials could not locate
           them. ...

           The government continued its longstanding  policy  of  accepting
           refugees, or  defectors,  from  North  Korea,  who  by  law  are
           entitled to citizenship in South Korea. The government resettled
           970 such refugees during the first half of the year, raising the
           total to slightly more than 25,400  since  2002.  Many  refugees
           from  North  Korea  alleged  societal  discrimination  by  South
           Koreans and cultural differences  that  resulted  in  adjustment
           difficulties.  The  government  provided  adjustment  assistance
           services to recently settled  refugees,  including  rental  aid,
           exemption  from  education  fees  for  middle-  and  high-school
           students, medical assistance,  business  loans,  and  employment
           assistance.  The  government  also  operated  Hana  Centers,  or
           Centers to Adjust to  Regions,  which  educated  refugees  about
           adapting  to  specific  geographic  areas,  provided  counseling
           services, and aided social adjustment."

   4. In relation to refoulement to either China or North  Korea,  only  one
      instance is cited, concerning the  return  of  a  Chinese  citizen  to
      China:

           "Refoulement: As of late November [2012], Jin Jingzhe,  a  self-
           proclaimed Chinese practitioner of Falun  Gong  who  arrived  in
           South Korea in 2008 and was arrested in September 2011, remained
           detained at Hwasung Foreigner's Protection Center  under  threat
           of deportation and awaited a court's decision on his appeal."

   5. Two points are relevant:  Mr Jin admits that he is Chinese and entered
      South Korea in 2008 (presumably posing as  a  North  Korean  migrant).
      Although he is threatened with removal, he has not been removed  in  a
      period of at least four years.

   Amnesty International

   6. On 28 November 2008, an Amnesty International article called on  South
      Korea to 'repeal or fundamentally reform the National  Security  Law'.
      Whilst noting that there have been some instances when the 60 year old
      NSL was used as a form of censorship,  the  report  acknowledges  that
      South Korea has security concerns regarding North Korea.

   7. The report cites two instances  in  which  Professor  Oh  Se-chul  was
      accused of 'enemy-benefiting' activities but the charges were  roundly
      dismissed  by  the  Seoul  District  Court.  No  other   articles   or
      publications critical of South Korea from  Amnesty  International  are
      before us and this article is now over five years old.

   IPI Global Observatory

   8. In an article published on 23 August 2012 in IPI  Global  Observatory,
      written by Cheong Ju Kim, an inspector with the South Korean  National
      Police agency who was then a graduate student on Columbia University's
      Master of International  Affairs  course,  he  reported  that  China's
      attitude to North Korean refugees was hostile and that  North  Koreans
      were particularly vulnerable once in  China.   South  Korea  had  been
      seeking to persuade China to take a more relaxed stance.  The  article
      contained a table showing the numbers of  North  Koreans  arriving  in
      South Korea in recent years with a sharp drop in 2012, reflecting  the
      first few months of Kim Jong-un's leadership:

           [pic]

   9. In his article, Mr Cheong stated that:

           "The situation of North Korean defectors in China  is  extremely
           grim. China regards them as illegal border crossers that  should
           be sent back to North Korea and repudiates the requests  of  the
           international community to acknowledge them as  refugees.  Their
           illegal  status   intensifies   their   vulnerability,   because
           compulsory  repatriation   to   North   Korea   entails   severe
           punishments,  making   defectors   cling   to   whatever   harsh
           alternatives  they  have,  such  as  hiding  and   waiting   for
           assistance  from  the  South  Korean  government  and  NGOs,  or
           escaping to adjacent states such as Thailand, Vietnam, and Laos.
           This latter alternative often requires  hiring  assistance  from
           brokers or volunteering to be  trafficked  or  indentured  as  a
           means to cross the border. ...

           The number of North Korean defectors crossing the Chinese border
           is decreasing since Kim Jung-un has reinforced border  security.
           The annual influx of North Koreans into  South  Korea  had  long
           been an increasing trend, but it sharply  dropped  by  about  50
           percent relative to 2011 during the first six months of Kim Jung-
           un's leadership. Brokers organizing the escape from North  Korea
           are becoming more organized as  the  business  has  become  more
           lucrative  due  to  the  increased  risk.  Some  Chinese   human
           trafficking organizations are traveling to North Korea  to  lure
           young women by promising a better life out of poverty,  only  to
           sell them for $500 to Chinese farmers in need of housewives. ...




           Diplomatic conflict about the defector issue is not likely to be
           solved easily. China has been avoiding any disputes  with  North
           Korea and is disregarding the human right infringements suffered
           by North Korean defectors.  China  adamantly  repatriates  North
           Korean defectors despite continuous requests  from  South  Korea
           for China to reconsider its policy. China, in turn, presses  the
           South  Korean  government  to  stop   assisting   North   Korean
           defectors."


10. Mr Cheung noted that  outside  South  Korea,  neighbouring  states  were
   reluctant to assist North Korean migrants and that UNHCR in  its  'Global
   Trends' report for 2011  had  recorded  only  1052  North  Koreans  given
   refugee status around the world, with the highest number being 603 in the
   United Kingdom.  He expressed hope of more openness under Kim Jong-Un.

Press reports in 2010

11. On March 25 2010,  North  Korea  sank  the  South  Korean  warship,  the
   Cheonan. On April 20 2010, the  South  Korean  authorities  arrested  two
   North Korean intelligence agents accused of plotting to assassinate Hwang
   Jang-hy?p, the highest-ranking North Korean ever to defect.  Mr Hwang was
   a former Secretary of the North Korean Workers' Party and Chairman of the
   Supreme People's Assembly. The reports fuelled suspicions in South  Korea
   that some of the 20,000 North Korean defectors currently  living  in  the
   South could be sleeper agents, dispatched by the North Korean regime.

12. On 20 May 2010, Radio Free  Europe/Radio  Liberty  reported  that  South
   Korea blamed  North  Korea  for  the  sinking  of  the  Cheonan  and  was
   threatening retaliation.  On 25 May 2010, Voice of  American  News  (VOA)
   published an article stating that North Korea had  broken  off  relations
   with South Korea, and on 12 June 2010, that North  Korea  had  threatened
   the South.

13. On 11 June 2010, a more reflective piece in Radio  Free  Asia,  entitled
   'Cheonan fallout hits defectors', reported the outcome of a  round  table
   discussion on May 21 2010, between South Korean students and North Korean
   migrants living in South Korea.  The North Korean students were  hurt  by
   being questioned as to why North Korea would do such a thing.  They  were
   South Korean citizens now and were not answerable for the actions of  the
   North Korean regime:

           "...As soon as investigations confirmed the North's involvement,
           young North Korean defectors, who are all now citizens of  South
           Korea, said they  were  subjected  to  constant  questioning  by
           classmates over the incident.

           "Before, when I introduced myself to a stranger, saying  that  I
           was from North Korea, people would just think 'Wow, he came from
           a  tough  place,'"  one  young  defector  told   a   round-table
           discussion between defectors and South Korean  students  sparked
           by the sinking incident. "However, now, when I introduce  myself
           as someone born in North Korea, people can't avoid  thinking  of
           the Cheonan," he added.  "I think  I  sense  this  prejudice.  I
           sense that people feel that 'these North Koreans are dangerous,'
           so, since the Cheonan incident, I have no longer said I am  from
           North Korea."...

           Children and young adults who defect to  South  Korea  from  the
           Stalinist North already face a long battle in adapting to  life-
           and education-in a capitalist country. After receiving  a  North
           Korean-style education, which focuses on the 'supreme  goodness'
           of the regime and stifles creative thinking,  they  often  spend
           years in hiding, often in China, missing out on  several  years'
           education as their South Korean peers are flocking  to  cramming
           schools to improve their grades. ...

           A South Korean student said that it is common  for  students  in
           South Korea to pretend to ignore the existence of  North  Korean
           defectors  in  their  midst.  "From  the  moment  North   Korean
           defectors set foot on South Korean soil, they became citizens of
           the Republic of Korea," he said. "They used  to  live  in  North
           Korea but they are now citizens of the Republic of Korea, and  I
           don't  understand  why  they  should  feel  guilty  for  actions
           conducted by North Korea."

           Another said he finds it regrettable that North Korean defectors
           in the South are hurt and offended by attitudes toward them."

14. War did not break out in 2010 nor, despite a brief  flare  up  in  2012,
   has it done so to date.

BBC News

15. An article headed 'North Korea enters 'state of war' with South',  dated
   20 March 2013 recorded renewed tensions between  North  Korea  and  South
   Korea.  The tensions did not subsequently develop  into  renewed  warfare
   between the two states.

European Parliament Resolution on the situation  of  North  Korean  refugees
(24 May 2012)

16. The Parliament deplored the human rights situation in  North  Korea  and
   noted the May 2012 report by  the  South  Korean  National  Human  Rights
   Commission on human rights violations in North Korea, based on  some  800
   interviews  with  refugees,  including  several  hundred  defectors   who
   survived the prison camps.  In  the  preamble  to  its  conclusions,  the
   Parliament noted the 2010 North Korean Ministry of Public Security decree
   which made defection 'a crime against the nation' and  the  statement  in
   December 2011 by the North Korean authorities that they would 'annihilate
   up to three generations of a  family  where  a  family  member  fled  the
   country during the 100 day period of mourning for the death of Kim  Jong-
   il.

17. The report notes that the UNHRC  deplored  'the  grave,  widespread  and
   systematic human rights abuses in North Korea, in particular the  use  of
   torture and labour camps  against  political  prisoners  and  repatriated
   citizens of the DPRK'; that large parts of the population  are  suffering
   starvation and a third of North Korean women and children  were  reported
   to be malnourished in 2009 by the World Food  Programme;  that  over  the
   years, up to 400,000 North Koreans had fled the country, many now  living
   in China as illegal migrants, but most of whom had no intention to remain
   in China, to which they travelled in order to make  their  way  to  South
   Korea or other parts of the world. A large number  of  the  North  Korean
   refugees in China  were  women,  many  of  whom  were  victims  of  human
   trafficking,  sex  slavery  and  forced  marriage,  whose  children  were
   considered stateless in China and either abandoned or 'left to  the  same
   fate as their mothers'.

18. China had entered into a 1986 repatriation agreement with  North  Korea,
   whereby UNHCR asylum  procedures  were  not  available  to  North  Korean
   citizens in China, and up to 5000 North Korean refugees were arrested and
   returned there from China every year. Eye witness reports  described  the
   treatment of defectors returned to North Korea:  they were systematically
   subjected to torture, imprisoned in concentration camps and may  even  be
   executed.   Entire  families  were  imprisoned,  including  children  and
   grandparents, on the basis of 'guilt by association; those  who  returned
   pregnant were allegedly forced to abort and there was a  risk  of  babies
   with Chinese fathers being killed. Satellite  images  and  accounts  from
   defectors supported allegations that North Korea operated  at  least  six
   concentration camps and  numerous  're-education'  camps  housing  up  to
   200,000 prisoners, most of them political

19. The recommendations called on North Korea  and  China  to  change  these
   practices and on China to treat North Korean defectors as 'full  citizens
   of the Republic of Korea' and to grant them safe passage to  South  Korea
   or other third countries, and to treat them as refugees  sur  place  with
   access to UNHCR procedures and to legal residence, if married to  Chinese
   citizens.

Quality Solicitors letter (14 October 2011)

20. By a letter of 14 October 2011, Ms Charlotte Buckley, senior  caseworker
   with Quality Solicitors (who represent MP) reported the outcome of  their
   investigations into the procedures at the South Korean Embassy in London.
    They had been told that an applicant for  South  Korean  citizenship  is
   required to attend twice at the Embassy,  the  first  time  to  make  the
   request and be given a list of required documents; and the  second  time,
   for an appointment with the Consulate.  Both appointments must be made in
   person; the Embassy was not prepared to indicate the likely timeframe for
   recognition of an applicant as a South Korean citizen, or refusal of that
   application.

International Crisis Group

21. The ICG report "Strangers at Home: North Koreans in the South" dated  14
   July 2011 records that before 1999, there were hardly  any  North  Korean
   defectors to South Korea and those small numbers who did arrive were Cold
   War heroes, true defectors of  men  from  the  North  Korean  elite.  The
   numbers had surged since then, and were now mostly women,  many  of  them
   single mothers with dependent children, ill  educated,  under  nourished,
   and socially discriminated against in South Korea.

22. By December 2010, a total of 20,360 defectors had arrived in the  South,
   and the number was expected now to remain steady  at  2500-3000  a  year.
   Restrictions  in  North  Korea  had  been  tightened,  including  greater
   punishments for attempting to defect. Out of a  total  population  of  72
   million people on the  Korean  peninsula,  approximately  500,000-750,000
   remained separated from family members by the North-South division.

23. Integration of North Koreans into South  Korea  was  problematic;  South
   Korea was aware of the need to address it because of the  possibility  of
   total failure of the North Korean state in the future, which might create
   a massive outflow of refugees because of the brutal living conditions  in
   the North. The issue was a constant risk to already delicate negotiations
   between the Koreas.

24.  The  report  gives  examples  of  a  small  number  of   North   Korean
   intelligence agents who infiltrated the South  through  the  'protection'
   procedure and passed classified information back to the  North  including
   the names of South Korean agents  operating  in  North  Korea,  who  were
   killed;  contact  and  background  information  on  100  senior  military
   officers; and the whereabouts of prominent North Korean  defectors  (from
   the early phase of defection), one of whom, Hwang  Jang-hy?p,  was  later
   the subject of an assassination plot by  two  other  intelligence  agents
   posing as ordinary defectors.  They were identified and sentenced  to  10
   years' imprisonment in South Korea in June 2010.  There is no  suggestion
   that they were refouled to North Korea.

Freedom House

25. The bundle included the Freedom in the World report for  2009  on  South
   Korea. That document is significantly out of date,  dealing  with  events
   now six years old.  The most recent available report is  that  for  2012,
   which is broadly optimistic as to South Korea's  freedoms.   South  Korea
   has transformed itself over the  period  since  partition,  from  a  poor
   agrarian country to one of the world's leading industrial nations. It had
   recovered well from the global financial crisis in 2008  under  President
   Lee, who focused on strengthening relations with the United  States.   In
   November 2012, South Korea ratified the Korea-United  States  Free  Trade
   Agreement, and South Korea, Japan and the United States reaffirmed  their
   commitment to cooperate in dealing with North Korea.

26. South Korea is an electoral democracy with executive power vested  in  a
   directly elected  President  who  may  serve  only  one  five-year  term.
   Political pluralism is robust, with multiple parties competing for power.
    Travel both within South Korea and abroad is  unrestricted,  except  for
   travel to North Korea, which requires government approval.  During  2012,
   there had been increased tensions with North Korea, starting  with  North
   Korea's launch of a warhead satellite, and a brief retaliation  by  South
   Korea.

27. Overall, the political  system  is  healthy,  but  plagued  by  bribery,
   influence peddling and extortion, which are successfully  prosecuted  and
   litigated on occasion. The report records the result of  the  April  2012
   legislative elections, won by the Saenuri Party, and the country's  first
   female President, Park Guen-hye, daughter of former President Park Chung-
   hee,  a  brutal  dictator  for  whose  past  actions  she  has   publicly
   apologised.  There had been political and corruption scandals  under  the
   previous administration of President Lee Myung-bak.

28.  The  report  notes  that  South  Korea's  news  media  are   free   and
   competitive. Newspapers are privately owned and  report  aggressively  on
   government policies and alleged official and  corporate  wrongdoing.  The
   National Security Law is used to monitor and control internet traffic and
   the media suffer from government interference  and  influence.   However,
   the government generally respects citizens' right to  privacy.  An  Anti-
   Wiretap Law sets the conditions under which the  government  may  monitor
   telephone calls, mail, and e-mail.

29. The constitution provides for freedom of religion, but  Buddhist  groups
   accused the  Lee  government  of  religious  bias.  Academic  freedom  is
   unrestricted,  though  the  National  Security  Law   limits   statements
   supporting the North Korean regime or communism. A January 2012 students'
   rights ordinance for all Seoul-based elementary, middle, and high schools
   bans corporal punishment and discrimination against students on the basis
   of gender, religion, age, race, sexual identity, or pregnancy and  allows
   students to stage rallies. A related teachers' rights ordinance was  also
   announced. The Ministry of Education,  Science  and  Technology  filed  a
   lawsuit with the Supreme Court challenging the  ordinance  and  filed  an
   injunction to suspend its implementation, which the Supreme Court did  in
   November. No further decisions on the two ordinances had been reached  by
   the end of the year.

30. South Korea respects  freedom  of  assembly,  but  police  must  receive
   advance notice of all demonstrations,  which  may  not  undermine  public
   order. Human rights groups, social welfare organizations, and other  NGOs
   are active and generally operate  freely.   South  Korea's  judiciary  is
   generally considered to be independent.  There are  occasional  incidents
   of police verbal or physical abuse but no systemic concerns.   The  death
   penalty still exists but has not been used since December 1997,  although
   there are about 60 death row inmates. Prisons lack  some  amenities  (hot
   water in  winter)  but  there  have  been  few  reports  of  beatings  or
   intimidation by guards.

31. The report drew a distinction between those in South Korea who  are  not
   ethnic Koreans:

      "The  country's  few  ethnic  minorities  face  legal   and   societal
      discrimination. Residents who are  not  ethnic  Koreans  have  extreme
      difficulties obtaining citizenship, which is based on parentage rather
      than place of birth. Lack of citizenship  bars  them  from  the  civil
      service and limits job opportunities at some major corporations."

32. There is no comment at all about the status of North Korean migrants  in
   the 2012 report.  Women have legal equality but face some  discrimination
   in society and employment in practice.  Married women have only had equal
   inheritance rights since 2005 and, despite President Park being the first
   woman  President  of  South  Korea,  women  remain  underrepresented   in
   government with just below 16% of seats.
