

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      Jaff (s.120 notice; statement of "additional grounds") [2012] UKUT
                                 00396(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2012                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ALAND OSMAN JAFF

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Kadic of Cambridge Immigration Legal Centre
Limited


      (i) In the absence of a s.120 notice and a  statement  of  "additional
      grounds", an appellant could not rely  on  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006 before the First-tier Tribunal as that
      had not formed part of his application for leave to remain made to the
      Secretary of State: Lamichhane v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 260 applied.

      (ii) A statement of "additional grounds" may be made in response to  a
      s.120 notice at any time, including up to (and perhaps at the time of)
      the hearing of the appeal.

      (iii) Although the legislative scheme prescribes no particular form in
      which a statement  of  "additional  grounds"  must  be  made,  such  a
      statement must as a minimum set out with some level  of  particularity
      the ground(s) relied upon by  the  appellant  as  the  foundation  for
      remaining in the UK and upon which reliance has  not  previously  been
      placed.   It must "state" the additional ground to  be  relied  on  in
      substance or, at least, in form.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Headen) allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
      Secretary of State's decision taken on 25 March 2011 refusing to  vary
      his leave to remain in the UK and to remove him by way  of  directions
      to Iraq under s.47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
      2006.

   2. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

The Judge's Decision

   3.  Judge  Headen  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on   asylum   and
      humanitarian  protection  grounds.   She  did  not  accept  that   the
      appellant would be at risk on return to Iraq.  That decision  was  not
      challenged before me and stands.

   4. However, the Judge  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  two  bases:
      first,  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR;  and  secondly,  under   the
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (SI  2006/1003)
      ("the  2006  Regulations").   Both  decisions  were  based  upon   the
      appellant's relationship with a Latvian national (Anna  Danilova)  who
      was his girlfriend.  At para 46, the Judge found:

           "The unchallenged evidence is that the appellant is the  partner
           of an EEA national and has been in a durable  relationship  with
           her since 2008.  They plan to marry.   The  appellant's  partner
           has been living with the appellant at his address.   Documentary
           evidence has been provided to confirm this relationship and  the
           partner's status."

   5. The Judge found that from  1  May  2011,  the  appellant's  girlfriend
      ceased to be subject to the Worker Registration Scheme in  respect  of
      Latvia and, as a worker, was exercising EU treaty rights.

   6. As regards the 2006 Regulations, on the basis of the finding that  the
      appellant had a durable relationship with an EEA national  worker  the
      Judge said this (at para 46):

           "....The  appellant  is  therefore  under  Regulation  8(5)   an
           extended family member entitled to a family permit."

   7. In relation to Art 8, the Judge found  that  the  appellant's  removal
      would be a disproportionate interference with his family life  enjoyed
      with his partner on the basis  that,  as  she  was  exercising  treaty
      rights in the UK, she could not be expected to  return  to  Latvia  in
      order to live with  the  appellant  and  equally,  she  could  not  be
      expected to return to Iraq with the appellant.

The Grounds and Submissions

   8. On 6 June 2011, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E B Grant) granted  the
      Secretary of State permission to appeal on the two grounds set out  in
      the application.  First, the Judge had been wrong to allow the  appeal
      under  the  2006  Regulations  as  the  appellant  had  not  made   an
      application under those Regulations.  Relying on the case of R (Weiss)
      v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 803 the grounds argue that the Judge could  not
      make a decision under the 2006 Regulations if an application  had  not
      been made to the Secretary of State.  Secondly, the grounds argue that
      the Judge was wrong to allow the appeal  under  Article  8  (which  is
      described  as  a  "discretionary  basis")  before  the  appellant  had
      exhausted his statutory options, namely made an application under  the
      2006 Regulations.

   9. In his submissions on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Tarlow
      accepted that the  Judge's  decision  in  respect  of  Article  8  was
      entirely appropriate.  He did not formally concede that point  but  he
      made no  further  submissions  in  relation  to  it.  Nevertheless  he
      submitted that for the reasons set  out  in  the  grounds  upon  which
      permission to appeal was sought the  Judge  should  not  have  made  a
      decision in respect of the 2006 Regulations  in  the  absence  of  the
      appellant having made an application under those Regulations.

  10. Ms Kadic, who represented the appellant submitted that the  judge  was
      entitled to consider the 2006 Regulations but, she accepted, since the
      decision to issue a residence card to an extended family member of  an
      EEA national required the exercise of discretion under  reg  17(4)  of
      the 2006 Regulations, the Judge had been wrong  to  allow  the  appeal
      outright.  The Secretary of State was still required to  exercise  her
      discretion under reg 17(4).

Discussion and Analysis

  11. The judge's factual finding that the appellant and his partner are  in
      a durable relationship is not challenged.   Nor is it challenged  that
      as from 1 May 2011,  the  appellant's  partner  was  an  EEA  national
      exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  As a consequence, Ms Danilova had
      a right to reside in the UK.  On the  basis  of  the  judge's  factual
      finding in respect of their relationship, the appellant was, in  fact,
      an "extended family member" under reg 8(5) of  the  2006  Regulations.
      However, even if the judge was entitled to make a decision  under  the
      2006 Regulations, she was wrong to consider  that  the  appellant  was
      "entitled to a family permit".  (The  document  is  in  fact  properly
      called a "residence card": see reg 17).  By  virtue  of  reg  17(4)  a
      residence card may be issued to  an  extended  family  member  by  the
      Secretary of State but that involves the exercise of discretion  which
      has yet to be exercised by the Secretary of State.  Therefore, even if
      the First-tier Tribunal had been entitled to decide the  appeal  under
      the 2006 Regulations, the successful outcome of the appeal could be no
      more than the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with
      the law and it remained for her to exercise discretion under reg 17(4)
      in line with the First-tier Tribunal's finding that the appellant  and
      his partner are in a durable relationship.

  12. That said, however, I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal  was
      not entitled to reach a decision under the 2006 Regulations.

  13. It is not disputed that the appellant  has  not  made  an  application
      under those Regulations to the Secretary of State for a residence card
      as an "extended family member".  Indeed, I was  told  at  the  hearing
      that he has not done so even now.  In those circumstances, it is clear
      from a line of cases decided by the Court of Appeal  that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal could only consider a ground of appeal not part  of  the
      application considered by the  Secretary  of  State  in  reaching  the
      appealed immigration decision if it has been raised in a statement  in
      response to a s.120 notice served by the Secretary of State under  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   That  line  of  cases
      includes Weiss (relied upon by the Secretary of State in the grounds);
      AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1079 and  culminating  in  the
      recent decision in Lamichhane v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 260.

  14. In Lamichhane the Court of Appeal considered the issue of whether  the
      First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction to deal with matters raised by an
      appellant in an appeal which he had not  previously  raised  with  the
      Secretary of State where  a  "one-stop"  notice  under  s.120  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had not  been  served  by
      the Secretary of State on the appellant.  Having examined the relevant
      statutory provisions in the 2002 Act, Stanley Burnton LJ concluded  at
      [41] that :

           "...an appellant on whom no section 120 notice has  been  served
           may not raise before the Tribunal any ground for  the  grant  of
           leave to remain different from that which was the subject of the
           decision of the Secretary of State appealed against."

  15. That decision followed the earlier decision of the Court of Appeal  in
      AS (Afghanistan) to the same effect.

  16. Consequently, the Court of Appeal held that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      had no jurisdiction to consider that appellant's claim to remain as  a
      Tier 4 student as that had not been the basis upon which he had sought
      leave (it was in  fact  on  long  residence  grounds)  and  which  had
      resulted in the immigration decision the subject of the appeal as  the
      Secretary of State  had  not  served  a  s.120  notice  inviting  that
      appellant to state "additional grounds" on  which  he  claimed  to  be
      entitled to remain in the UK.

  17. In this appeal, the Secretary of State argues  that,  by  parity,  the
      First-tier Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to  consider  whether  the
      appellant had any basis under the 2006 Regulations to remain in the UK
      as this had not formed part of his original application.

  18. Although this case concerned an appellant's claim to reside in the  UK
      by virtue of the 2006 Regulations, the approach in  Lamichhane  is  no
      less applicable.  As in Lamichhane the appellant is  seeking  to  rely
      upon a ground set out in s.84 of the 2002 Act (s. 84(1)(d)).   However
      in this appeal, unlike in Lamichhane, a s.120 notice was served by the
      Secretary of State upon the appellant as part of the refusal  decision
      dated 25 March 2011.  That "one-stop" notice states:

           "You must now make a formal statement stating your  reasons  for
           wishing to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom.   You  should
           also state any grounds on which you should be permitted to enter
           or remain in the United Kingdom, and any grounds  on  which  you
           should not be removed from or be required to  leave  the  United
           Kingdom."

  19. In response to that the appellant did not serve any  formal  statement
      upon the Secretary of State.  The first reference that  the  appellant
      makes to his relationship with his EEA partner was in  the  bundle  of
      documents served on  the  First-tier  Tribunal  two  days  before  the
      hearing which was held on 6  May  2011.   Reference  is  made  to  his
      relationship in his statement dated 15 April 2011 (at page 11  of  the
      bundle).  Further, albeit in the context of Article  8,  the  skeleton
      argument at para 23 states that the "appellant has...a  girlfriend  in
      the UK".  That is the only reference in the skeleton argument  to  his
      girlfriend and no reference  or  reliance  is  placed  upon  the  2006
      Regulations.  In addition, there is a statement from  the  appellant's
      girlfriend (at pages 12-13 of the bundle) dated 3  May  2011  stating,
      inter alia, that they have been living together since 20 May 2009.  No
      direct reference is made to her EEA status or any suggestion that  the
      appellant wishes to assert a claim to be in  the  UK  based  upon  his
      relationship with an EEA national.

  20. Consequently, I accept Mr Tarlow's submission that the appellant,  had
      there been no s.120 statement, would not have been  entitled  to  rely
      upon the 2006 Regulations directly  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      However, unlike in Lamichhane, there was a s.120  notice.   The  issue
      is,  therefore,  whether  the  appellant  has  made  a  "statement  of
      additional grounds" in response to that notice  relying  on  the  2006
      Regulations.

  21. The 2002 Act does not stipulate any particular form a statement  under
      s.120 should take.  As Stanley Burnton LJ noted in Lamichhane at [35]:

           "Section 120 does not itself provide for the consequences of the
           service of a notice.  It does not stipulate any time  limit  for
           its notice  or  for  the  statement  in  which  it  invites  the
           applicant to make in response to it."

  22. The notice as set out in the Secretary of State's refusal decision  in
      this appeal states that:

           "The statement should be made on the form NOTICE  OF  APPEAL  if
           you are appealing this decision."

  23. To the extent that this appears to  stipulate  the  form  in  which  a
      statement should be made by  an  appellant  in  response  to  a  s.120
      notice, it cannot be determinative.  The Notice  of  Appeal  will,  of
      course, be the document filed with the  First-tier  Tribunal  when  an
      appellant seeks  to  appeal  an  adverse  immigration  decision.   The
      implication of the Secretary of State's notice is that  the  statement
      must be contained in that Notice of Appeal and,  therefore,  certainly
      cannot be made  subsequently.   That,  however,  is  contrary  to  the
      express wording of s.85(3) of the 2002 Act which, in referring back to
      sub-section 2 of  section  85,  that  imposes  an  obligation  on  the
      Tribunal to consider any matter raised in  such  a  statement,  states
      that

           "Sub-section (2) applies to a statement made under  section  120
           whether the statement was made before or after  the  appeal  was
           commenced." (my emphasis)

  24. As the emphasised words make clear, the statutory scheme  contemplates
      a statement in response to a s.120 notice being made after  an  appeal
      has been commenced and, consequently, after a  Notice  of  Appeal  has
      been  filed  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The   statement   may,
      therefore, be in a document served  after  the  Notice  of  Appeal  is
      filed.  There can be no objection,  therefore,  in  principle  in  the
      appellant having made a "statement" under  s.120  shortly  before  the
      hearing of the appeal.  The only issue is whether he has done so.   In
      my judgment he has not. The "statement" must as a minimum set out with
      some level of particularity the ground or basis  relied  upon  by  the
      appellant as a basis for him remaining in the UK and upon which he has
      not previously relied.   It must "state" the additional ground  to  be
      relied on in substance or, at least, in form.  Merely setting out  the
      evidence supporting his claimed relationship with his partner, without
      any reference to her EEA status and his claimed right to reside in the
      UK as her "extended family member" cannot, in my judgment, amount to a
      "statement" under s.120 relying upon the 2006 Regulations.  As I  have
      already pointed out, the skeleton argument sets  out  the  appellant's
      legal basis for remaining in the UK and reliance is only  placed  upon
      Article 8 of the ECHR.  No reference is made to the  2006  Regulations
      or his girlfriend's EEA status.

  25. For this reason, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in allowing  the
      appeal as not being in accordance with the law because  the  appellant
      was "an extended family member of an EEA  national".   The  First-tier
      Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider that ground  as  it  had  not
      been raised in a s.120 statement  in  response  to  the  Secretary  of
      State's notice under s.120. To that extent, therefore,  the  Secretary
      of State's appeal is allowed.

  26. However, the Judge was fully entitled (indeed  required)  to  consider
      whether the appellant's removal breached Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   In
      doing so, the Judge was entitled to consider whether the appellant had
      any basis for remaining in the UK as the "extended family  member"  of
      an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  The Judge found that he was
      an "extended family member"  of  an  EEA  national  and  that  factual
      finding is not challenged.  The Judge was entitled to  find  that  the
      appellant's partner could not be expected to return to her own country
      to live with the appellant or to go to Iraq to  live  with  him  given
      that she was exercising treaty rights in the UK.  I did not understand
      Mr Tarlow to challenge any of the Judge's findings. They are  findings
      which were entirely open to him  on  the  evidence.   Indeed,  in  the
      absence of any countervailing factor - and none were raised before the
      Judge  -  his  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  removal  would   be
      disproportionate was inevitable.

  27. For these reasons, therefore, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
      allow the appeal as not being in accordance with the law  (namely  the
      2006 Regulations) involved the making of an error of  law  and  I  set
      that decision aside and dismiss the appeal on that ground.

  28. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum and
      humanitarian protection grounds is not challenged and stands.

  29. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the appeal under Article 8
      also stands.

                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:

