
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Mubu and others (immigration appeals - res judicata) [2012] UKUT 00398(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                     |Determination Sent          |
|On 26 September 2012                      |                            |
|                                          |............................|
|                                          |...........                 |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
                        Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Paul Mubiana Mubu
                               Olivia Tengende
                              Paula Kamona Mubu
                           Mwendabai Patrice Mubu
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M. Tanner, Home Office Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents:   Mr Z. Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors

The principle of res judicata does not operate in immigration appeals.

The guidelines set out in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702;  [2003]  Imm  AR  1
are always to be applied to  the  determination  of  a  factual  issue,  the
dispute as to which has already been the subject of  judicial  determination
in an appeal against an earlier  immigration  decision  involving  the  same
parties. This is so whether the finding in the earlier determination was  in
favour, or against, the Secretary of State.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.  The  respondents  [hereinafter  'the  claimants']  are  citizens   of
      Zimbabwe. They are aged 36, 35, 13 and 9 years old  respectively.  The
      first and second claimants  are  married  and  the  third  and  fourth
      claimants are their children.


   2. The first three claimants entered the United Kingdom  as  visitors  in
      2001. They failed to leave the United Kingdom by the date their  leave
      expired, and subsequently overstayed. On the 11th July 2003 the  first
      claimant was granted leave to remain until the 11th  July  2007.  Such
      leave was granted on the basis of his  UK  ancestry,  it  having  been
      accepted by the Secretary of State  that  he  is  the  grandson  of  a
      British citizen by birth, a Mr Ernest Alletson. The second  and  third
      claimants were granted  leave  to  remain  for  the  same  period,  as
      dependents of the first claimant. The fourth claimant was born in  the
      United Kingdom on the 8th June 2004.

   3. On the 18th June 2007 the first claimant (with the  second  to  fourth
      claimants being named as his dependents) applied for an  extension  of
      his leave to remain, again, on the grounds of his UK ancestry. On  the
      14th  January  2008  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  each  of  the
      claimants' applications. The Secretary  of  State  refused  the  first
      claimant's application pursuant to paragraph 186(iii) of  HC  395.  It
      was concluded that two certified copy birth certificates that had been
      produced by the first claimant in support of  his  application,  these
      being in his own and his mother's [Mrs Christina Alletson] names, were
      not authentic.

   4. The conclusions of the Secretary of State in  the  decisions  of  14th
      January 2008 were based on  the  contents  of  a  letter,  dated  27th
      November 2007 and authored by the  Registrar  General  of  Births  and
      Deaths in Zimbabwe. This letter was written in response to an  enquiry
      made by the British Embassy in Harare and, inter alia, stated that the
      entry numbers shown on the aforementioned birth certificates were such
      that the certificates were found to  be  'not  authentic'.  The  entry
      number on the certificate in Mrs Alletson's name [SMS/662/48] was said
      not to exist in the 'files' and the certificate said to relate to  the
      first claimant ['entry number' HMS/4221/76] 'was in respect of someone
      else in our files and not Paula (sic) Mubiana Mubu".

   5. Each of the claimants appealed the Secretary of State's  decisions  to
      the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal. Judge Tipping heard  the  appeals
      on the 25th June 2008. The Secretary of State was not  represented  at
      that hearing. In a determination promulgated  on  the  1st  July  2008
      [referenced IA/01712/2008] Judge Tipping allowed the first  claimant's
      appeal, concluding that he met the  requirements  of  the  immigration
      rules. We only have  before  us  the  appeal  determination  of  Judge
      Tipping in relation to the first claimant, however, the  Secretary  of
      State accepts that each of the  claimants'  appeals  were  allowed  by
      Judge Tipping and, indeed,  we  note  that  Judge  Tipping  refers  to
      hearing all of the claimants' appeals on the same basis  concurrently,
      in paragraph 1 of his determination made  in  relation  to  the  first
      claimant.

   6. In allowing the appeal of the first claimant, Judge Tipping materially
      stated as follows:

         "[9] In response  to  this  refusal,  the  appellant  has  obtained
         further certified copy birth certificates from Zimbabwe, and  these
         were submitted under cover of a letter dated 7 April 2008 from  his
         representatives.  In  anticipation  of   the   arrival   of   these
         certificates the hearing of  this  appeal  was  adjourned  from  26
         February to 11 April 2008, by which date the certificates had  been
         received, albeit  only  recently.  The  hearing  on  11  April  was
         therefore adjourned to allow the respondent to  consider  and  make
         enquiries about the  new  certificates.  However,  by  the  further
         adjourned date, 3 June, this had not  been  done.  The  Immigration
         Judge reluctantly adjourned the hearing again...


         [10] Mr A Pompa, a Presenting Officer, represented  the  respondent
         at the hearings on 11 April and 3 June 2008,  and  stated  that  he
         would reserve the appeal to himself. Nevertheless, neither  he  nor
         any other representative of  the  respondent  was  present  at  the
         hearing before me. No further evidence has been  submitted  on  the
         respondent's behalf. The burden of establishing  that  the  further
         certificates submitted in April by the appellant  are  not  genuine
         rests on the respondent...


         [13] In compliance with the direction by the Immigration Judge on 3
         June, the appellant has sought to obtain  confirmation  that  these
         certificates are genuine. He contacted the Registry  in  Harare  by
         telephone, but in a faxed reply received on the day of the  hearing
         and submitted by the appellant, the Registry stated that  it  could
         not act except in response to a formal application by  the  British
         Embassy.  The  appellant  also  contacted  the  Zimbabwean  Embassy
         (formerly the High Commission) for help, but the  authorities  said
         that this was not a matter in which they were  prepared  to  become
         involved.


         [14] In the absence from the hearing of representation on the  part
         of the respondent, the appellant's  evidence  was  unchallenged  in
         cross-examination. I found the appellant  a  clear  and  consistent
         witness, and his evidence  is  to  some  extent  supported  by  the
         submitted documents. His description of the obtaining of the second
         set of certificates matches that which was given to the Immigration
         Judge at the hearing on 3 June. No further evidence or  submissions
         on this, the sole issue in the appeal on immigration  grounds,  has
         been provided on the respondent's behalf.


         [15] In these circumstances, I accept to the relevant  standard  of
         proof that the appellant is the grandson of Mr Ernest Alletson.  No
         other failure to meet the requirements of paragraph 186 and 189  is
         alleged on the part of the respondent. For these  reasons,  I  find
         that the appellant satisfies on a balance of probabilities  all  of
         the relevant requirements of HC395."

   7.  The  Secretary  of  State  chose  not   make   an   application   for
      reconsideration of the determinations of Judge  Tipping,  but  instead
      granted each of the claimants leave to  remain  until  the  16th  June
      2010.


   8. On the 14th June 2010 the first claimant applied for Indefinite  Leave
      to Remain pursuant to paragraph 192 of the Immigration Rules. Each  of
      the other claimants were detailed therein as being his dependents.  On
      the 28th October  2010  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  first
      claimant's application, pursuant to paragraph 193 of  the  Immigration
      Rules, with reference to paragraphs 186 and 192 of  those  rules.  The
      Secretary of State treated the second to fourth  claimants  as  having
      made separate applications, and each of these claimants'  applications
      were refused on the sole basis that the first claimant  had  not  been
      granted Indefinite Leave to Remain. The Secretary  of  State  did  not
      refuse  the  claimants'  applications  in  reliance   on   any   other
      provisions.

   9. In her decision of the 28th October 2010 the Secretary of  State  gave
      the following reasons for refusing the first claimant's application;

         "To demonstrate your claimed relationship to  Ernest  Alletson  you
         have submitted Zimbabwean birth certificates for yourself and  your
         mother,  Christina  Alletson.  Although  the   Zimbabwean   Central
         Registry have been unable  to  trace  the  records  for  the  birth
         certificate submitted in your name, they have  confirmed  that  the
         birth certificate submitted for your mother is not authentic.


         It is noted  that  this  is  the  third  certificate  bearing  your
         mother's name which the Zimbabwean Central Registry have  confirmed
         is not authentic. It is noted that  all  three  birth  certificates
         show that your mother was born on 23 November 1948  in  the  Andrew
         Fleming Hospital, Salisbury. The Annals of  the  Royal  College  of
         Surgeons of England confirm that the Andrew  Fleming  Hospital  did
         not open its doors to patients until May  1974.  It  is  considered
         that this casts further doubt on the authenticity of all the  birth
         certificates which you have submitted bearing your mother's name.


         As your mother's birth certificate is  not  authentic,  it  is  not
         accepted that Ernest Alletson is your grandfather.

  10. The claimants appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Judge  Andonian
      heard the appeals on the 14th January 2011. The judge allowed each  of
      the claimants' appeals in a combined determination promulgated on  the
      21st January 2011. In doing so the judge referred  to  the  claimants'
      history in the United Kingdom  and  summarised  the  determination  of
      Judge Tipping. Immediately after doing so the judge stated as follows:


         "[8] There is no doubt therefore that this  Tribunal  categorically
         holds that the Appellant is the Grandson of a British Citizen  born
         in the UK and meets the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  in
         that respect.


         [9] There was no  Presenting  Officer  before  me  to  dispute  the
         evidence. The 1st Appellant appeared and gave evidence  in  support
         of his appeal.


         [10] I believe the Appellant has discharged  the  burden  of  proof
         incumbent on him on the civil standard"


  11. The Secretary of State filed  grounds  of  appeal  in  support  of  an
      application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
      grounds contended that  Judge  Andonian  had  erred  in  treating  the
      determination of Judge Tipping  as  disposing  of  the  central  issue
      between the parties, without having given consideration to  the  'new'
      evidence provided by the Secretary of State that had not  been  placed
      before Judge Tipping. On the 31st March 2011 Upper Tribunal Judge C.N.
      Lane granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal and thus  the
      matter came before us.

  12. Prior to the hearing we drew the parties  attention  to  the  reported
      decision of the Upper Tribunal (Senior Immigration  Judge  Latter)  in
      Chomanga (binding effect of unappealed decisions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT
      00312 (IAC), and gave them opportunity to  consider  their  respective
      positions in light of its conclusions.


  13. At the outset of the hearing Ms Tanner requested an adjournment on the
      basis that (i) another Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Kandola, had
      previously had involvement in the appeal and wished to retain  conduct
      of it; (ii) she had assumed that the hearing  was  listed  as  a  'for
      mention'; and (iii) she had  only  received  the  claimants'  skeleton
      argument on the 24th September 2012.

  14. Having considered the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,
      and in particular rules 2 and 5, we refused to  adjourn  the  hearing.
      This is an appeal in which there has already been a significant delay,
      the Secretary of State's decision having been made  approximately  two
      years ago and Ms Tanner made no submission to the effect that she  was
      not sufficiently well prepared to conduct  the  hearing  and,  indeed,
      indicated that she had anticipated that the decision in  Chomanga  may
      be  seen  to  be  relevant.  Further,  Ms  Tanner  could  provide   no
      explanation as to why the application for  an  adjournment  was  being
      made for the first time on the morning of the hearing. We,  therefore,
      proceeded to hear the submissions of the parties.

  15. The crux of Ms Tanner's submissions were to the  effect  that  it  had
      been incumbent on Judge Andonian to give consideration to all  of  the
      documents that had been placed before him, including  those  that  had
      not previously been relied upon by the Secretary of State before Judge
      Tipping. She drew the Tribunal's  attention  to  these  documents  and
      asserted that they demonstrated that  the  evidence  provided  by  the
      claimants was not genuine and that they had acted fraudulently.

  16. The panel invited Ms Tanner to make submissions as to the relevance of
      the fact that the 'new' documents produced by the Secretary  of  State
      before Judge Andonian could, prima facie, have  been  produced  before
      Judge Tipping. She responded by accepting that the  document  obtained
      from the Annals of the  Royal  College  of  Surgeon  could  have  been
      produced before Judge Tipping. She asserted, however, that a number of
      the letters from the Zimbabwean Central Registry could not  have  been
      produced to Judge Tipping because they post-dated his determination.

  17. Ms Tanner finally submitted that if the Tribunal were to set aside the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal  it  ought  to  consider  the
      'new' documents for itself and conclude that the documentation  relied
      upon by the claimants is not  genuine.  She  asserted  that,  in  such
      circumstances, the claimants' appeals ought be dismissed.

  18. In response, Mr  Malik  relied  upon  the  contents  of  his  skeleton
      argument, asserting that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  erred  as
      claimed, or at all. He submitted that the nature of  the  relationship
      between the first claimant and Mr Ernest Alletson had been  determined
      by Judge Tipping and  was  consequently  to  be  considered  as  being
      subject to the principles of res  judicata.  He  drew  the  Tribunal's
      attention to the judgment of the Supreme Court in  R  (Coke-Wallis)  v
      Institute of Chartered Accountants [2011] UKSC 1.  Placing  particular
      reliance on paragraphs 27 and 34 of this judgment, he asserted that  a
      cause of action estoppel operated in the instant appeal so as preclude
      the Secretary of State, under any circumstance, from  seeking  to  re-
      litigate the issue of the relationship between the first claimant  and
      Ernest Alletson.  He  asserted  that  given  that  the  fact  of  such
      relationship was the only issue between the parties before the  First-
      tier Tribunal, the First-tier Tribunal was correct to have allowed the
      appeals.

  19. The panel invited  Mr  Malik,  on  a  number  of  occasions,  to  make
      submissions as to why, if res judicata operated at all in this appeal,
      it fell to be considered in relation to principles relevant to a cause
      of action estoppel as opposed to those relevant to an issue  estoppel.
      In response Mr Malik again referred the panel to paragraph 34  of  the
      Supreme Court's judgment in Coke-Wallis, asserting that the  facts  of
      the instant case were such that they fulfilled the  criteria  relevant
      to cause of action estoppel and thus could not fall to  be  considered
      in reliance on the principles relevant to an issue estoppel.

  20. We also invited Mr Malik to make submissions as to the application  of
      the principles set out in Chomanga. He asserted that the  decision  in
      Chomanga fell to be distinguished from the instant case on  the  basis
      that (i) the Secretary of State had not  given  effect  to  the  first
      Tribunal's decision in Chomanga, whereas in  the  instant  appeal  the
      Secretary of State had given effect to Judge Tipping's  decision;  and
      (ii) the Tribunal's decision in Chomanga did not give  effect  to  the
      judgment in Coke-Wallis and  that  it  should,  consequently,  be  re-
      visited in light of it.

  21. In reply  Ms  Tanner  submitted  that  estoppel  could  not  apply  to
      immigration matters because it was a  well  establish  principle  that
      fresh evidence could  lead  to  earlier  decisions  being  altered  in
      immigration cases. In support of this submission she sought  to  place
      reliance upon the starred decision of the  Tribunal  in  Devaseelan  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 00702.

  22. At the end of the parties' submissions we reserved our  decision.  For
      the sake of completeness we note that  Mr  Malik's  skeleton  argument
      made a number of further submissions as to why the  claimants  appeals
      ought be allowed, in the event that  we  were  not  with  him  on  the
      assertions we have set out above. We indicated to the parties that  we
      saw no need  to  hear  from  them  in  relation  to  these  additional
      submissions.


Immigration Rules

  23. We need only set out the following immigration rules for the  purposes
      of determining the first claimant's appeal. As we have detailed above,
      the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  second  to  fourth  claimants'
      applications solely on the basis that the first claimant did not  have
      the required leave to remain.


         "[186] - The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
         enter the United Kingdom on  the  grounds  of  his  United  Kingdom
         ancestry are that he:
         ...
         (iii)is able to provide proof that one of his grandparents was born
         in the United Kingdom and Islands and that any such grandparent  is
         the applicant's blood grandparent or grandparent by  reason  of  an
         adoption recognised by the laws of the United Kingdom  relating  to
         adoption...



         [192] Indefinite leave to remain may be granted, on application, to
         a Commonwealth citizen  with  a  United  Kingdom  born  grandparent
         provided:


      i) he meets the requirements of paragraph 186(i)-(v)...




         [193] Indefinite leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
         grounds of a United Kingdom born grandparent is to  be  refused  if
         the  Secretary  of  State  is  not  satisfied  that  each  of   the
         requirements in paragraph 192 is met..."

Discussion on the Legal Principles


  24. Mr Malik's principle submission is to the effect that, by operation of
      the principle of res  judicata  and  in  particular  cause  of  action
      estoppel, the findings made by Judge Tipping that the  first  claimant
      is the grandson of Mr Ernest Alletson  and  that  Mr  Alletson  was  a
      British citizen by birth, cannot be the subject of further  litigation
      and must be considered to be final.

  25. In support of his submission that such  principles  are  operative  in
      immigration appeals Mr Malik sought to rely on paragraph  27  of  Lord
      Clarke's judgment in Coke-Wallis. Lord  Clarke  materially  stated  as
      follows when referring to the principle of res judicata:

         "... There is no doubt that  it  applies  to  what  may  be  called
         ordinary civil proceedings. In Thrasyvoulou v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Environment [1990] 2 AC 273, where an issue of estoppel was
         held to arise out of a determination of a planning application, the
         principle was held to apply to public law proceedings"

  26. In his opinion in Thrasyvoulou Lord Bridge stated as follows, at 289C-
      D:


         "In principle they must equally apply to adjudications in the field
         of  public  law.  In  relation  to  adjudications  subject   to   a
         comprehensive self contained statutory code, the presumption, in my
         opinion,  must  be  that  where  statute  has  created  a  specific
         jurisdiction for the determination of any issue  which  establishes
         the existence of a legal  right,  the  principle  of  res  judicata
         applies to give finality to that determination unless an  intention
         to exclude that principle can be properly inferred as a  matter  of
         construction of the relevant statutory provisions."


  27. It is clear that the principles of  res  judicata  can  apply  in  the
      public law field, and that it is generally to be  presumed  that  they
      apply in a statutorily created jurisdiction. Lord  Bridge  recognised,
      however, that the principle of res judicata  would  not  apply  if  an
      intention to exclude that principle can  be  properly  inferred  as  a
      matter of construction  of  the  relevant  statutory  provisions.  The
      Tribunal and the Courts have, on a number of occasions,  rejected  the
      contention that the principle of res judicata applies  to  immigration
      appeals.


  28. In AS and AA (Effect of previous linked determination) Somalia  [2006]
      UKAIT 00052, (approved by the Court  of  Appeal  in  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
      1040), Mr Ockelton, Deputy President, said as follows, in the  context
      of an appeal by an appellant who asserted that a previous  finding  of
      fact by an immigration adjudicator as to his sister's clan membership,
      was binding on the tribunal determining his appeal:

         "60. Generally speaking, parties  to  an  action  must  regard  the
         matter as finally settled between them by a subsisting order  of  a
         competent court.  This is the rule of  res  judicata.   ...  It  is
         sometimes said that there is no  rule  of  res  judicata  or  issue
         estoppel in immigration appeals.  Technically speaking,  that  must
         be right."


  29. In Ocampo v SSHD [2006] EWCA 1276, Auld LJ  stated,  when  considering
      the relevance to the determination of  the  appellant's  appeal  of  a
      conclusion by the Immigration Tribunal that the  appellant's  daughter
      had given credible evidence in her own appeal, in circumstances  where
      there had been  a  material  overlap  of  factual  assertions  between
      appellant's, and his daughter's, appeal:


         "24. In my view, it is at  the  very  least  doubtful  whether  the
         principles of res judicata or issue estoppel have any  application,
         certainly in their  full  rigour,  to  appeals  before  immigration
         tribunals, any more than they do to successive claims for  judicial
         review:"


  30. Similar comments were made by Sir John Donaldson MR in R  v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department ex parte Momin Ali [1984] 1 WLR 663.


  31. We find nothing in the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  Coke-Wallis
      that leads us to come to a  different  conclusion  to  that  which  is
      expressed  in  the  decisions  cited  above.  We  conclude  that   the
      principles of res judicata are not applicable in immigration appeals.


  32. If we are wrong in this conclusion, however, we nevertheless reject Mr
      Malik's submission that cause of action estoppel, as opposed to  issue
      estoppel, is operative in the instant appeal.

  33. The distinction is of some significance because  if  cause  of  action
      estoppel is operative it creates an absolute bar to re-litigation of a
      cause of action whereas the operation of issue estoppel does not [Coke-
      Wallis at paragraphs 26 and 47].

  34. Mr Malik drew the Tribunal's attention to paragraph 34 of the judgment
      of Lord Clarke in Coke-Wallis (cited above) [with whom Lords  Rodgers,
      Collins,  Clarke  and  Dyson  were  in  agreement],  when  seeking  to
      establish that a cause of action  estoppel  operates  in  the  instant
      appeal. Lord Clarke says as follows, in that paragraph:

         "In para 1.02 Spencer Bower and Handley makes it clear  that  there
         are a number of constituent elements in a case based  on  cause  of
         action estoppel. They are that: "(i) the decision, whether domestic
         or foreign, was judicial in the relevant sense; (ii) it was in fact
         pronounced; (iii) the tribunal had jurisdiction  over  the  parties
         and the subject matter; (iv) the decision was - (a) final;  (b)  on
         the  merits;  (v)  it  determined  a  question  raised   in   later
         litigation; and (vi) the parties are the same or their  privies  or
         the earlier decision was in rem."

  35. Mr Malik asserts that the six factors referred to by  Lord  Clarke  in
      the aforementioned paragraph are all present in the instant appeal and
      that, consequently, the principles of cause of action estoppel  arise.
      This submission fails, however, to take cognisance of  the  fact  that
      the claimants succeeded before Judge Tipping. The  relevance  of  this
      can be explained by reference to paragraph  1.04  of  4th  Edition  of
      Spencer Bower and Handley on Res Judicata (2009):

         "If the action succeeds the cause of action merges in the  judgment
         and is extinguished. A second action  cannot  be  brought  on  that
         cause of action, not because there  is  an  estoppel,  but  because
         there is no longer a cause of action."


  36. Lord Clarke also refers to this distinction in  paragraph  26  of  his
      judgment in Coke-Wallis, when considering  the  difference  between  a
      cause of action estoppel and an issue estoppel, quoting Diplock LJ  in
      the decision in Thoday v Thoday [1964] P 181, 167-198:


         "The particular type of estoppel relied  upon  by  the  husband  is
         estoppel per rem judicatam. This is a generic term which in  modern
         law includes two species. The first  species,  which  I  will  call
         'cause of action estoppel,' is that which prevents a  party  to  an
         action from asserting or denying, as against the other  party,  the
         existence of a particular cause of  action,  the  non-existence  or
         existence of which has been determined  by  a  court  of  competent
         jurisdiction in previous litigation between the  same  parties.  If
         the cause of action was determined to exist, ie judgment was  given
         upon it, it is said to be merged in the judgment, or, for those who
         prefer Latin, transit in rem judicatam. If it was determined not to
         exist, the unsuccessful plaintiff can  no  longer  assert  that  it
         does;  he  is  estopped  per  rem  judicatam.  This  is  simply  an
         application of the rule of public policy  expressed  in  the  Latin
         maxim 'Nemo debet bis vexari pro  una  et  eadem  causa.'  In  this
         application of the maxim 'causa' bears its literal Latin meaning."


  37. In the instant matter the claimants succeeded before Judge Tipping  in
      their challenge to the Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  the  14th
      January 2008 and, as a consequence, their cause of action merged  into
      Judge  Tipping's  determinations.  These  decisions  cannot   be   re-
      litigated, not because the Secretary of State is estopped  from  doing
      so, but because the  cause  of  action  i.e.  the  claimants'  appeals
      against the Secretary of State's decisions of 14th January 2008 not to
      grant them leave to remain, were, extinguished by the fact that  there
      was a final  determination  in  the  claimants'  favour.  Indeed,  the
      Secretary of  State  acted  on  that  determination  by  granting  the
      claimants leave to remain.


  38. The claimants  now  seek  to  challenge  different  decisions  of  the
      Secretary of State i.e. those of the 28th  October  2010.  This  is  a
      different cause of action to that brought by the claimants against the
      decision of 14th January 2008.

  39. Further, and in any event, the appeals against the  decisions  of  the
      28th October 2010 are not causes of action brought by the Secretary of
      State, but by the  claimants  themselves.  Even  if  cause  of  action
      estoppel could, in  principle,  be  brought  to  bear  in  immigration
      appeals, it could not operate in the First-tier  Tribunal  as  against
      the  Secretary  of  State  because  the  legislation  permits  of   no
      circumstance in which the Secretary of State could be  the  instigator
      of a cause of action before that Tribunal i.e. the appeal.

  40. For all these reasons  we  reject  Mr  Malik's  submissions  that  the
      principles of res judicata operate in these appeals.

  41. We next turn our consideration to the issue as to what the appropriate
      principles are that ought be applied in circumstances  such  as  those
      that arise in the instant appeals.

  42. Senior Immigration Judge Latter considered  similar  circumstances  in
      his decision in Chomanga  (binding  effect  of  unappealed  decisions)
      Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT  00312  (IAC).   In  Chomanga  the  appellant,  a
      Zimbabwean national, was granted leave to remain for five years on the
      basis of her United Kingdom ancestry, it being asserted by Ms Chomanga
      that her grandmother was a British Citizen by birth. In support of her
      application she produced  birth  certificates  in  her  own,  and  her
      mother's, names.

  43. After having granted Ms Chomanga leave to  remain,  the  Secretary  of
      State obtained information from the Zimbabwe Central Registry  stating
      that the  birth  certificates  produced  by  the  appellant  were  not
      genuine. The Secretary of State curtailed Ms  Chomanga's  leave  as  a
      consequence. The appellant appealed  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal. The Secretary of State failed to submit the  documents  from
      the Zimbabwean Central Registry, and Ms Chomanga's appeal was allowed.
      This determination was not  appealed.  However,  after  reviewing  the
      evidence the Secretary of State issued a further  decision  curtailing
      the appellant's  leave.  The  appellant  again  appealed  against  the
      decision to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, and that  appeal  was
      again allowed. The Secretary of State appealed  and  thus  the  matter
      came before Senior Immigration Judge Latter.

  44. Having quoted extensively from the decision of the Court of Appeal  in
      Secretary of State v  TB  (Jamaica)  [2008]  EWCA  977,  Judge  Latter
      concluded as follows:

         "[20] I am satisfied  that  the  application  of  these  principles
         resolves the issues which have arisen in this appeal and  that  the
         arguments about abuse of process raised in the grounds are  largely
         beside the point.  The respondent was bound by the findings made by
         IJ Ross who was not satisfied that she  had  produced  any  or  any
         sufficient evidence to maintain the assertion  that  the  appellant
         had obtained her leave to remain on the basis  of  UK  ancestry  by
         submitting false documents.  The respondent had had the opportunity
         of filing evidence in support of that contention but had failed  to
         do so or indeed  to  attend  the  hearing.   By  making  a  further
         decision by relying on evidence which could and  should  have  been
         produced  at  that  hearing,  the  respondent  was   in   substance
         attempting to circumvent the judge's decision.  It is right that in
         paragraph 17 of his determination the judge expressed the view that
         it was open to the respondent to curtail the  leave  again  and  to
         produce the relevant documents on any subsequent appeal but in  the
         light of TB that view was incorrect.  He said  that  the  issue  of
         falsity had not been  resolved  but  it  had  by  the  respondent's
         failure to produce evidence and by  the  immigration  appeal  being
         allowed.  These comments made obiter by the judge did not give  the
         respondent the power to take a course of action  not  open  to  her
         under the law.


         [21] None of the  exceptions  to  the  general  principle  that  an
         unappealed decision is binding  set  out  in  para  35  of  Stanley
         Burnton LJ's judgment apply in the  present  case.   There  was  no
         fresh evidence which was not available at the date of the  hearing,
         no change in the law and no relevant change of circumstances or new
         events after the date of decision.  This was also not a case  where
         there was subsequent evidence of fraud: see EB  (fresh  evidence  -
         fraud- directions) Ghana [2005] UKAIT 000131.  The issue before  IJ
         Ross was whether  false  documents  had  been  relied  on  and  the
         evidence on which the respondent based her subsequent decision  was
         exactly the same as the evidence previously relied on.


         [22] For these reasons I am not satisfied that it was open  to  the
         respondent to curtail the appellant's current leave  following  the
         dismissal of the appeal by IJ Ross by making a fresh decision based
         on precisely the same evidence."


  45. Mr Malik, in pursuit of his submission that the principle of cause  of
      action estoppel ought be applied, sought to distinguish  the  decision
      of Chomanga on the basis  that  the  Tribunal  in  Chomanga  had  been
      considering an appeal in which the Secretary of State  had  not  given
      effect to the first determination of  the  Tribunal,  whereas  in  the
      instant case  the  Secretary  of  State  had  given  effect  to  Judge
      Tipping's determination by granting the claimants leave to remain.

  46. We see no force in this submission. Mr Malik is plainly wrong  in  his
      assertion that the Secretary of State did not give effect to the first
      determination of the Tribunal in Chomanga. Had the Secretary of  State
      not done so she could not have issued a further decision to curtail Ms
      Chomanga's leave. By curtailing Ms Chomanga's leave for a second  time
      it is trite that the Secretary of State must have given effect to  the
      first Tribunal's determination that the  original  curtailment  of  Ms
      Chomanga's leave had been unlawful.

  47. Ms Tanner submitted  that  the  principles  set  out  in  the  starred
      determination of the Tribunal in Devaseelan v Secretary of  State  for
      the Home Department [2003] Imm AR 1 ought be applied  to  the  instant
      appeal, and not the principles enunciated in  Chomanga.  She  did  not
      develop this point beyond making the bald assertion. Nevertheless,  it
      is a point that  deserves  careful  consideration  if,  for  no  other
      reason,  than  the  fact  that  the  Tribunal  in  Chomanga  did   not
      specifically allude to the potential  application  of  the  Devaseelen
      'guidelines' in its determination.

  48. Devaseelan concerned second appeals made on human rights grounds by an
      asylum seeker whose asylum appeal  had  been  earlier  dismissed.  The
      guidance given in Devaseelan was approved by the Court  of  Appeal  in
      Djebbar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  EWCA  804
      at paragraphs 30, 31 and 40. In DB [2003] UKAIT  00053  the  AIT  said
      that '[15] There is nothing in Devaseelan which limits its  principles
      to asylum and human rights appeals. There is no reason why they should
      be so limited. We  are  satisfied  that  the  principles  set  out  in
      Devaseelan  apply  to  all  categories  of   appeals   coming   before
      Adjudicators and the Tribunals".


  49. The most relevant points of the guidance  given  by  the  Tribunal  in
      Devaseelan, for the present purposes, are as follows:

         "(1) The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
         starting-point.  ....

         (4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not  brought  to  the
         attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were relevant  to
         the issues before him, should be treated by the second  Adjudicator
         with the greatest circumspection.  ...

         (6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on  facts
         that are not materially different  from  those  put  to  the  first
         Adjudicator, and proposes to  support  the  claim  by  what  is  in
         essence the same evidence as that available  to  the  Appellant  at
         that time, the second  Adjudicator  should  regard  the  issues  as
         settled by the  first  Adjudicator's  determination  and  make  his
         findings in line with that determination rather than  allowing  the
         matter to be relitigated...

         (7)      The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines  (4)  and
         (6) is greatly reduced if there is some very good  reason  why  the
         Appellant's failure to adduce relevant evidence  before  the  first
         Adjudicator should not be, as it were, held against him.  We  think
         such reasons will be rare..."

  50. We can see no logical basis for concluding  otherwise  than  that  the
      same guidelines apply whether the 'previous decision' was in favour of
      or against the Secretary of State. The  fact  that  the  Secretary  of
      State accepts that this is so is  implicit  in  the  submissions  made
      before the IAT by Miss  Giovannetti  of  Counsel,  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State, in Devaseelan. When seeking to identify reasons in
      support of  her  submission  that  'legal  and  policy  considerations
      demanded that the appellant's second appeal be determined in line with
      the first', save in limited circumstances, it  is  recorded  that  she
      asserted as follows:


         "The first is fairness: it would be unfair to an Appellant, who had
         satisfied the first Adjudicator that  his  account  of  events  was
         credible, to deprive him of the benefit of that finding. If that is
         right, it must follow that an Appellant who has failed  to  satisfy
         an Adjudicator of his credibility is not entitled to have the  same
         evidence re-assessed by a second Adjudicator. It is not fair to the
         public for there to be a system in which favourable findings  stand
         but  unfavourable  findings  are  always  questionable.   Secondly,
         general principles of consistency and finality  in  litigation  are
         important even in the absence of a rule of res  judicata.  Thirdly,
         the general approach to findings of fact in immigration cases  both
         on appeal to the Tribunal and outside the IAA (e.g. ex parte Danaie
         [1998] 1mm AR 84) is that findings of fact stand  unless  there  is
         good  reason  to  displace  them.  Fourthly,  it  would,  in   Miss
         Giovannetti's submission, be contrary  to  good  administration  to
         have a system which allowed for the  continuing  existence  of  two
         undisturbed  determinations  of  the  IAA  containing  inconsistent
         findings of fact in relation to the  same  individual."  [paragraph
         34]


  51. In AS & AA Mr Ockelton concluded  as  follows,  when  considering  the
      application of the Devaseelan guidelines:


         [62] ... a decision-maker  considering  a  second  application,  or
         second claim, or second proceedings, to which a person involved  in
         earlier proceedings was a party, should no doubt have regard to the
         previous judgment.  There are two  reasons.   First,  it  may  well
         summarise what was said on the appellant's behalf  on  the  earlier
         occasion. In a jurisdiction such as ours which has no hearsay rule,
         that material has evidential value of its own.  Secondly, it is (so
         far) the authoritative decision on the matters that were raised  at
         that time.  If the parties did not take any  opportunity  available
         to them to challenge  those  findings  then,  the  Tribunal  should
         require a good reason for departing from them now.   Considerations
         of that sort are behind the guidance in Devaseelan,  which  we  set
         out earlier in this determination.  The previous  judgment  is  not
         binding, but it is not to be ignored.  If there is no  good  reason
         for departing from it, it must, as  between  the  parties  to  that
         litigation, be treated as settling the issues  with  which  it  was
         concerned and the facts on which the determination was based"


  52. We respectfully endorse that as the correct approach to be applied  in
      appeals such as the instant one.


  53. Although no mention was made  of  the  Devaseelan  guidelines  in  the
      decision of Chomanga, the decision itself is entirely consistent  with
      the proper application of points 1, 6 and 7 of  those  guidelines.  In
      Chomanga the Secretary of  State  was  relying  on  identical  factual
      assertions in the second appeal as had been determined  in  the  first
      appeal. There was found to be no 'good reason' why  the  Secretary  of
      State had failed to  adduce  relevant  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
      hearing Ms Chomanga's first appeal, it being noted that, on the  facts
      of that case, the Secretary of State was doing no more than attempting
      to circumvent the first Tribunal's decision  without  having  appealed
      against it.

Findings and Reasons


Setting Aside

  54. With those principles in mind we now turn to  the  decision  of  Judge
      Andonian. It is not suggested by Mr Malik, nor  could  it  have  been,
      that the Judge gave  any  consideration  to  the  application  of  the
      Devaseelan guidelines, or in particular as to whether there was  'good
      reason' for the failure of the Secretary of State to produce to  Judge
      Tipping the letters from the Registrar General of Births and Deaths in
      Zimbabwe, dated 28th May 2008 19th July 2010 and 14th October 2010, or
      the extract from the Annals  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of
      England (1974) Vol 54.

  55. Judge Andonian proceeded to determine the appeal  on  the  basis  that
      Judge Tipping's conclusions on the issue of the  relationship  between
      the first claimant and Mr Ernest Alletson were determinative  of  that
      same  issue  before  him.  They  were  not.  Applying  the  Devaseelan
      guidelines they were to be treated  as  the  starting  point  for  his
      considerations.

  56. For this reason we find that the making of the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      determination involved the making of an error on a point of law and we
      set aside that decision and re-make it for ourselves.

Re-making of Decision

  57. When concluding in the first claimant's favour on the issue of whether
      he was related as claimed to Mr Ernest  Alletson,  Judge  Tipping  had
      before  him  two  copies  of  birth  certificates  bearing  the  first
      claimant's name,  referenced  with  'entry  numbers'  HMS/4221/76  and
      NCA/9052/76  respectively.  He  also  had   before   him   two   birth
      certificates bearing the  name  Christina  Alletson,  referenced  with
      'entry numbers' SMS/662/48 and SBY/148/48 respectively  (paragraphs  8
      and 10 of Judge Tipping's determination).

  58. The Secretary of State produced a letter to Judge Tipping, dated  27th
      November 2007, from the Central Registry in Zimbabwe, authored by  the
      Registrar General of Births  and  Deaths.  This  letter  purported  to
      respond to an enquiry by the British Embassy  in  Harare,  and  states
      that 'Entry number SMS/662/48 in respect of  Christina  Alletson  does
      not exist in our files' and 'Entry number HMS/4221/76 [is] in  respect
      of someone else in our files and not Paula [sic] Mubiana Mubu'.

  59. Judge Tipping's  determination  indicates  that  the  hearing  of  the
      claimants' appeals was adjourned on both the 11th April 2008  and  3rd
      June 2008 to allow time for the Secretary of  State  to  make  further
      enquiries of the Central Registry in Zimbabwe in relation to the birth
      certificates referencing 'entry numbers SBY/148/48  and  NCA/9052/76'.
      However, the Tribunal had received no further evidence in this  regard
      by the date of the hearing on the 25th June 2008 and neither  did  the
      Secretary of State seek a further adjournment of the hearing  on  that
      occasion. As detailed above, Judge Tipping subsequently  proceeded  to
      allow the claimants'  appeals,  accepting  the  nature  of  the  first
      claimant's relationship with Mr Alletson when doing so. The  Secretary
      of State did not make  an  application  for  reconsideration  of  this
      decision.

  60. We now have before us a letter from the Registrar  of  General  Births
      and Deaths in Zimbabwe, dated 28th May 2008, which, inter alia, states
      that the birth registrations  of  both  the  first  claimant  and  Mrs
      Christina   Alletson   (respectively   referenced   NCA/9052/76    and
      SBY/98674/60) are 'Not Authentic'. The Secretary of State has provided
      no explanation as to why this evidence was  not  placed  before  Judge
      Tipping given that it pre-dates the hearing before  him  by  nearly  a
      month. Neither has  any  explanation  been  provided  as  to  why  the
      Registrar General of  Births  and  Deaths  was  asked  to  consider  a
      certificate  in  Mrs  Alletson's  name  bearing  an   'entry   number'
      SBY/98674/60, given that  no  evidence  has  been  placed  before  the
      Tribunal that the first  claimant  has  ever  produced  a  certificate
      bearing this  'entry  number';  as  recorded  by  Judge  Tipping,  the
      certificate produced by the first  claimant  in  March  2008,  in  Mrs
      Alletson's name, bore the entry number 'SBY/148/48'.

  61. The Secretary of  State  also  produces  a  further  letter  from  the
      Registrar General of Births and Deaths in Zimbabwe,  dated  19th  July
      2010. This letter states,  inter  alia,  that  the  birth  certificate
      produced by the  first  claimant  in  Mrs  Christina  Alletson's  name
      (referencing 'entry number' SBY/148/48) is  'Not  Authentic'  and  the
      birth certificate produced by the  first  claimant  in  his  own  name
      (referencing 'entry number' NCA/9052/76) had 'not been confirmed'.  It
      is to be recalled that these were also  the  'entry  numbers'  on  the
      birth certificates produced to Judge Tipping, in relation to which the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal granted the  Secretary  of  State  two
      adjournments in 2008 in order that she  may  obtain  further  evidence
      regarding their authenticity.  It is also notable that, by  way  of  a
      letter dated 14th October 2010, the Registrar General  of  Births  and
      Deaths  in  Zimbabwe  stated  that  the  record   of   'entry   number
      NCA/9052/76', in the first claimant's name, was 'missing'.

  62. Ms Tanner submits that significant weight ought  be  attached  by  the
      Tribunal to the letters of the 28th May 2008, 19th July 2010 and  14th
      October 2010, asserting that, at least in respect of  the  latter  two
      letters, they post date the decision of Judge Tipping and  could  not,
      therefore, have been placed  before  him.  She  further  asserts  that
      because the Secretary of State has been active in pursuing evidence in
      relation to these claimants, she [the Secretary of State]  should  not
      be prejudiced by the failure to produce relevant evidence before Judge
      Tipping.

  63. We do not accept this is so. The Secretary of State has had copies  of
      the birth certificates in the names of  the  first  claimant  and  Mrs
      Alletson, referenced with entry numbers  NCA/9052/76  and  SBY/148/48,
      since March 2008. It was on the basis  of  the  documents  referencing
      these  entry  numbers  that  Judge  Tipping  concluded  in  the  first
      claimant's favour in his determination of 1st July 2008;  the  hearing
      having been twice adjourned for the Secretary of State  to  check  the
      authenticity of these documents.

  64. The letter of the 28th May 2008, plainly, pre-dates the hearing before
      Judge Tipping and still no explanation has been provided as to why  it
      was not placed before him. The subsequent letters from  the  Registrar
      General of Births & Deaths say no more than the letter of the 28th May
      2008, save that one of them  refers  to  a  birth  certificate  in  Ms
      Alletson's name containing a reference number that the  evidence  does
      not demonstrate has ever been provided by the claimants.

  65. The only other evidence relied upon by the Secretary of  State  before
      us, that was not relied upon before Judge Tipping, is  a  copy  of  an
      article obtained from the 'Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons  of
      England (1974)  vol  54'.  This  article  indicates  that  the  Andrew
      Flemming Hospital in Salisbury, Rhodesia, did not open  its  doors  to
      patients until May 1974. It  was  in  this  hospital  that  the  first
      claimant asserts that his mother was born in 1948. Ms Tanner  accepts,
      however, that there is no good reason as to why this evidence was  not
      produced to Judge Tipping.

  66. We are well aware that, in  the  field  of  public  law,  finality  of
      litigation is subject always to the discretion of the Court  if  wider
      interests of justice so require. We bear in mind,  however,  that  the
      nature of the issue now in dispute between the parties  was  the  same
      issue that was determinative of the appeal before  Judge  Tipping.  We
      also bear in mind the failure of the Secretary of State to produce all
      of the relevant evidence to Judge Tipping that ought to have been,  or
      could have been with reasonable diligence, made available to  him.  In
      light of these considerations we conclude that  the  determination  of
      Judge  Tipping  should  be  treated  as  settling  the  issue  of  the
      relationship between the first claimant and Mr Ernest Alletson.

  67. The Secretary of State takes no further  issues  in  relation  to  the
      claimants' satisfaction of the respective immigration  rules  and,  as
      such, we allow each of the claimants' appeals on the  basis  that  the
      Secretary of  State's  decisions  were  not  in  accordance  with  the
      immigration rules.


Decision

For the above reasons we conclude:

The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  and  its  decision  is  set
aside.

The decision we remake is to allow each of the  claimants'  appeals  on  the
basis that the Secretary of State's decisions were not  in  accordance  with
the Immigration Rules.

                            Signed: Mark O'Connor
                         Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                           Date: 22nd October 2012
