
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Sahebi (Para 352(iii): meaning of "existed") [2019] UKUT 00394 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |             Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 26 September 2019                 |                                                      |
|                                     |.......................................               |
|                                     |                                                      |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D HARRIS


                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              rasool jan sahebi
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For   For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Khan, Solicitor from Lincolns Solicitors


On its true  construction,  para  352A(iii)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is
satisfied by showing nothing more than the formal existence  of  a  marriage
or civil partnership as at the time of the refugee's departure from  his/her
country  of  former  habitual  residence.  In  contrast   to   less   formal
relationships, there is no requirement to show  that  the  relationship  had
the qualitative character  of  it  having  subsisted  at  the  time  of  the
refugee's departure.





                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease  of  reference,  we  shall  refer  to  the  Appellant  in  the
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal as the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    ("ECO") and the Respondent as the Claimant.

 2.  This  appeal  concerns  the  Family  Reunion  provisions  within   the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules"), in  particular  para  352A.  The  core
    question for us to grapple with is one of interpretation: does the term
    "existed" in para 352A(iii) of  the  Rules  mean  that  an  applicant's
    relationship with the refugee immediately prior to the departure of the
    latter from their country of former habitual residence had to have  the
    qualitative characteristic of being subsisting?

 3. The ECO asserts that the answer to this question is "yes". The Claimant
    contends  that  the  term  denotes  a  state  of  affairs  without  any
    qualitative constituent. In other words, there is no need to show  that
    the relevant relationship had more than formal content at the  time  of
    the refugee's departure.

Background

 4. This is an appeal  by  the  ECO  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gribble ("the judge"), promulgated on 31  May  2019,  in
    which she allowed the Claimant's appeal against the ECO's decision of 4
    June 2018, refusing to issue him with entry clearance as the spouse  of
    a refugee recognised in the United Kingdom ("the Sponsor"), pursuant to
    para 352A of the Rules.

 5. The entry clearance application (deemed to constitute  a  human  rights
    claim) was made on 8 March 2018 and refused on three bases.  First,  it
    was not accepted that the Claimant was  in  fact  the  husband  of  the
    Sponsor. Second, it was noted that the Sponsor, having arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2014, made a protection claim which she asserted that
    the Claimant had assaulted her and, as result, they had separated prior
    to her departure from Pakistan. The ECO  was  therefore  not  satisfied
    that the marriage was subsisting. Third, the ECO concluded  that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances in the case.

The judge's decision

 6. Having considered the evidence, the judge made the  following  findings
    of fact, none of which are challenged by the ECO:

        1) the Claimant married the Sponsor  1996  and  that  marriage  has
           never been dissolved;

        2) the Sponsor left  Pakistan  in  2012  and  came  to  the  United
           Kingdom;

        3) prior to her departure  from  Pakistan,  the  Sponsor  had  been
           separated and estranged from the  Claimant  on  account  of  his
           domestic violence towards her;

        4) the Sponsor was, at the time of the Claimant's  entry  clearance
           application, a recognised refugee in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
           grant of limited leave to remain as such running from 1  January
           2016 to 12 September 2021;

        5) as at the date of the application,  there  had  been  a  genuine
           reconciliation between the Claimant and the Sponsor,  and  their
           relationship was subsisting.

 7. On the basis of these findings, at [31] the judge  concluded  that  all
    the criteria under para 352A of the Rules had been met. In  particular,
    she found that the separation and estrangement had no bearing  on  para
    352A(ii) because the marriage had taken place in 1996 -  prior  to  the
    departure of the Sponsor - and there was nothing in sub-para (ii) which
    required anything other than that.

 8. In light of the satisfaction of the Rule, the judge concluded that  the
    Article 8 claim should succeed.

 9. It is to be noted that the Claimant  and  Sponsor  have  four  children
    together, all of whom reside in the United Kingdom with leave to remain
    in line with that of their mother. Their presence in this  country  has
    played no material part in the Claimant's case.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. The grounds put forward by the  ECO  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    permission asserted that the judge erred in failing  to  consider  para
    352A(iii).  It  is  said  that  this  provision  requires  the  married
    "relationship" to have "existed" at the point at which the Sponsor left
    Pakistan and that it also had to have been "subsisting".

11. In refusing permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Swaney  was  of  the
    view that para  352A(iii)  did  not  include  a  requirement  that  the
    marriage be subsisting at the point of  the  refugee's  departure  from
    their country of former habitual residence. It was said that if such  a
    requirement had been intended, this would have been  stated  expressly.
    The Judge noted the absence of  any  authority  suggesting  a  contrary
    approach.

12. The renewed grounds of appeal essentially  replicate  those  originally
    put forward, with the additional  argument  that  para  352A(ii)  lends
    support to the interpretation of sub-para (iii).

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia on  9
    August 2019.

The relevant legal framework

14. Para 352A of the Rules reads as follows:

      "Family Reunion Requirements for leave  to  enter  or  remain  as  the
partner of a refugee

      352A. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter or
      remain in the United Kingdom  as  the  partner  of  a  person  granted
      refugee status are that:

      (i) the applicant is the partner of a person who currently has refugee
      status granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and

      (ii) the marriage or civil partnership did not take  place  after  the
      person granted  refugee  status  left  the  country  of  their  former
      habitual residence in order to seek asylum or the  parties  have  been
      living together  in  a  relationship  akin  to  marriage  or  a  civil
      partnership which has subsisted for  two  years  or  more  before  the
      person granted  refugee  status  left  the  country  of  their  former
      habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and

      (iii) the relationship  existed  before  the  person  granted  refugee
      status left the country of their former habitual residence in order to
      seek asylum; and

      (iv) the applicant would not be excluded from protection by virtue  of
      paragraph 334(iii) or

      (iv) of these Rules or Article 1F of the Refugee  Convention  if  they
      were to seek asylum in their own right; and

      (v) each of the parties intends to live permanently with the other  as
      their partner and the relationship is genuine and subsisting

      (vi) the applicant and their partner must not be within the prohibited
      degree of relationship; and

      (vii) if seeking leave to enter, the applicant holds  a  valid  United
      Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity."

15. The relevant provision of para 352G of the Rules state:

      "Interpretation

      352G. For the purposes of this Part:

      ...

      (d) "Partner" means the applicant's spouse, civil partner, or a person
      who has been living together with the applicant in a relationship akin
      to a marriage or civil partnership for at least two years prior to the
      date of application."

16. The term "existed", as used in para 352A(iii), is not defined.

The hearing

17. At the outset, both representatives confirmed that they were unaware of
    any authority or indeed any other materials dealing  specifically  with
    the core question identified at the start of our decision.

18. Despite their dispute as to the correct interpretation  of  para  352A,
    both parties are agreed that our answer to the core  question  will  be
    determinative of the Claimant's appeal. Mr Singh accepted  that  if  we
    were to favour the Claimant's interpretation and to conclude  that  all
    criteria under para 352A were met, nothing else need be shown in  order
    to succeed on Article 8 grounds. Conversely, Mr Khan accepted  that  if
    our conclusion on the interpretative question went the other way, there
    were no other features of the Claimant's case which would permit him to
    succeed.

19. Mr Singh relied on the grounds of appeal, as presented  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and then to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  amended  form.  He
    submitted that the judge had failed to grapple with para 352A(iii),  as
    she should have, given the conjunctive "and" at  the  end  of  sub-para
    (ii). He acknowledged the absence of any requirement  that  a  relevant
    relationship must have "existed" (whatever the precise meaning of  that
    term may be) "immediately" prior to the refugee's departure.

20. Mr Singh's positive arguments on  the  interpretive  question  were  as
    follows. First,  it  was  submitted  that,  adopting  the  natural  and
    ordinary meaning interpretive approach,  the  term  "existed"  in  para
    352A(iii) was to be read as "subsisted", in the sense that the relevant
    relationship  held  an  emotional  quality  prior  to   the   refugee's
    departure.

21. Second, a contextual approach should be adopted.  Reference  should  be
    had to other provisions within para 352A and  352D.  It  was  submitted
    that sub-para (iii) had been inserted into para 352A for a  reason:  it
    must have some utility. Given that sub-para  (ii)  already  included  a
    temporal requirement that the relevant relationship was  present  prior
    to the refugee's departure,  sub-para  (iii),  which  also  includes  a
    temporal condition, must bring something more to the table, as it were.
    Otherwise, the requirement would be otiose. In Mr  Singh's  submission,
    this additional factor was that the relationship in question must  have
    been subsisting at the relevant time, and the term "existed" should  be
    interpreted accordingly.  The  requirement  in  sub-para  (ii)  that  a
    cohabiting "relationship akin to marriage or a civil partnership"  must
    have "subsisted" for two years or more prior to the  departure  of  the
    refugee sponsor, supports the ECO's interpretation of  sub-para  (iii).
    If a requirement of subsistence was imposed upon those in a  cohabiting
    relationship, those in  a  marriage  or  civil  partnership  should  be
    treated similarly.

22. During the course  of  his  submissions,  Mr  Singh  acknowledged  that
    recourse to the Refugee Convention may be appropriate when interpreting
    para 352A(iii).

23. Mr Khan made the point that the term "subsisted" could easily have been
    used in sub-para (iii) if that had been  the  intention.  He  submitted
    that the term "existed" had what he described  as  a  "purely  factual"
    meaning.

Discussion

24. We re-state the core issue in  this  appeal.  With  reference  to  para
    352A(iii) of the Rules, can an individual rely on a  relationship  that
    merely "existed" immediately prior to the departure of that person from
    his/her country of former habitual residence, or must it be shown  also
    to have been "subsisting"?

25. In answering this question, we are bound to say at this stage that  the
    drafting of the sub-para leaves something to be desired and indeed  its
    very presence appears anomalous.

26. The principal interpretative approach to the Rules is well-settled.  At
    para 10 of Mahad [2009] UKSC 16, [2010] 1 WLR 48, Lord Brown stated:

      "10. The Rules are  not  to  be  construed  with  all  the  strictness
      applicable to the construction of a statute or a statutory  instrument
      but, instead, sensibly according to the natural and  ordinary  meaning
      of the words used, recognising that they are statements of  the  ECO's
      administrative policy."

27. Having regard to the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (6th Ed,  2007),
    we find that the term "exist" is defined in the following terms:

      "Have objective reality or being.

      Have being in a specified place or form or under specified conditions.
      Of a relation, circumstance, etc.: be found, subsisted.

      Continue alive or in being; maintain existence."

28. In our view, whilst the term "subsisted" is referred to, the definition
    as a whole inclines towards  a  meaning  consistent  with  a  state  of
    affairs simply having an objective factual  basis,  without  the  added
    qualitative ingredient contended for by the ECO.

29. The term "subsisted" is attributed the following meanings:

      "Of a material or abstract thing: exist, have a real existence; remain
      in being, continue to exist, last."

30. The use of the word "real" in  the  definition  would  appear  to  lend
    weight  to  the  argument  that  "subsisted"  implies   a   qualitative
    characteristic going beyond a purely objective state of affairs.

31. With the above in mind, it is self-evident that the  term  which  would
    support the ECO's  case,  namely  "subsisted",  is  not  used  in  para
    352A(iii). We take it as a robust starting point that the precise words
    used in a  particular  Rule  are  the  result  of  deliberate  drafting
    decisions. (See, for example, R (Ahmed) v  SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  1070  at
    [15].) The corollary of this is that the absence of  words  is  also  a
    consequence of a conscious act.

32. We think it is  important  to  consider  this  provision  in  its  full
    context. Having considered the Explanatory Memorandum to the  Statement
    of Changes HC667 (which inserted sub-para (iii) into para 352A and  had
    effect in relation to decisions taken on or after 24  November  2016.),
    we find no support for the ECO's case from this source.

33. We then turn to  examine  another  aspect  of  para  352A  itself.  The
    argument put forward by the  ECO  in  the  renewed  grounds  of  appeal
    relates to the wording of paragraph  352A(ii).  It  is  said  that  the
    requirement that a "relationship akin to marriage or civil partnership"
    must have "subsisted" for at least two years  prior  to  the  refugee's
    departure from the country of their former habitual residence  goes  to
    show  that  a  marriage  or  civil  partnership  must  also  have  been
    subsisting as at the departure date, and that the term "existed" in sub-
    para (iii) should be interpreted accordingly.

34. This argument faces at least four significant obstacles.

35. First, as discussed previously, it was open to the Secretary  of  State
    when inserting sub-para (iii) into para 352A in 2016  or  at  any  time
    thereafter, to have actually used  the  term  "subsisted"  rather  than
    "existed". The choice of one over the other is telling.

36. Second, if there had been an intention to impose a requirement  that  a
    marriage or civil partnership had to be subsisting before  the  refugee
    sponsor left his/her country of former habitual residence,  this  could
    have been expressly stated in sub-para (ii) itself, as it is in respect
    of a "relationship akin to marriage or civil partnership".

37. Third, on the ECO's case, para 352A(iii) would effectively involve  not
    simply the substitution of "subsisted"  for  "existed",  but  also  the
    inclusion of additional qualificatory  words.  On  its  face,  sub-para
    (iii) applies to all three types of relationship described in  sub-para
    (ii): marriages, civil partnerships, and relationships akin to  either.
    There is, as we have seen, already a requirement in sub-para (ii)  that
    the third category of relationships must have "subsisted" prior to  the
    refugee's departure. If, as contended by the ECO, the term "existed" in
    sub-para (iii) were to be given the  meaning  "subsisted",  the  result
    would be that the requirement could not apply to  that  third  category
    because  it  had  already  been  imposed  in  the  previous   sub-para.
    Otherwise, there would  in  effect  be  an  anomalous  and  unnecessary
    replication of requirements for one category of relationships.

38. In order to avoid this unsatisfactory state of affairs, one would  have
    to  qualify  which  relationships  were  subject  to   the   subsisting
    requirement by either reading into para 352A(iii) the words "in respect
    of a marriage or civil partnership," before "the relationship", or  the
    words "if a marriage civil partnership" after "the  relationship".  The
    upshot of this is that a significant rewriting of the sub-para would be
    required, itself an undesirable course of action, in order to create an
    overall sense of consistency within the Role as a whole.

39. Fourth, the history of para 352A(iii) does not assist the  ECO's  case.
    In fact, it lends support to the  Claimant's  position.  Prior  to  the
    changes brought about by HC667  in  2016,  the  Rule  did  not  include
    relationships akin to marriages or civil partnerships. These were dealt
    with in para 352AA, the relevant provisions of which read as follows:

      "(ii) the parties have been living together in a relationship akin  to
      either a marriage or a civil partnership which has subsisted  for  two
      years or more; and

      (iii) the relationship existed before the person granted  asylum  left
      the country of his former habitual residence in order to seek asylum"

40. The interaction between sub-paras  (ii)  and  (iii)  was  logical:  the
    former  described  the  type  of  relationship  and   its   qualitative
    character; the latter imposed a temporal requirement.

41. HC667 deleted para 352AA in its entirety and  such  relationships  were
    brought within the purview of para 352A by way of an amendment to  sub-
    para (ii). In addition, what was clearly a temporal requirement in para
    352AA(iii) was effectively brought over in substantially the same terms
    to para 352A.  For  our  part,  we  are  not  been  provided  with  any
    compelling argument as to why what was  a  temporal  requirement  under
    para 352AA should have somehow acquired a qualitative character  during
    its journey from one Rule to the other. On the contrary,  in  our  view
    there is a strong case for saying that the insertion of para  352A(iii)
    was undertaken without due thought to its relevance or  utility  within
    the amended para 352A as a whole.

42. There is an important  consideration  that  might  at  first  sight  be
    thought to point the other way. If all that an applicant need  show  is
    that the marriage or civil partnership existed prior to  the  refugee's
    departure from his/her country of former habitual residence, the Family
    Reunion provisions may be laid  open  to  abuse.  The  relationship  in
    question may not have had any real substance prior  to  departure,  but
    would entitle an applicant to rely on it  for  the  purpose  of  family
    reunion, a concept which, as its name suggests,  might  be  thought  to
    rely on real relationships.

43. The danger of such  abuse  is,  however,  met  by  para  352A(v).  This
    presents an important and necessary safeguard by requiring an applicant
    to show that he/she  intends  to  live  permanently  with  the  refugee
    sponsor and that the relationship  "is  genuine  and  subsisting".  The
    applicant referred to in the previous paragraph would be  shut  out  by
    virtue of the failure to satisfy this qualitative criterion at the time
    of the decision on the application.

44. The present  appeal  provides  an  illustration  of  the  safeguard  in
    operation. Here, there had been a long-standing marriage.  Due  to  his
    misconduct, the Claimant separated from the Sponsor and this separation
    continued up until the point of the latter's departure  from  Pakistan.
    The Claimant was only able to succeed before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because the  judge,  having  quite  rightly  carefully  considered  the
    possibility of there having  been  pressure  applied  to  the  Sponsor,
    accepted that the couple had reconciled, and that the relationship  was
    now "genuine and subsisting", with reference to para 352A(v).

45. It may be said that there is a further opportunity for potential abuse.
    At the hearing,  Mr  Singh  acknowledged  the  absence  of  the  adverb
    "immediately" in front of "before"  in  para  352A(iii).  We  were  not
    provided with any submissions on this point by  either  representative,
    but it may be suggested that if the term "existed" is given the meaning
    contended for by the Claimant, an applicant who had married or  entered
    into a civil partnership, but then formally dissolved that relationship
    prior to the refugee's departure, could rely on the historical fact  of
    its existence to obtain entry  clearance  under  para  352A.  To  guard
    against this, so the argument would run, the term "immediately"  should
    be read into sub-para (iii).

46. Rewriting sub-para (iii) yet again is an unattractive  proposition.  It
    would  be  the  third  occurrence,  following   the   substitution   of
    "subsisted" for "existed" and the  qualificatory  words  distinguishing
    marriages and civil partnerships from  relationships  akin  to  either.
    Having said that, in seeking to navigate a sensible path  through  para
    352A as a whole, it appears to us as though there must be a  connection
    between the relationship relied on under  sub-paras  (ii),  (iii),  and
    (v). Therefore, the applicant whose marriage or civil  partnership  had
    been formally dissolved prior to the refugee's departure would  not  be
    able to show that "the relationship" relied on either "existed" (in the
    sense contended for by the Claimant) or was "genuine  and  subsisting".
    In respect of relationships akin to marriages  or  civil  partnerships,
    there is, as we have seen, an express qualitative element (in the sense
    that they must have been subsisting). If such a relationship had ceased
    to subsist by the time the refugee sponsor left  the  country,  a  core
    characteristic would have fallen away and it is difficult  to  see  how
    "the relationship" could be "genuine and subsisting" at  the  point  at
    which an entry clearance application was made.

47. Thus, the better reading of para 352A(iii) is that the  term  "existed"
    implies a state of affairs (i.e. a marriage, a civil partnership, or  a
    subsisting cohabiting relationship) present  as  at  the  time  of  the
    refugee's departure from his/her country of former habitual residence.

48. Another provision of the Rules said by the ECO to be relevant  is  para
    352D. The original grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal contain
    the following passage:

      "It must  be  remembered  that  the  purpose  of  the  Family  Reunion
      provisions is to ensure that families which have been split up due  to
      persecution or ill-treatment can be reunited in a country  of  refuge.
      Those who were already living separately for other reasons do not come
      within the scope of these  provisions,  as  is  perhaps  more  clearly
      demonstrated by the terms of 352D, by which children of  refugees  who
      were not living in their household  at  the  point  of  departure  are
      ineligible for family reunion."

49. Para 352D(iv) of the Rules requires that a child applicant:

      "(iv) was part of the family unit of the person granted asylum at  the
      time that the person granted asylum left the country of their habitual
      residence in order to seek asylum."

50. This particular provision  was  considered  in  BM  and  AL  (352D(iv);
    meaning of "family unit") Colombia [2007] UKAIT 00055. Contrary to  the
    ECO's assertion in the present case, the Tribunal held that  there  was
    no requirement that an applicant child had to have been living  in  the
    same household as the refugee sponsor at  the  relevant  time.  Such  a
    limitation, if intended, could have  been  expressly  included  in  the
    Rule, but had not been. Whether a child was part  the  refugee  "family
    unit" was a matter of fact, to be assessed  in  light  of  the  child's
    individual circumstances, and having full regard to what were described
    as "wide ranging childcare and child protection issues" likely to arise
    in cases where a decision to grant entry clearance may lead to  a  pre-
    existing family unit being broken up.

51. In our view, para 352D(iv) provides no real  assistance  to  the  ECO's
    case. There is no proper analogy to be drawn between that provision and
    para 352A(iii). Not only does the passage  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    overlook the central conclusion in  BM  and  AL,  but  the  absence  of
    express words in para 352D(iv) in fact lends support to the  Claimant's
    argument as to the proper interpretative approach to the provision with
    which we are concerned.

52. Thus far, we see very little by way of  clear  support  for  the  ECO's
    contentions in this appeal. The wording  of  para  352A(iii),  together
    with its place in the overall structure of the Rule, leads  us  a  long
    way down the interpretive path signposted by the Claimant.

53. Are there wider contextual factors that draw us back and compel  us  to
    take a different direction?

54. Given that para 352A deals with family reunion in the context of one of
    the parties being a refugee, it is appropriate to have regard to  legal
    instruments relating to that status and its consequential benefits.

55. The Refugee Convention itself does  not  contain  a  reference  to  the
    principle of family unity. However, the Final Act of the Conference  of
    States adopting the Convention recommended that signatory  states  took
    "necessary" measures to ensure family unity (the relevant excerpts  are
    set out in Annex I to the UNHCR Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for
    Determining Refugee Status and Guidelines on International  Protection,
    February 2019. We note that Chapter VI of Part 1 of the Handbook itself
    offers nothing by way of material assistance).

56. As European law has sought to apply  obligations  arising  out  of  the
    Refugee Convention, we have considered relevant provisions  of  Council
    Directive 2004/83/EC ("the Directive").

57. The relevant provisions of Article  23  of  the  Directive,  under  the
    heading "Maintaining family unity", state:

      "1. Member States shall ensure that family unity can be maintained.

      2. Member States shall ensure that family members of  the  beneficiary
      of refugee or subsidiary protection status, not  individually  qualify
      for such status, are entitled to claim the  benefits  referred  to  in
      Articles 24 to 34, in accordance with national procedures and  as  far
      as it is compatible with the  personal  legal  status  of  the  family
      member.

      ...

      5. Member States may decide that this Article also  applies  to  other
      close relatives who live together as part of the family at the time of
      leaving the country of origin, and who were wholly mainly dependent on
      the beneficiary of refugee or subsidiary  protection  status  at  that
      time."

58. Insofar as Article 23(1) is concerned,  it  takes  the  ECO's  case  no
    further. There is nothing incompatible with the need  to  "ensure  that
    family  unity  can  be  maintained"  and  the  interpretation  of  para
    352A(iii) which we are inclined to adopt.

59. Article 2(h) of the Directive states:

      " 'family members' means, insofar as the family already existed in the
      country of  origin,  the  following  members  of  the  family  of  the
      beneficiary of refugee or subsidiary protection status who are present
      in  the  same  Member  State  in  relation  to  the  application   for
      international protection:

            - the spouse  of  the  beneficiary  of  refugee  or  subsidiary
              protection status or his or her unmarried partner in a stable
              relationship, whether legislation or practice of  the  Member
              State concerned treats unmarried couples in a way  comparable
              to married couples under its law relating to aliens."

60. Of potential significance is the use of the term "existed"  in  Article
    2(h) when defining "family members"; that being the same word  used  in
    para 352A(iii). Whilst terms used in EU law are not subject to the same
    relatively narrow  interpretive  approach  as  the  Rules,  we  see  no
    inconsistency between the definition in Article 2(h)  and  the  natural
    and ordinary meaning of "existed" in para 352A(iii). In fact,  we  note
    that the definition of  "unmarried  partner"  imposes  the  qualitative
    requirement of having to show stability, a characteristic  that  is  in
    our view equivalent to such a relationship  having  "subsisted"  within
    the meaning of para 352A(ii). Thus,  the  reasoning  we  have  set  out
    earlier in our decision relating to the interaction  between  sub-paras
    (ii) and (iii) and the proper meaning of "existed" is  compatible  with
    the Directive. It follows that our  assessment  of  the  wider  refugee
    context does not compel us to the interpretive outcome  sought  by  the
    ECO.

61. What then of the very presence of para 352A(iii)  itself?  If  sub-para
    (ii) requires the relevant relationship (whether a  marriage,  a  civil
    partnership, or a "relationship akin to" either) to have taken place or
    been present prior to the  refugee's  departure  from  the  country  of
    his/her former habitual residence, why then  seemingly  replicate  that
    temporal restriction in sub-para (iii)?

62. The ECO's argument that para 352A(iii) should be interpreted so  as  to
    avoid it being superfluous is on the face of it a strong one.  However,
    it does not, in  and  of  itself,  provide  a  sufficiently  compelling
    justification for substantially rewriting the sub-para in order to give
    it an effect different from that which is apparent from the natural and
    ordinary meaning of  the  words  used,  when  viewed  in  their  proper
    context.

63. We fully appreciate that a consequence of this is that  para  352A(iii)
    has little, if  any,  utility.  In  effect,  it  repeats  the  temporal
    requirement imposed on relationships by sub-para (ii). Yet, as  alluded
    to earlier in our decision, the insertion of sub-para (iii)  into  para
    352A does not appear to have been the  subject  of  sufficiently  close
    attention by the Secretary of  State  at  the  time  or  thereafter.  A
    provision which served a clear purpose in the context of  relationships
    akin to marriages or civil partnerships was moved, unchanged, from  one
    rule to another only, on our analysis, to lose its raison d'�tre.

Conclusion on the core issue

64. We conclude that on its true construction para 352A(iii) of  the  Rules
    is satisfied by showing nothing more than the  formal  existence  of  a
    marriage or civil partnership at the time of  the  refugee's  departure
    from his/her country of former habitual residence. In contrast to  less
    formal  relationships,  there  is  no  requirement  to  show  that  the
    relationship had the qualitative character of it  having  subsisted  at
    the time of the refugee's departure.

65. This interpretation gives appropriate weight to the actual  wording  of
    the rule, its context and history. In addition, it is  consistent  with
    the principle of family unity as recognised within provisions of EU law
    pertaining to refugees.

Error of law decision

66. We now turn to consider the effect of our conclusion on the correctness
    of the judge's decision.

67. There is an error in the sense that the judge failed  to  address  para
    352A(iii) at all. However, that error was not material to  the  outcome
    of the appeal. She was right to  have  concluded  that  the  Claimant's
    estrangement from the Sponsor prior  to  the  latter's  departure  from
    Pakistan in 2012 was "not strictly relevant" to the satisfaction of the
    Rule. It was sufficient for the Claimant  to  show  that  he  had  been
    married to the Sponsor at all material times and that that relationship
    was currently "genuine and subsisting".

68. There has never been any suggestion by the ECO that anything more  than
    a satisfaction of para 352A needed to be shown for the Claimant to have
    succeeded in his appeal before the judge. The allowance of that  appeal
    "on human rights grounds" was, on the facts as found, wholly correct.

Anonymity

69. The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  a  direction.  None  has  been
    requested at this stage in proceedings. There is no reason to make such
    a direction in any event.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Signed      [pic]            Date: 4 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


