
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

SB (vulnerable adult: credibility) Ghana [2019] UKUT 00398 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2019                            |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       MR CMG OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                     SB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARTY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Allison, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
     (Harrow Office)

For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



(1) The fact that a judicial fact-finder decides to treat  an  appellant  or
witness as a vulnerable adult does not mean  that  any  adverse  credibility
finding in respect of that person is thereby to be  regarded  as  inherently
problematic and thus open to challenge on appeal.



(2)  By applying the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No  2  of  2010,  two
aims are achieved. First, the judicial  fact-finder  will  ensure  the  best
practicable conditions for the person  concerned  to  give  their  evidence.
Secondly, the vulnerability will also be taken into account  when  assessing
the credibility of that evidence.



(3)  The Guidance makes it plain that it is for the judicial fact-finder  to
determine the relationship between the vulnerability and the  evidence  that
is adduced.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born  in  1983.   He  entered  the
    United Kingdom in  2011  as  a  visitor.   In  2012,  he  submitted  an
    application for residence documentation as a spouse of an EEA national.
     That was refused by  the  respondent  in  July  2013.   The  appellant
    appealed against that refusal but by March 2014 he  had  become  appeal
    rights exhausted.

 2. On 15 April 2015, the appellant was convicted at Aylesbury Crown  Court
    of two counts of rape of a female  aged  16  years  or  over.   He  was
    sentenced to eight years' imprisonment.  The appellant raped a stranger
    in the street, both anally and vaginally.  The  appellant  pleaded  not
    guilty, thereby requiring  the  victim,  according  to  the  Sentencing
    Judge, "to relive her appalling ordeal at your hands, but you chose not
    to give evidence and go into the witness box yourself".  The  Probation
    Service concluded that the appellant posed a high risk of harm to adult
    females and that he had a high risk of sexual offending.

 3. On 30 January 2017, the respondent served a notice of decision to  make
    a deportation order on the appellant.  Six months later, the  appellant
    claimed asylum and, three months later, that he was a victim of  modern
    slavery.

 4. The  appellant's  asylum  and  protection  claims  were  based  on  his
    assertion that he would face mistreatment on his return to Ghana, owing
    to his unwillingness to traffick drugs to the United Kingdom.  He  also
    feared serious harm there as  a  result  of  his  United  Kingdom  rape
    conviction.  On 3 April 2019, the respondent  refused  the  appellant's
    protection claim.  On 16 April 2019, the appellant filed  a  notice  of
    appeal with the First-tier Tribunal.  At this point, he was represented
    by Duncan Lewis Solicitors, having signed a letter  of  instruction  to
    them on 18 January 2019.  Duncan Lewis were also acting in  a  judicial
    review,  challenging  the  appellant's  detention  by  the  respondent.
    Dicksons Solicitors had previously acted for the appellant,  submitting
    representations on his behalf in 2017 and 2018.

 5. On 24 April 2019, the First-tier Tribunal sent the appellant and Duncan
    Lewis a notice relating to the pre-hearing review of his  case  and  of
    the substantive hearing, to be held respectively on 13 and 20 May 2019.



 6. On 10 May 2019 at 10.15 am, Ms F, a trainee solicitor at Duncan  Lewis,
    sent an email to the First-tier  Tribunal  headed  "URGENT  ADJOURNMENT
    REQUEST".  Ms F's application said:-

         "As evident from the Appellant's medical records, he is  vulnerable
         and not suitable for detention.  It is  noted  in  the  Appellant's
         medical records on 16th January 2019  that  there  is  evidence  of
         historical risk of self-harm.  His medical records states  that  he
         is moderately serve [sic] depressed.

         It is further on evident that the  Appellant's  mental  health  has
         deteriorated whilst in detention.  The Appellant has a diagnosis of
         depression and is currently on medication for this.  The  Appellant
         has repeatedly stated that he suffers from low  mood  and  lack  of
         motivation.  The Appellant in  the  past  has  attempted  to  self-
         strangulate and he was found with a ligature in his room trying  to
         end his life.   The  Appellant  has  thus  been  placed  on  hourly
         observation.

         Please see enclosed the Appellant's medical records.

         It is also essential to point out that the Appellant instructs that
         whilst in Ghana, he was tortured by his traffickers.  As  such,  it
         is not possible to make a decision  in  his  asylum  claim  without
         giving the Appellant the opportunity to seek a  medical  expert  to
         provide a medico legal report in his  matter.   We  submit  that  a
         medico legal report goes to the core of his  asylum  claim  and  it
         will not be possible to determine his appeal without such a report.

         Psychiatrist report

         We therefore seek an adjournment because a psychiatrist  report  is
         required to assess whether  the  Appellant  is  capable  of  giving
         instructions and thus his ability to effectively take part  in  the
         legal proceedings.

         We have been in contact with Dr Satinder Sahota who  is  Consultant
         Forensic  Psychiatrist  in  the  NHS  in  regards  to  providing  a
         psychiatric report for the Appellant.

         As the Appellant is currently  detained  at  Morton  Hall  IRC,  Dr
         Sahota has advised that he will be able to attend  and  assess  the
         Appellant on 25th May 2019.

         Appellant will be denied due justice.  A  Country  Expert  is  also
         required for the reasons set out above.

         We look forward to your urgent response in this matter."

 7.  First-tier  Tribunal  Caseworker  Varney   refused   the   adjournment
    application in a written decision dated 13 May  2019.   The  caseworker
    observed that although Duncan Lewis made reference to  the  appellant's
    medical records, they did "not identify any aspects  of  these  records
    which indicate he may not be capable of giving instructions.  There  is
    no guarantee that funding will be  available  for  the  country  expert
    report and the representatives' reasons for requiring such a report are
    speculative".

 8. On 15 May 2019, the First-tier Tribunal was  supplied  with  an  appeal
    bundle from the appellant, running to 479 pages.  Also on that  day,  a
    witness statement of  the  appellant  was  filed  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, signed by the appellant on (it seems) 14 May.  The  statement
    detailed  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  in  need  of   international
    protection and commented on  various  paragraphs  of  the  respondent's
    letter of refusal.  Under the heading "Mental  Health",  the  appellant
    referred to his medical records, stating that he was "moderately severe
    depressed and  I  am  currently  on  medication  for  this".   He  also
    described his "low mood and lack of motivation" and that in the past "I
    have attempted to self-strangulate".  He also  said  that  he  suffered
    from "nightmares and flashbacks.  I may only able to sleep  for  a  few
    hours a day.  I  have  been  taking  antidepressants  and  anti-anxiety
    medication for a period 3 years".

 9. On 20 May 2019, the appellant's appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Plumptre,  sitting  at   Harmondsworth.    The   appellant   was
    represented by Mr Allison.  He renewed the application of Duncan  Lewis
    for the  hearing  to  be  adjourned.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    recorded Mr Allison's application as follows:-

         "11. Mr Allison stated  that  he  had  spoken  to  his  instructing
             solicitor,  [Ms  F]  who  had  expressed  concerns  about  the
             appellant's mental capacity to give instructions and  referred
             me to the Bar Council's guidance on  mental  incapacity  which
             made reference to Re P [2008] EWCA Civ  462  and  specifically
             paragraph 47 to the effect that once a  solicitor  or  Counsel
             had formed a view that the client might not be  able  to  give
             proper instructions and might be a person under a  disability,
             their professional duty was to have the question  resolved  as
             quickly as possible.

         12.  He read out an email from Ms F, a trainee solicitor at  Duncan
             Lewis, from his mobile telephone in terms that:

                  "Please note that a statement was prepared with the client
                  during attendance  at  Harmondsworth  a  few  months  ago.
                  However this was not finalised and was  not  signed.   The
                  statement was finalised with the client last week and sent
                  to him to read over, sign  and  fax  back  which  he  did.
                  During my appointment at Harmondsworth the client was able
                  to give instructions.  Since then his  mental  health  has
                  worsened with nightmares, flashbacks and he is  unable  to
                  concentrate.  It has been  difficult  to  obtain  specific
                  instructions.  I strongly believe my client's  ability  to
                  give instructions should be assessed.  Whilst he  is  able
                  to give instructions I believe he has been  struggling  to
                  do so recently.  I do still believe he would  be  able  to
                  stand as a witness but I am unable to tell how effectively
                  he would give instructions as I have been unable to obtain
                  an assessment dealing with this".

             This is a summary of the terms of the email as Mr Allison  was
             unable to download a copy from his phone.  Mr  Allison  sought
             further instructions because he recognised that  the  text  of
             this  email  did  not  meet  the  test  to  establish   mental
             incapacity to give instructions.

         13.  The appellant confirmed that he had seen  Duncan  Lewis  four-
             five weeks ago at Harmondsworth and was thereafter transferred
             to Morton Hall.

         14.  Mr Allison also made reference to ES (s.82 NIA 2002,  Negative
             NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 335 and the need for the Tribunal  to
             make its own  assessment  about  the  trafficking  claim.   He
             stressed that the Tribunal would benefit from  a  professional
             psychiatric assessment of the appellant's mental  ill  health.
             He relied on the Rule 35 report  before  me  and  the  medical
             records which showed that the appellant  had  been  prescribed
             antidepressants since August 2017.   These  records  indicated
             conditions consistent with PTSD, and  that  on  page  261  the
             appellant had reported that his  roommate  found  him  with  a
             ligature.  There were concerns about the appellant's  risk  of
             suicide and he had been put on  observation.   An  adjournment
             was needed for a professional medical  assessment  as  to  the
             appellant's capacity to give instructions and possible suicide
             risk.  The Tribunal should have the  opportunity  to  consider
             such psychiatric assessment.  A country report was  needed  on
             the risk  of  re-trafficking  from  Ghana  and  the  level  of
             protection available in that country.

         15.  The Presenting Officer opposed the adjournment,  stating  that
             neither  a  psychiatric  report  nor  a  country  report   was
             necessary given the detailed medical records.  He referred  me
             to many  non-attendances  by  the  appellant  in  his  medical
             records and references to him not  having  any  mental  health
             issues.  The appellant had had sufficient capacity to  sign  a
             witness statement five days ago when  he  had  challenged  the
             Home Office reasons for  refusing  his  protection  and  human
             rights claim.  He  acknowledged  that  there  was  no  country
             guidance on the conditions  in  Ghana.   The  medical  records
             indicated that the appellant frequently self-referred  himself
             to  doctors.   The  medical  records  and  OASys  Report  were
             reliable documents which the Tribunal could properly take into
             account.  Any further professional medical assessment was  not
             necessary.

         16.  I queried whether Duncan Lewis had public funding  for  either
             report.  Mr Allison was not able to confirm this.

         17.  In reply, Mr Allison submitted that  mental  ill  health  does
             fluctuate.  His instructing  solicitor  had  observed  a  very
             recent deterioration in the appellant's  mental  capacity  and
             submitted that an adjournment for these reports was  necessary
             for reasons of fairness."

10. Judge Plumptre decided to  refuse  the  adjournment  application.   She
    recorded her reasons as follows:-

         "18. I refused an adjournment to obtain two expert reports since  I
             was satisfied from the terms of Duncan Lewis' letter  dated  9
             May 2019 that public funding had not  been  obtained,  as  the
             letter stated this was outside legal aid rates  and  it  could
             take eighteen weeks for funding to be obtained, an  assessment
             to be conducted and a report to be produced.   Hence  I  found
             the position might be  the  same  at  any  adjourned  hearing.
             Further, the only steps taken to obtain reports  were  in  the
             form of an informal email dated 8 May 2019 to  Dr  Sahota  who
             had indicated he could see the appellant at Morton Hall on  25
             May 2019 and that he had no other availability.  In making  my
             decision  that  a  psychiatric  report  was   unnecessary,   I
             considered that the appellant's detailed medical records  from
             pages 166-290, i.e. some 130 pages, provided ample evidence to
             the Tribunal in relation to the appellant's medical conditions
             and that a further report would be of limited assistance.

         19.  I found that if Duncan Lewis had serious professional concerns
             about the appellant's  mental  capacity  to  give  instruction
             steps would have been taken earlier to consult Dr  Sahota  and
             took into account that despite such concerns, Duncan Lewis had
             been able to draft a  witness  statement  and  had  asked  the
             appellant to read, sign it and fax it back - conduct  which  I
             considered inconsistent with any concerns over the appellant's
             mental capacity to give instructions.

         20.  In relation to the request for a country  expert  report  from
             Katherina Thomas, although it was stated by Duncan Lewis  that
             they were in contact with this writer  who  stated  she  could
             provide a country report by 18 May 2019, this report  was  not
             before me.   I  took  into  account  that  Ms  Thomas  was  in
             residence  at  Broad  Institute  of  Harvard  University   and
             Massachusetts Institute of Technology, that she has  a  Master
             of Science in public health at the London  School  of  Hygiene
             and Tropical Medicine.   I  found  her  expertise  to  provide
             evidence about effective state protection and the availability
             of mental health institutions in Ghana was questionable, given
             that there was no indication that she had every [sic]  visited
             the country and no indication of what  her  knowledge  was  of
             Ghana.  Moreover, the respondent had made reference to country
             guidance in some detail about the sufficiency of protection in
             Ghana by reference to websites and the availability of medical
             treatment in Ghana at paragraphs 83-89 of the decision letter.
              I was not satisfied  that  Katherina  Thomas  had  sufficient
             expertise on the limited details provided about her  that  any
             report from her would be of assistance to the Tribunal.

         21.  Thirdly, I gave weight to the fact that the grounds of  appeal
             dated 16 April 2019 made no mention of the appellant's  mental
             ill health or possible incapacity  to  give  instructions.   I
             reminded myself of Rule 2 of the  2014  Procedure  Rules  that
             delay was not in the public interest nor in  the  interest  of
             the appellant who had been in immigration detention  since  18
             November 2018."

11. The judge then recorded what happened next:-

         "22. Having given my ruling, I gave Mr Allison  the  time  to  take
             further instructions.  On return to court at 13.40 Mr  Allison
             very properly stated that he had been able to speak to  Marina
             Khan of Duncan Lewis, the supervisor of [Ms F], who  confirmed
             that the appellant does have capacity to give instructions.

         23.  In making my decision to refuse the adjournment I stated  that
             I would  treat  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness  in
             accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No  2  of
             2010  in  view  of  the  diagnosis  of  depression   and   his
             prescription for antidepressants for the last three years."

12. Beginning at paragraph 24,  Judge  Plumptre  set  out  the  appellant's
    evidence, given orally to her, adopting his written witness  statement.
    She also recorded the cross-examination of the Presenting Officer.

13. At the beginning of the section of her decision dealing  with  findings
    of fact and credibility the judge said:-

         "38. In reaching my findings I have borne in  mind  the  well-known
             case of Karanakaran and the categorisation  by  Brooke  LJ  in
             paragraph 55 that when assessing future risk I  have  to  take
             into account disparate pieces of evidence.

         39.   When  considering  the  appellant's  asylum  claim   I   have
             considered it in the context of the factual matrix provided by
             reference to website  reports,  the  letters  written  by  the
             appellant, the trafficking report and the medical records , as
             per the guidance given by Buxton LJ in Mibanga v  SSHD  [2005]
             EWCA Civ 376.

         40.  In assessing all this evidence I  have  been  mindful  of  the
             Joint Presidential Guidance Note and that the appellant  is  a
             vulnerable witness given the diagnosis of depression and  that
             he should be accorded a liberal application of the benefit  of
             the doubt."

14. At paragraphs 41 to 48, Judge Plumptre gave her reasons for  concluding
    that the appellant was guilty of a  particularly  serious  crime,  such
    that (even if he succeeded in establishing a  real  risk  of  harm,  if
    returned to Ghana) he would not be entitled to refugee  status  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She noted, in particular, at  paragraph  41  that  "Mr
    Allison sensibly did not challenge this finding by the respondent which
    I endorse".

15. Judge Plumptre then turned to the assessment of the  appellant's  claim
    to be at real risk of serious harm in  Ghana.   At  paragraph  50,  she
    explained how her approach to the issue of trafficking, in  respect  of
    which the appellant had received a negative decision from the Competent
    Authority, was to consider all the evidence in the round at the date of
    the hearing, applying the lower standard of proof.

16. Beginning at paragraph 51, the  judge  then  examined  the  appellant's
    account of being asked to smuggle drugs into the United  Kingdom.   She
    gave weight to the appellant's answer in his screening  interview  that
    he was an electrician in Ghana with a good job and that a man he worked
    with had said that "he would help me to get a  good  education".   This
    man "gave me a bag to bring with me but a friend  tipped  me  off  that
    there were drugs in the bag so I  came  without  it".   Judge  Plumptre
    found that the fact the appellant had left the bag behind  "speaks  for
    itself in that he exercised free will to do this and was not in any way
    coerced or forced to do so".  That was, she  found,  inconsistent  with
    the appellant's assertion that he was "being exploited".   Further,  in
    both his screening and substantive asylum interviews the appellant  had
    made no mention of being detained and tortured in  a  house  for  three
    weeks.  She found that claim to be "a later fabrication".

17. The judge then turned to the appellant's letter of  24  November  2018,
    where he had been given an opportunity to clarify  discrepancies.   The
    appellant claimed that  the  interviewing  officer  who  conducted  the
    asylum interview had made a number of errors.  The judge gave weight to
    the fact that the interview took place on 30 November 2017 and that the
    appellant had been sent a copy of the interview notes but chose to make
    no complaint about any errors for nearly  a  year,  until  24 November
    2018.  Some of the alleged discrepancies  concerned  other  sources  of
    information which did not relate to the asylum  interview.   The  judge
    gave weight to the fact that in his letter of 28 March 2017 and  during
    his asylum interview the appellant stated that  he  had  no  family  in
    Ghana, whereas in the NRM Referral there was reference to the appellant
    telling an Immigration Officer that threats were made to him if he told
    his family in Ghana.

18. In a Rule 35 report, compiled whilst the  appellant  was  in  detention
    consequent upon him raising a claim that  he  had  been  tortured,  the
    judge noted there was reference to him saying that  the  ringleader  of
    the drugs gang had asked for  information  about  his  family  and  had
    threatened him.  The judge gave weight to the appellant's  response  of
    24 November 2018, where the appellant stated  that  when  referring  to
    family he had meant "my relatives not  a  direct  family  and  even  my
    friends as well".  The judge did  not  find  that  to  be  a  plausible
    explanation, given that the appellant had previously  said  he  had  no
    family in Ghana.  The judge considered  that  the  appellant's  account
    "has been undermined by these severe inconsistencies".

19. At paragraph 54, the judge gave weight to the appellant's letter of  22
    February 2017 that "those you have suffered from since your grandmother
    died when you were 10" conflicted with what he had said at  his  asylum
    interview, that he did not come across or  meet  the  drug  gang  until
    after  he  had  done  an  electrical  job,  when  he  would  have  been
    approximately 28 years old.

20. At paragraph 55, the judge  gave  weight  to  the  fact  that  the  NRM
    Referral Report made reference to the appellant being held in  a  house
    for five days before being taken to the airport in Ghana,  whereas  the
    Rule 35 Report recorded the appellant as saying he was held in a  house
    for two to three weeks.  There was also no mention  in  either  of  the
    interviews of the appellant being held for any length  of  time  before
    going to the airport.  In the NRM Referral, the appellant said  he  was
    threatened by the gang that he  would  be  raped  and  was  beaten  and
    kicked; whereas there was no mention at  all  of  this  in  his  asylum
    interview (paragraph 56).  The judge also noted that the appellant  had
    not spoken to the interviewing officer at his  asylum  interview  about
    being stabbed because  the  officer  was  not  interested  to  ask  him
    information about this.  The judge found this to be "a fabrication  and
    do not accept that he mentioned this in his asylum interview",  for  if
    he had, it would undoubtedly have been recorded (paragraph 57).

21. The appellant was inconsistent about whether he had been given a locked
    bag containing drugs at the airport or whether he had been given it  at
    the house.  At paragraph 59, the judge noted the discrepancy  that,  at
    interview, the appellant said he gave the bag containing drugs  to  his
    friend, whereas he stated in the letter dated 11 March 2017 that he had
    dumped the bag.  At paragraph 61, the judge did not  find  it  credible
    that the appellant would enter into an arrangement with the  man  known
    as Mr Noah, whom he had known for only about three weeks, or  that  the
    latter was willing to entrust the appellant with the task of  importing
    dangerous drugs, after knowing him for only  such  a  short  period  of
    time.

22. At paragraph 62, the judge found that the appellant  gave  no  credible
    explanation at interview as to why he would put his best friend's  life
    at risk by giving him the bag allegedly containing  drugs.   The  judge
    rejected the appellant's explanation that he did not put  his  friend's
    life at risk because he thought "he could sort it".

23. At paragraph 63, the judge considered a threatening letter said to come
    from the leader of  the  gang  and  also  letters  of  support  of  the
    appellant, including a letter from his church.   Considering  these  in
    the round, she concluded that it was for the  appellant  to  show  that
    documents adduced in his support could be relied upon  to  support  his
    claim.

24. Having made that self-direction, the judge, at paragraph 64, found  the
    purported letter from the gang  leader  unreliable,  in  that  it  made
    reference to the gang going after the  appellant's  family,  which  was
    inconsistent with his claim that his parents died in a car  crash  when
    he was aged 9 or 10 and that his grandfather died when he was 10 to  15
    years old; and that he had no family to return to in Ghana.  There was,
    indeed, no evidence that the letter even came from Ghana.

25. As regards the appellant's claim  that  the  gang  knew  the  date  the
    appellant would be released from prison, the judge held that there  was
    no means of any gang or friend being aware of the  appellant's  removal
    date to Ghana unless he chose to inform them himself (paragraph 66).

26. Judge Plumptre then turned to the issue of suicide risk:-

         "Suicide Risk

         67.  As acknowledged by Mr Allison the reasoning of Dyson LJ as  he
             then was in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 remains good law  and
             that the test in suicide cases is not whether there is "a real
             risk of an increased risk", but  simply  whether  there  is  a
             "real risk" that removal will cause an asylum seeker  to  take
             his/her life.  Measures taken by the  expelling  state  before
             and during removal, and the availability of medical  treatment
             and family support after removal may reduce the risk below the
             threshold of a "real risk".  I note that in 'foreign cases' as
             opposed to 'domestic cases' where  the  risk  is  run  in  the
             expelling country, the threshold for Article 3 is particularly
             high.  I have considered what is set out and the case  law  on
             the risk of suicide at paragraph 18 of Mr  Allison's  skeleton
             argument.

         68.  I find at the time of the OASys Report that the  appellant  is
             recorded as having no mental health issues and note from  page
             261, part of the medical records, that it  was  the  appellant
             who said that his roommate found him with a ligature which  he
             intended to use to end his life.   I  accept  that  he  is  on
             hourly observations from 16 January 2019 which in my  judgment
             does not establish that the appellant  is  a  genuine  suicide
             risk but  is  indicative  of  the  care  which  the  detention
             authorities are required to take.  I have considered his  oral
             evidence that he made two other suicide attempts but take into
             account that there is no record of these two attempts  in  his
             medical records.  Given the numerous  inconsistencies  in  the
             appellant's account of events in Ghana,  I  am  not  satisfied
             that there have been two additional suicide attempts, although
             I accept  that  the  appellant  is  vulnerable  and  has  been
             diagnosed with depression.

         69.  I find any diagnosis of  depression  is  consistent  with  the
             appellant's uncertain future in Ghana, his lack of immigration
             status in the UK given  that  he  is  an  overstayer,  and  as
             submitted by the Presenting Officer is consistent  with  being
             depressed about the breakdown of  his  relationship  with  his
             wife and lack of contact with his daughter whom understandably
             the appellant misses.

         70.  I give weight to the fact that the appellant failed  to  raise
             any concerns of being targeted in Ghana as  a  result  of  his
             criminal  convictions  being  public  knowledge   until   very
             recently.  I reject his claim that he cannot return  to  Ghana
             because people are aware of them as  a  late  fabrication  and
             find that there was no reference  to  any  such  fear  in  his
             screening and asylum interviews.

         71.  I find that there is sufficiency of protection from the police
             in Ghana for any claimed fear of the  ...  gang  for  all  the
             reasons given in paragraphs 45-53 of the decision letter,  and
             find that there is a functioning police force in that  country
             and that although they may be susceptible to corruption, steps
             are being taken to address this.

         72.  I find that any mental health problems  and  possible  suicide
             risk are being managed by suitable medication for  depression.
             I apply the reasoning in N V SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 that the high
             threshold to establish that the appellant's removal would be a
             breach of Article 3 ECHR has not been met.

         73.  I give weight to  what  is  stated  at  paragraph  83  of  the
             decision letter about the availability of medical treatment in
             Ghana which is one of the most advanced countries in Africa in
             terms of health organisations thanks  to  a  public  insurance
             system, and  that  there  are  many  different  categories  of
             hospital in Ghana and that  there  are  around  1,294  private
             hospitals and around 1,818 public hospitals generally  located
             in urban areas.

         74.  I give weight to  what  is  stated  at  paragraph  85  of  the
             decision  letter  about  the  treatment  for   mental   health
             conditions and  that  mental  health  services  in  Ghana  are
             available at most levels and to what is set out  at  paragraph
             86 and adopt the finding at paragraph  87  of  the  respondent
             that suitable medical care  is  available  in  Ghana  for  any
             mental  instability  or   mental   health   issues   including
             depression, anxiety, stress, panic attacks, paranoia, suicidal
             thoughts, sleeplessness, loneliness, emptiness, confusion  and
             sadness.   I  give  weight  to  the  fact   that   Citalopram,
             Mirtazapine and Sertraline are all available in Ghana, as  per
             the COI Requests/Information dated  April  2018  and  February
             2017."

27. At paragraph 75, dealing with section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 (claimant's credibility), Judge
    Plumptre noted that, although the appellant had allegedly come  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2011 to escape his problems in Ghana and claim asylum
    (as asserted in two of his letters written in support of his  challenge
    to deportation), he did not claim asylum at the airport and did so only
    after he had been served with an  order  of  deportation.   That  delay
    constituted  "behaviour"  which  undermined  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's asylum claim.

28. Finally, at  paragraph  76,  Judge  Plumptre  noted  that  "there  were
    sensibly no submissions on Article 8  on  which  the  appellant  cannot
    rely, given the breakdown of his marriage and lack of any contact  with
    his daughter".  She then proceeded to dismiss the appeal.

29. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Allison drafted the grounds attached  to
    Duncan Lewis's application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds described the "factual basis of A's appeal" as a
    fear of the man named Noah, who had "previously tortured" the appellant
    in Ghana and threatened him with death; and "the risk of  A  committing
    suicide as a result of his fears about returning to Ghana".

30. Paragraph 5 of the grounds contended that the  renewed  application  to
    adjourn made to Judge Plumptre at the hearing "was based  at  least  in
    part on the need to obtain supporting medical evidence of the  risk  of
    suicide".   In  the  light  of  what  the  grounds  asserted  was   the
    respondent's "procedural obligation to assess  available  treatment  in
    Ghana, it was essential for A to be able to produce  reliable  evidence
    from a mental health professional  properly  qualified  to  assess  his
    mental state, diagnose any relevant medical conditions and  proffer  an
    expert  opinion  on  risk.   Medical  records  could  not  properly  be
    considered as a satisfactory substitute".

31. So far as concerned Judge Plumptre's reliance on delay on the  part  of
    Duncan Lewis, the grounds contended that since the appellant "has  been
    in detention throughout the proceedings, the available time  to  obtain
    supporting medical evidence was necessarily limited".  The grounds went
    on to say that it had been explained "that in light of the need to make
    an application for funding to the LAA [Legal Aid Authority] due to  the
    quotation being above the relevant threshold, an  adjournment  of  8-10
    weeks was being sought.  On this basis, there was  simply  insufficient
    time to make the necessary arrangements".

32. The grounds contended that Judge Plumptre had been wrong to rely on the
    OASys Report that the appellant had no mental  health  issues,  despite
    accepting that he was a vulnerable witness  due  to  his  diagnosis  of
    depression.  So far as the suicide attempts were concerned, the grounds
    submitted that the judge had failed to have regard to the fact that two
    further suicide attempts were said to have post-dated the first one  in
    January 2019.  This touched upon the point made earlier in the grounds,
    that there was a gap in the medical records  from  10  February  to  19
    April 2019 and no medical records from 30 April 2019 onwards.

33. Ground 2 asserted that Judge Plumptre misapplied  the  law  on  suicide
    risk, as articulated in J v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 6529 and Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362.  Judge  Plumptre  had  wrongly
    assumed that the high threshold of Article 3 harm required in so-called
    "health" cases apply, when those authorities made it  plain  that  this
    was not the correct legal position.

34. Ground 3  asserted  that  Judge  Plumptre  had  not  given  effect,  in
    analysing the appellant's evidence, to the fact that the appellant  had
    been treated by her as a vulnerable witness.

Discussion

(a) The grant of permission

35. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bibi on 17 July 2019.  Somewhat remarkably, Judge  Bibi,
    at  paragraph  2,  stated  in  terms  that  Judge  Plumptre's  decision
    "contains a material error of law".  At paragraph 3,  Judge  Bibi  said
    that Judge Plumptre "has erred in not granting an adjournment to enable
    the appellant  to  produce  reliable  evidence  from  a  mental  health
    professional properly qualified to assess his  mental  state,  diagnose
    any relevant medical conditions and to offer an expert opinion on risk.
     The medical records could not properly be considered as a satisfactory
    substitute".

36. It is inappropriate for a judge granting permission to appeal to assert
    that the decision under challenge contains a  material  error  of  law.
    Although, at paragraph 4 of her decision, Judge Bibi stated that "there
    is an arguable error of law  that  has  been  identified  which  merits
    further consideration", her views, as expressed in paragraphs 2 and  3,
    should have been couched in terms of arguability.

37. If Judge Bibi had been satisfied, not just that there was  an  arguable
    error of law, but that Judge Plumptre had in fact made an error of  law
    in her decision, then Judge Bibi should  have  reviewed  that  decision
    pursuant to rule 35 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. We are not suggesting that
    such a course would have been appropriate reaction to Judge  Plumptre's
    decision; merely that it is only in the context of review that a  judge
    considering an application for permission to appeal is entitled to  say
    that the decision under challenge is  legally  erroneous.  As  will  be
    evident from what follows, the challenges to Judge Plumptre's  decision
    are, in fact, devoid of merit.

 (b) The refusal to adjourn

38. The oral and written grounds of challenge to Judge Plumptre's  decision
    to refuse to  adjourn  the  substantive  hearing  mis-characterise  the
    application with which  she  was  faced.   As  can  be  seen  from  the
    application sent by email on 10 May from Ms F  of  Duncan  Lewis,  the
    application to adjourn in order to obtain a psychiatric report  was  on
    the basis that this "is required to assess  whether  the  appellant  is
    capable of giving instructions and thus his ability to effectively take
    part in the legal proceedings".  Although Ms F made  reference  to  the
    appellant  having  attempted  to  self-strangulate,   the   adjournment
    application was not made, even in part, so that  a  medical  assessment
    could be obtained of the risk of the appellant committing  suicide,  if
    he were returned to Ghana.

39. When Mr Allison renewed the application before Judge  Plumptre,  it  is
    evident from paragraph 11 of her decision that this  was  on  the  same
    basis as Ms F had put the written application.  The email read  out  to
    the judge by Mr Allison, and recorded by her at  paragraph  12  of  her
    decision,  is  concerned  with  the   appellant's   ability   to   give
    instructions, even if "he would be able to stand as a witness".

40. Although the judge, at paragraph 14, recorded Mr Allison as saying that
    an adjournment was needed "for a professional medical assessment as  to
    the appellant's capacity to  give  instructions  and  possible  suicide
    risk", it is quite evident that this was no more than an aside.  It  is
    noteworthy that Mr Allison's written skeleton argument of 20  May  2019
    dealt at length with the issue of suicide risk to the appellant but did
    not contain any submission that further  evidence  on  this  issue  was
    necessary.  On the contrary, paragraph 17  of  the  skeleton  reads  as
    follows:-

         "17.  Although  the  Respondent  has  concluded   that   there   is
             insufficient evidence  to  preclude  that  A's  removal  would
             result in suicide (RFRL, �100) this assessment does  not  take
             into account the  evidence  indicating  that  A  has  actually
             attempted to commit suicide whilst in detention."

41. At paragraph 18 of the  skeleton,  Mr  Allison's  submission  that  the
    respondent  had  an  obligation  to  assess  what  treatment  would  be
    available in practice, to  preclude  the  real  risk  of  suicide,  was
    couched in terms of what medical evidence might be available in  Ghana.
    We have not been told that the psychiatrist whom Duncan Lewis wished to
    instruct has any expertise about mental health facilities in Ghana.

42. We are not satisfied that any criticism can be made of Judge Plumptre's
    finding at paragraph 19 of her decision regarding Duncan  Lewis  having
    had an opportunity of consulting Dr Sahota at an earlier point in time.
      The  medical  evidence  before  the  judge  extended  back   over   a
    considerable period.  The appellant  himself  said  that  he  had  been
    taking antidepressant medication for three years.  Over  much  of  that
    period he had been instructing Dicksons  Solicitors,  who  were  making
    representations on his  behalf  following  service  of  the  notice  of
    decision to make a deportation order in January 2017.   The  change  of
    solicitors which, as we have said, appears to have occurred in  January
    2019 falls to be looked at in that light.  In any event, the mere  fact
    that the appellant had been in detention at the time Duncan Lewis began
    to represent him should not have  posed  significant  difficulties  for
    such an experienced immigration practice.

43. At the hearing, we asked Mr Allison whether Dr Sahota  had  produced  a
    report.  Mr Allison replied that he had not.  The explanation given was
    that the Legal Aid Agency would not fund such a report unless and until
    the Upper Tribunal had found a material error of law in the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  Under questioning from us, Mr Allison was  unable
    to say whether Duncan Lewis had, in the interim, made any  approach  to
    the LAA to secure exceptional funding, or the like, in order to  enable
    such a report to be prepared.

44. We have to say  that  we  find  this  stance  problematic.   The  Upper
    Tribunal is being  urged  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Plumptre on an entirely speculative basis.   So  far  as
    concerns the alleged gap in medical records, referred to in the grounds
    of application for  permission  to  appeal,  Duncan  Lewis  could  have
    obtained the appellant's authority to get these from the respondent, in
    respect of the remaining period when the appellant  was  in  detention.
    Given that the appellant has now been released, and lives in  Cornwall,
    records could have been sought from his General Practitioner.

45. We make no professional criticism of Ms F;  but  the  events  described
    above raise the question of how a trainee solicitor was allowed by  her
    firm to make the assertion that  this  appellant  was  not  capable  of
    giving instructions, when a more experienced  practitioner  would  have
    realised the difficulties with such a stance,  as  belatedly  occurred:
    see paragraph 11 above.

46. We find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre did not err in  law  in
    refusing to adjourn. She properly addressed  the  application  made  to
    her.

(c) The risk of suicide

47. As we have seen, Judge Plumptre dealt with the issue of suicide risk at
    paragraphs 67 to 74 of her decision.  The criticism in the  grounds  of
    her finding at paragraph 68, regarding the absence of evidence  of  two
    further suicide attempts, fails for the  reason  we  have  just  given:
    there is still no satisfactory evidence of these, let alone anything to
    show that it would have materially affected the judge's analysis of the
    suicide risk, based on the evidence that was before her.

48. The appellant contends that Judge Plumptre misapplied the relevant law,
    in that J held that the risk of harm is not to be assessed by reference
    to the elevated  threshold  for  "health  cases",  such  as  one  finds
    articulated in D v United Kingdom  (1997)  24  EHRR  423  and  in  N  v
    Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department   [2005]   UKHL   31.
    Notwithstanding that J featured prominently in his written grounds,  Mr
    Allison did not consider it necessary to  provide  the  Upper  Tribunal
    with a copy of the judgment or of  that  in  Y  and  Z  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ  362,  upon
    which he also relied.

49. At paragraph 67 of her decision, the judge set out a  synopsis  of  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment in J.  We can see nothing  wrong  with  what
    she there said.  Under the heading "Foreign Cases" Dyson LJ set out the
    following requirements:-

         "26. First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed.  This must attain a minimum level  of
             severity.  The court has said on a number  of  occasions  that
             the  assessment  of  its   severity   depends   on   all   the
             circumstances  of  the  case.   But  the  ill-treatment   must
             "necessarily be serious"  such  that  it  is  "an  affront  to
             fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to
             a country where he is at risk of serious  ill-treatment":  see
             Ullah paras [38-39].


         27.  Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights. Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:


                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).
             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka..."
         28.  Thirdly, in the context of  a  foreign  case,  the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.




         29.  Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).


         30.  Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach
             of article 3 in a suicide case, a question  of  importance  is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to  be  based  is
             objectively well-founded.  If the fear  is  not  well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
             the removal will be in breach of article 3.


         31.  Sixthly, a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights."

50. That articulation of the  test  was  specifically  in  the  context  of
    "foreign cases".  However, at paragraph 33, under the heading "Domestic
    Cases" Dyson LJ said this:-

         "33. In relation to domestic cases, it is apparent that  Strasbourg
             applies a somewhat different approach, since  the  concern  to
             avoid or minimise the extra-territorial effect of the ECHR (ie
             the third of the 6 factors we have just mentioned) is  absent.
             But the remaining factors are equally applicable  in  domestic
             cases.  The sixth factor is of particular significance.   This
             is not surprising because the signatories  to  the  ECHR  have
             sophisticated  mechanisms  in  place  to  protect   vulnerable
             persons from self-harm within their  jurisdictions.   Although
             someone who is sufficiently determined to do  so  can  usually
             commit suicide, the fact that  such  mechanisms  exist  is  an
             important, and often decisive, factor taken into account  when
             assessing whether there is a real  risk  that  a  decision  to
             remove an immigrant is in breach of article 3."

51. At paragraph 42, Dyson LJ said:-

         "42. ... In our view, suicide cases should  be  approached  in  the
             manner that we have explained earlier.  Cases  concerning  the
             risk of death resulting from the non-availability of treatment
             in the receiving state are not precisely  analogous  to  those
             concerning the risk of suicide.  The scope  of  article  3  in
             relation to the former has now been explained by the House  of
             Lords in N(FC)."

52. The judgment of Sedley LJ in Y and Z makes reference to  another  Court
    of Appeal case that post-dates Y: RA (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 1210. Richards LJ,  giving  the
    judgment of the Court, had this to say about the standard or  threshold
    to be applied where  the  risk  of  Article  3  harm  following  return
    concerns the risk of suicide:

               "49.   There has been some debate in our  domestic  case-law
           as to the extent to which cases of mental illness, in particular
           where it is said that removal  will  give  rise  to  a  risk  or
           increased risk of suicide, are analogous to  cases  of  physical
           illness for the purposes of the application of article 3: see  J
           v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
           629, para 42; R (Tozlukaya) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
           Department  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  379,  para  62;  AJ  (Liberia)  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1736,
           para 15; and CN (Burundi) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2007]  EWCA  Civ  587,  paras  25-26.  Mr  Mackenzie
           contended that a material  difference  exists  between  the  two
           types of case, since in the suicide risk case the  very  act  of
           expulsion causes or may cause a deterioration in the applicant's
           condition whereas in the HIV/AIDS situation it is  the  loss  of
           assistance or services currently enjoyed that gives rise to  the
           issue under article 3.  Whilst there may be factual  differences
           between the two types of case, the passage I have quoted from  N
           v United Kingdom makes clear, as it seems to me, that  the  same
           principles are to be applied to them both.  Nor do I detect  any
           important difference  of  approach  in  the  domestic  cases  on
           suicide risk.  In the present case the senior immigration  judge
           relied both on the line of domestic authority beginning with J v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department and on  the  line  of
           Strasbourg authority beginning with D v United Kingdom.   In  my
           view that resulted in a perfectly  coherent  approach,  in  line
           with the statement of principles now to be found in N  v  United
           Kingdom.


     50. In any event, I am satisfied that the senior immigration judge  was
           entitled to conclude that the appellant's removal to  Sri  Lanka
           would not have such adverse  consequences  for  the  appellant's
           psychiatric condition as to reach the article  3  threshold;  on
           her findings of fact, this could  not  be  said  to  be  a  very
           exceptional case where the humanitarian grounds against  removal
           are compelling.  She was similarly entitled to conclude that his
           removal would not be in breach of article 8."



53. In Y and Z,  Sedley  LJ  distinguished  but  did  not  disapprove  what
    Richards LJ held at paragraphs  49  and  50  of  RA.  Those  paragraphs
    accordingly remain an authoritative finding on risk  of  suicide  after
    return. They fully accord with what Judge Plumptre held in the  present
    appeal. It is unfortunate that we  were  not  referred  to  RA  at  the
    hearing.

54. So far as UK suicide risk was concerned, there was no  evidence  before
    the judge to show that the respondent was not responding appropriately,
    whilst the  appellant  was  in  detention,  following  the  appellant's
    suicide attempt.  On the evidence before the judge, she was entitled to
    conclude  at  paragraph  69  that  the  appellant's  mental  state  was
    "consistent  with  being  depressed  about   the   breakdown   of   his
    relationship with his wife and lack of contact with his  daughter  whom
    understandably the appellant misses".  No suggestion  was  made  by  Mr
    Allison that the respondent would not take appropriate  precautions  to
    safeguard the appellant, in the event of him being detained with a view
    to effecting his removal.

55. So far as Ghana was concerned, there is no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    finding at paragraph 74 that relevant  drugs,  including  the  commonly
    prescribed citalopram, mirtazapine, and sertraline,  are  available  in
    Ghana.  Furthermore, paragraph 30 of J  is  highly  important.   There,
    Dyson LJ found that, if a person's fear of harm on return is not  well-
    founded "that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
    the removal would be in breach of Article 3".  The judge made  findings
    of fact that the appellant was not a witness  of  truth  and  that  his
    account of  what  he  feared  might  happen  to  him  in  Ghana  was  a
    fabrication.  For the reasons we will shortly give,  the  challenge  to
    the judge's conclusions is not made out.   Accordingly,  the  appellant
    will know that there are no individuals in Ghana, such as Noah, waiting
    to harm him.

56. Mr Allison sought to rely upon Y and Z.  Quite apart from what we  have
    just said, the facts of Y  and  Z  were  entirely  different  from  the
    present one, in that  the  appellants,  who  had  been  imprisoned  and
    tortured in Sri Lanka, were so fearful of what might happen to them  on
    return that there was a real risk that they would commit suicide,  even
    though the Sri Lankan authorities might not  any  longer  be  adversely
    interested in them: paragraphs 49, 50 and 61 to 64.

57. We conclude that the Judge Plumptre did not materially err  in  law  in
    her assessment of the suicide risk to the appellant.




(d) The appellant as a vulnerable adult

58. At paragraph 23 of her decision, Judge Plumptre  said  that  she  would
    treat the appellant "as a vulnerable witness  in  accordance  with  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010".  We  assume  that  she
    meant "vulnerable adult": see paragraph 2, footnote 2 to  the  Guidance
    Note and paragraph 1 of the Senior  President  of  Tribunals'  Practice
    Direction: Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive witnesses.   No  point
    emerges from this slip.

59. The appellant's final ground of appeal contends that, having decided to
    treat the appellant as a  vulnerable  adult,  at  no  point  did  Judge
    Plumptre "appear to give effect to" this fact, when making her findings
    of fact including, importantly, the findings of credibility.

60. There is no merit in this challenge.  The fact that  a  judicial  fact-
    finder decides to treat an appellant or witness as a  vulnerable  adult
    does not mean that any adverse credibility finding in respect  of  that
    person is thereby to be regarded as  inherently  problematic  and  thus
    open to challenge on appeal.

61. By applying the Joint Presidential Guidance Note, No  2  of  2010,  two
    aims are achieved. First, the judicial fact-finder will ensure the best
    practicable conditions for the person concerned to give their evidence.
    Secondly, the vulnerability  will  also  be  taken  into  account  when
    assessing the credibility of that evidence.

62. So far as the second aim is concerned, the Guidance makes it plain that
    it is for  the  judicial  fact-finder  to  determine  the  relationship
    between the vulnerability and the evidence that is adduced:

           "3. The consequences of such vulnerability  differ  according  to
        the degree to which an individual is affected. It is  a  matter  for
        you to determine the extent  of  an  identified  vulnerability,  the
        effect on the quality of the evidence and the weight to be placed on
        such vulnerability in assessing the evidence before you, taking into
        account the evidence as a whole".

63. If one examines the judge's findings, one can see that they  are  fully
    in accord with that second aim. At paragraph 40,  the  judge  expressly
    stated that she had had regard to the appellant  as  vulnerable,  given
    his diagnosis of depression "and that he  should  be  accorded  liberal
    application of the benefit of the doubt".  Mr Allison  was  completely
    unable before us to show that Judge Plumptre might not, in  fact,  have
    done what she expressly said she did.   On  the  contrary,  Mr  Allison
    could offer no explanation of how the fact that the appellant has  been
    on antidepressants is capable of  having  a  positive  bearing  on  the
    credibility  of  his  account,  by  reference  to   his   contradictory
    statements ranging over a considerable period of  time.   As  the  Vice
    President observed at the hearing, there is nothing to  show  that  the
    appellant's answers at interview were any more or less to be  taken  at
    face  value  on  this  account  than  were   his   subsequent   written
    submissions, including his witness statement of May 2019.

64. In any event, certain fundamental problems with the appellant's account
    cannot rationally be ascribed to his depression.   His  inconsistencies
    regarding whether he has family in Ghana were attempted to be explained
    on the basis that he meant "my relatives not a direct family  and  even
    my friends as  well"  (paragraph  53).   The  appellant  was  not  here
    asserting that he had forgotten about or been too depressed to remember
    whether he had family in Ghana.   Likewise,  the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraphs 60 to 62 were that it was unbelievable  that  an  individual
    who had not known the appellant for long would give him drugs, or  that
    the appellant would enter into such an arrangement.  The same  is  also
    true of the judge's finding that it was not  believable  the  appellant
    would put his best friend's life at risk.



Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


      Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


      Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
      or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
      direction applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of  court
      proceedings.




                      Signed                     Date






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

