
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Niaz (NIAA 2002 s. 104: pending appeal) [2019] UKUT 00399 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 October 2019                            |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       MR CMG OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                             Muhammad ayaz niaz
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Farhat, Solicitor, Gulbenkian Andonian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings shall identify any  member  of  the  appellant's  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.
This direction supersedes that made by the First-tier Tribunal.



(1) Section 104(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
contains an exhaustive list of the circumstances in which  an  appeal  under
section 82(1) is not finally determined.

(2)  Although section 104(2) is describing situations in which an appeal  is
not to be regarded as finally determined, the corollary is that, where  none
of the situations described in sub-paragraphs (a)  to  (c)  apply  (and  the
appeal has not lapsed  or  been  withdrawn  or  abandoned),  the  appeal  in
question must be treated as having been finally determined.

(3)  An appeal which has ceased to be pending within the meaning of  section
104  becomes  pending  again  if  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  refusing
permission to appeal from the First-tier Tribunal  is  quashed  on  judicial
review.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who entered the  United  Kingdom
    in 2004, aged 27, as a student.  In April 2009, the  appellant  applied
    for leave as a spouse of a person present and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  That was rejected by the respondent on 8 June  2009.   On  15
    June 2009, the appellant applied for further leave  as  the  spouse  of
    such a person; and this was granted by the respondent from 2  September
    2009 to 2 September 2011.

 2. On 2 September 2010, however, the appellant's  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse was curtailed.  On 16 September  2010  the  appellant  filed  an
    appeal against that decision but his appeal was dismissed  in  December
    2010.  On 7 July 2011, the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was allowed.

 3. Also on 16 December 2010, the appellant had  submitted  an  application
    for leave  to  remain,  relying  upon  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The
    respondent granted him discretionary leave from 30 August  2011  to  30
    August 2014.

 4. On 28 September  2012,  the  appellant  submitted  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of ten years continuous  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom.  That application was refused  by  the
    respondent on 9 December 2015 by means  of  a  decision  which,  it  is
    common  ground,  included  the  refusal  by  the  respondent   of   the
    appellant's human rights claim.

 5. The appellant's appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  in  January
    2018.  Attention rightly focussed upon the ability or otherwise of  the
    appellant to meet the requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration
    Rules.  If the appellant could not do so, there would be no prospect of
    the respondent granting him indefinite leave to remain under  paragraph
    276C.  In that event, it  would  be  necessary  to  consider  paragraph
    276ADE(1), which contains the  requirements  to  be  met  by  a  person
    seeking leave to remain on the grounds  of  a  protected  private  life
    within the scope of Article 8.

 6. Paragraph 276B provides as follows:-

         276B The requirements to be met  by  an  applicant  for  indefinite
             leave to remain on the ground of long residence in the  United
             Kingdom are that:
             (i) (a)  he has  had  at  least  10  years  continuous  lawful
                   residence in the United Kingdom.
             (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons
                  why it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite
                  leave to remain on the ground of  long  residence,  taking
                  into account his:
                  (a)  age; and
                  (b)  strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
                  (c)   personal  history,  including  character,   conduct,
                      associations and employment record; and
                  (d)  domestic circumstances; and
                  (e)  compassionate circumstances; and
                  (f)  any representations received on the person's  behalf;
                      and
             (iii)    the applicant does not fall  for  refusal  under  the
                  general grounds for refusal.
             (iv) the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of
                  the English language and sufficient knowledge  about  life
                  in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.
             (v)  the applicant  must  not  be  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
                  immigration laws, except  that,  where  paragraph  39E  of
                  these Rules applies, any  current  period  of  overstaying
                  will be disregarded. Any previous  period  of  overstaying
                  between periods of leave will also be disregarded where -
                  (a)  the previous application was made before 24  November
                      2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or
                  (b)  the further application  was  made  on  or  after  24
                      November  2016  and  paragraph  39E  of  these  Rules
                      applied."
 7. In refusing the appellant's application, the respondent had  taken  the
    view that the application under paragraph 276B fell for refusal  "under
    the general grounds  for  refusal"  (paragraph  276B(iii))  because  of
    certain behaviour of the  appellant.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found in favour of the appellant on this issue and we need say no  more
    about it.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge, however, agreed with the respondent that
    the appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276B(i)(a)
    in that he had not had ten years' continuous lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.  This was because the  appellant  had  not  had  lawful
    leave between 7 April 2009, when his statutorily-extended  leave  under
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 expired, and 2 September  2009,
    when he was granted further leave to remain.  7 April 2009 was the date
    on which an application by the appellant, made on  24  March  2009  for
    leave to remain as the spouse of a settled person, had been rejected by
    the Secretary of State, on the basis that the application was  invalid.
    The appellant had re-submitted  that  application  on  14  April  2009,
    leading to another rejection by the respondent on 8 June 2009.  It was
    only when the appellant submitted the application  again,  on  15  June
    2009, that he was granted leave on 2 September 2009.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the period of  unlawful  leave
    in 2009 to be in excess of 28 days and that the later  grant  of  leave
    did not  rectify  matters.   The  judge,  accordingly,  considered  the
    appellant's private  life  by  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)  but
    concluded that the appellant did not satisfy its requirements.

10. Having concluded that the appellant's case "under Article 8 outside the
    Rules"  could  not  succeed,  the  appellant's  appeal  was   dismissed
    (paragraphs 68 and 69).

11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  and,  subsequently,  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  her
    decision, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith found that  the  appellant's  sole
    ground of appeal was unarguable:-

         "The Appellant was put on notice by the Respondent in  the  reasons
         for refusal letter that he was said to have made an application  on
         24 March 2009 which was refused on  7  April  2009  and  a  further
         application on 14 April 2009 which was refused on 8 June 2009 prior
         to making the application on 15 June 2009 which was  granted.   The
         Appellant did not apparently challenge those assertions ...

         It appears to be asserted that there was no gap of five  months  as
         found by the Judge because of the operation of the "28 days"  grace
         periods.  That is unarguable.  The Appellant had section  3C  leave
         until the refusal of the first application on 7 April 2009 and made
         a further application on 14 April.  That this was in the period  of
         grace which the Respondent  allows  without  automatic  refusal  on
         grounds of overstaying  does  not  however  mean  that  it  extends
         section 3C leave.  Accordingly, the Judge was right  to  find  that
         the Appellant had no leave between April 2009  and  September  2009
         when he was next granted leave and, accordingly, could not claim to
         have had continuous lawful residence for a period of ten years."

12. In order to understand the  legal  position  following  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Smith's refusal of permission to appeal, it is necessary  to  set
    out the following provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002:-

         "78. No removal while appeal pending

             (1)  While a person's appeal under section 82(1) is pending he
                  may not be-

                  (a)  removed from the United Kingdom in accordance with  a
                      provision of the Immigration Acts, or

                  (b)  required to leave the United  Kingdom  in  accordance
                      with a provision of the Immigration Acts.

             (2)  In this  section  "pending"  has  the  meaning  given  by
                  section 104.

         ...

         92.  Place from which an appeal may be brought or continued

         ...

             (8)  Where an appellant  brings  an  appeal  from  within  the
                  United Kingdom but leaves the United  Kingdom  before  the
                  appeal is finally determined, the appeal is to be  treated
                  as abandoned unless the claim to which the appeal  relates
                  has been certified under section 94(1) or (7)  or  section
                  94B.

         ...

         104. Pending appeal

             (1)  An appeal under  section  82(1)  is  pending  during  the
                  period-

                  (a)  beginning when it is instituted, and

                  (b)  ending when it is finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
                      abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).

             (2)  An appeal under section 82(1) is not  finally  determined
                  for the purpose of subsection (1)(b) while-

                  (a)  an application for permission to appeal under section
                      11 or 13 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act
                      2007 could be made or is awaiting determination,

                  (b)  permission to appeal under either of  those  sections
                      has  been  granted  and  the   appeal   is   awaiting
                      determination, or

                  (c)  an appeal has been remitted under section 12 or 14 of
                      that Act and is awaiting determination.

         ..."

13. The effect of Upper Tribunal Judge Smith's  refusal  of  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was that the  appellant's  appeal  was  no
    longer "pending" within the meaning of section  104.   The  appellant's
    application for permission to appeal under section 11 of the Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 was no longer "awaiting determination".
     No appeal lay to the Court of  Appeal  against  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Smith's decision because her decision was an "excluded decision" within
    section 13(8)(c) of the 2007 Act.

14. Since the appellant's appeal was not pending, section 78  of  the  2002
    Act no longer acted as a statutory bar on his removal by the respondent
    from the United Kingdom.  However, on 21 May 2018, ten days after Upper
    Tribunal Judge Smith's refusal of permission, the appellant  instructed
    his present solicitors to  begin  judicial  review  proceedings,  which
    sought to quash Upper Tribunal Judge Smith's decision.   The  basis  of
    the judicial review was that the  appellant  did,  in  fact,  meet  the
    requirements of  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  the
    following reasons.  Paragraph 276B(v) required any previous  period  of
    overstaying between periods of  leave  to  be  disregarded,  where  the
    further application was made before 24 November 2016 and was within 28
    days of the expiry of leave.  According to the appellant,  the  "clock"
    stopped, for the purpose of calculating the 28 day period, on 14 April
    2009, when the appellant re-submitted his application.  This meant, the
    appellant submitted, that the period from 15 April to 8 June 2009  fell
    to be disregarded for the purposes of paragraph 276B.  On 8 June  2009,
    the respondent again rejected the application; and so, according to the
    appellant, only seven days passed before the appellant re-submitted  on
    15 June 2009.  That re-submission stopped the  "clock"  again  until  2
    September 2009, when leave was granted.

15. As a result, the appellant submitted that he could, in fact,  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B(v).  In this regard, he relied  upon  an
    unreported case of the Upper Tribunal, which had adopted  the  approach
    just described.

16. The appellant's application for permission to bring judicial review was
    refused by HHJ McKenna, sitting as a High Court Judge.   He  held  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had been "plainly right" to conclude that there
    was a gap of five months for the reasons articulated in the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and in the decision of Upper Tribunal  Judge  Smith
    refusing permission.

17. HHJ McKenna's decision to refuse permission was made on 13  July  2018.
    On 17 August 2018, the appellant was detained by the respondent and the
    police.  He was issued with  a  notice  of  removal.   The  appellant's
    solicitors informed the respondent that an application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal against HHJ McKenna's  decision  would
    be made.  A notice of application to that effect  was  filed  with  the
    Court of Appeal on 21 August 2018.

18. An out of hours application for a stay  on  removal  was  made  by  the
    appellant's solicitors to the High Court on 28 August 2018.   The  High
    Court refused to grant the stay, observing that the appellant's removal
    would not nullify the pending appeal before the  Court  of  Appeal  and
    that, if the appellant were ultimately successful, there  would  be  no
    barrier to his return to the United Kingdom.

19. The appellant was removed by a charter flight on 28  August  2018.   He
    remains in Pakistan.  The appellant's solicitors say they informed  the
    Court of Appeal of this development.

20. On 23 January 2019, the Court of Appeal granted  permission  to  appeal
    and remitted the matter to the High Court  which,  on  12  April  2019,
    quashed the Upper Tribunal's refusal of permission to appeal.

21. On 8 May 2019, the appellant's solicitors wrote to  the  respondent  to
    request that the appellant should be allowed to return  to  the  United
    Kingdom, following the successful outcome of his judicial  review.   On
    30 May 2019, the respondent replied to the effect  that  the  appellant
    would not be able to return and that his appeal fell to be  treated  as
    abandoned.  A copy of the respondent's  letter  was  forwarded  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

22. On 26 July 2019, the Upper Tribunal issued a notice to the effect  that
    the appeal would be treated as abandoned, subject to  submissions  from
    the appellant's solicitors.  On 31 July 2019, the solicitors responded,
    submitting that the appeal should not be treated as  abandoned  because
    in section 92(8) of the 2002  Act  the  verb  "leaves"  in  the  phrase
    "leaves the United Kingdom" required the appellant to depart  from  the
    United Kingdom out of choice, rather than being forcibly removed by the
    respondent.

23. The matter came before us on 23 October  2019.   We  were  assisted  by
    helpful skeleton arguments from Mr Farhat and Mr Kotas, supplemented by
    their oral submissions.  We are grateful to them for their  assistance.



24. We do not accept Mr Farhat's submission that an appeal is  not  finally
    determined for the purpose of section 104 of the 2002  Act  during  the
    period when a judicial  review  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  refusal  of
    permission to appeal may be made or whilst an application  for  such  a
    judicial review is awaiting decision.  The wording  of  section  104(2)
    precludes such a construction.  Section  104(2)  lists  three  specific
    situations in which an appeal is not finally determined. Subsection (2)
    does not mention judicial review. If the legislature  had  intended  to
    include judicial review in the list, it would have done  so.  There  is
    also, in our view, no reason  for  assuming  the  legislature  intended
    section 104(2) to be merely a non-exhaustive set of examples of when an
    appeal is not to be treated as finally determined. The  prohibition  in
    section 78 on removal  whilst  an  appeal  is  pending  requires  legal
    certainty on this issue. (We shall  have  more  to  say  about  section
    104(2) at paragraph 29 below.)

25. As a general matter, we agree with Mr Farhat that  a  person  who  does
    have a pending appeal, and who is removed by  the  Secretary  of  State
    pursuant to her immigration powers, does not thereby cause their appeal
    to be abandoned under section 92(8).  The meaning of "leaves the United
    Kingdom" in this context has been authoritatively determined  by  Sales
    LJ, giving judgment in SR (Algeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1375:-

         "15. The phrase "Where an appellant brings an appeal from  within
             the United Kingdom but leaves the United  Kingdom  before  the
             appeal is finally determined"  defines  the  circumstances  in
             which the appeal is to be treated as abandoned.  In  my  view,
             the word "leaves" used  in  this  context  means  "voluntarily
             leaves the United Kingdom".  It does not cover a situation in
             which  an appellant  is  removed  against  her  will  by  the
             Secretary of State.

         16.  My reasons for construing the word "leaves" in this way are as
             follows:

             (i)  To my mind, as a matter  of  ordinary  usage,  the  word
                  "leaves" has a strong connotation of an action being taken
                  by an agent on a voluntary basis (e.g. "The protester did
                  not  leave  the  building  but  was  removed  from  it  by
                  a security guard");
             (ii) In certain contexts it may be possible for the word to be
                  used to refer to simple physical relocation of  a person,
                  however that relocation  might  be  achieved,  whether  by
                  deliberate action taken by  the  person  as  agent  or  by
                  actions taken by others to relocate that person.  However,
                  there are no indications from the context here  that  such
                  a wider meaning was intended. On the  contrary,  I think
                  that both the linguistic context and the wider context and
                  scheme of the legislation support the  narrow  meaning  of
                  "leaves" referred to above.  As to the linguistic context,
                  the word "leaves" appears in a composite opening phrase in
                  which there is a single subject, the "appellant", who does
                  two things: she "brings an appeal" and  she  "leaves  the
                  United Kingdom".  The first clearly imports  a notion  of
                  voluntary agency on  the  part  of  the  appellant,  since
                  bringing an appeal is not  something  which  is  done  to
                  an appellant, and I see no reason to change the sense of
                  the appellant being a voluntary agent doing something when
                  one comes to the second verb in the same phrase.  The  use
                  of the word "but" supports this view:  the  appellant  has
                  acted voluntarily to commence an appeal,  but  then  acts
                  voluntarily in another way so that it should be treated as
                  abandoned.
             (iii)    Rule of law considerations in  this  context  support
                  the same conclusion.  In a state governed by the rule  of
                  law, where the state itself  is  the  subject  of  ongoing
                  litigation, it would breach rule of law principles for the
                  state to be able to defeat the litigation not by defending
                  it on the merits  before  a court  or  tribunal,  but  by
                  physically removing the opposing  party  so  that  she  is
                  prevented from  bringing  her  claim  before  a court  or
                  tribunal, as appropriate, for determination  according  to
                  law.   Parliament  is  taken  to  legislate  for  a state
                  governed by the rule of  law  with  rights  of  access  to
                  justice: see, for example, R (Anufrijeva) v  Secretary  of
                  State for the Home Department [2003] UKHL 36; [2004] 1  AC
                  604, paragraphs [26]-[28]. Accordingly, Parliament must be
                  taken to have intended to use the  word  "leaves"  in  the
                  narrow sense referred to above, where it is the  voluntary
                  act of the appellant which has the stated  effect  of  the
                  appeal being abandoned;
             (iv) The narrower interpretation of  the  word  "leaves"  also
                  accords with what I think  is  the  manifest  object  and
                  purpose of the provision, namely to make  it  possible  to
                  strike out an appeal with a minimum of  procedural  fuss
                  when an appellant has voluntarily left the United Kingdom,
                  since such  action  is  generally  inconsistent  with  the
                  serious pursuit of an appeal launched  on  an in-country
                  basis.  To give the word "leaves" a wider  meaning  would
                  involve going beyond that object and purpose  without  any
                  good reason to do so;
             (v)  It is also significant  that  in  those  cases  in  which
                  predecessor provisions, including section 104(4)(b) of the
                  2002 Act, set out above, have  been  considered  in  this
                  court, the judges expressing views  as  to  their  meaning
                  have been careful to say that the word "leaves" refers  to
                  the appellant "by his voluntary action" physically leaving
                  the United Kingdom: see MM (Ghana) v  Secretary  of  State
                  for  the  Home  Department  [2012]   EWCA   Civ   827   at
                  paragraph [32] and Shirazi v Secretary of State  for  the
                  Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1562; [2004]  INLR  92  at
                  paragraph [13]. These observations have not been critical
                  to the points in issue  in  those  cases,  which  in  fact
                  concerned voluntary departures by an appellant.  However,
                  they are in  line  with  my  own  view  that  the  natural
                  interpretation of the word "leaves"  in  this  context  is
                  that it connotes voluntary  action  on  the  part  of  the
                  appellant in question."
26. The effect of the quashing of a decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing
    permission to appeal from the First-tier Tribunal upon  section  104(2)
    of the 2002 Act was  considered  in  Saimon  (Cart  Review:  "pending")
    [2017] UKUT 00371 (IAC).   In  that  case,  an  appellant  had  brought
    judicial review to  challenge  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    refusing permission to appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which had dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision
    of the respondent,  refusing  to  vary  leave  to  remain.   After  the
    quashing of the Upper Tribunal's refusal of permission,  the  appellant
    left the United Kingdom voluntarily.

27. The case for the appellant in Saimon  was  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    refusal of permission  meant  that  the  appellant's  appeal  had  been
    "finally  determined"  and  that  the  appellant  had  not,  therefore,
    abandoned his appeal by leaving the United Kingdom.

28. The Upper Tribunal's response to this submission was as follows:-


         "7.  We have the very  gravest  of  difficulty  in  accepting  that
             submission.  We should say that nothing decided here should be
             taken as a decision as to whether an appeal is pending after a
             decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing permission  to  appeal
             has been given but before it has been quashed in any  judicial
             review proceedings brought in respect of it.  During that time
             we agree with Mr Saini that it may be rather difficult to  say
             that the appeal is pending: but we make no decision  on  that.
             That is not this case.  In this case the question  is  whether
             the appeal was pending at the time when the appellant left the
             United Kingdom, which was after Judge Freeman's  decision  had
             been quashed.  The effect of the quashing of  Judge  Freeman's
             decision was that from 13 May 2015 the position was that there
             had been  no  lawful  determination  of  the  application  for
             permission  to  appeal  made  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   That
             application, previously thought to have been  determined,  was
             now  awaiting   decision   or   determination.    Indeed,   in
             proceedings  before  this  Tribunal,  Judge  Canavan   granted
             permission.  If she had not done so, the appeal could  not  be
             before us.  But she could only do so on the basis  there  was,
             following the judgment of the High Court, an  application  for
             permission outstanding and awaiting determination.

         8.   Although the argument put by Mr Saini  might  have  effect  if
             confined to the  interpretation  of  s  104(1)(b),  it  simply
             cannot stand, in our judgment, against 104(2) because  leaving
             out the words which do not apply precisely to this appeal, the
             position is that "an appeal  under  s  82(1)  is  not  finally
             determined for the purposes of sub-s 1(b) while an application
             for permission  under  s  11  of  the  2002  Act  is  awaiting
             determination".   That  is  precisely  the  position  of  this
             appeal, following the 13 May 2015 decision of the High  Court;
             the application for permission was awaiting determination, the
             determination which was in due course apparently made by Judge
             Canavan on 11 January 2017.

         9.   It follows that the appeal was pending at the  time  when  the
             appellant left the United Kingdom in August 2015.  By  leaving
             the United Kingdom he abandoned his appeal and since that date
             there has been no appeal before the Tribunal; it  fell  to  be
             treated  as  abandoned  from  that   date.    All   subsequent
             proceedings in it are therefore invalid and  the  position  is
             that the appeal having been abandoned, the appeal to us cannot
             succeed."

29. The second and third sentences of paragraph 7 of Saimon foreshadow  the
    conclusion we have reached in the present case; namely, that an  appeal
    which has been finally determined ceases to be pending.  In the case of
    an application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  under
    section 11 of the 2007 Act, the appeal is finally determined when it is
    no longer "awaiting determination",  which  will,  of  course,  be  the
    position once the application is, in fact, determined.   That,  in  our
    view, is the inexorable result of section 104(2)(a).  Although  section
    104(2) is describing situations  in  which  an  appeal  is  not  to  be
    regarded as finally determined, the corollary is that,  where  none  of
    the situations described in sub-paragraphs (a) to (c)  apply  (and  the
    appeal has not lapsed or been withdrawn or abandoned),  the  appeal  in
    question must be treated as having been finally determined.  Any  other
    result would mean the respondent could never  safely  assume  that  the
    removal of an individual would not violate section 78 of the 2002  Act.



30. The fact that the refusal of permission to appeal  was  quashed,  as  a
    result of the proceedings in the Court of Appeal  after  the  appellant
    had been removed, means the appellant's appeal must, from  that  point,
    be treated as again pending.  There is nothing  inherently  problematic
    with the fact that an appeal may, under the  statutory  scheme,  become
    pending after a period during which, compatibly with that  scheme,  the
    appeal has been treated as finally determined.

31.  In this regard, Mr Kotas rightly relied upon  the  judgment  in  AB  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 59.  In that
    case, the appellant had been removed following an  unsuccessful  appeal
    that had been heard pursuant  to  the  so-called  detained  fast  track
    process, which was subsequently held to be  unlawful.   An  application
    for  judicial  review  compelling  the  respondent  to  use  her   best
    endeavours to facilitate and fund the appellant's return to the  United
    Kingdom, in order to take a  direct  and  active  part  in  the  appeal
    process (which was again  ongoing,  following  the  withdrawal  of  the
    detained fast track regime), was unsuccessful.   The  Court  of  Appeal
    regarded itself as bound by its earlier judgments in Draga v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ  842  and  Fardous  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  931.   In
    those cases, the court had refused to  hold  that  a  decision  of  the
    respondent taken in pursuance of her immigration powers must be treated
    as unlawful, merely because the  respondent's  decision  was  taken  by
    reference to the decision of another body which was later found to have
    been unlawful.  McFarlane LJ, giving judgment in AB, held as follows:-

         "69. This court is bound by the decisions  in  Draga  and  Fardous.
             The starting point for our  consideration  must  be  that,  in
             absence of any additional basis for holding that decision  'B'
             was made unlawfully, a later finding that, in  the  event,  an
             earlier decision 'A' that was relied upon  was  unlawful  does
             not, of itself, affect the validity of decision  'B'.   Absent
             any separate basis for holding that the SSHD acted  unlawfully
             in making and implementing the decision to remove  AB  to  the
             Cameroon in December 2014, the fact  that,  subsequently,  the
             DFT regime and his FTT appeal have  been  held  to  have  been
             unlawful  does  not  render  the  separate  removal   decision
             unlawful or establish that the SSHD was not entitled,  at  the
             time, to rely upon the legal validity of the  DFT  scheme  and
             the tribunal decisions relating to the appeal and the  refusal
             of a stay."

32. The upshot of all this is (a) that on 28 August 2018 the respondent did
    not act contrary to  section  78  of  the  2002  Act  in  removing  the
    appellant because, at that time, the appellant did not have  a  pending
    appeal; and (b) that the Upper Tribunal is seized  of  the  appellant's
    appeal.  Although the  Upper  Tribunal  granted  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, following the quashing
    of Upper Tribunal Judge Smith's refusal, it is  for  the  appellant  to
    show that the First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an error of  law,
    such that that decision should be set aside.

33. As Mr Farhat candidly  acknowledged  at  the  hearing  before  us,  the
    appellant's  case,  based  on   paragraph   276B,   faces   insuperable
    difficulties.  On 21 June 2019, the Court of  Appeal  handed  down  the
    judgment in  R  (Masum  Ahmed)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1070 which, when deciding  the  question  of
    permission, was directed to be published, given  the  numerous  appeals
    raising the same issue.

34. At paragraph 13, the court noted that the respondent submitted that the
    applicant  "has  misunderstood  paragraph  276B  of  the  Rules.    ...
    paragraphs 276B(i) - (v) are quite separate requirements, each of which
    had to be fulfilled  in  order  for  a  person  to  qualify  for  'long
    residence' status again".

35. The court agreed.  In its view the wording of paragraph 276B was  clear
    and  that  sub-paragraphs  (i)  to  (v)  "are  separate,   freestanding
    provisions, each of which has  to  be  met"  (paragraph  15(1)).   Sub-
    paragraph (v) was not drafted as an exception to  sub-paragraph  (i)(a)
    and made no reference to it.  There was no difficulty  in  giving  sub-
    paragraph (v) a  self-contained  meaning.   There  was  also  a  marked
    contrast in the drafting of the definitions of  "continuous  residence"
    and "lawful residence" in  paragraph  276A.   Differences  in  drafting
    should not be read as accidental  or  unintended  (paragraph  15(2)  to
    (7)).  There is, accordingly, no error of law on the face of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision.   The  judge  made  a  correct  finding
    regarding the  operation  of  paragraph  276B,  on  the  facts  of  the
    appellant's case.  It has not  been  shown  that  the  judge  erred  in
    respect of the findings on paragraph  276ADE  or  in  his  analysis  of
    Article 8, outside the Rules.

36. Mr Farhat submitted that there may, in fact, have been  errors  in  the
    respondent's rejection, on 7 April and 8 June 2009, of the  appellant's
    applications of 24 March and 14 April respectively.   It  was  possible
    that the  respondent's  records  would  disclose  the  reason  for  the
    rejections, which  could  then  be  scrutinised.   Although  Mr  Farhat
    submitted that these matters could appropriately be  addressed  in  the
    context of the present appeal, and that this would be preferable to the
    appellant making an application for entry clearance once  any  relevant
    information had been uncovered, we are firmly  of  the  contrary  view.
    The present proceedings are not a vehicle for  embarking  upon  such  a
    course of action.  If the appellant has a case to  make,  including  on
    Article 8 grounds, then he can and should put that  case  in  an  entry
    clearance application and await the result.  As we pointed  out  to  Mr
    Farhat, in responding to any application, the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    is obliged to act in accordance with the Human Rights Act 1998.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error  of  law.
The appeal is dismissed.


                      Signed                     Date






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
