
[pic]
IAC-FH-GJ-V2


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 September 2012                          |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     MF

                                                        Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT






                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahluwalia, instructed by Wilsons Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

   i. Prior to the new immigration rules (HC 194) introduced on 9 July 2012,
      cases  involving  Article  8  ECHR  ordinarily  required  a  two-stage
      assessment: (1) first to assess whether the decision appealed  against
      was in accordance with the immigration rules;  (2)  second  to  assess
      whether the decision was contrary to the appellant's Article 8 rights.


  ii. The new immigration rules set out a number of  mandatory  requirements
      relating to claims reliant on Article 8  ("Article  8  claims")  which
      make clear that if such requirements are not met, the Article 8  claim
      under the rules must be refused. They also contain related  provisions
      which confer discretion  but  it  is  discretion  to  grant  leave  in
      response to an Article 8 claim only if the new mandatory  requirements
      are met.

 iii. Whenever the new rules have application judges are obliged to consider
      whether an appellant can  show  he  meets  the  relevant  requirements
      (s.86(3)(a) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002).
      Where the new rules afford some related discretion, judges are obliged
      to  consider  whether  that  discretion  should  have  been  exercised
      differently (s. 86(3)(6)). However, what judges are  doing  when  they
      are conducting this exercise is simply applying the rules:  the  rules
      are the rules: see paragraph 10 Mahad [2009] UKSC 16.  The  fact  that
      these rules in part refer expressly to Article 8 or to certain Article
      8 concepts is incidental.  The fact that as a result of these  changes
      the rules are longer and incorporate some of the vocabulary of Article
      8 makes no difference.

  iv. Because for most purposes the immigration rules must  be  given  legal
      effect  (see  Odelola   [2009]  UKHL  25),  their   requirements   for
      applicants  making  an  Article   8   claim   to   show   "exceptional
      circumstances" or "insurmountable obstacles" are to be  understood  as
      legal requirements in the same way as any other mandatory requirements
      of the rules.


   v. However, the new rules only cover Article 8 claims brought under some,
      not all, Parts of the Rules and  only  accommodate  certain  types  of
      Article 8 claims.


  vi. Even if a decision to refuse an Article 8 claim under the new rules is
      found to be correct, judges must still consider whether  the  decision
      is in compliance with a person's human rights under s.6 of  the  Human
      Rights Act ( see s.84(1)(c), (g) and (e) and s.86(2) and  (3)  of  the
      2002 Act) and, in automatic deportation cases, whether  removal  would
      breach a person's Convention rights (s.33(2)  UK  Borders  Act  2007).
      Thus in the context of deportation and removal cases the need for a  2
      stage approach in most Article 8 cases remains imperative because  the
      new rules do not encapsulate the guidance given in Maslov   v  Austria
      App no.1683/03 [2008] ECHR 546, which has been endorsed by the  higher
      courts.

 vii. When considering Article 8 in the context of an  appellant  who  fails
      under the new  rules,  it  will  remain  the  case,  as  before,  that
      "exceptional circumstances" is not to be regarded as a legal test  and
      "insurmountable  obstacles"  is  to  be  regarded  as   an   incorrect
      criterion.

viii.  However,  as  a  result  of  the  introduction  of  the  new   rules,
      consideration by judges  of  Article  8  outside  the  rules  must  be
      informed by the greater specificity which they give to the  importance
      the Secretary of State attaches to the public interest.  For  example,
      the new rules set out thresholds of criminality by reference to  terms
      of imprisonment so that Article 8 private life claims can only succeed
      if they not only have certain periods of residence but can  also  show
      their criminality has fallen below these thresholds.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is a decision to which both members of the panel  have  contributed.
The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He is a foreign criminal as  defined
by s.32(1) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  and  his  appeal  lies  against  a
decision by the respondent dated 28  October  2010  to  make  a  deportation
order against him pursuant to  s.32(5)  of  that  Act.   We  shall  set  out
further particulars of his case shortly. His name and  that  of  his  family
are anonymised solely in the interests of his daughter, F, who is  aged  16.


2. This appeal raises issues under the new immigration  rules,  HC  395  (as
amended from 9 July 2012[1]) which seek, inter alia,  to  set  forth  a  new
framework for reaching decisions on claims based on Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
We suspect that the issue of the status and meaning of the  new  rules  will
preoccupy Tribunal and higher  court  judges  for  some  time  to  come  and
doubtless, as case law about the new rules develops, a fuller  understanding
will be reached than that offered here.   But  we  must  make  a  start  and
indeed the higher courts  will  expect  to  have  the  benefit  of  Tribunal
thinking in a range of cases.  The present panel is able to speak with  some
knowledge as to how the tribunal judiciary has dealt with  Article  8  cases
hitherto.

The previous position

3. The position as regards Article 8 cases prior  to  these  new  rules  was
relatively straightforward.  Following the coming into force  of  the  Human
Rights Act 1998 ("HRA") on 1 October 2000, in early  reported  decisions  of
the former Immigration and Asylum Tribunal, for example Nhundu  and  Chiwera
IAT [2001] 01/TH/1603, a structured approach was adopted which ensured  that
Article 8 claims were analysed in the same way  as  enjoined  by  Strasbourg
jurisprudence.  The validity of a structured approach was confirmed  by  the
higher courts, in particular by the House of  Lords  in  R  (Razgar)  [2004]
UKHL 27.   Reported  cases  also  highlighted  the  importance  of  deciding
Article 8 cases by reference to  the  criteria  set  out  by  the  ECtHR  in
Boultif v Switzerland 54273/00 [2003] 33 EHRR  1179  as  developed   in  the
Grand Chamber cases, Uner v Netherlands 46410/99 [2006] 3 FCR  229  GC  ECHR
and Maslov v Austria [2008] GC ECHR 1638/03.  As our higher courts began  to
develop fuller guidance on various aspects of Article 8, it was  not  always
obvious to the tribunal judge that theirs was entirely consistent with  that
of the Strasbourg Court (e.g. whereas the ECtHR has for a long time  applied
tests of "exceptional circumstances"  and  "insurmountable  obstacles",  the
House of Lords in Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and the  Court  of  Appeal  in  cases
such as VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ  5  have  proscribed  the  use  of  such
tests).  But that  was  unproblematic  because,  although  s.2  of  the  HRA
requires all judges to "take account of" Strasbourg jurisprudence,  it  does
not give it binding effect and under  our  doctrine  of  judicial  precedent
decisions of our higher courts are binding on us.

4. What, however, has always been  uncontroversial  from  the  beginning  is
that our human rights jurisdiction is rooted  in  primary  legislation.   By
s.6 of the HRA  we  are  obliged  to  act  in  compliance  with  a  person's
Convention rights.  As already noted, by  s.2  of  the  same  Act,  although
Strasbourg jurisprudence does not bind us, we are  under  an  obligation  to
take it into account.  Further, domestic primary legislation has  identified
specific  human  rights  grounds  of  appeal:  s.84(1)(c)  and  (g)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act").   These
grounds are in addition to s.84(1)(e) ("that the decision is  otherwise  not
in accordance with the law"), a ground that is  distinct  from  and  (as  is
made clear by s.86(3)(a)) wider than s.84(1)(a) ("that the decision  is  not
in accordance with the immigration  rules").   In  relation  to  immigration
decisions affecting foreign nationals, s.33(2) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007
provides, as one of the statutory exceptions (Exception 1) to the  automatic
deportation regime,  "...where removal of the foreign criminal in  pursuance
of a deportation order would breach (a) a person's Convention rights".

5. Subject to transitional provisions, most  of  the  new  rules  came  into
effect on 9 July 2012.  During the period October 2000 to 8  July  2012  the
immigration rules made no specific references to  Article  8.   Paragraph  2
imposed a duty on all primary decision-makers (Immigration  Officers,  Entry
Clearance Officers and all staff of the relevant  Home  Office  Directorate)
to "carry out their duties in compliance with the provisions  of  the  Human
Rights Act 1998".  There  were  specific  rules  in  Part  13  dealing  with
deportation and administrative removal which  specified  that  decisions  on
such matters are subject to the requirement that they  not  be  contrary  to
the European Human Rights Convention (e.g.  old  paragraph  364,  paragraphs
380, 395D).  Some of the changes made to the immigration rules from time  to
time appeared to be the result of developments in Strasbourg  jurisprudence,
one example being paragraph 246 which provides for limited  leave  in  order
to ensure parental contact with a child; but they were  essentially  changes
in  the  policy  of  the  Secretary  of  State  influenced   by   Strasbourg
jurisprudence, no more than that.





Two-stage approach

6. Against this backdrop the judicial task was  relatively  straightforward.
Cases involving Article 8 ordinarily[2]  required  a  two-stage  assessment:
(1) first to assess whether the decision appealed against was in  accordance
with the immigration rules; (2) second to assess whether that  decision  was
contrary to the appellant's  Article  8  rights.   (In  a  very  significant
number of cases, where the appellant  fell  outside  the  immigration  rules
(e.g. because he was an overstayer),  the  only  issue  was  (2));   and  in
considering (2) there was  no  reason  to  think  that  the  rules  had  any
decisive bearing on the conduct of the Article 8 balancing  exercise.  Under
this two-stage approach the only way in which  human  rights  considerations
arose under (1) was in the context of  ensuring  that  their  interpretation
was consistent with the obligation imposed by s.3 of the HRA but the  higher
courts saw little turning on that. Further, it was not generally  considered
that failure to meet the requirements of  the  rules  was  determinative  of
whether an appellant had a realistic prospect of success in their Article  8
claim, although the expectation was that it would only be a  small  minority
of cases that would succeed.

7.  If  there  were  any  doubts  about  whether  this  two-stage  model  of
assessment (where applicable) was valid, they were dispelled by  the  higher
courts in a series of cases beginning with Huang [2007]  UKHL  11  in  which
the House of Lords made clear:

     (i)   that  the  immigration  rules  are  not  required  to  guarantee
         compliance with Article 8 and they do not strike the  balance:  "It
         is a premise of the statutory scheme enacted by Parliament that  an
         applicant may fail to qualify under the rules and yet  may  have  a
         valid claim by virtue of Article 8" (Huang, paragraph 17);


    (ii)    "the  [immigration  rules]  include  no  overarching   implicit
         purposes" (Laws LJ in  AM  (Ethiopia)  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer
         [2009] Imm AR 2 paragraph 38);


    (iii)  for decision-makers the principal effect of s.6 HRA is that they
         are obliged to have regard to and give  effect  to  an  applicant's
         Article 8 rights; "In exercising  her  powers,  whether  within  or
         outside (emphasis in judgment) the rules of practice, the Secretary
         of State must have regard and give effect to applicants' convention
         rights ....The immigrant's Article  8  rights  will  be  (must  be)
         protected by the Secretary of State and the court, whether  or  not
         that is done through the medium of the Immigration  Rules..."  (Sir
         Anthony May in Syed and Patel [2011] EWCA Civ 1059, paragraph 35)

8. It was also evident from the decision letters made by  primary  decision-
makers that where applicable they too applied a two-stage approach.

The new rules

9. The critical question of course is what difference the new rules  HC  395
(as amended from 9 July 2012)  make  to  assessment  of  claims  reliant  on
Article 8 ("Article 8 claims").

10. Prior to the publication of the new rules,  the  Home  Office  published
its "Statement of Intent: Family Migration", June 2012 which summarised  the
changes made in respect of Article 8 as follows:

             "First, we shall end the situation where  those  claiming  the
         right to enter or remain in the UK on the basis of ECHR  Article  8
         -the right  to  respect  for  private  and  family  life  -  do  so
         essentially without regard to the Immigration Rules. The new  rules
         will fully reflect the factors which can weigh for  or  against  an
         Article 8 claim. They  will  set  proportionate  requirements  that
         reflect, as  a  matter  of  public  policy,  the  Government's  and
         Parliament's view of how individual rights to respect  for  private
         or family life should  be  qualified  in  the  public  interest  to
         safeguard  the  economic  well-being  of  the  UK  by   controlling
         immigration and to protect the public from foreign criminals.  This
         will mean that failure to meet the requirements of the  rules  will
         normally mean failure to establish an Article 8 claim to  enter  or
         remain in the UK, and no grant of leave on that basis".

11. At paragraph 31 of the Statement it is said that:

         "The new Immigration Rules will unify consideration under the rules
         and Article 8, by defining the basis on which a person can enter or
         remain in the UK on the basis of their family or private life. They
         will have to meet clear, transparent requirements on  the  face  of
         the rules, e.g. that they have no significant criminality, are in a
         genuine relationship, and meet the  minimum  income  threshold  and
         English language requirements. ..."

12.  The  Home  Office  also  issued  a  statement  dated  13   June   2012,
"Immigration Rules on Family and  Private  Life:  Grounds  of  Compatibility
with Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights".  Observing  at
paragraph 5 that:

     "[u]sually, the Courts show deference to the judgement of the decision-
    maker. However, in the context of  immigration  decisions  on  A8,  the
    Courts are impeded from doing so by  the  failure  of  the  Immigration
    Rules to reflect any consideration of proportionality under A8"

paragraph 20 of this statement identifies that:

    "The intention is that the Rules will state how the balance  should  be
    struck between the public interest and individual rights,  taking  into
    account relevant case law, and thereby provide  for  a  consistent  and
    fair   decision-making   process.   Therefore,   if   the   Rules   are
    proportionate, a decision taken in  accordance  with  the  Rules  will,
    other than in exceptional cases, be compatible with A8."

13. In the course of discussing "the new 10-year  route  to  settlement  for
    those whose removal would breach Article 8" the statement  declares  at
    paragraph 67:

         "Bringing A8 within the Rules  will  ensure  consistency,  fairness
    and transparency in decision-making. We will retain discretion to grant
    leave outside the Rules in genuinely  exceptional  cases  where  it  is
    considered that the  Rules  will  produce  a  disproportionate  result.
    However, it is considered that those cases will be rare since  the  new
    Rules reflect the Government's view - which Parliament will be  invited
    to endorse - of how the balance should  be  struck  between  individual
    rights under A8 and the  public  interests  in  safeguarding  the  UK's
    economic well-being in controlling immigration and  in  protecting  the
    public from foreign criminals. "

14. The statement concludes at paragraph 89 that "[i]t is  the  Department's
view that the new Rules on family and private life are compatible with  ECHR
Article 8".


15. Attached to the new rules themselves is an  Explanatory  Memorandum.  At
paragraph 7.2 under the sub-head "Approach to ECHR Article  8"  it  is  said
that:

      "7.2 The new Immigration Rules will reform the  approach  taken  as  a
      matter of public policy towards ECHR Article 8 - the right to  respect
      for family and private life - in immigration  cases.  The  Immigration
      Rules will fully reflect the factors which can weigh for or against an
      Article 8 claim. The rules will set  proportionate  requirements  that
      reflect the Government's and Parliament's  view  of  how  individuals'
      Article 8 rights  should  be  qualified  in  the  public  interest  to
      safeguard the economic well-being of the UK by controlling immigration
      and to protect the public from foreign criminals. This will mean  that
      failure to meet the requirements  of  the  rules  will  normally  mean
      failure to establish an Article 8 claim to enter or remain in the  UK,
      and no grant of leave on that basis.  Outside  exceptional  cases,  it
      will be proportionate under Article 8 for an applicant  who  fails  to
      meet the requirements of the rules to be removed from the UK."

16. Since the publication of the new rules UKBA has also issued  Immigration
Directorate Instructions  (IDIs)  and  (since  5  October  2012)  Modernised
Guidance to caseworkers on how to operate  them.  For  the  most  part  they
direct caseworkers to decide Article  8  claims  by  reference  to  the  new
criteria set out in  the  rules.  However,  there  are  also  passages  that
reflect acceptance that this exercise is not  necessarily  conclusive.  Thus
in the IDI headed "Long residence and private life" (dated 28  August  2012)
under the subhead "Exceptional circumstances" it was stated:


    "If the applicant does not meet  the  requirements  and  there  are  no
    exceptional  circumstances  which  would  mean  that  even  though  the
    applicant does not meet the requirements  of  the  rules,  refusal  and
    requirement to leave the UK would be a breach of Article 8 (see related
    link: Exceptional circumstances) the application should be refused."

17. Without seeking here to analyse these materials, it is readily  apparent
that both the June 2012 Statement of Intent document,  the  13th  June  2012
statement by the Home Office and the recent  IDIs  and  Modernised  Guidance
reflects a tension between two positions regarding the implications  of  the
new rules for assessment of Article 8 claims. On the  one  hand,  e.g.  when
the  Statement  of  Intent  talks  at  paragraph  31  about  the  new  rules
"unify[ing] consideration under the  rules  and  Article  8"  and  the  Home
Office statement of 13 June  states  that  "the  new  Rules  on  family  and
private life are compatible with ECHR Article 8", they appear to  adopt  the
position that for decision-makers the Article 8 assessment must  or  can  be
done wholly within the new rules. On the other hand, when  they  state  that
failure to meet the new rules will "normally" mean failure to  establish  an
Article 8 claim "other than in exceptional cases", they  appear  to  embrace
the position that the new rules are not conclusive as to  assessment  of  an
Article 8 claim: see paragraph 7 and 11 of  the  Statement  of  Intent,  the
latter of which states that if an applicant fails to meet  the  requirements
of the new rules, "it should only be in genuinely exceptional  circumstances
that refusing them leave and removing them from the UK would breach  Article
8" (see also paragraph 35). Similar references can  be  found  in  the  Home
Office statement of 13th June: see paragraphs 20, 37, 67 and 70.

18. Whilst these materials form part of the background to our  consideration
of the meaning of the rules themselves they can be no  more  than  that.  In
our approach to the meaning of immigration rules we must adhere to the  firm
guidance of the Supreme Court in Mahad v ECO  [2009]  UKSC  16  which  makes
clear that the task of the judges must be to discover from  the  words  used
in the rules themselves what the Secretary of State must be  taken  to  have
intended and that the IDIs (or similar internal  instructions  or  guidance)
are not to be taken as a gloss on their meaning. As stated by Lord Brown  at
paragraph 10:
      10....Essentially it comes to this. The Rules are not to be  construed
      with all the strictness applicable to the construction of a statute or
      a statutory instrument but, instead, sensibly according to the natural
      and ordinary meaning of the words  used,  recognising  that  they  are
      statements of the Secretary  of  State's  administrative  policy.  The
      respondent's counsel readily accepted  that  what  she  meant  in  her
      written case by the proposition "the question of interpretation is . .
      . what the Secretary of State intended his policy to be" was that  the
      court's task is to discover from the words used in the Rules what  the
      Secretary of State must be taken to have intended.  After  all,  under
      section 3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971, the Secretary of  State  has
      to lay the Rules before Parliament which then has the  opportunity  to
      disapprove them. True, as I observed in Odelola (paragraph  33):  "the
      question is what the Secretary of State intended. The  rules  are  her
      rules." But that intention is to be  discerned  objectively  from  the
      language  used,  not  divined  by   reference   to   supposed   policy
      considerations. Still less is the Secretary of State's intention to be
      discovered from  the  Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions  (IDIs)
      issued  intermittently  to  guide  immigration   officers   in   their
      application of the rules. IDIs are given pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of
      Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act which provides that:
           "In the exercise of their functions under this  Act  immigration
           officers shall act in accordance  with  such  instructions  (not
           inconsistent with the immigration rules) as may be given them by
           the Secretary of State . . ." (emphasis added).
      11.  It  is  evident  that  IDIs  have   on   occasion   been   issued
      inconsistently with the Rules as interpreted by the  courts.  A  plain
      instance of this was an instruction issued in April  2001  stating  in
      relation to rule 281 that support for  a  married  couple  from  their
      families in the UK "would not satisfy the  Rules,  which  require  the
      couple to maintain themselves",  an  instruction  flatly  contrary  to
      Collins J's unappealed decision some 18 months earlier in  Arman  Ali.
      Whilst I would readily ascribe such an inconsistency to a  regrettable
      lack of coordination rather than characterise it  (as  the  appellants
      suggest) as "a matter of great constitutional concern", for my part  I
      found the series of IDIs canvassed before us (in any event  incomplete
      for want of any retained archive of such instructions,  another  thing
      to be regretted) singularly unhelpful on the issue of construction."

19. We also have to bear in mind that  for  most  purposes  the  immigration
rules have the force of law: see Odelola v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2009] UKHL 25  paragraph  6  (Lord  Hoffman)  and  paragraph  27
(Lord Brown); Pankina [2010] EWCA Civ 719.



20. Considering the new rules in the light of this guidance, we  cannot  say
that we find it easy to regard everything  that  is  said  about  Article  8
within the new rules as part of a coherent whole. At the very  least,  there
appears to be tensions within them (similar  to  those  we  discern  in  the
Statement of Intent  and  the  IDIs  and  Modernised  Guidance)  between  an
approach which sees them as a complete  code  for  dealing  with  Article  8
claims  and  an  approach  which  sees  them  as  requiring  decision-makers
sometimes to go beyond the rules. What can be said, however, is  that  there
are a number of provisions which either refer to Article 8  or  to  some  of
its elements (for convenience  we  shall  refer  to  these  as  "Article  8-
specific "or "Article 8-related" provisions) and  which  set  out  mandatory
requirements making clear  that  if  such  requirements  are  not  met,  the
Article 8 claim under the Rules must be refused. Consider, for example,  the
following examples:

         "326B.   Where the Secretary of State is considering  a  claim  for
                asylum or humanitarian protection under this Part, she  will
                consider any Article 8 elements of that claim in  line  with
                the provisions of Appendix FM (family life)  and  paragraphs
                276ADE to 276DH (private life)  of  these  Rules.  (emphasis
                added)


         ...


         A362.    Where Article 8 is raised in the  context  of  deportation
                under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will
                only succeed where the requirements of these rules as  at  9
                July  2012  are  met,  regardless  of  when  the  notice  of
                intention  to  deport   or   the   deportation   order,   as
                appropriate, was served." (emphasis added)


Paragraph 398 of the new rules also stipulates that:

      "398. Where a person claims that their deportation would  be  contrary
          to the UK's obligations under Article 8 ...


          ...


          (c)    ... the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim  will
              consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,  if  it
              does not, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
              the public interest in  deportation  will  be  outweighed  by
              other factors." (emphasis added)

    (See also on administrative removal paragraph 400.)

21. Appendix FM (Family Members) stipulates that  it  is  to  apply  to  all
applications both  to  those  by  family  members  (as  defined  within  the
Appendix) and to those falling under Part 8 except as otherwise set  out  in
paragraphs A277-A280.  The ability of  Appendix  FM  to  govern  Part  8  is
effected by paragraph A278: "The requirements to be met under Part  8  after
9 July 2012 may be modified or supplemented by the requirements in  Appendix
FM".  The Appendix also contains  Section  GEN  which  expressly  identifies
that the purpose of the new FM "route":

      "... reflects how, under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, the
      balance will be struck between the right to respect  for  private  and
      family life and the legitimate aims of protecting  national  security,
      public safety and the economic well-being of the UK; the prevention of
      disorder and crime; the  protection  of  health  or  morals;  and  the
      protection of the rights and freedoms of others. It  also  takes  into
      account the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of  children  in
      the UK".

22. Complementing the "Family Member" ("FM") route, the new rules  create  a
"Private Life" route to long residence, and they likewise  make  this  route
subject to precise criteria related to residence, age,  extent  of  ties  to
the country of return, etc.

23. Whilst, by virtue of their setting out specific requirements  that  have
to be met in order for claims brought under  the  new  family  life  or  the
private life heads to succeed, it might be thought that the legal effect  of
these new rules is to provide  a  complete  code  for  assessing  Article  8
claims, we do not see that this is, or can be, the  case  for  a  number  of
reasons. First the new rules only  cover  Article  8  claims  brought  under
specific Parts of the rules.  For example, both Part 8 and the new  Appendix
FM (to which Part 11 on asylum cross-refers) only seek to  cover  all  those
seeking to enter or remain as family members  through  the  migration  route
and this is extended to applicants for asylum or humanitarian protection  by
Part 11 on Asylum. They do not include all those who seek to stay in the  UK
on  family  life  grounds.  Similarly,  the  new  private  life   provisions
modifying Part 7 only make provision  for  certain  types  of  private  life
claims and the private life exception insofar as  it  relates  to  offenders
only allows for specified categories of offenders to qualify. There  are  no
specific provisions in the new rules for those seeking  leave  to  enter  or
remain under Parts 1-6, much of Part 8 or  most  of  Part  9  (as  amended).
Thus, if a primary decision maker is deciding a claim brought under  Part  2
by a person seeking to enter or remain as  a  visitor  for  private  medical
treatment under paragraphs 51-56, and in that claim also raises  Article  8,
none of the new provisions appear to regulate how the Secretary of State  is
to assess such a claim,  although  the  new  Article  8-specific  provisions
might be thought to have analogous application.  Essentially  in  this  type
of case the primary decision-maker will still have  to  undertake  much  the
same type of two-stage process of assessment described earlier and to do  so
ungoverned by any Article 8 -  specific  criteria  set  out  in  the  rules.
Second, even within the routes they establish, the  new  provisions  clearly
do not seek to accommodate all possible types of Article 8 claims  based  on
family life or private life.  Thus, for example, the definition  of  "family
life" as contained in Appendix FM only provides a route to those who have  a
family life with a person who is settled in the UK,  a  British  citizen  or
has  limited  leave  as  a  refugee  or  person  in  need  of   humanitarian
protection: see GEN.1.1. It is also confined  to  applicants  who  are  here
lawfully: see R-LTRP.1.1. Only certain types of claims to private  life  are
covered by the new Private Life  route  for  long  residence.  Moreover,  by
strictly demarcating "family life" and "private life" heads of claim, it  is
not clear how the decision-maker is to consider in any individual  case  the
cumulative impact of these.

24. Thirdly, some of the rules (continue to) require the  decision-maker  to
act in accordance with  legal  norms  outside  the  rules  themselves.  Thus
paragraph 397 states that:

         "397. A deportation order will not be made if the person's  removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.  Where
         deportation would not be contrary to  these  obligations,  it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation is outweighed".


 (It is not entirely clear how this is to be reconciled with paragraph  398,
which sets out mandatory requirements that must be met by a person  claiming
their deportation would be contrary to the UK's  obligations  under  Article
8, unless paragraph 397 is taken to be addressing the wider  position  under
primary legislation).

25. The last example brings us to the fundamental reason why we  think  that
(whatever the intention) these rules cannot  be  construed  as  providing  a
complete code for Article 8 claims.  Primary  decision-makers  are  as  much
bound by s.6 of the HRA as judges are.   Further,  and  unsurprisingly,  the
new rules maintain the paragraph 2 obligation on primary decision-makers  to
act "in compliance with"  Article  8  (and  indeed  all  provisions  of  the
European Human Rights Convention).   And in relation to  deportation  cases,
even primary decision-makers remain obliged  by  the  terms  of  s.33(2)  to
consider whether deportation of a  foreign  criminal  "would  breach  (a)  a
person's Convention rights" and paragraphs  397  and  400  which  deal  with
deportation and administrative removal also refer  directly  to  obligations
under the European Human Rights Convention.


26. The Upper Tribunal and the higher courts can be expected  to  develop  a
fuller understanding of the new rules, but we must now  grapple  with  those
aspects having a potential bearing on this appeal.  It seems to us  in  this
regard that  several  features  are  of  particular  importance.  First,  as
already intimated, many of them mandate primary  decision-makers  to  assess
Article 8 claims according to certain criteria.  If the  specified  criteria
are not met, then an  application  must  be  refused:  see  e.g.  paragraphs
276BE, 276CE, 276DH (which relate to private  life),  and  paragraphs  A362,
397, 400  (which  relate  to  deportation  and  removal)  and  the  numerous
provisions dealing with partners, victims of  domestic  violence,  children,
parents and adult dependent relatives.  One consequence of the inclusion  of
these provisions is that  decision-makers  can  no  longer  proceed  on  the
assumption that Article 8 claims are  generally  to  be  dealt  with  wholly
outside the rules. On the contrary, the Article 8-specific rules have to  be
applied wherever they now apply.

27. A second important feature is that although (as was a feature under  the
old Part 8) several provisions of the new rules confer a discretion,  it  is
only a discretion to allow a claim if all mandatory  requirements  are  met.
For example, although paragraph 276ADE sets out  mandatory  requirements  to
be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the grounds of  private  life,
the decision as to whether  to  grant  leave  to  remain  is  discretionary:
"[l]imited leave ... may be granted ..." ( It would  appear  that  even  the
mandatory list of requirements  specified  in  paragraph  276ADE  imports  a
discretionary  element  when  there  has  been   refusal   of   an   earlier
application: this rule contains a closing sentence  which  presupposes  that
consideration  of  this  paragraph  entails  a   balancing   exercise:   "In
considering applications under this paragraph, the Secretary of State  shall
attach less weight to private life in the UK established  following  refusal
of  an  earlier  application  for  leave  to  remain  made  under  paragraph
276ADE").

28. It is also important to flag one thing the new rules do not do. Even  if
(contrary to our  understanding)  they  were  thought  to  furnish  a  near-
complete  code  for  dealing  with  Article  8  claims,  they  still   leave
considerable scope for individual assessment.  For  example,  in  specifying
that for certain categories there  is  an  exceptional  circumstances  test,
they still clearly contemplate that when applying this test  decision-makers
will have to conduct a  fact-sensitive  assessment  of  proportionality.  We
cannot see that they seek to prescribe the outcome of any particular case.

29. As to  whether  the  new  rules  embody  legislative  as  distinct  from
executive policy (see below),  we  see  nothing  in  principle  illegitimate
about the Secretary of State seeking to make specific provisions within  the
immigration rules as to how Article 8 claims are to  be  assessed.   We  are
told by Mr Ahluwalia that  there  may  be  challenges  brought  on  judicial
review against the new rules based on  arguments  alleging  that  reform  of
this kind is inherently  illegitimate.   Whether  that  is  so  is  not  our
concern.  However, so far as our own statutory functions are  concerned,  we
cannot see that the  mere  enterprise  of  establishing  Article  8-specific
rules can be criticised. The ECHR is based on the principle of  subsidiarity
and one of the legislative purposes of the HRA was to "bring  rights  home".
If there was nothing amiss in the UK Government introducing  specific  human
rights provisions in primary legislation (the HRA, s.84 of the 2002 Act  and
s.33(2) of the UK Borders Act 2007), we cannot see that  there  is  anything
amiss in publishing rules  relating  to  assessment  of  Article  8  claims.
Indeed (leaving aside for the moment whether they succeed  in  their  stated
aims) such steps would appear to promote the principles of  legal  certainty
and transparency.  "Consistency,  fairness  and  transparency  in  decision-
making" (see the Home Office statement  of  13  June  2012  cited  above  at
paragraph 13) are surely laudable objectives.


30. The remaining features of importance are best dealt with in the  context
of their particular relevance to judges.


The new rules and judges

31. Our essential task as judges is confined to  deciding  the  significance
of the new  rules  for  the  exercise  our  statutory  functions  under  the
Immigration Acts. We remind ourselves  (as  noted  earlier)  that  for  most
purposes the immigration rules have the force of  law,  see  Odelola  [2009]
UKHL 25, Pankina [2010] EWCA Civ 719.  Judges  must  give  legal  effect  to
them.  That must be as true of the new rules as of the old.

32. It might be thought that one could  deduce  from  the  proposition  that
immigration rules very often  have  the  force  of  law  the  position  that
insofar as the new rules regulate how Article 8 claims are to  be  assessed,
judges must apply them in the same way as primary decision-makers,  so  that
the old two-stage  assessment  (rules;  Article  8)  is  for  most  purposes
collapsed into a one-stage assessment (rules).  But  that  would  be  wrong.
The rules do not and cannot replace the law that is binding  upon  us.   Our
duties under primary legislation are no less than they were before.  We  are
still required by s.6  of  the  HRA  not  to  act  contrary  to  a  person's
Convention rights and by s.2 to take account  of  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.
We are still bound to reach decisions on specific human  rights  grounds  of
appeal under s.84 of the 2002 Act and s.33 of the UK Borders Act  2007.   We
are still required  to  consider  not  just  whether  (where  applicable)  a
decision is in accordance with the immigration rules  but  also  whether  to
allow an appeal under s.84(1)(c),(g) or indeed s.84(1)(e) of the  2002  Act:
see s.86(2).  For this reason  our  method  of  assessment  must  ordinarily
remain a two-stage one (rules; Article 8).

33. That is not to say that when the new rules apply the first stage of  the
assessment is the same as before.  Plainly now there are  some  rules  which
specify what requirements have to be met  in  order  for  the  Secretary  of
State to be satisfied a claim based on  Article  8  can  succeed  under  the
rules.  Whenever the new rules have application, we are obliged to  consider
whether an appellant can  show  he  meets  the  relevant  requirements:  see
s.86(3)(a).  Where the new rules afford some discretion, we are  obliged  to
consider whether that discretion  should  have  been  exercised  differently
(s.86(3)(b)).

34. However, what judges are doing when they are  conducting  this  exercise
is simply applying the rules: the rules are  the  rules:  see  paragraph  10
Mahad [2009] UKSC 16.  The fact that these rules in part refer expressly  to
Article 8 or to certain Article 8 concepts is incidental.  The fact that  as
a result of these changes the rules are longer and incorporate some  of  the
vocabulary of Article 8 makes no difference.

35. A corollary of the fact that the new rules often have the force  of  law
(see  above)  is  that  we  must  treat  its  requirements  of  "exceptional
circumstances"  and  "insurmountable  obstacles"  as  legal  tests.  If  the
requirement of "most exceptional compassionate circumstances" as set out  in
existing immigration rules dealing  with  dependent  relatives  is  a  legal
requirement, there is no logical  basis  for  saying  the  new  "exceptional
circumstances" criterion is any less of a legal requirement (albeit  it  may
be a somewhat nebulous one).

36. Equally, however, it is important to note that as these tests  arise  in
the new rules they are context-specific.  In particular it  would  be  wrong
to describe the new rules as imposing an exceptionality test in  all  cases.
Paragraph 398 makes clear that if a person meets the requirements of 399  or
399A, he succeeds without having to show exceptional circumstances.

37. Before, however, the judge can complete his  or  her  judicial  task  it
remains to assess whether the decision under the rules (if it  is  negative)
is contrary to the appellant's Convention rights and that remains  a  (stage
2)  question  that  must  be  asked  by   taking   account   of   Strasbourg
jurisprudence and, more importantly, domestic higher court authority  as  to
what that jurisprudence means.  Hence, if  the  application  under  the  new
rules of an "exceptional circumstances" (or an  "insurmountable  obstacles")
test results in an appellant losing under the rules, it is  still  incumbent
on us to ask whether that  is  consistent  with  his  Convention  rights  as
interpreted by our higher courts.  If, in an Article 8 case,  the  decision-
maker rejected the application under  the  new  rules,  having  applied  the
"insurmountable obstacles" test, but the applicant shows  that  family  life
cannot "reasonably" be continued abroad, then  our  duty  is  to  allow  the
appeal on human rights grounds.  We are  bound  by  higher  court  authority
that the proper test for Article 8  purposes  is  "reasonableness":  see  VW
(Uganda).  The fact that the Strasbourg Court's jurisprudence  continues  to
see "insurmountable obstacles" as a proper criterion  does  not  alter  this
fact.  As already noted, our duty is only  to  take  account  of  Strasbourg
jurisprudence and,  whether  the  former  might  be  thought  by  us  to  be
inconsistent with higher court precedent binding on us, matters not.

38. Whilst for the above reasons we consider that we are obliged by  primary
legislation to continue (ordinarily)  to  adopt  a  two-stage  approach,  we
acknowledge that in practice where  Article  8-specific  provisions  of  the
rules have application, the second stage assessment will  take  a  different
hue. It will now resemble that conducted under the rules  to  a  greater  or
lesser extent.  Clearly, if the  new  rules  perfectly  mirrored  Strasbourg
jurisprudence  as  interpreted  by  our  higher  courts,  the  second  stage
judicial exercise would largely cover the same  canvas.  The  difficulty  is
that the new rules do not obviously constitute a perfect mirror.  We do  not
seek in this decision to  gauge  the  extent  of  the  difference,  but  one
particular difference is of great importance  in  the  present  case.   This
relates to their methodology.  They do not  set  out  in  full  the  Boultif
criteria (Boultif v Switzerland, 54273/00; [2001] ECHR 497) as  restated  by
the Grand Chamber  in  Maslov  v  Austria  1683/03;  [2008]  ECHR  546  (see
Appendix A).  It is possible to read the new rules as encompassing  some  of
these criteria, but the decision-maker is not mandated or directed  to  take
all of them into account.

39. It may be argued that there is no reason to  think  that  the  decision-
maker applying the new rules would not have regard to such factors,  but  it
can be seen that  the  Article  8-specific  mandatory  requirements  do  not
include them and most of the discretionary provisions of the new rules  only
apply to those who meet the mandatory requirements (i.e. they do not  assist
if those requirements are not met).  We remind ourselves that the ECtHR  has
made clear that these criteria must be treated as  relevant  considerations.
For example, in Alim v Russia 39417/07, 27 Sept 2011  at  paragraph  80  the
First Section stated that the Maslov criteria "are meant to  facilitate  the
application of Article  8  in  expulsion  cases."  Our  higher  courts  have
agreed: see JO (Uganda) [2010] EWCA  Civ  10  (paragraph  21);  RS  (Uganda)
[2011] EWCA Civ 1749; albeit for one  caveat  see  D  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  39,
paragraph 32.

40. This impacts on the need for how any Article 8 assessment under the  new
rules  must  address  the  particular  circumstances  of   the   individual.
Obviously decision-makers applying the new Article 8-specific or Article  8-
related rules  consider  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  individual
applicant, but they are mandated to do this through the medium  of  specific
requirements.  Strasbourg jurisprudence, by contrast, does not  circumscribe
fact-sensitive  assessment  beyond  requiring  the  Maslov  criteria  to  be
treated as relevant considerations.  Thus the above quotation  from  Alim  v
Russia continues with the observation:

      "... the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  respective  criteria  will
      inevitably vary according to the specific circumstances of each case."

41. Our conclusion is that  the  need  for  a  two-stage  approach  in  most
Article 8 cases remains imperative  because  the  new  rules  do  not  fully
reflect Strasbourg jurisprudence as interpreted by our higher courts and  in
particular they do not encapsulate the Maslov criteria.

New rules and the public interest

42. There is, however, at least one  important  respect  in  which  the  new
rules affect the second-stage  Article  8  assessment.   Previously  judges'
understanding of the weight the Secretary of State attaches  to  the  public
interest side of the Article 8 balancing exercise had largely to be  gleaned
from the submissions of the Secretary of State in  leading  cases.   It  has
fallen very much to the judicial system to give it  form  and  content.   In
deportation cases involving foreign criminals s.32  of  the  2007  Act  gave
clear parliamentary expression to the particular  importance  the  Secretary
of  State  attached  to  their  deportation:  see  MK   (deportation-foreign
criminal-public interest) Gambia [2010] UKUT 281  (IAC);  AP  (Trinidad  and
Tobago) [2011] EWCA Civ 551 per Carnwath LJ; Gurung  v  Secretary  of  State
for  the  Home  Department  EWCA  Civ  62.  Now  more   generally,   greater
specificity is given in the new rules as to what circumstances are  seen  to
attract  the  greatest  weight  in  respect  of  the  public  interest;  the
Secretary of State has now  herself  told  us  what  factors  she  considers
relevant and what weight at the general  level  she  attaches  to  them.  In
particular, in the context of deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  the  new
rules set out thresholds of criminality (by reference to length of terms  of
imprisonment) so that the Article 8 private life claims brought  by  foreign
criminals can only succeed (unless there are exceptional  circumstances)  if
they not only have certain periods of residence  but  can  also  show  their
criminality has fallen below these thresholds.

43. That must and should properly inform our Article 8  assessment  made  in
compliance with our s.6 obligations under the HRA.   Whereas  previously  it
has been open to judges, within certain limits, to reach their own  view  of
what the public interest is and the weight to be attached to it,  the  scope
for doing so is now more limited.

44. From the above it  will  be  clear  what  we  think  is  new  about  the
immigration rules, but the degree  to  which  these  new  rules  change  our
interpretation of the "public interest" should  not  be  exaggerated.   Even
under the old rules it  has  never  been  legitimate  to  treat  the  public
interest in a narrow and restrictive fashion: see N (Kenya) [2004] EWCA  Civ
1094, OH (Serbia) [2008] EWCA Civ 694, UE (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 975.

45. Previous case law has held that a proportionality assessment  can  never
treat the public interest as immutable: see GS (Article 8,  public  interest
not a fixity) Serbia and Montenegro [2005] UKAIT  000121.  Whether  the  new
rules do now (at least in some contexts) treat  the  public  interest  as  a
fixity is a matter likely to need  addressing in future cases;  for  present
purposes it will suffice to observe that they certainly do (in  most  cases)
establish  an  exceptionality  threshold  for  the  public  interest  to  be
outweighed.

46. In considering whether  the new rules help  identify  the  Secretary  of
State's view of the public interest, Mr Ahluwalia has  asked  us  to  decide
whether they fully reflect the will of Parliament in much the same way  that
Carnwath LJ clearly thought the  new  automatic  deportation  provisions  of
the 2007 Act did. Mr Ahluwalia (without  demur  from  Mr  Deller)  submitted
that the negative resolution procedure in  use  for  the  immigration  rules
cannot  be  equated  with  debates  preceding   primary   legislation.    He
highlighted Lord Bingham's statement in Huang at  paragraph  17  that  there
was a sharp contrast between housing legislation, which was the  product  of
close parliamentary debate and discussion with the  competing  interests  of
landlords and tenants  being  fully  represented,   and  the  way  in  which
changes in the immigration rules are made.

47. We do not consider we need to address this  issue  because,  whether  or
not the rules do fully reflect the will of Parliament, they are certainly  a
statement of executive policy: as Lord  Brown  stated  at  paragraph  34  of
Odelola "... as Mr Ockelton put it in the  Tribunal's  decision  here,  'the
immigration rules are essentially executive, not  legislative'".   And  even
just as statements of executive policy they now include greater  delineation
of what the Home Secretary considers to be in the public interest.

48. Thus in our view provisions in the new  rules  dealing  with  Article  8
claims have two functions:

    (a)     They create new provisions which must be  given  legal  effect,
        although it is left  as  a  matter  for  the  tribunal  and  courts
        whether their application is  contrary  to  a  person's  Article  8
        rights; and


    (b)     They operate to enhance judicial understanding of  the  "public
        interest" side of the scales.


The appellant's appeal

49. This appeal is brought by the appellant against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal (FtT) consisting of Judge Elek and Mrs J  Holt  who  dismissed
his appeal against a decision by the respondent  on  28  October  2010  that
s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies.  In a decision of 10  July  2012
the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Reeds) found, with the concurrence of Mr Deller, that the FtT had  erred  in
law in its evaluation of the findings of fact  it  made  for  the  following
reasons:


        a. It had failed to consider whether ss.32 & 33 of the  UK  Borders
           Act 2007 are incompatible  with  Article  20  TFEU:  the  Treaty
           precludes national measures that have the  effect  of  depriving
           Union Citizens and their family members of the enjoyment of  the
           substance of their rights.
        b. It had failed to give consideration as a  primary  consideration
           to the best interests of the  child  and  failed  to  adequately
           consider the effect of deportation on the step daughter or  that
           she was a British citizen.
        c. It had failed to consider the OASys report.
        d. It  had  inadequately  considered  the  proportionality  of  the
           deportation of the appellant as regards his spouse.
        e. It  had  incorrectly  considered  family  and  private  life  as
           discrete elements with separate conclusions.

50. The decision as regards the findings with regard to Article  8  was  set
aside (there being no challenge to the findings of the Tribunal  as  regards
the decision to dismiss the appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or
Article 3 grounds). It was specified that the factual findings of the First-
tier Tribunal were to form the basis of the resumed hearing.


51. The appellant arrived in the  UK  from  Nigeria  in  March  1998  as  an
illegal entrant.  Although he claims he tried applying for  asylum  earlier,
there is no record of his doing so until September  2006.   On  20  November
2009 he was convicted of handling stolen goods, possession and/or use  of  a
false instrument for which he was sentenced to 18 months.  He committed  all
his offences between late October and late  November  2005.   Prior  to  his
conviction the appellant obtained (on 6  February  2009)  a  certificate  of
approval to marry and on 28  March  2009  he  married  SB.   She,  like  her
daughter F, born 11 August 1996, is a British citizen.

52. On 29 June he applied for leave to remain on the basis of his  marriage.
 On 22 March and again on 9 September 2010 (after another such  application)
the Secretary of State responded negatively.  On 28 October 2010 she made  a
deportation order under s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

53. We heard  extremely  helpful  submissions  from  both  advocates.   Both
confirmed that no issue was taken with the adverse finding of  fact  on  the
appellant's asylum-related claims made by the FtT.  Article 8 was stated  to
be the sole ground.

54. Mr Ahluwalia pointed out that the  FtT  did  not  dispute  the  evidence
given at the hearing from the appellant, his wife S and  his  mother-in-law,
Mrs VC.  Their evidence was that the couple  had  begun  a  relationship  in
February 2008 and they have lived together since their marriage.  Mr  Deller
did not seek to challenge the further updating given in  witness  statements
of their family situation since the hearing before the FtT in January  2011.
 That updating noted that the couple continued to  live  together  and  that
the appellant had assumed the role of Mrs VC's carer.   Quite  recently  Mrs
VC's husband, Mr GC,  a  British  citizen  who  had  previously  resided  in
Jamaica, had returned to the UK.  He required kidney  dialysis  daily.   The
appellant had also become an integral part of his care.

55. Mr Deller confirmed at the hearing that it was the Secretary of  State's
position that the appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  fell  to  be
considered  under  the  new  immigration  rules,  notwithstanding  that  the
deportation order was made nearly two years ago (on 28 October  2010).   New
paragraph A362 reads:

      "A362.      Where Article 8 is raised in the  context  of  deportation
            under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under  Article  8  will
            only succeed where the requirements of these rules as at 9 July
            2012 are met, regardless of when the  notice  of  intention  to
            deport or the deportation order, as appropriate, was served."

56. Mr Deller also said that whether considered under the  old  or  the  new
rules, the respondent no longer wished to argue that it would  be  a  viable
option for the appellant's wife and daughter to relocate to Nigeria  and  in
that way maintain family life ties with the appellant.  The  combination  of
her working commitments, her daughter's  schooling,  the  need  for  her  to
ensure proper care of her mother and  father  and  her  and  her  daughter's
British  citizenship,  amounted  to  insurmountable  obstacles  making  that
option unreasonable.

57. Mr Ahluwalia conceded that if the new  rules  did  apply  the  appellant
would only succeed if he could  show  that  his  case  involved  exceptional
circumstances.  The appellant could not come within paragraph  399  because,
even though he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with F; and  F  had
lived in the UK  for  over  7  years;  and  it  would  not  be  sensible  or
reasonable to expect F to leave the UK, the appellant  could  not  meet  the
requirement set out at paragraph 399(b) namely "there  is  no  other  family
member who is able to care for the child in the UK".   Hence  his  case  was
governed by paragraph 398 which in its final sentence specified that:


      "... the Secretary of State in assessing  [a  claim  that  deportation
      would violate Article 8] will consider whether paragraph 399  or  399A
      applies  and,  if  it  does  not,  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
      circumstances that the public interest in maintaining the  deportation
      order will be outweighed by other factors." (emphasis added)

Retrospectivity

58. Mr Ahluwalia urged us to find that  the  provisions  of  the  new  rules
relating to  deportation,  A362  in  particular,  are  inapplicable  to  the
appellant's appeal because (i) the deportation order was signed  almost  two
years ago, before any plans were  made  for  the  introduction  of  the  new
rules; (ii) a fortiori the reasons for refusal letter makes no reference  to
the new criteria; (iii) there has been no new reasons for refusal letter  by
the respondent; (iv) "it seems particularly unfair that A  is  subjected  to
the new rules given that his appeal was heard 18 months  ago  on  24.1.2011"
and that, had the FtT not erred in law, then  his  appeal  would  have  been
dealt with under the old rules.

59. We do not find the arguments on this issue  all  one  way.   In  Odelola
(FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (Respondent)
[2009] UKHL 25 it was held that, unless specified to the  contrary,  changes
in the immigration rules "take effect whenever they say they  take  effect."
(Lord Brown paragraph 39, see also Lord Hope, paragraph 7); see also  R  (on
the application of Munir and Anor) v the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2012] UKSC 32.  Even though their Lordships in Odelola were  not
agreed as to whether the  common  law  presumption  against  retrospectivity
applied to the immigration rules, all agreed that the central issue was  the
fairness  of  retroactive  changes,  and  that  to  decide  fairness  it  is
necessary to have regard to a range of  factors,  including  the  extent  to
which the value of the rights which the appellant had under the old  law  or
rules is now diminished to any significant extent.   If  one  applied  these
dicta in the abstract to the context of the  new  rules  on  deportation  in
relation  to  the  appellant,  it  is  difficult  to  see  any   significant
diminution of the appellant's rights.  At the time of the  decision  he  was
already subject to s.32(5) of the 2007 Act so that  there  was  a  statutory
presumption that his continued presence was  not  conducive  to  the  public
good.  Further, for reasons given already, we do not consider that  the  new
rules can be exhaustive of the issue of whether the  deportation  order  was
contrary to a person's  Article  8  rights.   Judges  have  to  decide  that
question by applying existing Strasbourg  jurisprudence  as  interpreted  by
the higher courts.  Under both the pre-9 July 2012 rules (which  would  have
applied if no error of law being found) and the new rules, he  was  entitled
to the protection afforded to him by s.6 of the Human Rights  Act  which  we
as judges must always accord.

60. However, whilst for reasons which will become clear  the  issue  is  not
material to the outcome of this case, we think that  the  arguments  against
treating A362 as having retrospective effect carry more weight.  In  Odelola
their Lordships were concerned with decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State
made under the rules in force on or  after  that  date.  The  case  did  not
establish that new rules are capable of governing appeals heard  after  that
date in respect of decisions taken before it. Since the  new  rules  concern
how the Secretary of State decides claims, it would need  very  clear  words
to show that A362 was intended to bind courts and tribunals hearing  appeals
against decisions that were made and appealed before A362 came  into  force.
The wording of the  new  rule  (which  refers  to  "...when  the  notice  of
intention to deport or deportation order, as appropriate,  was  served")  is
not  couched in language one would expect if its  retrospective  effect  was
as contended for by Mr Deller; it does not say, for example, "regardless  of
when the decision was made". We remind ourselves that when  s.  85A  of  the
2002 Act was brought into force, the  drafters  decided  that  an  elaborate
transitional provision was needed, as regards the effect of that section  on
current appeals: see Alam [2012] EWCA Civ 960. If one  of  the  purposes  of
A362 is to regulate appeals against  decisions  taken  long  before  9  July
2012, it is difficult to see that this is within the scope of  the  enabling
power to make rules under s.3(2) of the Immigration Act  1971.  Further,  If
Mr Deller were right then,  if the FtT when  hearing  this  appeal  had  not
been found to have erred in law, its  determination  would  have  been  (and
could only have been) made under the old rules, yet solely because an  error
of law has been found, it would transmogrify  into  a  case  under  the  new
rules. For these reasons we are not persuaded that the new  rules  apply  to
the decision under appeal in this case. However, in case  we  are  wrong  in
that conclusion we shall proceed to address the situation of  the  appellant
under the new rules.

The appellant's case under the new rules: our assessment

61. Mr Ahluwalia's secondary submission was that if the new rules did  apply
then we should find that  the  appellant's  claim  did  involve  exceptional
circumstances under the Article 8-related provisions of  the  rules  dealing
with deportation and removal.

62. It seems to  us  that  two  features  of  the  new  rules  dealing  with
deportation  are  of  signal  importance.  First,  they   start   from   the
presumption that  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  is  that  the  person's
deportation is deemed to be conducive to  the  public  good  (see  paragraph
396), proceed to identify certain  limited  categories  of  person  who  may
nevertheless  be  entitled  to  limited  leave  subject  to  their   meeting
stringent requirements (set out at paragraphs  399,  399A)  and  then  state
that for the rest they  can  only  succeed  if  they  can  show  exceptional
circumstances. Second  (and  perhaps  curiously),  beyond  stipulating  that
someone  in   the   appellant's   situation   must   establish   exceptional
circumstances (because he was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at
least twelve months), the new rules tell  us  very  little  else  about  the
factors the  Secretary  of  State  considers  should  inform  the  balancing
exercise governed by this criterion. Paragraph 399A might be  said  to  have
analogical bearing, although strictly speaking it relates only to those  who
(unlike the appellant) are able to meet the requirements of  paragraphs  399
or 399A.  But even considered purely by analogy, they do not on  their  face
greatly assist the appellant because he has not "lived continuously  in  the
UK for at least 20 years"; he is not "aged under 25"; he has been  found  to
have family in Nigeria; and even if he was taken to have  no  "family"  ties
(as he has claimed in a recent witness statement)  it  cannot  seriously  be
contended that he has "no ties (including social, cultural or  family)  with
the country to which he would have to go [Nigeria] if required to leave  the
UK" (emphasis added).  These two  features  already  tilt  the  scales  very
heavily against  a  person  such  as  the  appellant  seeking  to  resist  a
deportation order on Article 8 grounds within the new rules.

63. We are aware that the  recent  IDIs  and  now  the  Modernised  Guidance
contain sections  on  how  caseworkers  are  to  decide  whether  there  are
"exceptional circumstances". We did not have submissions  on  these  but  in
any event we do not think that higher court authority permits  us  to  treat
them as a gloss on the meaning  of  the  term  within  the  new  rules:  see
paragraph 18 above. If these (or any other sections) were to be adjudged  to
contain more generous provisions than the rules, then issues  may  arise  as
to legitimate expectation and policy, but neither party has  suggested  that
is the case here.

64. Although the actual factual matrix for this appellant may  be  described
as unique, its context is not: the appellant  was  an  illegal  entrant  who
after  arriving  in  the  UK  became  involved  in  a  stable  relationship,
committed a crime for which he was imprisoned for  over  12  months  and  is
liable to deportation as a foreign criminal. That  his  family  members  may
suffer is part of the matrix that occurs in many such cases. In  this  case,
had we found paragraph A362 to have retrospective effect so that it  applied
to the decision under appeal in this case,  our  decision  would  have  been
that  the  appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  his   circumstances   are
exceptional and so he does not meet the requirements of the  new  rules.  We
are against Mr Ahluwalia on this matter. We would add that Mr Ahluwalia  did
not seek to argue  that  the  appellant  stood  to  succeed  under  the  old
immigration rules[3].

Article 8 judicial assessment

65. We next consider whether even though the appellant  is  not  subject  to
the new  rules,  he  can  succeed  in  establishing  that  he  falls  within
Exception 1 as set out in s.33 of the 2007  Act,  either  on  the  basis  of
s.84(1)(c) or (g) (which respectively prohibit action contrary to the  Human
Rights Act and removal in consequence of the  immigration  decision)  or  on
the basis of s.84(1)(e) ("otherwise not in accordance with the law"),  which
must also encompass acts contrary to the Human Rights Act.   In  considering
this ground we are bound by decisions of  the  higher  courts.   As  already
noted, higher court authority on  Article  8  in  the  deportation/expulsion
context does not impose a  legal  test  of  exceptional  circumstances.  The
higher courts have also made clear that in the context of deportation  cases
the principles set out by the Grand Chamber of the ECtHR in  Maslov  are  to
be taken as binding on us: see above paragraph 39 (it  is  for  that  reason
that we copy the Tribunal decision in Sanade in attaching relevant  extracts
from Maslov to our decision).

66. Mr Ahluwalia's argument as to  the  appellant's  Article  8  grounds  is
essentially as follows:

       i. It is not in dispute that the appellant has both "family life" and
          "private life" within the meaning of Article  8(1).   Further,  in
          respect of both heads his  claim  has  a  strong  factual  content
          supporting this.


      ii. The appellant's family life with  SB  had  commenced  in  February
          2008.  The respondent had granted them permission to marry.   They
          have been married since March 2009; they have lived together since
          marriage.  When in prison the appellant  received  regular  visits
          from his wife and mother in law and kept regular  contact  through
          telephone calls, letters and cards.  Over a period of  five  years
          the appellant has developed a close relationship with F and he  is
          like a father to her (she  has  no  contact  with  her  biological
          father).  She kept in email contact when he  was  in  prison.   He
          helps her with her education.  He also assists with  the  care  of
          his mother in law, taking her to the hospital and  doctor  (he  is
          her primary daytime carer whilst his wife is  out  at  work).   He
          also helps with  his  father  in  law's  care,  attending  to  his
          personal care, with daily dialysis and needs.


     iii. As regards private life, the appellant has now been in the UK over
          fourteen years.  He arrived illegally when  still  a  minor  (aged
          17).  He has been here nearly half his life.  Since  his  offences
          committed in 2005 he has sought to better himself through  studies
          at Newton College and Birkbeck University where  he  is  presently
          doing a BSc degree in Financial Economics with Accounting.   Prior
          to the offences he committed in 2005 he was of good character  and
          had no previous offences.  His offences took place  over  a  short
          period of time.  He was not a principal  in  the  index  offences.
          Despite his tax credit  offences  attracting  a  possible  maximum
          sentence of fourteen years, he was only given fifteen months (plus
          3  months  for  a  passport  offence).    There   was   no   court
          recommendation for deportation.  He has  not  re-offended.   OASys
          has confirmed him as at a low risk of re-offending and  at  a  low
          risk to members of the public.  His prison behaviour was exemplary
          and he used his time there constructively as a mentor and  gaining
          various certificates.  He has been released without  the  need  to
          refer him to a MAPPA.


      iv. It is not in dispute that the deportation decision amounts  to  an
          interference with his right to respect for his private and  family
          life.


       v. It is clear from the previous summary that his family and  private
          life have a strong positive factual content.  Given that Mr Deller
          has conceded that in the appellant's case it was not reasonable to
          expect his wife or daughter to relocate with him, the  sole  issue
          was  whether  his  criminality  and  immigration  wrongdoing  were
          serious   enough   to   make   his   deportation    proportionate,
          notwithstanding the fact that it would severely limit  the  family
          life he presently enjoyed with  his  wife  and  her  family.   His
          presence in the UK was positively contributing to the ongoing care
          of his wife's parents, both of whom had serious  health  problems.
          Of  particular  importance  was  the  adverse  impact   that   the
          appellant's deportation would have on the welfare of  F  for  whom
          the respondent accepted that it would not be reasonable to  expect
          her to move to Nigeria.  Now 16, she was involved in vital  exams;
          she has just begun her Level 1 NVQ in  Applied  Science.   Lacking
          contact with her natural father, the appellant has become  her  de
          facto father.   The  appellant's  absence  would  result  in  more
          pressure upon her, together with her  mother,  to  assist  in  her
          grandparents'  care  needs;  her  high  degree  of  trust  in  the
          appellant is shown by the fact that she allows  him  to  accompany
          her to hospital appointments (she requires  treatment  for  spinal
          curvature requiring her to wear a brace).


67. There is one further matter which was identified by  the  Tribunal  when
granting permission and by Mr Ahluwalia in  his  submissions.   It  concerns
the relevance to the appellant's case of  the  fact  that  F  is  a  British
citizen and it was contended by Mr Ahluwalia  that  (i)  although  F  was  a
stepchild, she would be treated for EU  law  purposes  as  a  child  of  the
appellant; (ii) as such, the appellant was entitled to be  considered  under
Exception 4 (s.33(4) of the 2007 Act: "where  the  removal  of  the  foreign
criminal from the United Kingdom in pursuance of a deportation  order  would
breach rights of the foreign criminal under the Community treaties") and  he
was entitled to pray in aid the principles established by the CJEU  in  Case
C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano [2011] EUECJ; Case C-256/11 Murat Dereci [2011]  EUECJ
and by the Upper Tribunal in Sanade and others (British children -  Zambrano
- Dereci) [2011] UKUT 48 (IAC).

Article 8: our assessment

68.  We have already found that the  appellant's  claim  could  not  succeed
under the old or new rules (even  assuming  the  latter  have  retrospective
effect, which we have rejected),  but  that  it  remains  for  us,  applying
Strasbourg jurisprudence as interpreted by  our  higher  courts,  to  decide
whether  his  deportation  would  be  a  proportionate  measure  such   that
Exception 1 under s.33 of the UK Borders Act 2007 did not apply.  It is  not
in dispute that the appellant has private as well as  family  life  ties  in
the UK although the weight to be attached to those is  somewhat  reduced  by
the fact that they have built up whilst  his  immigration  status  here  has
been precarious: see JO (Uganda) and JT (Ivory Coast) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  10.
It is accepted that  the  deportation  decision  against  which  he  appeals
constitutes an interference with  his  right  to  respect  for  private  and
family life. It is uncontentious that the decision  is  in  accordance  with
the law within the meaning of Article 8(2).

69. Turning to proportionality, we have to consider both  the  private  life
and family life elements of his Article 8  claim  cumulatively.  Given  that
the appellant's family includes a child (F) we have also to ensure  that  we
conduct a distinct best interests of the child assessment  as  part  of  the
proportionality assessment: see MK  (best  interests  of  the  child)  India
[2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC).

70. In our judgement, the reasons weighing  in  favour  of  the  appellant's
deportation  bear  considerable  weight.  For  reasons  already  given,   we
consider  that,  separately  from  their  own  scope  of  application   (and
irrespective  of  whether  they  have  retrospective  effect)  ,   the   new
immigration rules are evidence that the Secretary of  State  has  sought  to
address the failure of the previous immigration  rules  to  incorporate  any
consideration of proportionality under Article  8;  and  they  are  also  an
index of the enhanced importance the Secretary  of  State  attaches  to  the
public  interest  in  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   The   appellant
received a sentence of over 12 months.  That  he  has  failed  to  meet  the
requirements of the new rules is a very significant  consideration  and  the
reasons why he has been found to fail are also relevant when conducting  our
proportionality assessment. Despite Mr Ahluwalia's attempt to  mitigate  the
seriousness of the  offences,  the  sentencing  judge  was  clear  that  the
appellant knew the extent of the fraud he was involved in and  his  passport
offence was a means to perpetration of his fraud.  It is also of  importance
that, quite separately from his criminal wrongdoing, the  appellant  has  an
extremely bad immigration history.  He arrived in  the  UK  in  1998  as  an
illegal entrant.  It was only after he had been  apprehended  in  connection
with his tax credit fraud that he claimed asylum (in 2006)  and  that  claim
was found to be untrue.  Hence in his case there  are  two,  not  just  one,
strong public interest reasons in favour of his deportation.

71. Further, his immigration wrongdoing cannot be divorced from the case  he
makes in respect of his family and private life.  All of the  personal  ties
he now relies on were formed in full knowledge that his  immigration  status
was precarious and that is a factor which Strasbourg  and  UK  jurisprudence
consistently treats as of relevance in assessing the weight to  be  attached
to those ties.  Had he left the UK when he was required to,  none  of  those
ties would have formed.  On the other hand, the Secretary of  State's  delay
of some four years in making a decision  on  the  appellant's  asylum  claim
does  weaken  to  some  extent  her  claim  to  now  find  his   deportation
imperative.

72. The combination of the appellant's conviction for criminal offences  and
eighteen months' sentence, coupled with his lengthy history  of  immigration
offending, are strong reasons in favour of his deportation.  We are  obliged
of course, by the Maslov criteria to treat as a relevant factor the  evident
fact that he has not  re-offended  for  nearly  seven  years  and  has  been
assessed as at a low risk of re-offending and as a low risk  to  members  of
the public.  But it remains that he is someone who  is  a  foreign  criminal
under s.32(5) of the 2007 Act.  At the same time, Mr Deller conceded at  the
outset of the hearing that by virtue of  the  family  circumstances  of  the
appellant's spouse, a British citizen, and the  welfare  of  her  child,  F,
also a British citizen, it would not be reasonable to expect  her  or  F  to
relocate  to  Nigeria.   Doubtless  Mr  Deller's  concession  reflected  the
concession the Secretary of State had also made in the case of Sanade.

73. In this regard we would note that we have not found it necessary in  the
event to consider whether the appellant  was  entitled  to  succeed  on  the
basis of Exception 3 of s.33 of the 2007 Act by virtue  of  having  a  child
who was a British citizen and whose right to substantial  enjoyment  of  her
rights  as  a  Union  citizen  would  be  significantly  impaired   by   the
appellant's deportation. (We note  that  Mr  Deller's  contention  that  the
appellant did not have any EU rights was not based on the fact  that  F  was
only a stepchild - he did not  dispute  Mr  Ahluwalia's  submission  that  F
being only the appellant's stepchild made no difference to  the  application
of Zambrano and Dereci principles  and  Sanade  principles.  His  objections
were based on other arguments.)

74. By virtue of Mr Deller's concession that relocation of  the  appellant's
wife  and  stepchild  is  not  a  reasonable  option,  the  scope   of   our
proportionality assessment is somewhat limited.  We  are  left  to  consider
only whether it would  be  proportionate  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
undertake a deportation that would result in separating the  appellant  from
his family for a very long time, except for visits by them  to  Nigeria  and
indirect forms of communication.

75. When deciding that the FtT had erred in law, the  Upper  Tribunal  ruled
that its findings of fact could nevertheless be preserved and at  paragraphs
21-22 the FtT found the appellant still had family in Nigeria.   Despite  Mr
Ahluwalia's submissions to the contrary, we see no good  reason  to  revisit
that finding  and  hence  we  consider  that  if  returned  to  Nigeria  the
appellant would be able to resume ties with  family  members  there.   Given
that he is a mature adult, we do not in any event consider that the lack  of
such ties is a significant factor.

76. In our view the appellant, notwithstanding creditable efforts to  better
himself through further education, his evident dedication to his  wife,  her
daughter F and parents remains someone who is  a  foreign  criminal  with  a
poor immigration history.  Be  that  as  it  may,  we  cannot  overlook  the
importance in this case of the human rights of these family  members,  F  in
particular.

77. We take into account that the appellant's wife, S, has worked  for  many
years as support  worker  caring  for  people  with  learning  difficulties,
mental health problems and disabled people although she  has  recently  been
doing agency work to allow her to  better  balance  her  work  and  domestic
responsibilities.  However, given the relatively short duration of  her  tie
with the appellant  and  the  fact  that  both  knew  from  the  outset  the
appellant's immigration status was precarious (a distinct factor  identified
in Maslov paragraph 57) and the fact that there would at least be scope  for
limited contact in the context of her visiting Nigeria, we do  not  consider
that in terms of their relationship the  appellant's  deportation  would  be
disproportionate.

78. Nor do we consider that the appellant's  current  care  for  his  wife's
parents strengthens his case significantly, because we  are  satisfied  that
in his absence other arrangements could be made with the help of social  and
health services and the appellant's wife's  agency  work  affords  her  more
flexibility  to  attend  to  their  needs  than  would  have  been  possible
previously.  (We do however accept that care by social and  health  services
would not be considered by those parents as supportive and helpful  as  that
received from the appellant who assists in emotional wellbeing  as  well  as
mere physical care.)

79. We cannot, however, reach the same conclusion in relation  to  the  best
interests of F. By s. 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
2009, we are obliged, of course, to treat the best interests  of  the  child
as a primary consideration.  We weigh against the appellant's case  that  it
was not until F was around 13 years old that he became involved in her  life
and so his role as a de facto father must not be  exaggerated  in  terms  of
her history.   But  for  a  child,  especially  one  who  has  not  had  any
involvement with her birth father for some considerable  time,  the  present
is much more important than the past.  In our view, a key document  in  this
case is the very recent report dated  15  September  2012  from  independent
social worker, Peter Horrocks giving his assessment of the importance  to  F
of her relationship with the appellant.  We know from the evidence  (see  in
particular her statement of 7 September 2012) that F herself  has  said  she
regards the appellant as her de facto father and it seems to  us  that  this
recent report, paragraphs 4.8-4.9 in  particular,  corroborates  this  fact.
This report also emphasises the pressure she  would  come  under  to  devote
time to helping with the care of her  two  maternal  grandparents,  both  of
whom have significant care needs.

80. It is our task as judges to seek, pursuant to our duty under s.6 of  the
HRA, to strike a fair balance.  In considering the many factors in  play  in
this case, we attach very significant weight to the serious  view  taken  by
the respondent of the appellant's criminality and poor  immigration  history
(albeit, applying  the  Maslov  criteria,  it  is  clear  that  he  has  not
reoffended for nearly 7 years and he has been assessed as being at low  risk
of re-offending). However, as against that we are confronted with a case  in
which the respondent has conceded that it would not be reasonable to  expect
his wife and daughter to accompany him  to  Nigeria  to  live  as  a  family
there. The case is also one in which the best interests  of  the  child,  F,
are to have a de facto father as she grows up. Weighing all the evidence  in
the balance, we are satisfied that that it would  not  be  proportionate  in
2012  to  deport  the  appellant.   It  almost  certainly  would  have  been
proportionate  for  her  to  have  done  so  in  earlier  years  before  the
appellant's relationship with F became established, but, as  noted  earlier,
the Secretary of State did not actively pursue the  appellant's  deportation
earlier which she could  have  done  if  his  asylum  application  had  been
timeously processed.

81. For the above reasons:

    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and  its  decision  has  been  set
         aside.


    The decision we re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal on Article 8
         grounds.




Signed


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
Immigration and Asylum Chamber































                                  Appendix


Extracts from Maslov v Austria (1683/03); [2008] ECHR 546

"(a)        General principles

    68.    The main issue to be determined is whether the  interference was
         "necessary in a democratic society". The fundamental principles  in
         that regard are well established in the Court's case-law  and  have
         recently been summarised as follows (see ner, cited above,   54-
         55 and 57-58):


             "54.  The Court reaffirms at  the  outset  that  a  State  is
                  entitled, as a matter of international law and subject  to
                  its treaty obligations, to control  the  entry  of  aliens
                  into its territory and their residence there  (see,  among
                  many other authorities, Abdulaziz, Cabales and  Balkandali
                  v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 28 May 1985,  Series  A
                  no. 94, p. 34,  67, Boujlifa v. France,  judgment  of  21
                  October 1997, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1997 VI,
                  p. 2264,  42). The  Convention  does  not  guarantee  the
                  right of an alien to enter or to reside  in  a  particular
                  country and, in pursuance of  their  task  of  maintaining
                  public order, Contracting States have the power  to  expel
                  an alien convicted of criminal  offences.  However,  their
                  decisions in this field  must,  in  so  far  as  they  may
                  interfere with a right  protected  under  paragraph  1  of
                  Article 8, be in accordance with the law and necessary  in
                  a democratic society,  that  is  to  say  justified  by  a
                  pressing social need and, in particular, proportionate  to
                  the legitimate aim pursued (see Dalia v. France,  judgment
                  of 19 February 1998, Reports 1998-I, p. 91,  52;  Mehemi
                  v. France, judgment of 26 September 1997, Reports 1997-VI,
                  p. 1971,  34; Boultif v. Switzerland, cited above,   46;
                  and Slivenko v. Latvia [GC], no. 48321/99, ECHR 2003-X, 
                  113).


             55.       The Court  considers  that  these  principles  apply
                  regardless of whether an alien entered the host country as
                  an adult or at a very young age, or was perhaps even  born
                  there. In this context the Court refers to  Recommendation
                  1504 (2001) on the non expulsion of long-term immigrants,
                  in which the Parliamentary  Assembly  of  the  Council  of
                  Europe recommended that the Committee of Ministers  invite
                  member States, inter alia,  to  guarantee  that  long-term
                  migrants who were born  or  raised  in  the  host  country
                  cannot be expelled under any circumstances (see  paragraph
                  37 above). While  a  number  of  Contracting  States  have
                  enacted legislation or adopted policy rules to the  effect
                  that long-term immigrants who were born in those States or
                  who  arrived  there  during  early  childhood  cannot   be
                  expelled on  the  basis  of  their  criminal  record  (see
                  paragraph 39 above), such an  absolute  right  not  to  be
                  expelled cannot, however, be derived from Article 8 of the
                  Convention, couched, as paragraph 2 of that provision  is,
                  in terms which clearly allow for exceptions to be made  to
                  the general rights guaranteed in the first paragraph.


             ...


             57.       Even  if  Article  8  of  the  Convention  does  not
                  therefore contain an absolute right for  any  category  of
                  alien not to be  expelled,  the  Court's  case law  amply
                  demonstrates  that  there  are  circumstances  where   the
                  expulsion of an alien will give rise  to  a  violation  of
                  that  provision  (see,  for  example,  the  judgments   in
                  Moustaquim v. Belgium, Beldjoudi v. France and Boultif  v.
                  Switzerland, cited above; see also Amrollahi  v.  Denmark,
                  no.  56811/00,  11  July  2002;  Y?lmaz  v.  Germany,  no.
                  52853/99, 17 April 2003; and Keles v.  Germany,  32231/02,
                  27 October  2005).  In  the  case  of  Boultif  the  Court
                  elaborated the relevant criteria which  it  would  use  in
                  order to assess whether an expulsion measure was necessary
                  in  a  democratic  society  and   proportionate   to   the
                  legitimate aim pursued. These criteria, as  reproduced  in
                  paragraph 40 of the Chamber judgment in the present case,
                  are the following:


                  -    the nature and seriousness of the  offence  committed
                      by the applicant;


                  -    the length of the applicant's  stay  in  the  country
                      from which he or she is to be expelled;


                  -    the time elapsed since the offence was committed  and
                      the applicant's conduct during that period;


                  -    the nationalities of the various persons concerned;


                  -    the applicant's family situation, such as the  length
                      of the marriage, and  other  factors  expressing  the
                      effectiveness of a couple's family life;


                  -    whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time
                      when he or she entered into a family relationship;


                  -    whether there are children of the  marriage,  and  if
                      so, their age; and


                  -    the seriousness of the difficulties which the  spouse
                      is likely to encounter in the country  to  which  the
                      applicant is to be expelled.


            58. The Court would wish to make explicit  two  criteria  which
                may already be implicit in those identified in the  Boultif
                judgment:


                  -    the best interests and well-being of the children, in
                      particular the seriousness of the difficulties  which
                      any children of the applicant are likely to encounter
                      in the country  to  which  the  applicant  is  to  be
                      expelled; and


                  -    the solidity of social, cultural and family ties with
                      the host country and with the country of destination.


                 As to the first  point,  the  Court  notes  that  this  is
                  already reflected in  its  existing  case  law  (see,  for
                  example, ?en v. the Netherlands, no. 31465/96,    40,  21
                  December   2001,   Tuquabo-Tekle   and   Others   v.   the
                  Netherlands, no. 60665/00,  47, 1 December 2005)  and  is
                  in line with the Committee  of  Ministers'  Recommendation
                  Rec(2002)4 on the legal status  of  persons  admitted  for
                  family reunification (see paragraph 38 above).


                 As to the second point, it is to be noted  that,  although
                  the applicant in the case of Boultif was already an  adult
                  when he  entered  Switzerland,  the  Court  has  held  the
                  'Boultif criteria' to apply all the more so ( plus  forte
                  raison) to cases concerning applicants who  were  born  in
                  the host country or who moved there at an early  age  (see
                  Mokrani v. France, no. 52206/99,    31,  15  July  2003).
                  Indeed, the rationale behind  making  the  duration  of  a
                  person's stay in the host country one of the  elements  to
                  be taken into account lies  in  the  assumption  that  the
                  longer a person has been residing in a particular  country
                  the stronger his or her ties with  that  country  and  the
                  weaker the ties with the country of his or her nationality
                  will be. Seen against that background, it is  self-evident
                  that the Court will have regard to the  special  situation
                  of aliens who have spent most, if not all, their childhood
                  in the host country, were brought up  there  and  received
                  their education there."


    69.    In the ner judgment, as well as in the Boultif judgment (  48)
         cited above, the Court has taken care to establish the  criteria  -
         which were so far implicit in its case-law -  to  be  applied  when
         assessing whether an expulsion measure is necessary in a democratic
         society and proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued.


    70.    The Court would stress that while the criteria which emerge from
         its case-law and are spelled out in the Boultif and ner  judgments
         are meant to facilitate the application of Article 8  in  expulsion
         cases by  domestic  courts,  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
         respective criteria will inevitably vary according to the  specific
         circumstances of each case. Moreover, it has to be  borne  in  mind
         that where, as in the  present  case,  the  interference  with  the
         applicant's rights under Article 8 pursues, as  a  legitimate  aim,
         the "prevention of disorder or crime" (see paragraph 67 above), the
         above criteria ultimately are designed to help evaluate the  extent
         to which the applicant can be expected  to  cause  disorder  or  to
         engage in criminal activities.


    71.    In a case like the present one, where the person to be  expelled
         is a young adult who has not yet founded a family of his  own,  the
         relevant criteria are:


           - the nature and seriousness of the  offence  committed  by  the
             applicant;


           - the length of the applicant's stay in the country  from  which
             he or she is to be expelled;


           - the time elapsed since  the  offence  was  committed  and  the
             applicant's conduct during that period;


         -        the solidity of social, cultural and family ties with  the
             host country and with the country of destination.


    72.    The Court  would  also  clarify  that  the  age  of  the  person
         concerned can play a role when applying some of the above criteria.
         For instance, when assessing the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the
         offences committed by an applicant, it has to be taken into account
         whether he or she committed them as a juvenile or as an adult (see,
         for instance, Moustaquim v. Belgium, judgment of 18 February  1991,
         Series A no. 193, p. 19,  44,  and  Radovanovic  v.  Austria,  no.
         42703/98,  35, 22 April 2004).


    73.    In turn, when assessing the length of the  applicant's  stay  in
         the country from which he or she is to be expelled and the solidity
         of the social, cultural and family ties with the host  country,  it
         evidently makes a  difference  whether  the  person  concerned  had
         already come to the country during his or her childhood  or  youth,
         or was even born there, or whether he or she only came as an adult.
         This tendency is  also  reflected  in  various  Council  of  Europe
         instruments,   in   particular   in    Committee    of    Ministers
         Recommendations Rec (2001)15 and Rec (2002)4 (see paragraphs  34-35
         above).


    74.    Although Article  8  provides  no  absolute  protection  against
         expulsion for any category of aliens (see ner, cited above,  55),
         including those who were born in the host country or moved there in
         their early childhood, the Court has already found that  regard  is
         to be had to the special situation of aliens who have  spent  most,
         if not all, their childhood in the host country,  were  brought  up
         there and received their education there (see ner,  58 in fine).


    75.    In short, the Court considers that for a settled migrant who has
         lawfully spent all or the major part of his or  her  childhood  and
         youth in the host country very  serious  reasons  are  required  to
         justify expulsion. This  is  all  the  more  so  where  the  person
         concerned committed the offences underlying the  expulsion  measure
         as a juvenile.


    76.    Finally, the Court reiterates that national authorities enjoy  a
         certain  margin  of  appreciation   when   assessing   whether   an
         interference with a right protected by Article 8 was necessary in a
         democratic society and proportionate to the legitimate aim  pursued
         (see Slivenko v. Latvia [GC], no. 48321/99,  113, ECHR 2003 X, and
         Berrehab v. the Netherlands, judgment of 21 June 1988, Series A no.
         138, p. 15,  28). However, the Court has  consistently  held  that
         its task consists in ascertaining  whether  the  impugned  measures
         struck a fair balance between the relevant  interests,  namely  the
         individual's rights protected by the Convention on the one hand and
         the community's interests on  the  other  (see,  among  many  other
         authorities, Boultif, cited above,  47). Thus, the State's  margin
         of appreciation  goes  hand  in  hand  with  European  supervision,
         embracing both the legislation and the decisions applying it,  even
         those given by an independent court (see, mutatis mutandis, Socit
         Colas Est and Others v. France, no. 37971/97,  47, ECHR 2002-III).
         The Court is therefore  empowered  to  give  the  final  ruling  on
         whether an expulsion measure is reconcilable with Article 8. "



-----------------------
[1] By HC194 (9 July 2012), CM8423 (20 July 2012), HC514 (30 July 2012),
HC565 (6 September 2012).

[2] This two-stage approach was seen to require modification in relation  to
deportation appeals both under the statutory regime in place  prior  to  the
coming into force of the UK Borders Act 2007 and thereafter in  relation  to
non-automatic   deportations:   see   Bah    (EO(Turkey)    -liability    to
deport[pic][3]
@ABCPS^fqwxy}~.) [2012] UKUT 00196 (IAC).
[4] Even under the old rules in force at the date of the decision to make  a
deportation order in this case (28 October, 2010), the appellant's  position
was governed by the automatic deportation provisions of ss.32-38 of  the  UK
Borders Act 2007, on  which  see   MK(deportation-foreign  criminal  -public
interest) Gambia [2010] UKUT 281 (IAC).


