
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  MG (prison-Article 28(3) (a) of Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT
                                 00392 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 May 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      mG

                        [ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED]


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Palmer instructed by Treasury Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms L Hirst instructed by the Aire Centre

   1) Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38/EC contains the requirement that
      for those who have resided in the host member state for  the  previous
      10 years, an expulsion decision made against them must be  based  upon
      imperative grounds of public security.


   2) There is a tension in the judgment of the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
      European Communities in Case C-400/12  Secretary  of  State  v  MG  in
      respect of the meaning of the "enhanced protection" provision.

   3) The judgment  should  be  understood  as  meaning  that  a  period  of
      imprisonment during those 10 years  does  not  necessarily  prevent  a
      person from qualifying for  enhanced  protection  if  that  person  is
      sufficiently integrated. However, according to the  same  judgment,  a
      period of imprisonment must have  a  negative  impact  in  so  far  as
      establishing integration is concerned.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   By a decision of 24 August 2012 this Tribunal requested  a  preliminary
    ruling from the Court of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  (CJEU)  on
    several questions relating to  the  proper  interpretation  of  Article
    28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38/EC (hereafter "the Citizens  Directive").
    This decision was reported as MG (EU  deportation  -  Article  28(3)  -
    imprisonment) Portugal [2012] UKUT 268 (IAC). Our questions arose as  a
    result of the following events:  (i)  on  8  July  2010  the  appellant
    (hereafter Secretary of State for the Home  Department  or  SSHD)   had
    refused the application of the respondent, MG (hereafter the claimant),
    who is an EEA national, for a permanent residence card and, in light of
    her conviction on one count of cruelty  and  three  counts  of  assault
    against one of her own children, had ordered  her  to  be  deported  on
    grounds of public policy and public security pursuant to regulation  21
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereafter
    "the 2006 Regulations") (which  implement  this  Directive);  (ii)  her
    subsequent appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was successful; (iii)  the
    SSHD had then been granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal;
    (iv) the Upper Tribunal found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in
    law and set its decision aside; (v) the Upper Tribunal  concluded  that
    it could not proceed to re-make the decision without a ruling from  the
    CJEU.  On 16 January 2014 the CJEU delivered its rulings both  in  this
    case, Case C-400/12, Secretary of State v  MG  and  in  Case  C-387/12,
    Onuekwere v SSHD. Having now received answers from the CJEU, we are  in
    the position of being able to complete our hearing in order to  re-make
    the decision. It is as well to  set  out  the  relevant  provisions  of
    regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations and of Articles 27 and 28 of  the
    Citizens Directive which they seek to implement. We  also  include  the
    CJEU ruling in MG as an Appendix. Regulation 21 provides:
         "(1) In this regulation a 'relevant decision' means an EEA decision
         taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
         health.
         (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.
         (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security.
         (4) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-
         (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or
         (b) is under the  age  of  18,  unless  the  relevant  decision  is
         necessary in his best interests, as provided for in the  Convention
         on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly  of  the
         United Nations on 20th November 1989.
         (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-
         (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;


         (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct
         of the person concerned;
         (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;
         (d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  the
         decision;
         (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not  in  themselves
         justify the decision.
         (6) Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."
In Chapter VI of the Citizens  Directive  ('Restrictions  on  the  right  of
entry and the right  of  residence  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
security or public health'), Articles 27 and 28 provide:
     "1.      Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member States may
    restrict the freedom of movement and residence of  Union  citizens  and
    their family members, irrespective of nationality, on grounds of public
    policy, public security or public health. These grounds  shall  not  be
    invoked to serve economic ends.
    2.      Measures taken on grounds of public policy or public  security
    shall comply with the principle of proportionality and shall  be  based
    exclusively on  the  personal  conduct  of  the  individual  concerned.
    Previous  criminal  convictions  shall  not  in  themselves  constitute
    grounds for taking such measures.
    The personal conduct of  the  individual  concerned  must  represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society. Justifications that are isolated from
    the particulars of the case or that rely on considerations  of  general
    prevention shall not be accepted.
    3.      In order to ascertain whether the person concerned represents a
    danger  for  public  policy  or  public  security,  when  issuing   the
    registration certificate or, in the absence of a  registration  system,
    not later than three months from the date  of  arrival  of  the  person
    concerned on its territory  or  from  the  date  of  reporting  his/her
    presence within the territory, as provided for in Article 5(5), or when
    issuing the residence card,  the  host  Member  State  may,  should  it
    consider this essential, request the Member State  of  origin  and,  if
    need be, other Member States  to  provide  information  concerning  any
    previous police record the person concerned may  have.  Such  enquiries
    shall not be made as a matter of routine. The  Member  State  consulted
    shall give its reply within two months.
    4.      The Member State which issued the passport  or  identity  card
    shall allow the holder of the document who has been expelled on grounds
    of public policy, public security, or public health from another Member
    State to re-enter its territory  without  any  formality  even  if  the
    document is no longer valid or the nationality  of  the  holder  is  in
    dispute.'
    9        Article 28 of Directive 2004/38, entitled 'Protection against
    expulsion', which also falls within Chapter VI, provides:
    '1.      Before taking an expulsion  decision  on  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security, the host Member State shall take account  of
    considerations such as how long the individual concerned has resided on
    its territory, his/her  age,  state  of  health,  family  and  economic
    situation, social and cultural integration into the host  Member  State
    and the extent of his/her links with the country of origin.
    2.      The host Member State  may  not  take  an  expulsion  decision
    against  Union  citizens  or  their  family  members,  irrespective  of
    nationality,  who  have  the  right  of  permanent  residence  on   its
    territory, except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security.
    3.      An expulsion decision may not be taken against Union citizens,
    except if the  decision  is  based  on  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security, as defined by Member States, if they:
    (a)      have resided in the host Member State  for  the  previous  10
    years; or
    (b)      are a minor, except if the expulsion is necessary for the best
    interests  of  the  child,  as  provided  for  in  the  United  Nations
    Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989."
2.   At the last hearing on 21 May 2012 (which resulted in the  request  for
    a preliminary ruling) the SSHD maintained her decision  to  deport  but
    said  she  now  accepted  that  the  claimant  had  acquired  permanent
    residence by virtue of the employment history of  her  husband  who  is
    also an EEA national.  The respondent also said she  accepted  that  if
    the claimant was entitled to the highest level of protection  based  on
    ten years' residence as set out in Article 28(3)(a), so that she  could
    only be deported if there were "imperative grounds of public security",
    then her appeal must succeed because there were no such  grounds.   The
    respondent  maintained,  however,  that  the   claimant's   period   of
    imprisonment between 27 August 2009 and 11 July 2010 (in service  of  a
    sentence of 21  months  following  conviction  for  the  aforementioned
    offences) meant that her  deportation  was  justified  even  under  the
    second highest level of protection against deportation as  set  out  in
    Article 28(2) which in respect of a person who had  acquired  permanent
    residence required the state to show there  were  "serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public security".

3.   A fortiori, the respondent maintained, the claimant could  not  benefit
    from the lowest or baseline level of protection against deportation set
    out in Article 28(1) which required "grounds of public policy or public
    security".

4.   At the time this Tribunal decided to request a  preliminary  ruling  in
    August 2012, we observed that the evidence regarding the risk posed  by
    the claimant to the public and whether she had a propensity to reoffend
    was "finely balanced". We  noted  that  on  the  one  hand  there  were
    positive comments made in some  of  reports  by  various  professionals
    tending to indicate that even in July 2010 the claimant  could  not  be
    seen as a present threat to society  and  that  the  risk  of  her  re-
    offending was low. The family court judge in July 2011 did not rule out
    that she could rehabilitate. The latest medical report (from Dr Coffey)
    noted an improvement in her mental state and expressed similar hopes in
    relation to rehabilitation. On the other hand, in  some  reports  there
    were serious concerns expressed as to whether she had faced up  to  her
    crimes or had demonstrated that she was free of  her  involvement  with
    heroin and association with other substance-abusers; and in a July 2010
    NOMS report the risk of her causing harm to her own children and others
    was assessed as high. In a psychiatric report of 9  December  2010  the
    medical opinion (from Dr Smith) was that she posed a risk  to  her  own
    children were she to have unsupervised contact with them. In July  2011
    the family court judge found she posed a high risk of emotional harm to
    her children and stated  that  "there  is  clearly  a  risk  of  direct
    physical harm to the children as well but this is not the highest  risk
    as it could be addressed by adequate supervision of direct  contact  to
    secure the physical safety of the children".

5.   Soon after we received the ruling of the CJEU on  the  questions  asked
    of it regarding the claimant's case, we asked  her  representatives  to
    produce  evidence  updating  her  circumstances.   In   response,   her
    representatives submitted a number of documents,  including  a  witness
    statement for the claimant and letters from her husband, her godmother,
    her godmother's son, her employer and a friend.

6.   The Tribunal also requested the parties to  prepare  their  submissions
    so as to address certain questions which it considered the CJEU  ruling
    to have  left  arguably  unclear.   We  shall  allude  to  those  where
    necessary below.

7.   At the hearing before us MG gave evidence, adopting  her  previous  and
    new witness statements as true and correct.  In reply to questions from
    Mr Palmer for the SSHD she said that although there were no longer  any
    family court proceedings, she continued to have only  indirect  contact
    with her children.  She rang them most days.  She  had  not  seen  them
    since they had come to see her when she was still in prison.  Since she
    had been released on immigration  bail  in  March  2012  she  has  been
    residing with her godmother (whom she had known back in  Portugal)  and
    her godmother's son.  Her godmother  had  lived  in  the  UK  for  some
    fourteen years.  She had lived with her  godmother  in  the  UK  at  an
    earlier period, between 2000-2001, but she had then  gone  to  live  by
    herself.  In Portugal (Madeira) she had a father, two sisters  as  well
    as aunties and cousins.

8.   As regards her employment, MG confirmed that she had only worked for  a
    short period in May 1998-March 1999, which was shortly  after  she  had
    arrived in the UK.  However seven months ago,  in  November  2013,  she
    started part-time work working 20 hours per week in a florists and that
    was continuing.  (Before the Tribunal there was a letter from the owner
    of the florists attesting that the claimant had been a model  employee,
    never having missed a day of work and being trusted with such tasks  as
    locking up the shop).

9.   Asked if she accepted that she had committed offences  of  cruelty  and
    assault against one of her own children in 2008, the claimant  said  at
    that time her whole life was "broken" and she was now trying  her  best
    "to have her life back."

10.  Asked when she had begun using drugs, the claimant said  it  was  2007;
    it was not in  2006  as  her  husband  had  apparently  said  to  child
    professionals at one stage.  Since she had been released from detention
    she had not used any drugs.

11.  In re-examination and  in  reply  to  questions  from  the  bench,  the
    claimant said she called her children by phone  every  weekday  shortly
    before their bedtime.  On Saturday and Sunday they would call her using
    their  father's  phone.   Although  she  and   her   husband   remained
    permanently separated, he was  now  happy  for  her  to  have  frequent
    telephone contact with the children.  At Xmas the children sent  her  a
    card; and on Mother's Day a gift.

12.  Asked if she continued to have contact with the  set  of  friends  with
    whom she had associated when she was  using  drugs,  she  said  she  no
    longer saw any of them.  None had tried to contact her.

13.  Asked if she continued to have a problem with  alcohol,  the  appellant
    said it was not true she had ever had an alcohol  problem  but  in  any
    event she no longer  consumed  alcohol  except  occasionally  in  small
    quantities.

14.  At the hearing Mr Palmer and Ms  Hirst  both  developed  their  written
    submissions.

15.  With reference to the terms of Article 33(2) of the Citizens  Directive
    and the  corresponding  provision  of  regulation  24(5)  of  the  2006
    (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  (which  requires  the  SSHD  to
    enforce a deportation order within two years[1])), Ms  Hirst  contended
    that the lapse of time in this case meant  the  decision  of  the  SSHD
    under appeal (made in July 2010) was no longer in accordance  with  the
    law.  Mr Palmer argued that  Ms  Hirst's  submission  was  based  on  a
    misreading of Article 33(2) which only operated from the  time  of  the
    issue of removal directions ("expulsion order is enforced after  it  is
    issued").  Essentially it was only the decision to deport that  was  in
    question; removal directions had not  yet  been  issued.  He  accepted,
    however, that through the appeal  process  the  Tribunal  was  entitled
    (save for one caveat) to have regard to  post-decision  evidence  about
    that decision.

16.  Mr Palmer's caveat was that in respect of application of the  ten  year
    requirement set out in Article 28(3)(a), the Tribunal was confined to a
    consideration of matters as they stood at the date  of  decision  of  8
    July 2010. That followed from the CJEU ruling in MG that  the  10  year
    period of residence referred to in that provision "must  be  calculated
    by counting back from the date of the decision ordering  the  expulsion
    of the person concerned" (paragraph 28). If it were otherwise, the  ten
    year threshold would be subject to ever-changing variation.

17.  Ms Hirst argued that Mr Palmer's caveat in  respect  of  the  ten  year
    test made no sense as it would mean that the SSHD could dictate whether
    or not applicants could seek to rely on positive features  about  their
    life following release from prison.  The SSHD could  simply  decide  to
    make the decision, as she often did, whilst an applicant was  still  in
    prison.

18.  Mr Palmer's principal contentions regarding the  meaning  of  the  CJEU
    ruling in respect of Article 28(3)(a) and the ten year requirement were
    that it established that:

    (i)  any period of prison falling within the ten  years  prior  to  the
         deportation decision cannot be taken into account for the  purposes
         of granting enhanced protection under Article 28(3)(a);


    (ii) in principle, periods of prison interrupt the continuity  of  that
         period of  residence;


    (iii)    the implication of an applicant's period  of  residence  being
         non-continuous due to a period  of  imprisonment  is  that  such  a
         period cannot positively accrue to  his  or  her  benefit  for  the
         purposes of Article 28(3)(a). Deciding whether  periods  of  prison
         deprive applicants of protection under Article 28(3)(a) requires an
         overall assessment of the quality of the integrative links (or lack
         of them) an applicant had forged whilst in the host  member  state.
         The exercise here is all about considering degrees  of  integration
         in the context of the particular circumstances  of  an  applicant's
         case.  On the logic of paragraphs 23 and 24 of MG, there  could  be
         degrees of integration ranging from low quality  to  high  quality.
         The circumstances in the CJEU judgment in Case C-145/09 Tsakouridis
         [2010] ECR-I-11979, were to do with absence abroad, a feature  that
         did not necessarily break integrative links. By  contrast,  as  the
         CJEU had made clear in MG, integrative links cannot be  established
         by reference to time spent in prison and integrative links  can  be
         broken by virtue of an applicant's subsequent imprisonment.


19.  Applying the CJEU ruling in MG to the facts of the claimant's case,  Mr
    Palmer urged that  the  Tribunal  regard  her  as  having  forged  only
    relatively weak links with the UK between her arrival in the UK in 1998
    and her conviction in July 2009.   The  fact  that  she  had  exercised
    Treaty rights by working (albeit only for a brief period of ten  months
    in 1998/9) and had had three children in the UK were offset by the fact
    of her drug use, her association  with  drug  users  and  her  criminal
    conduct.  As regards her time in prison, the MG ruling made clear  that
    that could not be treated as having any relevant integrative features -
    regardless of educational courses etc.  She had not expressed  remorse.
    Not only did prison break her relatively weak links with  the  UK,  but
    against that background the claimant cannot be said  to  have  regained
    integrative status.  She had only accrued nine years eleven  months  in
    the UK before she was arrested.  Her drug use started in 2007  (if  not
    2006).  Although she had married she had separated in 2006, her contact
    with her children was extremely limited, confined to indirect  contact.
    The father and the children have moved away.  She has no  other  family
    in the UK.

20.  The other  important  feature  of  the  claimant'  case,  submitted  Mr
    Palmer,  was that the conditions which had led to her offending had not
    gone away and there was no evidence that she was no longer at  risk  of
    reoffending.  The MAPPA assessment made some time ago contemplated  she
    would remain a risk for five years and in any event that period has not
    yet come to an end.  Ms Hirst was wrong to cite R (Oyston) v The Parole
    Board [2000] Prison LR 45 as authority for the proposition that lack of
    remorse was not a relevant factor.   In  that  judgment  the  Court  of
    Appeal had held that  whilst  "not  necessarily  conclusive",  lack  of
    remorse was always a factor.  The report on the claimant from Dr  Smith
    noted that she had been having problems with anger management and  said
    that she had no insight into her personal difficulties.  There  was  no
    evidence that  her  prospects  of  rehabilitation  would  be  adversely
    affected in Portugal.

21.  Ms Hirst said that in terms of understanding  of  the  main  principles
    established by the CJEU in MG, her position and that of  Mr Palmer were
    not now  that far apart. In her written submission she had stated  that
    according to the CJEU  judgment  periods  of  imprisonment  during  the
    requisite 10-year period of residence will not automatically exclude  a
    Union Citizen from relying on the protection of Article 28(3)(a).  They
    would only do so if, in light of all relevant factors, the  integrative
    links previously forged with the host Member State had been broken.  By
    reiterating the principle, first enunciated in Tsakouridis,  that  "all
    relevant factors must be taken into account in each  individual  case",
    the CJEU makes clear that this principle applies more  generally.  Thus
    an individual,  fact-sensitive,  assessment  is  always  required  when
    considering the impact of any factors capable of breaking continuity of
    residence. In relation to Article 28(3)(a), the CJEU had departed  from
    the hard line it had taken in Onuekwere to Article 16(2) (dealing  with
    acquisition of permanent residence). Given that one of  the  principles
    enshrined  in  EU  law  was  that  prison  sentences  should   aim   at
    reintegration into society and that the European Court of Human  Rights
    had held that people in prison continue to enjoy their rights whilst in
    prison, whether integrative links have  been  broken  by  a  period  of
    imprisonment will be a fact-sensitive question.

22.  In respect of the application of Article  28(3)(a)  to  the  claimant's
    case, Ms Hirst considered that Mr Palmer was  wrong  to  say  that  the
    Tribunal should confine itself to facts as they were  at  the  date  of
    decision.  Integration can only sensibly be judged after the period  of
    prison was over.  The test was  an  ongoing  one.   If  Mr  Palmer  was
    correct, the respondent could determine  the  level  of  protection  by
    ensuring the expulsion order was always taken before  the  end  of  the
    period of imprisonment.  The question of the level of  protection  (ten
    years or not) and the question of  proportionality  both  stood  to  be
    assessed at today's date.

23.   Ms Hirst said that  she  was  not  seeking  to  rely  as  evidence  of
    integration on the claimant's period of imprisonment, but rather on the
    fact she had accrued ten years' residence (including five years  during
    which she acquired permanent residence) before she had gone to  prison.
    Given that backdrop, it cannot be said that her relatively short period
    of imprisonment broke the integrative links she had  previously  forged
    with  the  UK,  especially  given  that  whilst  in  prison   she   had
    participated in a series of  courses,  including  drug  awareness,  and
    anger management courses designed to facilitate her rehabilitation  and
    resettlement into society; and  that her  period  of  imprisonment  had
    come to an end in July 2010 and her criminal licence had expired in May
    2011, since when she had been living in  the  community,  had  complied
    with all  reporting  restrictions  and  had  not  reoffended.  She  was
    employed and therefore exercising Treaty rights directly.  She now  had
    a much more positive  living  situation  with  her  godmother  and  her
    godmother's child.  She was now in a steady job and there  was  a  very
    positive reference from her employer.

24.  Ms Hirst urged the Tribunal not to accept Mr Palmer's attempt to  argue
    that the CJEU drew a distinction between 'good' and 'bad'  integration.
    That was contrary  to  the  Court's  approach  to  the  conduct  of  Mr
    Tsakouridis who had been involved in narcotics in and out  of  Germany.
    The purpose of the Directive was to facilitate  free  movement;  beyond
    that it was silent.  Someone meeting the conditions of the Directive as
    a family member is automatically someone who is integrated,  simply  by
    being here.  Ms Hirst argued that once someone had acquired a right  to
    permanent residence, he or she should be deemed to be integrated.

25.  Ms Hirst took  issue  with  Mr  Palmer's  attempt  to  argue  that  the
    claimant was still at risk of reoffending.  The NOMS report  of  August
    2009 recorded the risk of her causing serious harm in the future to  be
    medium, but that was completed by a probation officer who had  not  met
    the appellant.  In the later October 2009 OASys report the risk of  her
    reoffending was assessed as "low".  There was no evidence of  drug  use
    since she had been given immigration bail.  It had not been possible to
    obtain a further OASys or NOMS assessment as she was no longer  subject
    to supervision.  Her prison licence had expired.  Dr Smith in  February
    2009 said she posed a low risk to other children  and  was  content  to
    recommend she had supervised contact with  her  children.   Whilst  the
    psychiatric report of April 2009 had said there may  well  be  abnormal
    features, there was no finding of mental illness.  This  was  the  rare
    case where prison seems to have worked.  It was very difficult  to  say
    the claimant was a "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat".

Our Assessment

26.  We are grateful for the submissions we had from Ms Hirst and Mr  Palmer
    both of whom also presented  observations  to  the  CJEU  when  MG  was
    pending before the CJEU.  Not least because  of  the  great  care  they
    took, we will say something about  those  parts  of  their  submissions
    dealing with the meaning of  the  Court's  eventual  judgment,  but  as
    matters have turned out, it is not necessary for us to do so  in  order
    to decide this case.  That is because we have concluded,  having  taken
    account of the further evidence now available,  that  the  claimant  is
    entitled to succeed in her appeal even on the basis of  the  lowest  or
    "baseline" level of protection.

27.  Mr Palmer has submitted  that  in  respect  of  the  highest  level  of
    protection (Article 28(3)(a)) the Upper Tribunal is constrained by  its
    terms to confine ourselves to the facts as they stood at  the  date  of
    the decision to deport.  We think he  is  wrong  about  that.  Once  an
    appeal lies against that decision, then, via Schedule 1 to the 2006 EEA
    Regulations, the Tribunal has power under s.85(4) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to "consider evidence about any  matter
    which [it] thinks relevant to the substance of the decision,  including
    evidence which  concerns  a  matter  arising  after  the  date  of  the
    decision." The requirement set out in Article 28(3)(a)  identifies  the
    criterion which must be applied when an  expulsion  decision  is  being
    made against a person  who has for  ten  years'  residence  (specifying
    that such a decision must be based  on  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security); it does not seek to identify the  matters  relevant  to  the
    substance of  the  expulsion  decision  itself.  But  even  if  we  had
    considered Mr Palmer was correct to say that the key date for  deciding
    an appeal based on Article  28(3)(a)  was  the  date  of  decision,  he
    himself accepts that the same did not apply either in relation  to  the
    second-highest or baseline levels of protection.  In respect  of  these
    levels, he agreed that the Upper Tribunal was  entitled  to  take  into
    account matters as they stood now, only a  few  months  short  of  four
    years since the date of decision (8 July 2010).  Since we have  decided
    the claimant is entitled to succeed in her appeal even on the  baseline
    level of protection, we need say no more about this matter.

Assessment of the claimant's circumstances

28.  At the date of decision (in  July  2010)  the  claimant  was  still  in
    prison, under Immigration  Act  powers  having  only  just  served  her
    sentence.  Whilst she was in prison the family court  granted  her  the
    right to have supervised contact with her children in public, but on  5
    July 2011, in response to a local authority application, a family court
    judge decided to restrict contact to indirect contact and also to  make
    a prohibited steps order, stating that the appellant had  yet  to  show
    she could maintain a stable, drug-free life.  Bearing in mind  that  at
    that time the family court had before it several reports,  including  a
    NOMS Report of August 2009 rating her risk of causing serious  harm  in
    the future as medium, a MAPPA report rating her a high risk to her  own
    children and children in general, we consider that  at  that  time  the
    respondent was more  than  justified  in  concluding  that  there  were
    serious grounds of public policy and public security for deporting her.
     Given the action taken by the family court, it could not be said  that
    it was in the  best  interest  of  her  children  for  her  to  play  a
    significant role in their lives and thus to be able to  remain  in  the
    UK.

29.  At the date on which  this  Tribunal  decided  to  make  an  order  for
    reference (August 2012), we made  clear  (as  noted  already)  that  we
    regarded the decision on whether there were serious grounds  of  public
    policy and public security to be "finely balanced". By then  there  had
    been a psychiatric report by Dr Coffrey (dated 23 January  2012)  which
    concluded that her behaviour in prison had been generally  settled  and
    that there was an improvement in her mental  state,  but  Dr  Coffrey's
    prognosis for her future rehabilitation in the community was stated  as
    being largely dependent on whether on release  she  would  engage  with
    various support agencies and be able to abstain from illicit drugs.

30.  The position now,  in  May  2014,  however,  is  strikingly  different.
    Although  the  claimant  still  only  has  indirect  contact  with  her
    children, there are no longer any ongoing family court proceedings  and
    in a signed letter dated 15 April 2014 her  husband  (who  lives  in  a
    different area of the UK) has written stating that  despite  separation
    he and the claimant maintain a friendship relation and  "we  have  been
    trying to solve together concerns about  the  education  of  our  three
    sons....I believe that if we not in the same country anymore that could
    bring emotional damage for our  sons,  and  I'm  very  concerned  about
    it...it is my wish that [MG] can stay near us....our  family  has  been
    through lots of emotional damage, specially our boys, and  all  we  are
    asking is the right of being a free family again".

31.  Mr Palmer did not seek to dispute the claimant's evidence that she  had
    frequent, almost daily, contact with her children by  telephone.  There
    were affectionate letters from them to her.

32.  From a position where the claimant had been a user of  class  A  drugs,
    including heroin, and had lived on her  own  and  had  associated  with
    other users of class A drugs and where there was no clear evidence that
    the improvements in her mental state and behaviour in prison  would  be
    sustained once released, the claimant's evidence before us was that she
    no longer used drugs.  We note of course  that  we  did  not  have  any
    evidence from probation or medical professionals who had given  reports
    on her earlier, but we did have the clear evidence  from  her  employer
    that she has been in work for over six  months  and  has  been  a  good
    employee who had not missed a day's work for over 6  months.   Although
    we attach less weight to them because they  are  close  personally,  we
    also attach credence to the  written  statements  from  the  claimant's
    godmother and the latter's son, which confirm that the  claimant  lives
    with them and no longer associates with drug users. Mr Palmer  did  not
    seek to challenge any of this evidence.

33.  The claimant  has  still  never  made  a  clear  statement  of  remorse
    accepting her guilt, but we take the thrust of her evidence  before  us
    to be that she accepts that at the time of the  offence  her  life  was
    falling apart.  She was no longer voicing outright denial of guilt.

34.  Mr Palmer has sought to argue that on the  basis  of  the  professional
    assessments made of the claimant's  risk of reoffending,  although  the
    October 2009 MAPPA report was several years old,  its  risk  assessment
    looked forward five years and saw her as continuing to be a medium risk
    for the duration of that unfinished period.  We do  not  think  that  a
    report  of  that  vintage  can  be  treated  as  determinative  of  the
    claimant's present risk of reoffending.  It is a factor we  have  taken
    into account, but one which we consider outweighed by the current state
    of the evidence.

35.  From the claimant's evidence she still has family members  in  Portugal
    but her links with them are not strong.

36.  It must be borne in mind  that  Article  27(1)  states  that  "previous
    criminal convictions shall not in  themselves  constitute  grounds  for
    taking [deportation] measures" and Article 27(3) stipulates  that  "the
    personal conduct of the individual concerned must represent a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society".  Further, under the same  provision,
    justifications that are "isolated from the particulars of the  case  or
    that  rely  on  considerations  of  general  prevention  shall  not  be
    accepted".  This last provision stands in sharp contrast  to  the  more
    rigorous proportionality  test  to  be  applied  to  foreign  criminals
    seeking to rely on Article 8 of the ECHR, where  it  is  legitimate  to
    take account of the public interest and the principle of deterrence  in
    general: see Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT  85  (IAC)  at
    paragraph 66.

37.  We consider that we must  exercise  a  certain  degree  of  caution  as
    regards the current state of the evidence before us shedding  light  on
    the claimant's propensity to reoffend and any risks she might  pose  to
    her own children or  children  in  general.   Ms  Hirst  has  correctly
    pointed out that given expiry of the claimant's prison licence, and the
    cessation of family court proceedings, there is no statutory obligation
    on any of the probation or child  professional  bodies  to  provide  an
    expert  report.   Nevertheless  it  would  have  been  open  to   those
    instructed by the claimant  to  have  commissioned  a  report  from  an
    independent social worker or child professional.  At the same time, the
    prescribed grounds for expulsion being a restriction on  a  fundamental
    freedom under EU law (see recitals 22 and 23), it is for the  state  to
    justify such restriction and to show that  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security exist. The  claimant's  representatives  sent
    the further evidence relied on 22 April 2014. The SSHD did not lodge  a
    response.  We have not been told of  any  move  by  the  SSHD  to  make
    enquiries in the claimant's case relating to whether she  continued  to
    pose a present, genuine and sufficiently threat affecting  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society. As observed already,  Mr  Palmer  did
    not challenge any of the evidence relating to  the  claimant's  current
    circumstances.

38.  Even without evaluating  the  extent  of  the  claimant's  "social  and
    cultural integration" (to use the  phraseology  of  Article  27(4))  we
    cannot see that the SSHD can show that the  Article  27(2)  requirement
    (that the individual concerned must represent "a genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society") has been met in this case.  In our judgment  the  evidence
    does  not  disclose  that   the   claimant   poses   such   a   threat.



39.  Even if we were wrong to find that the SSHD is not entitled  to  deport
    the claimant on grounds of public policy and security  (the  "baseline"
    level of protection), that would still not justify our  dismissing  her
    appeal because the SSHD now accepts that prior to her imprisonment  she
    has acquired a permanent right of residence through  a  combination  of
    her short period of work in 1998/9 and her status as the family  member
    of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights (her  husband)  and  so  is
    entitled to be considered under the second highest level of protection.
     That was not accepted at the date of decision but was conceded by  the
    respondent at the original hearing before us.  Accordingly, in order to
    justify the  deportation  decision,  it  would  be  necessary  for  the
    respondent to show the existence of "serious grounds of  public  policy
    and security" under Article 28(2) (emphasis added).   Although  at  the
    time we made the order of reference we saw the decision as  to  whether
    the claimant could benefit from this  second  level  of  protection  as
    finely balanced, we have  already  made  clear  that  we  consider  the
    position now to be strikingly different. The claimant is also now (once
    again) an EEA national exercising through employment her treaty  rights
    in her own right, not just as a family member.

40.  Accordingly we are satisfied that the decision we should re-make is  to
    allow the claimant's appeal as it has not been  shown  that  there  are
    either grounds or serious grounds of public policy or  public  security
    justifying the deportation decision.

Interpretation of the CJEU ruling on Article 28(3)(a)

41.  In light of the above it is not necessary for us  to  seek  to  resolve
    the dispute between the parties as to the proper interpretation of  the
    answers given by the court in  MG  to  questions  asked  about  whether
    prison breaks continuity of residence for the purposes of being able to
    establish the requisite ten year period of residence.

42.  Prior to receiving further evidence  regarding  the  claimant's  up-to-
    date circumstances, but after receipt of the judgment of the Court,  we
    wrote to the parties asking them to comment on a  possible  tension  in
    the  text  of   the  answers  given  by  the  Court  and  an   apparent
    contradiction between:-

    (1)  its seemingly categorical statement in the first part of paragraph
         33 that "periods of imprisonment cannot be taken into  account  for
         the purposes of granting the enhanced protection  provided  for  in
         Article 28(3)(a) ...";  and


    (2)  its seemingly defeasible statement in the second half of the  same
         sentence (reinforced in paragraphs 35-36) that "in principle,  such
         periods interrupt the continuity of the period of residence for the
         purposes of that provision."




    Read together with (1), the Court's ruling earlier in the same judgment
    that the ten year period of residence "must be calculated  by  counting
    back from the date of the decision ordering that  person's   expulsion"
    (paragraph 24), would appear on its face  to  entail  that  if  in  the
    previous ten years prior to the decision to deport, the individual  had
    any period of imprisonment, he cannot qualify for  this  (the  highest)
    level of protection; the necessary qualifying period  of  residence  is
    irretrievably broken because "periods of imprisonment cannot  be  taken
    into account".  Such a reading would, of course,  give  rise  to   some
    "hard cases", as exemplified by the example of a person who in the last
    ten years had been sentenced to just one or two days' imprisonment; but
    there would be hard cases on any reading, and, on the facts of  such  a
    case, it would be stretching matters to imagine that the  Member  State
    could demonstrate,  as  required  by  the  integration  and  overriding
    proportionality requirements set out in Article 27, that such a  person
    represented "a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  one
    of the fundamental interests of society".  It is clear from the Court's
    ruling on the same day in Onuekwere in respect of Article  16(2),  that
    the prospect of "hard cases" did not deter it in any way from  reaching
    an unequivocal finding that" the periods of imprisonment  in  the  host
    Member State... cannot be taken into consideration in  the  context  of
    the acquisition ...of the right of permanent residence for the purposes
    of that provision."

43.  One strong factor in favour of  reading  (1)  as  meaning  that  prison
    categorically breaks the qualifying period  of  residence  is  that  if
    Article 28(3)(a) was to be read as simply an integration test (as seems
    to be implied, albeit in different ways, by both Miss  Hirst's  and  Mr
    Palmer's submissions),  there  would  be  effectively  two  integration
    tests, one under Article 28 and one under Article  27,  which,  because
    Article 27 applies to all three levels of protection,  would  might  be
    thought to render the overall protection scheme incoherent.

44.  In one respect it is possible to reconcile  a  categorical  reading  of
    (1) with the defeasible language of (2)  if  the  Court  meant  by  the
    latter only to confirm that its ruling in  Tsakouridis  was  a  special
    case, turning on the significance of absences abroad, rather than on in-
    country events such as imprisonment, and if it was solely to  recognise
    the absence abroad scenario that it chose to state that "in  principle"
    (rather  than  categorically)  continuity   of   residence   could   be
    maintained.  That is one possible construction of paragraph 27 read  in
    isolation.  However, that would be to disregard the fact that the Court
    at paragraphs 33 and 28 was clearly talking about interruption  of  the
    continuity of residence by a period of imprisonment in the host  Member
    State (not by absence abroad) and that is reinforced by  the  reference
    in paragraph 29 to the question of whether a period of imprisonment  is
    "capable of interrupting the continuity of  the  period  of  residence"
    involved.

45.  Doubtless compelled by such difficulties, both Ms Hirst and Mr  Palmer,
    albeit in  different  ways,  contend  that  on  the  Court's  reasoning
    imprisonment did not necessarily break the period of residence  of  ten
    years for the purposes of  qualifying  for  enhanced  protection  under
    Article 28(3)(a) and  that  this  provision  was  essentially  just  an
    integration test (albeit one premised according to Mr Palmer on  prison
    breaking  continuity  of  residence).   Both  pointed,  tellingly,   to
    paragraph 36 as a clear articulation of such a position.

46.  We have some difficulty with accepting their submissions as they  stand
    because if the ten year requirement is essentially just an  integration
    test, then it makes no sense for the Court to have stated in the  first
    sentence of paragraph 33 that "periods of imprisonment cannot be  taken
    into account for the  purposes  of  granting  the  enhanced  protection
    provided for in Article 23(3)(a)."  Such language on its face is in the
    same categorical mode used in Onuekwere and neither  Counsel  suggested
    that in respect of the latter the Court's words were meant to  be  read
    defeasibly.   How can it be accepted that periods  of  imprisonment  do
    not necessarily interrupt the continuity of  residence  in  calculating
    the ten years, when it has previously been stated that they "cannot  be
    taken into account"?  Miss Hirst quite rightly emphasised the fact that
    the Court's approach to interpretation  of  EU  legislation  is  highly
    teleological, but, as already intimated, it is not obviously consistent
    with the purpose  of  this  Directive  to  apply  Article  28(3)(a)  as
    essentially just an integration test,  when  such  a  test  is  already
    applied by Article 27.

47.  If the ten year residence  test  is  essentially  just  an  integration
    test, then it must be a conceptually different test from the five  year
    residence test established by the Court's ruling of the  same  date  in
    Case C-378/12, Onuekwere [2014] ECR I-0000.  According to this test, it
    is " clear from the very terms and the  purpose  of  Article  16(2)  of
    Directive 2004/38,[that] periods of imprisonment cannot be  taken  into
    consideration for the  purposes  of  the  acquisition  of  a  right  of
    permanent residence." (para 22). That ruling is expressed  without  any
    qualification.

48.  Despite our difficulties, we have concluded that a categorical  reading
    of (1) cannot be what the Court meant or at least  that  what  it  must
    have had in mind was to draw a distinction between  a  positive  taking
    into account and a negative interruption. If the Court in MG had  meant
    to convey by the terms "cannot be taken into account" that  periods  of
    imprisonment automatically disqualify a person from enhanced protection
    under Article 28(3)(a) protection,  it  would  not  have  seen  fit  to
    proceed in paragraph 35 to accept  as  a  possibility  that  the  "non-
    continuous" nature of a  period  of  residence  did  not  automatically
    prevent a person qualifying for enhanced protection. Nor would it  have
    chosen in paragraph 38 to  describe  periods  of  imprisonment  as  "in
    principle, capable both of interrupting the continuity of the period of
    residence for the purposes of  that  provision  and  of  affecting  the
    decision regarding the grant of the enhanced  protection  provided  for
    thereunder..." It would have had to say that, if they fall  within  the
    10 year period counting back from the  date  of  decision,  periods  of
    imprisonment  always  prevent  a   person   qualifying   for   enhanced
    protection.  In addition, what the Court goes on to say in paragraph 37
    about the implications of the fact that a person  has  resided  in  the
    host Member State during the 10 years prior to imprisonment is  clearly
    intended to underline that even though such a person has had  a  period
    of imprisonment during the requisite 10 year period (counting back from
    the date of decision ordering the expulsion: see para 27) it  is  still
    possible for them to qualify for enhanced protection and in this regard
    their prior period of residence "may be  taken  into  consideration  as
    part of the overall assessment referred to in paragraph 36  above".  We
    also bear in mind, of course, as did Pill LJ in Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department v FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA Civ 1199 at [42]  that  in
    Tsakouridis the CJEU Grand Chamber did not consider the  fact  that  Mr
    Tsakouridis had spent a  substantial  period  of  time  in  custody  in
    Germany in the year prior to the decision to  expel  him  (taken  on  9
    August 2008) as defeating his eligibility for enhanced protection under
    Article 28(3)(a).  Nevertheless (and  this  is  where  we  consider  Mr
    Palmer right and Miss Hirst wrong), the fact that the  Court  specifies
    that "in principle" periods of imprisonment interrupt the continuity of
    residence for the purposes of meeting the 10 year requirement can  only
    mean that so far as establishing  integrative links is  concerned  such
    periods must have a negative impact.

49.  Had it been necessary to our reaching  a  decision  in  the  claimant's
    case, we would have given serious consideration to making clear in  our
    decision that if there was an application for permission to appeal  our
    decision to the Court of Appeal, we would have been likely to grant it,
    in order for an  important  point  of  principle,  namely  the  precise
    meaning of  regulation  21(4)  of  the  2006  Regulations  and  Article
    28(3)(a) in the  context  of  a  period  of  residence  which  includes
    imprisonment,  to be addressed by a national court superior to our  own
    and in a case in which the issue was material. The issue of deportation
    of foreign criminals is of compelling public  importance.   This  would
    also enable the Court of Appeal to consider to what extent its judgment
    in Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  FV  (Italy)  (which
    considered that Article 28(3)(a) was essentially  just  an  integration
    test) requires modification  in  the  light  of  the  CJEU  rulings  in
    Onuekwere and MG. It would also afford an opportunity for that Court to
    rule  on  whether,  applying  the  doctrine  of  indirect  effect,  the
    requirement of regulation 21(4) that an EEA national must have  resided
    in the UK "for a continuous period of at least ten years prior  to  the
    relevant decision" (emphasis  added)  is  inconsistent  with  the  CJEU
    ruling in MG, which clearly contemplates that even someone  with  "non-
    continuous" residence over that 10 year period can qualify for enhanced
    protection under Article 28(3)(a).

50.    For the above reasons, we conclude:

         The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and its decision has been  set
    aside;

          The decision we re-make is to allow the claimant's appeal  against
    the deportation decision.

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey




































 Appendix

JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
16 January 2014 (*)
(Request for a preliminary ruling - Directive 2004/38/EC - Article  28(3)(a)
- Protection against expulsion - Method for calculating the  10-year  period
- Whether periods of imprisonment are to be taken into account)
In Case C-400/12,
REQUEST for a preliminary ruling under  Article  267  TFEU  from  the  Upper
Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber), London (United Kingdom), made  by
decision of 24 August 2012, received at the Court on 31 August 2012, in the
proceedings
Secretary of State for the Home Department
v
M.G.,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), President  of  the  Chamber,
J.L. da Cruz Vilaa, G. Arestis, J.-C. Bonichot and A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
Advocate General: M. Wathelet,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the  written  procedure  and  further  to  the  hearing  on
20 June 2013,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
-        M.G., by R. Drabble QC, L. Hirst, Barrister, and E. Sibley,
-        the United Kingdom Government, by A. Robinson, acting  as  Agent,
assisted by R. Palmer, Barrister,
-        the Estonian Government, by M. Linntam and N. Grnberg, acting as
Agents,
-        Ireland, by E. Creedon, acting as Agent, assisted  by  D. Conlan
Smyth, Barrister,
-        the Polish Government, by B. Majczyna and M. Szpunar, acting  as
Agents,
-        the European Commission, by M. Wilderspin and C. Tufvesson, acting
as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General's Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
1        This request for a preliminary ruling concerns the  interpretation
of Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament  and
of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the right of citizens of  the  Union  and
their family members to move and reside freely within the territory  of  the
Member States amending Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and repealing  Directives
64/221/EEC,  68/360/EEC,  72/194/EEC,  73/148/EEC,   75/34/EEC,   75/35/EEC,
90/364/EEC,  90/365/EEC  and  93/96/EEC  (OJ  2004  L  158,  p. 77,  and  -
corrigenda - OJ 2004 L 229, p. 35, and OJ 2005 L 197, p. 34).
2        The request has been made in proceedings between the Secretary  of
State for  the  Home  Department  ('the  Secretary  of  State')  and  Ms G.
concerning a decision to expel her from the United Kingdom.
 Legal context
 European Union law
3        According to recitals 23 and  24  in  the  preamble  to  Directive
2004/38:
'(23) Expulsion of Union citizens and their family members  on  grounds  of
public policy or public security  is  a  measure  that  can  seriously  harm
persons who, having availed themselves of the rights and freedoms  conferred
on them by the Treaty,  have  become  genuinely  integrated  into  the  host
Member State. The scope for such measures should  therefore  be  limited  in
accordance with the principle of proportionality  to  take  account  of  the
degree of  integration  of  the  persons  concerned,  the  length  of  their
residence in the host Member State, their age, state of health,  family  and
economic situation and the links with their country of origin.
(24)      Accordingly, the greater  the  degree  of  integration  of  Union
citizens and their family members in the host Member State, the greater  the
degree of protection  against  expulsion  should  be.  Only  in  exceptional
circumstances, where  there  are  imperative  grounds  of  public  security,
should an expulsion  measure  be  taken  against  Union  citizens  who  have
resided for many years in  the  territory  of  the  host  Member  State,  in
particular when they were born  and  have  resided  there  throughout  their
life. In addition, such exceptional circumstances should also  apply  to  an
expulsion measure taken against minors, in  order  to  protect  their  links
with their family, in accordance with the United Nations Convention  on  the
Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989.'
4        Article 2 of Directive 2004/38, entitled 'Definitions', states:
'For the purposes of this Directive:
1.      "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality of a Member
State;
2.      "family member" means:
(a)      the spouse;
...
3.      "host Member State" means the Member State to which a Union citizen
moves in order to exercise his/her right of free movement and residence.'
5        Article 3 of that directive, entitled 'Beneficiaries', provides:
'1.      This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to  or
reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a  national,  and
to their family members as defined in point 2 of Article 2 who accompany  or
join them.
...'
6        Chapter III of that  directive,  entitled  'Right  of  residence',
comprises Articles 6 to 15. Article 6 concerns  the  '[r]ight  of  residence
for up to three months' and Article 7 makes provision, subject  to  certain
conditions, for a '[r]ight of residence for more than three months'.
7        In  Chapter  IV  of  Directive  2004/38  ('Right   of   permanent
residence'), Article 16, which is entitled 'General rule for Union  citizens
and their family members', provides:
'1.      Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period of
five years in the host Member  State  shall  have  the  right  of  permanent
residence there. This right shall not be subject to the conditions  provided
for in Chapter III.
2.      Paragraph 1  shall  apply  also  to  family  members  who  are  not
nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with the Union  citizen
in the host Member State for a continuous period of five years.
3.      Continuity of residence shall not be affected by temporary absences
not exceeding a total of six months a year,  or  by  absences  of  a  longer
duration for compulsory military service, or by one absence of a maximum  of
12  consecutive  months  for  important  reasons  such  as   pregnancy   and
childbirth, serious illness, study or vocational training, or a  posting  in
another Member State or a third country.
4.      Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be lost  only
through absence from the host  Member  State  for  a  period  exceeding  two
consecutive years.'
8        In Chapter VI of Directive 2004/38 ('Restrictions on the right  of
entry and the right  of  residence  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
security  or  public  health'),  Article  27,  which  is  entitled  'General
principles', provides:
'1.      Subject to the provisions  of  this  Chapter,  Member  States  may
restrict the freedom of movement and residence of Union citizens  and  their
family members, irrespective of nationality, on grounds  of  public  policy,
public security or public health. These grounds  shall  not  be  invoked  to
serve economic ends.
2.      Measures taken on grounds of public policy or public security shall
comply with the principle of proportionality and shall be based  exclusively
on the personal conduct  of  the  individual  concerned.  Previous  criminal
convictions shall not in  themselves  constitute  grounds  for  taking  such
measures.
The personal conduct of the individual concerned must represent  a  genuine,
present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
interests of society. Justifications that are isolated from the  particulars
of the case or that rely on considerations of general prevention  shall  not
be accepted.
3.      In order to ascertain whether the  person  concerned  represents  a
danger for public policy or public security, when issuing  the  registration
certificate or, in the absence of a  registration  system,  not  later  than
three months from the date  of  arrival  of  the  person  concerned  on  its
territory or  from  the  date  of  reporting  his/her  presence  within  the
territory, as provided for in Article 5(5), or when  issuing  the  residence
card, the host Member State may, should it consider this essential,  request
the Member State of origin and, if need be, other Member States  to  provide
information concerning any previous police record the person  concerned  may
have. Such enquiries shall not be made as a matter of  routine.  The  Member
State consulted shall give its reply within two months.
4.      The Member State which issued the passport or identity  card  shall
allow the holder of the document who has been expelled on grounds of  public
policy, public security, or public health from another Member State  to  re-
enter its territory without any formality even if the document is no  longer
valid or the nationality of the holder is in dispute.'
9        Article 28 of  Directive  2004/38,  entitled  'Protection  against
expulsion', which also falls within Chapter VI, provides:
'1.      Before taking an expulsion decision on grounds of public policy or
public security, the host Member State shall take account of  considerations
such as how long the individual concerned  has  resided  on  its  territory,
his/her age, state of health, family  and  economic  situation,  social  and
cultural integration into the host Member State and the  extent  of  his/her
links with the country of origin.
2.      The host Member State may not take an  expulsion  decision  against
Union citizens or their family members,  irrespective  of  nationality,  who
have the right of permanent residence on its territory,  except  on  serious
grounds of public policy or public security.
3.      An expulsion decision may not  be  taken  against  Union  citizens,
except if the decision is based on imperative grounds  of  public  security,
as defined by Member States, if they:
(a)      have resided in the host Member State for the previous  10  years;
or
(b)      are a minor, except if the expulsion is  necessary  for  the  best
interests of the child, as provided for in the United Nations Convention  on
the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989.'
 United Kingdom law
10      The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  [('the
Immigration Regulations')] transpose Directive 2004/38 into national law.
11      Regulation 21 of the Immigration Regulations,  entitled  'Decisions
taken  on  public  policy,  public  security  and  public  health  grounds',
transposes Articles 27 and 28 of Directive 2004/38 into national law.
 The dispute in the main proceedings  and  the  questions  referred  for  a
preliminary ruling
12      Ms G. is a Portuguese national. On 12 April 1998, she entered the
United Kingdom with her husband, who is also a Portuguese  national.  Ms G.
was employed from May 1998 to March 1999. In March 1999, she  gave  up  work
to have her first child, who was born in June 1999. Ms G. and  her  husband
had two further  children  between  2001  and  2004.  Ms G.  was  supported
financially by her husband during that period of  inactivity  and  up  until
the couple's separation in December 2006. Despite  that  separation,  Ms G.
and her husband are still married.
13      In April  2008,  Ms G.'s  children  were  placed  in  foster  care
following a report by hospital staff that injuries to one  of  the  children
were non-accidental. On 21 November 2008, a family court  judge  determined
that Ms G. had been responsible for injuries caused to one of her children.
On 27 August 2009, having been convicted on one count of cruelty and  three
counts of assault by beating a person under 16 years, Ms G.  was  sentenced
to 21 months' imprisonment.
14      Following Ms G.'s conviction, her husband was awarded  custody  of
the children. While she was in prison, Ms G. was granted the right to  have
supervised contact with her children in public. In April 2010, however,  the
local authorities  stopped  that  contact  and,  in  August  2010,  made  an
application for contact to be suspended. On 5 July  2011,  a  family  court
judge decided to maintain the supervision  order,  to  restrict  contact  to
indirect contact and also to make a prohibited  steps  order,  stating  that
Ms G. had yet to demonstrate that she could maintain  a  stable,  drug-free
lifestyle.
15      On 11 May 2010, while she was still in prison, Ms G. applied to the
Secretary of State for a certificate of permanent residence  in  the  United
Kingdom. On 8 July 2010, the Secretary of State refused the application and
ordered that Ms G. be deported on  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public
security pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Immigration Regulations.
16      On 11 July 2010, Ms G. remained in custody despite having  served
her sentence, owing to  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  ordering  her
deportation. In that decision, the Secretary of State took the view,  first,
that  the  enhanced   protection   against   expulsion   provided   for   in
Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 is dependent on  the  integration  of
the Union citizen into the host  Member  State  and  that  such  integration
cannot take place while that citizen is in prison. Secondly,  the  Secretary
of State found that Ms G. was not entitled to  the  intermediate  level  of
protection against  expulsion  because  she  had  not  shown  that  she  had
acquired a right of permanent  residence  and,  in  any  event,  there  were
serious grounds of public policy and  public  security  for  expelling  her.
Thirdly, the Secretary of State found  that,  a  fortiori,  Ms G.  was  not
entitled to the basic level of protection against expulsion.
17      Ms G. appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum
Chamber)  ('the  First-tier  Tribunal'),  which  allowed   the   appeal   on
10 January 2011, holding that Ms G. had resided in the United Kingdom for a
period of over 10  years  prior  to  the  deportation  order  and  that  the
Secretary of State had failed to demonstrate  the  existence  of  imperative
grounds of public security. However,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  also  found
that, in the absence of evidence to show that her husband had been  employed
or that he had otherwise exercised  rights  conferred  by  the  FEU  Treaty,
Ms G. had not proved that she had acquired a right of  permanent  residence
for the purposes of Directive 2004/38.
18      The Secretary of State brought an appeal before the Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  ('the  referring  court')  against  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  By  decision  notified  on  13 August
2011, the referring court set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
on the ground that it was contrary to precedent.
19      In the proceedings before the referring  court,  the  Secretary  of
State accepted that, in May 2003, Ms G. had acquired a right  of  permanent
residence for the purposes  of  Directive  2004/38  and  that  she  had  not
subsequently lost that right. However, the parties to the  main  proceedings
continue  to  take  different  positions  both  as  regards  the  method  of
calculating the 10-year period referred to in Article 28(3)(a) of Directive
2004/38 and as regards the assessment, in the circumstances of the case,  of
serious grounds of public policy  or  public  security  as  referred  to  in
Article 28(1) and (2) of that directive.
20      In September 2011, while  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal and the referring court were still  under  way,  the  family  court
proceedings came to a close  after  Ms  G.'s  husband  moved  to  Manchester
(United Kingdom). Ms G. remained in custody until 20 March 2012.
21      In those circumstances, the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum
Chamber),  London,  decided  to  stay  the  proceedings  and  to  refer  the
following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
'1.      Does a period in prison following sentence  for  commission  of  a
criminal offence by a Union citizen break the residence period in  the  host
Member State required for that person to benefit from the highest  level  of
protection against expulsion under Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38
... or otherwise preclude the person relying on this level of protection?
2.      Does reference to "previous ten  years"  in  Article 28(3)(a)  [of
Directive 2004/38] mean that the residence has to be  continuous  in  order
for a Union citizen to  be  able  to  benefit  from  the  highest  level  of
protection against expulsion?
3.      For the purposes of Article 28(3)(a), is the  requisite  period  of
10 years during which a Union citizen must have resided in the host  Member
State calculated
(a)      by counting back from the expulsion decision; or
(b)      by counting  forward  from  the  commencement  of  that  citizen's
residence in the host Member State?
4.      If the answer to Question  3(a)  is  that  the  10-year  period  is
calculated by counting backwards, does it make a difference  if  the  person
has accrued 10 years' residence prior to such imprisonment?'
 Consideration of the questions referred
 Questions 2 and 3
22      By its second and third  questions,  which  it  is  appropriate  to
examine first, the referring court asks, in essence:  (i)  whether  the  10-
year period of residence  referred  to  in  Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive
2004/38  must  be  calculated  by  counting  backwards  (from  the  decision
ordering the expulsion of  the  person  concerned)  or  forwards  (from  the
commencement of that person's residence) and (ii) whether that  period  must
be continuous.
23      In that regard, it should first be noted that the Court  has  found
that, while recitals 23  and  24  in  the  preamble  to  Directive  2004/38
certainly  refer  to  special  protection  for  persons  who  are  genuinely
integrated into the host Member State, especially if they  were  born  there
and have spent all their life there, the fact remains that, in view  of  the
wording of Article 28(3)  of  that  directive,  the  decisive  criterion  is
whether the Union citizen lived in  that  Member  State  for  the  10 years
preceding the expulsion  decision  (see  Case  C-145/09  Tsakouridis  [2010]
ECR I-11979, paragraph 31).
24      It follows that, unlike the requisite period for acquiring a  right
of permanent residence, which begins when  the  person  concerned  commences
lawful residence in the host Member State, the 10-year period  of  residence
necessary for the grant of the enhanced protection provided for  in  Article
28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be calculated by counting back  from  the
date of the decision ordering that person's expulsion.
25      Secondly, the  Court  has  also  found  that  Article  28(3)(a)  of
Directive 2004/38  must  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that,  in  order  to
determine whether a Union citizen resided in the host Member State  for  the
10 years preceding the expulsion  decision  -  the  decisive  criterion  for
granting enhanced protection under that provision  -  all  relevant  factors
must be taken into account  in  each  individual  case,  in  particular  the
duration of  each  period  of  absence  from  the  host  Member  State,  the
cumulative duration and the frequency of those  absences,  and  the  reasons
why the person concerned left the host Member  State,  which  may  establish
whether those absences involve the transfer to another Member State  of  the
centre of the personal, family  or  occupational  interests  of  the  person
concerned (Tsakouridis, paragraph 38).
26      Those findings were intended to explain  to  what  extent  absences
from the host  Member  State  during  the  period  referred  to  in  Article
28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 prevent the person  concerned  from  enjoying
the enhanced protection provided for in that provision  and  were  based  on
the prior finding of fact that that provision  makes  no  reference  to  any
circumstances which are  capable  of  interrupting  the  10-year  period  of
residence needed to acquire the right  to  that  protection  (see,  to  that
effect, Tsakouridis, paragraphs 22 and 29).
27      Given  that  the  decisive  criterion  for  granting  the  enhanced
protection provided for in Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38  is  the
fact that the person concerned resided in the host Member State for  the  10
years preceding the expulsion decision and that  absences  from  that  State
can affect whether  or  not  such  protection  is  granted,  the  period  of
residence referred to in that provision must, in principle, be continuous.
28      In the light of all of the foregoing, the answer to Questions 2 and
3 is that, on  a  proper  construction  of  Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive
2004/38, the 10-year period of  residence  referred  to  in  that  provision
must, in principle, be continuous and must be calculated  by  counting  back
from the  date  of  the  decision  ordering  the  expulsion  of  the  person
concerned.
 Questions 1 and 4
29      By its first and fourth questions, the  referring  court  asks,  in
essence, whether Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must  be  interpreted
as meaning that a period of imprisonment  is  capable  of  interrupting  the
continuity of the period of residence for the  purposes  of  that  provision
and may, as a result,  affect  the  decision  regarding  the  grant  of  the
enhanced  protection  provided  for  thereunder,  even  where   the   person
concerned resided in the host  Member  State  for  the  10 years  prior  to
imprisonment.
30      In that regard, the Court has already  found  that  the  system  of
protection against expulsion measures established by  Directive  2004/38  is
based on the degree of integration of the  persons  concerned  in  the  host
Member State and that, accordingly, the greater the  degree  of  integration
of Union citizens and their family members in the  host  Member  State,  the
greater the degree of protection against expulsion should  be,  in  view  of
the fact that such expulsion can seriously harm persons who, having  availed
themselves of the rights and freedoms conferred on them by the  FEU  Treaty,
have become genuinely integrated into the host Member State  (see,  to  that
effect, Tsakouridis, paragraphs 24 and 25).
31      The Court has  also  found,  when  interpreting  Article  16(2)  of
Directive 2004/38, that the  fact  that  a  national  court  has  imposed  a
custodial sentence is an  indication  that  the  person  concerned  has  not
respected the values of the society of the host Member State,  as  reflected
in  its  criminal  law,  and  that,  in   consequence,   the   taking   into
consideration  of  periods  of  imprisonment  for  the   purposes   of   the
acquisition, by members of the  family  of  a  Union  citizen  who  are  not
nationals of a  Member  State,  of  the  right  of  permanent  residence  as
referred to in Article 16(2) of Directive 2004/38 would clearly be contrary
to the  aim  pursued  by  that  directive  in  establishing  that  right  of
residence (Case C-378/12 Onuekwere [2014] ECR I-0000, paragraph 26).
32      Since the degree of integration of the persons concerned is a vital
consideration underpinning both the right of  permanent  residence  and  the
system of protection against expulsion  measures  established  by  Directive
2004/38, the reasons making it justifiable for periods of  imprisonment  not
to be taken into consideration for the  purposes  of  granting  a  right  of
permanent residence or for such periods to be regarded as  interrupting  the
continuity of the period of residence needed  to  acquire  that  right  must
also be borne in mind when interpreting Article 28(3)(a) of that  directive.

33      It follows that  periods  of  imprisonment  cannot  be  taken  into
account for the purposes of granting the enhanced  protection  provided  for
in Article 28(3)(a) of Directive  2004/38  and  that,  in  principle,  such
periods interrupt  the  continuity  of  the  period  of  residence  for  the
purposes of that provision.
34      As regards the continuity of the period of residence, it  has  been
stated in paragraph 28 above that the 10-year period of residence  necessary
for the granting of enhanced protection as provided for in Article  28(3)(a)
of Directive 2004/38 must, in principle, be continuous.
35      As for the question of  the  extent  to  which  the  non-continuous
nature of the  period  of  residence  during  the  10  years  preceding  the
decision to expel the person concerned prevents him from  enjoying  enhanced
protection, an overall assessment must be made of  that  person's  situation
on each occasion at the precise time when the question of  expulsion  arises
(see, to that effect, Tsakouridis, paragraph 32).
36      In that regard, given that, in principle, periods  of  imprisonment
interrupt the continuity of the period of  residence  for  the  purposes  of
Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38, such periods may - together with the
other factors going to make up the entirety of  relevant  considerations  in
each individual case - be taken into account  by  the  national  authorities
responsible for applying Article 28(3) of that  directive  as  part  of  the
overall assessment required for determining whether  the  integrating  links
previously forged with the host Member State have been broken, and thus  for
determining whether the enhanced protection provided for in  that  provision
will be granted (see, to that effect, Tsakouridis, paragraph 34).
37      Lastly, as regards the implications of the  fact  that  the  person
concerned has resided in the host Member State during the 10 years prior  to
imprisonment, it should be borne in mind that, even though  -  as  has  been
stated in paragraphs 24 and 25 above  -  the  10-year  period  of  residence
necessary for the grant of the enhanced protection provided for  in  Article
28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be calculated by counting back  from  the
date of the decision ordering that person's expulsion,  the  fact  that  the
calculation  carried  out  under  that  provision  is  different  from   the
calculation for the purposes of the grant of a right of permanent  residence
means that the fact that the person concerned resided  in  the  host  Member
State  during  the  10 years  prior  to  imprisonment  may  be  taken  into
consideration as part of the overall assessment referred to in paragraph  36
above.
38      In the light of the foregoing, the answer to Questions 1 and  4  is
that Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted  as  meaning
that  a  period  of  imprisonment  is,  in  principle,   capable   both   of
interrupting the continuity of the period of residence for the  purposes  of
that provision and of affecting the decision  regarding  the  grant  of  the
enhanced  protection  provided  for  thereunder,  even  where   the   person
concerned resided in the host  Member  State  for  the  10  years  prior  to
imprisonment. However, the fact that that person resided in the host  Member
State  for  the  10  years  prior  to  imprisonment  may   be   taken   into
consideration as part  of  the  overall  assessment  required  in  order  to
determine whether the integrating links  previously  forged  with  the  host
Member State have been broken.
 Costs
39      Since  these  proceedings  are,  for  the  parties  to  the   main
proceedings, a step in the action pending before  the  national  court,  the
decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred  in  submitting
observations to the Court, other than the costs of those  parties,  are  not
recoverable.
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      On   a   proper   construction    of    Article    28(3)(a)    of
Directive 2004/38/EC of the European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of
29 April 2004 on the right of  citizens  of  the  Union  and  their  family
members to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member  States
amending Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and  repealing  Directives  64/221/EEC,
68/360/EEC,  72/194/EEC,  73/148/EEC,  75/34/EEC,   75/35/EEC,   90/364/EEC,
90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC, the 10-year period of  residence  referred  to  in
that provision must, in principle, be continuous and must be  calculated  by
counting back from the date of the decision ordering the  expulsion  of  the
person concerned.
2.      Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38  must  be  interpreted  as
meaning that a period of imprisonment is,  in  principle,  capable  both  of
interrupting the continuity of the period of residence for the  purposes  of
that provision and of affecting the decision  regarding  the  grant  of  the
enhanced  protection  provided  for  thereunder,  even  where   the   person
concerned resided in the host  Member  State  for  the  10  years  prior  to
imprisonment. However, the fact that that person resided in the host  Member
State  for  the  10  years  prior  to  imprisonment  may   be   taken   into
consideration as part  of  the  overall  assessment  required  in  order  to
determine whether the integrating links  previously  forged  with  the  host
Member State have been broken.
[Signatures]
[pic]
* Language of the case: English.
 European Union
The source of this judgment is the Europa web site. The information on  this
site is subject to a Disclaimer and a Copyright notice and rules related  to
Personal data protection. This electronic version is not  authentic  and  is
subject to amendment.


-----------------------
[1] Regulation 24(5) provides that "Where such a deportation order  is  made
against a person but he is not removed under the order during the  two  year
period beginning on the date on which the order is made,  the  Secretary  of
State shall only take action to remove the person under the order after  the
end of that period if, having assessed whether there has been  any  material
change in circumstances since the deportation order was made,  he  considers
that the removal continues to be justified on the grounds of public  policy,
public security or public  health".  Article  33(2)  provides  that  "If  an
expulsion order, as provided for in paragraph 1, is enforced more  than  two
years after it was issue, the Member State shall check that  the  individual
concerned is currently and genuinely a threat to public policy  or  security
and shall  assess  whether  there  has  been  any  material  change  in  the
circumstances since the expulsion order was issued".


