
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Kuruwitage) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 0402 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                            28 November 2014

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                        MR ERANGA GAYASHAN KURUWITAGE

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr A Jafar, Counsel (Direct Access) appeared on behalf of the Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE gleeson: This is the decision on the judicial review  application
    of Mr E G Kuruwitage, a Sri Lankan citizen.   The  judicial  review  is
    brought on the basis that the Secretary of State was acting ultra vires
    in using the Section 10 procedure and  further  that  she  should  have
    considered whether to curtail his existing leave giving rise to an  in-
    country right of appeal.

 2. The facts in this  case  so  far  as  relevant  are  as  follows.   The
    applicant entered the United Kingdom lawfully as a student on a Tier  4
    visa valid until  12  October  2011.    The  conditions  of  that  visa
    permitted employment.

 3. The applicant then  applied  for  further  leave,  which  was  granted,
    employment being prohibited.  He has not had the right to work since 12
    October 2011.

 4. The applicant's studies ceased on 22  July  2013  because  the  sponsor
    licence for his college, Park West College, was revoked. Thereafter, it
    has not been shown that he came within any of the permitted  categories
    of persons who may work.

 5. The applicant was arrested at home on 4 March 2014 and  admitted  under
    caution, as evidenced by the Immigration Officer's  official  notebook,
    that he was working at e-Solutions for twenty hours  per  week,  albeit
    unpaid.  The information was confirmed by his employer.  That  is  more
    than sufficient to trigger the Section  10  power  to  remove  and  the
    respondent proceeded to  exercise  it  by  making  Section  10  removal
    directions.

 6. The applicant admitted when arrested that he knew he was  not  entitled
    to work and that he had been working voluntarily and that, applying the
    definition of work,  in  paragraph  6  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    evidence of working in breach of conditions.

 7. Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman granted permission for judicial review  on
    the basis that it was arguable, since no evidence had been disclosed by
    the respondent, that the respondent had in her possession  no  material
    on which she could have considered that the  exercise  of  her  Section
    10(1)(a) power was open to her.  An immigration officer's notebook  was
    subsequently disclosed which contained a record of  an  interview  with
    the applicant in which he admitted that he  had  been  working  (albeit
    unpaid) and knew that he had no permission to do so.

 8. I have been taken to passages in the judgment of  Helen  Mountfield  QC
    sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge in  Shahbaz  Ali  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 3967 (Admin) which was handed
    down yesterday, 27 November 2014 and also to [27] in the judgment of Mr
    Justice Silber in Westech College v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWHC 1484 (Admin).

 9. The decision in Shahbaz Ali conveniently brings  together  and  reviews
    all of the existing jurisprudence which has developed recently  on  the
    Section 10 question, beginning at paragraph 50  in  the  judgment.   At
    paragraph 63, applying the dicta of Lord Justice Sedley at paragraph 24
    of Anwar & Anor v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 1275, that the respondent's election to use the s.10 route  to
    stifle in-country appeals was a 'serious abuse  of  power',  the  judge
    noted that the observation  was  obiter  dicta  and  distinguished  it.
    Overall, the decision in Shahbaz Ali is concerned principally with  the
    situation where the applicant has had no opportunity at all to  comment
    or be interviewed in connection with  the  respondent's  perception  of
    breach of condition (see in particular, paragraph [94] in Shahbaz Ali).



10. On the facts of this application, that was not the case.  There  was  a
    statement by the applicant confirming that he was working and  that  he
    knew he had no right to work.  Accordingly, the applicant cannot  show,
    as he would need to do, that when the respondent made her  decision  to
    remove this applicant, there was no evidence on which  she  could  have
    done so or that there was evidence that she did so by way of  an  abuse
    of power.

11. I have been told that the applicant  has  made  a,  presumably  timely,
    application for an out-of-country appeal  which  can  continue  and  in
    which he may make any factual or legal challenges which  he  wishes  to
    advance in relation to the substance of the removal directions  or  the
    evidence on which the respondent made them.  No sound reason  has  been
    advanced as to why an out of country remedy  is  insufficient  in  this
    case.

12. This application is dismissed.

13.  I  order  the  applicant  to  pay  the  respondent's  costs  of  these
    proceedings, to be assessed if not agreed.

14. There being no application for permission to appeal I refuse permission
    to appeal under paragraph 44(4B) because I am not satisfied that  there
    is any error of law in the decision which I have just given.~~~~0~~~~

