
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber

R (on the application of Sharif Hussein) v First-Tier  Tribunal  (para  353:
present scope and effect) IJR [2016] UKUT 00409 (IAC)


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                       Heard at Field House on:  20 May 2016
                                      Final written submissions: 9 June 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                             amin sharif hussein
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

                             FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL
                                                                  Respondent

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                            Interested Party

                                   Before

                          the hon. mr justice dove
                 (sitting as a judge OF the upper Tribunal)
                       Upper Tribunal Judge PETER LANE

                               - - - - - - - -

For the applicant: Mr R Toal, Counsel, instructed by Wilsons Solicitors
For the interested party: Mr T Fisher, Counsel, instructed by the
Government Legal Department
The respondent was not represented

 (1) Lord Neuberger's judgment in R (ZA (Nigeria)) v Secretary of State  for
the Home Department  [2010] EWCA Civ 926 is an  authoritative  pronouncement
on the scope of  the  Supreme  Court's  judgments  in  R  (BA  (Nigeria))  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKSC 7.

(2) Parliament's actions in amending paragraph 353  (fresh  claims)  of  the
immigration rules in the light of the changes to the appeal regime  made  by
the Immigration Act 2014, together with its decisions:-

     (i) to  amend,  but  without  bringing  into  force,  the  prospective
    amendments made in 2006 to the definition of "human  rights  claim"  in
    section 113 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; and
    (ii) to amend the existing definition of "human rights  claim"  in  the
    light of the 2014 Act,

 show that Parliament intends paragraph 353 to be used to determine  whether
further submissions constitute a fresh human rights claim  for  the  purpose
of "new" section 82 of the 2002 Act.

(3)  If, in the post-2014 Act world, Parliament had intended  paragraph  353
to apply only to the Secretary  of  State's  certification  decisions,  then
Parliament would have made this plain. If the applicant  were  correct  that
paragraph 353 currently has only such a limited ambit, commencing  the  2006
amendments to section 113 of the 2002 Act would not enable the Secretary  of
State to make any significantly greater and/or  coherent  use  of  paragraph
353.

(4) Parliament's decision to leave in place  the  expressions  "submissions"
and "if rejected" in paragraph 353 are  indicative  that  they  continue  to
serve the function of permitting the Secretary of State to categorise  cases
as between those that do not amount to a  claim  at  all  and  those  which,
though rejected, amount to a fresh human rights claim for  the  purposes  of
"new" section 82.

(5)  The Secretary of State is not the  sole  arbiter  of  whether,  in  any
particular case, she has made a decision to refuse a human rights claim,  as
opposed to refusing to treat submissions as amounting to a fresh claim.

                       - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                  JUDGMENT
                               (8 August 2016)
                       - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE PETER LANE:


A. Introduction


1.   As a result of the amendments made by the Immigration Act 2014  to  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, Parliament  reduced  from
    14 to 3 the number of rights of  appeal  under  the  2002  Act  against
    decisions of the Secretary of State in the immigration field.   Section
    82 (right of appeal to the Tribunal) now reads as follows:


         "(1) A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where -


             (a)  the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection
                  claim made by P;


             (b)  the Secretary of State has  decided  to  refuse  a  human
                  rights claim made by P, or


             (c)   the  Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to  revoke  P's
                  protection status.


         (2)  For the purposes of this Part -


             (a)  a 'protection claim' is a claim made by  a  person  ("P")
                  that removal of P from the United Kingdom -


                  (i)  would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
                      the Refugee Convention, or


                  (ii) would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  in
                      relation  to  persons  eligible  for   a   grant   of
                      humanitarian protection;


             (b)  P's protection claim is refused if the Secretary of State
                  makes one or more of the following decisions -


                  (i)  that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would  not
                      breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
                      Refugee Convention;


                  (ii) that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would  not
                      breach the United Kingdom's obligations  in  relation
                      to persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of  humanitarian
                      protection;


             (c)  a person has 'protection status' if the person  has  been
                  granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  as
                  a  refugee  or  as  a  person  eligible  for  a  grant  of
                  humanitarian protection;


             (d)   'humanitarian  protection'  is  to   be   construed   in
                  accordance with the immigration rules;


             (e)   'refugee'  has  the  same  meaning  as  in  the  Refugee
                  Convention.


         (3)  The right of appeal under subsection (1)  is  subject  to  the
             exceptions and limitations specified in this Part."


2.   Section 113 (interpretation) of the 2002  Act  contains  the  following
    definitions:-


         "(1) In this part, unless a contrary intention appears -


                  'asylum claim' means a claim  made  by  a  person  to  the
                  Secretary of State at a place designated by the  Secretary
                  of State that to remove the person from or require him  to
                  leave the United Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's
                  obligations under the Refugee Convention;


                  'humanitarian protection' has the meaning given in section
                  82(2);


                  'human rights claim' means a claim made by a person to the
                  Secretary of State at a place designated by the  Secretary
                  of State that to remove the person from or require him  to
                  leave the United Kingdom or to refuse him entry  into  the
                  United Kingdom[1] would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                  Human Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (public authority not to  act
                  contrary to Convention);


                   'the Human Rights Convention' has  the  same  meaning  as
                  'the  Convention'  in  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998   and
                  'Convention rights' shall be construed in accordance  with
                  section 1 of that Act;


                  'immigration rules' means rules under section 1(4) of  the
                  Immigration Act 1971 (general immigration rules);


                  'protection  claim'  has  the  meaning  given  in  section
                  82(2);[2]


                  'protection status'  has  the  meaning  given  in  section
                  82(2);[3]


                  'the Refugee Convention' means the Convention relating  to
                  the Status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28 July 1951  and
                  its Protocol."


3.   Section 12 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  (asylum
    and human rights  claims:  definition)  prospectively  amended  section
    113(1) of the 2002 Act.  If section 12 had been brought into force by a
    relevant Commencement Order, the  definitions  of  "asylum  claim"  and
    "human rights claim" would have read as follows:-


         "'asylum claim' -


         (a)  means a claim made by a person that  to  remove  him  from  or
             require him to leave  the  United  Kingdom  would  breach  the
             United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention, but


         (b)  does not include a claim which,  having  regard  to  a  former
             claim, falls to be disregarded for the purposes of  this  Part
             in accordance with immigration rules";


         'human rights claim' -


         (a)  means a claim made by a person that  to  remove  him  from  or
             require him to leave the  United  Kingdom  would  be  unlawful
             under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  (c.42)  (public
             authority  not  to  act  contrary  to  Convention)  as   being
             incompatible with his Convention rights, but


         (b)  does not include a claim which,  having  regard  to  a  former
             claim, falls to be disregarded for the purposes of  this  Part
             in accordance with immigration rules."


4.   The amendments contained in section 12 of the 2006 Act  have  not  been
    brought into force.  Instead, the 2014 Act  has  amended  the  existing
    definition of "human rights claim" in  section  113  by  inserting  the
    words "or to refuse him entry into the United Kingdom" (see footnote  1
    to paragraph 2 above) and deleting the  words  "as  being  incompatible
    with his Convention rights". The 2014 Act  also  made  a  corresponding
    change to the prospective definition of "human  rights  claim"  in  the
    2006 Act.[4]


5.     The following are the immigration rules that are  relevant  to  these
    proceedings:


         "Procedure and rights of appeal


         Fresh claims

         353.  When a human rights or protection claim[5] has  been  refused
         or withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under paragraph 333C of  these
         Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is no  longer  pending,
         the decision maker will consider any further  submissions  and,  if
         rejected, will then determine whether they amount to a fresh claim.
         The  submissions  will  amount  to  a  fresh  claim  if  they   are
         significantly different from the material that has previously  been
         considered. The submissions will only be significantly different if
         the content:
         (i)  had not already been considered; and
         (ii)  taken  together  with  the  previously  considered  material,
             created a realistic prospect of success,  notwithstanding  its
             rejection.  This paragraph  does  not  apply  to  claims  made
             overseas.
         353A. Consideration of further submissions shall be subject to  the
         procedures set out in  these  Rules.  An  applicant  who  has  made
         further submissions shall not be removed before  the  Secretary  of
         State  has  considered  the  submissions  under  paragraph  353  or
         otherwise."
6.   Although both Counsel had  prepared  for  the  hearing  on  20  May  by
    reference to the wording of paragraph 353, as it appeared at that  time
    on the Home Office's website, that wording was incorrect.  As a  result
    of  the  approval  by  Parliament  of  the  Statement  of  Changes   in
    Immigration Rules (HC 1025), the word "asylum"  in  paragraph  353  was
    replaced with effect from 6 April 2015 by the word "protection".

7.   As can be seen from paragraphs 1  and  2  above,  the  purpose  of  the
    amendment is to reflect the introduction by the 2014 Act into the  2002
    Act of the expression "protection claim".  The  amended  paragraph  353
    was the version in force on 26 June 2015, when the Secretary  of  State
    issued  her  letter,  declining  to  treat  the   applicant's   further
    submissions as a fresh claim.


B.  The issue


8.   With that necessarily elaborate legislative exegesis, we can state  the
    issue in these proceedings as follows: to what extent, if at  all,  can
    the Secretary of State utilise paragraph 353 of  the  Rules  so  as  to
    preclude P from appealing to the First-tier Tribunal under  section  82
    of the 2002 Act?


9.     Mr Toal, on behalf of the  applicant,  says  that  the  Secretary  of
    State may not rely at all  on  paragraph  353  for  this  purpose.   He
    submits that the position fundamentally changed, as  a  result  of  the
    changes brought by the 2014 Act.   Mr  Toal  says  the  Upper  Tribunal
    wrongly decided the cases of R (Waqar) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department (statutory appeals/paragraph  353)  [2015]  UKUT  00169
    (IAC) and R (Robinson) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (paragraph 353 - Waqar applied) [2016] UKUT 00133  (IAC),  in  both  of
    which it was held that paragraph 353 still has a role to  play  in  the
    post-2014 Act regime.  The Court of Appeal, according to Mr  Toal,  was
    accordingly wrong to refuse permission in Waqar.


10.    For the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Fisher  submits  that  Waqar  and
    Robinson were correctly decided.  Furthermore, although  involving  the
    immediately preceding  statutory  regime,  Mr  Fisher  says  that  this
    Tribunal is bound by the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  R  (ZA
    (Nigeria)) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  &  Another
    [2010] EWCA Civ 926.  Both sides respectively contend that the  correct
    application  of  principles  of  statutory  interpretation  demands   a
    decision in their favour.





C.  The present proceedings


11.  The applicant is a citizen of Somalia who entered  the  United  Kingdom
    in April 2009.  In August 2011, he was granted humanitarian  protection
    for a period of five years, expiring on 24 August  2016.   That  status
    was revoked by the Secretary of State on 19  November  2013,  on  which
    date the Secretary of State also decided to make a deportation order in
    respect of the applicant, following his  conviction  for  a  series  of
    violent and sexual offences.


12.  The applicant's appeal against the deportation decision  was  dismissed
    and on 28 October 2014 the applicant became "appeal  rights  exhausted"
    in respect of that decision.


13.  On 24 June 2015, the applicant made further submissions in  support  of
    a request to revoke the  deportation  order.   On  26  June  2015,  the
    Secretary of State rejected those submissions and concluded  that  they
    did not amount to a fresh claim under paragraph 353 of the  immigration
    rules.


14.  On 1 July 2015, the applicant attempted to  appeal  to  the  respondent
    against the decision of 26  June.   On  6  July  2015,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decided that the decision  against  which  the  applicant  was
    seeking to appeal was not one against which there  was  an  exercisable
    right of appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal accordingly  found  that  the
    appeal was "invalid"  and  that,  pursuant  to  rule  22(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014, the Tribunal  would  take  no  further  action  in
    relation to it.


15.  On 17 September 2015, an application was made  to  apply  for  judicial
    review  proceedings  to  challenge  the  decision  of  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  on  1
    March 2016.





D.  The cases


16.  In order to engage with the submissions of Mr Toal and  Mr  Fisher,  it
    is necessary to examine case law extending back some twenty years.





R v Home Secretary ex p Onibiyo [1996] QB 768


17.   A  Nigerian  national,  who  had  previously  appealed  unsuccessfully
    against a decision that he was not entitled  to  refugee  status,  made
    further submissions to the Secretary of State, who  declined  to  treat
    them as a fresh asylum claim.  The Court of  Appeal  (per  Bingham  MR)
    held that, although more than one "claim  for  asylum"  could  be  made
    within the meaning of section 1 of the Asylum and  Immigration  Appeals
    Act 1993, the Secretary of  State  had  power  to  decide  whether  new
    submissions amounted to a fresh such claim:


         "The first issue argued in this court was whether, as a  matter  of
         law, a person may during a single uninterrupted stay in the  United
         Kingdom make more than one  'claim  for  asylum'.   By  'claim  for
         asylum' is meant a claim falling within the definition in section 1
         of the Act of 1993.  The applicant argued that after dismissal of a
         first claim, a fresh claim could in law be made.  The Secretary  of
         State took a different view: he argued that once a person had  made
         a 'claim for asylum', been refused by the Secretary  of  State  and
         unsuccessfully exercised his rights of appeal under  section  8  of
         the Act of 1993, that exhausted his legal rights.  He could lay new
         material before the Secretary  of  State  and  the  latter,  if  so
         advised, could  in  the  exercise  of  his  discretion  refer  such
         material to a special adjudicator or the tribunal under section  21
         of the Act of  1971  (applicable  to  asylum  cases  by  virtue  of
         paragraph  4(2)(d)  of  Schedule  2  to  the  Act  of   1993)   for
         consideration by that person or body.  But once there had been  one
         claim for asylum and one appeal, there could be no  further  'claim
         for asylum' unless the claimant had left  the  United  Kingdom  and
         returned before making the fresh application.


         The judge accepted the Secretary  of  State's  argument.   After  a
         careful review of the relevant provisions and authorities,  and  of
         the arguments addressed to him, he said:


             'I have therefore come to the conclusion  that  the  statutory
             scheme of the Act of 1993 envisages a claim for  asylum  which
             becomes a historical  fact  entitling  the  asylum  seeker  to
             exercise a  right  of  appeal  under  section  8  against  any
             relevant  administrative  decision  or  action.   Any  further
             material submitted or applications made by or on behalf of the
             asylum seeker are submitted or made in support of the original
             claim, whether they are made before or after the Secretary  of
             State has made his decision on the claim or  before  or  after
             any appeal under section 8.  If the appeal is dismissed,  then
             the  material  or  applications  will  be  considered  by  the
             Secretary of State in the exercise of the discretion which  it
             is accepted that he had, to reconsider his decision, and if he
             considers it appropriate, to refer any matter arising  out  of
             those  materials  or  applications  to  an  adjudicator  under
             section 21 of the Act of 1971.'


         I prefer the applicant's argument on this point.  The obligation of
         the United Kingdom under the Convention is not to return a  refugee
         (as defined) to a country  where  his  life  or  freedom  would  be
         threatened for  any  reason  specified  in  the  Convention.   That
         obligation remains binding until the moment of return.   A  refugee
         (as defined) has a right not to be returned to such a country,  and
         a further right not to be returned pending a decision whether he is
         a refugee (as defined) or not.  It would in my  judgment  undermine
         the beneficial object of the Convention  and  the  measures  giving
         effect to it in this country  if  the  making  of  an  unsuccessful
         application  for  asylum  were  to  be  treated  as  modifying  the
         obligation of the United Kingdom or depriving a person of the right
         to make a fresh 'claim for asylum'.  It cannot in my view make  any
         difference whether the person making the fresh 'claim  for  asylum'
         has left the country and returned or remained here throughout.


         Any other construction would in my  view  be  offensive  to  common
         sense.  However rarely they may arise in practice, it is  not  hard
         to imagine cases in which an initial 'claim for  asylum'  might  be
         made on insubstantial, or  even  bogus,  grounds,  and  be  rightly
         rejected, but in which circumstances would arise or come  to  light
         showing a clear and serious threat of  a  kind  recognised  by  the
         Convention to the life or  freedom  of  the  formerly  unsuccessful
         applicant.   A  scheme  of  legal  protection   which   could   not
         accommodate  that  possibility  would  in  my  view  be   seriously
         defective."


         ......


         (1)   A fresh claim?

         It was accepted for the applicant that a fresh 'claim  for  asylum'
         could not be made by advancing an obviously untenable claim  or  by
         repeating, even with some elaboration or addition, a claim  already
         made, or by relying on evidence available to the applicant but  not
         advanced at the time  of  an  earlier  claim.  There  had,  counsel
         acknowledged,  to  be  a  significant  change  from  the  claim  as
         previously presented, such  as  might  reasonably  lead  a  special
         adjudicator to take a different view. If the fresh  claim  depended
         on new evidence, then it had to satisfy tests, analogous to Ladd  v
         Marshall  [1954]  1   WLR   1489,   of   previous   unavailability,
         significance and credibility.


         Stuart-Smith L.J. considered this matter  in  the  Manvinder  Singh
         case (unreported),  8  December  1995,  where  he  said  (with  the
         agreement of Rose L.J. and Sir John Balcombe):
             'In my opinion, in deciding whether or not a  fresh  claim  to
             asylum is made, it  is  necessary  to  analyse  what  are  the
             essential ingredients of a claim to asylum and see whether any
             of those ingredients have changed.  A  useful  analogy  is  to
             consider a cause of action. In order to establish a  cause  of
             action a plaintiff must  prove  certain  ingredients.  How  he
             proves them is  a  matter  of  evidence.  If  he  changes  the
             essential ingredients, he is asserting a  different  cause  of
             action.  What are the essential ingredients  of  a  claim  for
             asylum? First, that the applicant has a well-founded  fear  of
             persecution; secondly, that he has that fear  in  relation  to
             the country from whence he came; thirdly, that the  source  of
             the  persecution  is  the  authorities  of  that   state   or,
             alternatively, some other group or local population where  the
             actions  of  the  group  are  knowingly   tolerated   by   the
             authorities, or that the authorities refused or are unable  to
             offer effective protection (see the  handbook  of  the  United
             Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees,   paragraph   65);
             finally, that the persecution is by reason of the  applicant's
             race, religion, nationality  or  membership  of  a  particular
             social or political group.  In my view,  it  is  only  if  the
             applicant  asserts  that  one  or  more  of  these   essential
             ingredients is different from his earlier claim that it can be
             said to be a fresh claim.'
         I agree with this passage, and with the  propositions  accepted  by
         counsel for the applicant. There is danger in any  form  of  words,
         which can too easily be regarded  as  a  binding  formula.  In  the
         Manvinder Singh case [1996] Imm  A.R. 41, Carnwath J  held  that  a
         change in the character of  the  application  was  required.  I  am
         content with that statement, provided it is not taken to mean  that
         there must necessarily be a change in the nature of the persecution
         said to be feared. The acid test must always be whether,  comparing
         the new claim with that earlier rejected, and excluding material on
         which the claimant could reasonably have been expected to  rely  in
         the earlier claim, the new claim is sufficiently different from the
         earlier claim to admit of a realistic prospect  that  a  favourable
         view could be taken of  the  new  claim  despite  the  unfavourable
         conclusion reached on the earlier claim.

         (2)  Who is to decide?

         It is plain from rule 328 of Statement of  Changes  in  Immigration
         Rules that all  asylum  applications  will  be  determined  by  the
         Secretary of State in the first instance.

         (3)  Procedural consequences

         If the Secretary of State decides on a fresh claim to grant asylum,
         and the claimant is accordingly granted limited leave to enter,  no
         procedural difficulty is likely to arise.


         If the Secretary of State recognises a fresh claim as a 'claim  for
         asylum', but nonetheless decides that asylum should not be granted,
         I see no reason why the same consequences should not follow  as  on
         refusal of an initial claim. The disappointed claimant  can  pursue
         his right of appeal under section 8.


         The  problematical  situation  is  that  in  which,  as  here,  the
         Secretary of State does not recognise a claim as a fresh 'claim for
         asylum' and so declines to make any decision or to take or omit  to
         take any action which would trigger a right of appeal under section
         8. Neither party  suggested  that  the  asylum-seeker  was  without
         redress in this situation, and both accepted that redress could  be
         obtained only by resort to the court. But  there  agreement  ended.
         The applicant argued that whether or not a fresh 'claim for asylum'
         had been made was a matter of precedent fact to be decided, in case
         of dispute, by the court. The Secretary of State  argued  that  the
         question was one for him and his decision, while  not  immune  from
         challenge, could be challenged only on  grounds  of  irrationality.
         The cases already referred  to  contain  tentative  expressions  of
         opinion both ways.


         The judge did not rule on this question, and it  is  not  clear  to
         what extent it was argued before him. It  was  not  raised  in  the
         notice of appeal, and not  explored  in  the  applicant's  skeleton
         argument in this court. No authority was cited to us.  For  reasons
         given in Section V below,  I  do  not  regard  the  answer  to  the
         question as determinative of this appeal.  Since the issue  is  one
         of importance, and also in my opinion of considerable difficulty, I
         accordingly proffer a tentative answer only.


         The role of the court in the immigration field varies, depending on
         the legislative and administrative context. Where  an  exercise  of
         administrative power  is  dependent  on  the  establishment  of  an
         objective precedent fact the court will, if called upon to do so in
         case of dispute, itself rule whether such fact  is  established  to
         the requisite standard. Thus, for example, where  power  to  detain
         and remove is dependent on  a  finding  that  the  detainee  is  an
         illegal entrant, one who has entered clandestinely or by fraud  and
         deceit, the court will itself rule whether the evidence is such  as
         to justify that finding: Reg. v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department, EX.1 parte Khawaja [1984] A.C. 74.   By  contrast,  the
         decision whether an asylum-seeker is a refugee is a question to  be
         determined by the Secretary of State and the immigration  appellate
         authorities, whose determinations are susceptible to challenge only
         on Wednesbury principles:  Reg v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department, Ex parte Bugdaycay [1987] A.C. 514. I  am  of  opinion,
         although with some misgivings, that the judgment  whether  a  fresh
         'claim for asylum' has been made should  be  assimilated  with  the
         latter, and  not  the  former,  class  of  judgment.  If  the  test
         propounded in (1) above is correct,  the  answer  to  the  question
         whether or not a fresh 'claim  for  asylum'  has  been  made,  will
         depend not on the finding of any objective  fact,  nor  even  on  a
         literal comparison of the earlier and the later claim,  but  on  an
         exercise of judgment, and this is a  field  in  which  the  initial
         judgments are very clearly entrusted to the Secretary of State.  In
         giving effect, for example, to rule 346 of the Statement of Changes
         in Immigration Rules, it must be for the Secretary of State and not
         for the court to rule  whether  the  applicant  can  demonstrate  a
         relevant and substantial change in circumstances since his  refusal
         of an earlier application. In a  case  such  as  the  present,  the
         judgment is not very different from that  which  the  Secretary  of
         State may make under section 21 of the 1971 Act.


         I would accordingly incline to  accept  the  Secretary  of  State's
         argument on this point, while observing that decisions  reached  by
         him are susceptible to challenge on any Wednesbury ground, of which
         irrationality is  only  one:   see  Associated  Provincial  Picture
         Houses Ltd. V Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223."







ZT (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 6

18.   This  case  involved  the  appeals  system  under   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  as  it  stood  before  the  extensive
    changes made by the 2014 Act.  The House of Lords held  that,  where  P
    had made asylum and human rights claims that had been  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State and certified under section 94 of the  2002  Act  as
    "clearly unfounded" (with the result that  P  could  appeal  only  from
    outside the United Kingdom), any new submissions made by P whilst still
    in this country fell to be considered pursuant to  the  procedures  set
    out in paragraph 353.  The Secretary of State  had,  accordingly,  been
    wrong merely to maintain the certification of the claims; although  the
    appeal was dismissed on  the  basis  that  there  was,  in  effect,  no
    material error of law.  This was because the test for certification was
    more stringent than that contained in paragraph 353.


R (BA (Nigeria)) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  &  Another
    [2009] UKSC 7

19.  The Supreme Court judgments in BA (Nigeria) are heavily relied upon  by
    Mr Toal.  BA lost an appeal  against  a  decision  that  he  should  be
    deported as a result of serious criminal  offending.   BA  subsequently
    made further submissions as to why he  should  not  be  deported.   The
    Secretary  of  State  "agreed  to  consider  his  reasons  for  seeking
    revocation of the deportation order, but she  declined  to  revoke  it"
    [3].  PE, a citizen  of  Cameroon,  also  lost  his  appeal  against  a
    decision to deport as a result of criminality.  PE made new submissions
    and claimed that he had a right of  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal to revoke his deportation order.

20.  As in force at the relevant time, section 92 of the 2002  Act,  so  far
    as relevant, provided as follows:-

         "(1) A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while he is in the
             United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind  to  which  this
             section applies.
         .....


         (4)  This section also applies to an appeal against an  immigration
             decision if the appellant -


             (a)  has made an asylum claim, or a human rights claim,  while
                  in the United Kingdom, or


             (b)  ......"


21.  BA and PE argued that  section  92(4)(a)  conferred  a  suspensive  in-
    country right of appeal unless the  appeal  had  been  certified  under
    either section 94 or section 96 of the 2002 Act.  Section  94  entitled
    the Secretary of State to certify a case as "clearly unfounded",  while
    section 96 removed a  right  of  appeal  altogether  if  subject  to  a
    certificate that the issue raised had been, or should have been,  dealt
    with in an earlier appeal.  At paragraphs 14 to 23  of  the  judgments,
    Lord  Hope  set  out  the  competing  arguments  in  more  detail.   In
    particular:-

         "14. For the Secretary of State Miss Laing QC did not dispute  that
             a right of appeal arises under section 82(1) when  a  decision
             that is an  immigration  decision  is  taken.   Nor  does  she
             dispute that the Secretary of State's refusal in  these  cases
             not  to  revoke  the  deportation  orders   were   immigration
             decisions within the meaning of section 82(2)(k) of  the  2002
             Act.  What was in  issue  was  whether  the  right  of  appeal
             against those decisions was to be exercised  from  within  the
             United Kingdom.  Her submission was that the words 'an  asylum
             claim, or a human rights claim' in  section  92(4)(a)  mean  a
             first asylum or human rights claim or a second  or  subsequent
             asylum or human rights claim which  has  been  accepted  as  a
             fresh claim under rule 353 of the Immigration Rules.


         15.  She acknowledged that this was not the literal meaning of this
             provision, as the definitions of  these  expressions  made  no
             reference to the fact that the claims to which  they  referred
             had to be a first or a fresh claim.  But she  said  that  they
             had to be construed in  the  context  of  the  scheme  of  the
             statute as a whole, and that they had to be read  in  the  way
             she suggested to avoid an absurdity. She  submitted  that  the
             authorities also showed that they had to be  read  subject  to
             this qualification."


 22. Lord Hope rejected the Secretary of State's contentions:-

         "Discussion


         24.  I have set out the competing arguments at some length,  partly
             out  of  respect  for  the  excellent  submissions  that  were
             advanced by counsel on either side in the Chamber of the House
             of Lords on the occasion of the last sitting of the  House  in
             its judicial capacity, and  partly  because  they  demonstrate
             very clearly the essence of the issue  that  we  must  decide.
             Miss Laing invites  us  to  follow  Sir  Thomas  Bingham  MR's
             analysis of the problem in R v Secretary of State for the Home
             Department, Ex p Onibiyo [1996] QB 768, to hold that the words
             'an asylum claim, or a human  rights  claim  or  a  second  or
             subsequent claim which has been accepted by the  Secretary  of
             State  as  a  'fresh  claim',  and  that  the  procedure   for
             determining whether or not a second or subsequent claim  is  a
             fresh claim is to be found in  rule  353  of  the  Immigration
             Rules.  Mr Husain on the other  hand  invites  us  to  examine
             those words in the context of the current legislation read  as
             a whole, taking full account of the progress of thinking since
             Ex p Onibiyo as to how the problem of repeat claims should  be
             addressed.  He submits that there is no justification, in  the
             light of the provisions for dealing with  repeat  claims  that
             the 2002 Act contains, for enlarging upon the plain  words  of
             the statute.


         25.  The strength of Miss Laing's argument lies in  the  fact  that
             the definition of the phrase 'claim for asylum' has  remained,
             in substance, the same since its first appearance in section 1
             of the 1993 Act where it was said to mean:


                  'a claim made by a person (whether  before  or  after  the
                  coming into force  of  this  section)  that  it  would  be
                  contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
                  Convention for him to be  removed  from,  or  required  to
                  leave, the United Kingdom.'


             The Convention there referred to was, of course,  the  Refugee
             Convention.  The definition in section 167 of the 1999 Act was
             in substantially the same terms.  Section 113 of the 2002  Act
             varies the language a little bit, because it calls  this  kind
             of claim 'an asylum claim', introduces a requirement for it to
             be made at a place designated by the Secretary  of  State  (no
             such place has been  designated)  and  adds  a  definition  in
             almost  identical  terms  of  'a  human  rights  claim'.   The
             relevant phrase throughout is 'a claim'.


         26.  In R v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department,  Ex  p
             Onibiyo [1996] QB 768 the Secretary of State's  argument  that
             once there had been a claim for asylum and  one  appeal  there
             could be no further 'claim for asylum' unless the claimant had
             left the United Kingdom and returned before making  the  fresh
             application was rejected.  It was held that there could  be  a
             fresh 'claim for asylum' with the same consequences as to  the
             right of appeal as follow on the refusal of an initial  claim,
             provided that the Secretary  of  State  recognised  the  fresh
             claim as a 'claim for asylum'.  If one looks  no  further  and
             applies what  Bennion  on  Statutory  Interpretation,  5th  ed
             (2008), section 201 and Part X1V described  as  'the  informed
             interpretation rule', there is plainly much to be said for the
             view that the definitions that are set out in section  113  of
             the 2002 Act should be read in the same  way.   The  procedure
             for determining whether a repeat claim is or is not  a  'fresh
             claim' is set out in rule 353 of the  Immigration  Rules,  the
             effect of which I  attempted  to  explain  in  ZT  (Kosovo)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1  WLR  348,
             para 33.  It is a short step to conclude that a  repeat  claim
             which is not held under rule 353 to be a fresh claim falls  to
             be disregarded as 'an asylum claim', or a 'human rights claim'
             for the purposes of section 92(4)(a).  Like Lloyd LJ, I  would
             not draw an inference either way from the amendment of section
             113 by section 12 of the 2006 Act as it is not yet  in  force.



         27.  It is an elementary principle, however, that the  words  of  a
             statute should be construed in the context of  the  scheme  of
             the statute as a whole.  And it is plain that  the  scheme  of
             the 2002 Act is not the same as that of the 1993 Act to  which
             Sir Thomas Bingham MR addressed himself in Ex p Onibiyo [1996]
             QB 768.  The problem to which he addressed himself was created
             by the absence of any provision  in  the  statute  to  prevent
             abuse.  The question was how that gap might  best  be  filled,
             having regard to the fact that the  blunt  solution  that  was
             proposed by the Secretary of State would, as the Master of the
             Rolls pointed out at p 781G, undermine the  beneficial  object
             of the Convention and the measures giving effect to it in this
             country.


         28.  Parliament might, of course, have stood  still  and  left  the
             matter to be dealt with under the Immigration Rules.   But  it
             has not stood still.  The experience of the intervening  years
             has been taken into account.  First, there were the provisions
             against abuse in sections 73 to 77 of the 1999 Act.  Now there
             is a set of entirely new provisions in the 2002 Act.  As  Lord
             Hoffmann said in A v Hoare [2008] AC 844, para 15, while there
             is  a  good  deal  of  authority  for  having  regard  in  the
             construction of a statute to the way a word or phrase has been
             construed by the court in earlier statues, the value  of  such
             previous interpretation as a guide to construction  will  vary
             with the circumstances.  In this case the phrase  in  question
             has remained, in essence, unchanged.  But the system in  which
             it must be made to work is very different.  This is  a  factor
             to which full weight must be given.


         29.  The new system contains a range  of  powers  that  enable  the
             Secretary of State or, as the  case  may  be,  an  immigration
             officer to deal  with  the  problem  of  repeat  claims.   The
             Secretary of State's power in section 94(2) of the 2002 Act to
             certify that a claim is clearly unfounded, if  exercised,  has
             the effect that the person may not bring his appeal in-country
             in reliance on section 92(4).  The power in section 96 enables
             the Secretary of State or an immigration  officer  to  certify
             that a person who is subject to a new immigration decision has
             raised an issue which has been dealt with, or  ought  to  have
             been dealt with, in  an  earlier  appeal  against  a  previous
             immigration decision, which has the  effect  that  the  person
             will have no right of appeal against the new decision.  It  is
             common ground that the present cases are not certifiable under
             either of  these  two  sections.   Why  then  should  they  be
             subjected to a further  requirement  which  is  not  mentioned
             anywhere in the 2002 Act?  It can only be read  into  the  Act
             by, as Sedley LJ in the Court of Appeal put it,  glossing  the
             meaning of the words 'a.....claim' so as to exclude a  further
             claim which has not been held under rule 353  to  be  a  fresh
             claim: [2009] QB 686, paras 20, 30.  The court had to do  this
             in Ex p Onibiyo [1996] QB 768.  But there is  no  need  to  do
             this now.


         ......


         32.   ....  There  is  obviously  a  balance  to  be  struck.   The
             immigration appeals system must not be burdened with worthless
             repeat claims.  On the other hand, procedures that are put  in
             place  to  address  this  problem  must  respect  the   United
             Kingdom's  international  obligations.  That   is   what   the
             legislative scheme does, when section 95 is read together with
             section 94(9). It preserves the right to maintain in an out of
             country appeal that the  decision  in  question  has  breached
             international obligations. I would hold that claims which  are
             not certified under section 94 or excluded under  section  96,
             if rejected, should be allowed to proceed to appeal in-country
             under sections 82 and 92, whether or not they are accepted  by
             the Secretary of State as fresh claims.


         33.  There is no doubt, as I indicated in Z T (Kosovo) v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR  348,  para  33,
             that rule 353 was drafted on the assumption  that  a  claimant
             who made further submissions would be at risk of being removed
             or required to leave immediately if he does not have a  'fresh
             claim'. That was indeed the case when this rule was originally
             drafted, as there was no equivalent of section  92(4)  of  the
             2002 Act.  But Mr Husain's analysis has persuaded me that  the
             legislative scheme that Parliament has now put in  place  does
             not have that effect. Its carefully  interlocking  provisions,
             when read as a whole, set out the complete  code  for  dealing
             with repeat claims. Rule 353, as  presently  drafted,  has  no
             part to play in the legislative scheme. As  an  expression  of
             the will of Parliament, it must take priority over  the  rules
             formulated by the executive.  Rule  353A  on  the  other  hand
             remains in place as  necessary  protection  against  premature
             removal until the further submissions have been considered  by
             the Secretary of State."




R (ZA (Nigeria)) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2010]  EWCA
Civ 926

23.  In this case, the  applicants  contended  that,  on  the  basis  of  BA
    (Nigeria), paragraph 353 could not preclude them from pursuing  an  in-
    country right of appeal, and that  the  only  means  available  to  the
    Secretary of State of restricting the applicants' appeal rights was  to
    certify them as clearly unfounded, with  the  result  that  they  could
    appeal only once outside the  United  Kingdom.   The  Court  of  Appeal
    rejected that argument.

24.  At paragraph 1, Lord Neuberger MR described the issue as being:-

         "whether, as the Administrative Court  decided,  the  Secretary  of
         State is entitled to refrain from making an appealable  immigration
         decision in response to an asylum claim or  a  human  rights  claim
         which he reasonably concludes is merely repetition  of  an  earlier
         claim whose rejection  has  been  unsuccessfully  challenged  in  a
         concluded appeal".

         ......

         "5.  The contention of the claimants, SM and ZA, on the other  hand
             is that, irrespective of the weakness or repetitious nature of
             the renewed purported claims, the Secretary of  State  had  to
             make a decision on them, and that her duties  with  regard  to
             them were  governed  by  the  provisions  of  Part  5  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 whose effect  was
             either impliedly to repeal rule 353 or  to  render  it  of  no
             further application.


         6.   These rival submissions obviously  require  one  carefully  to
             consider the terms of rule 353 and of certain of the  sections
             in Part 5  of  the  2002  Act.   However,  they  also  require
             consideration of the decision of the  House  of  Lords  in  ZT
             (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1
             WLR 348, and of the  Supreme  Court  in  R  (BA  (Nigeria))  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  1  AC  444,
             this  latter  decision  providing  the  main  plank  for   the
             claimant's argument.


         .....


         15.  Rule 353 of the Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration  Rules
             (1994) (HC 395), as inserted and amended, is concerned with  a
             case where a person has already made 'a  human  rights  or  an
             asylum claim' which has been determined,  and  in  respect  of
             which he makes 'further submissions';  in  such  a  case,  the
             question  for  the  Secretary  of  State  is   whether   those
             submissions amount to 'a fresh claim': if it does not, she can
             refuse to treat it as a claim at all, so there is no  decision
             which can be appealed under section 82.  Section  94(1)(2)  is
             concerned with a case where a person makes 'an asylum claim or
             a human rights claim (or both)',  and  the  question  for  the
             Secretary  of  State  is  whether  the   claim   is   'clearly
             unfounded': if it is, then she will dismiss it, and  can  shut
             out an appeal under section 82 by so certifying.


         16.  It is rightly  common  ground  that  there  is  no  difference
             between 'a human rights or an asylum  claim'  and  'an  asylum
             claim or a human rights claim (or both)', and  that  what  are
             described in rule 353 as 'further submissions' could,  subject
             to the question of whether they raise a new point, amount to a
             fresh 'claim' capable of  falling  within  the  ambit  of  the
             sections in Part 5 of the 2002 Act.


         17.  The Secretary of State's case is that the two procedures under
             rule 353 and section 94(1)(2) can and  do  co-exist  perfectly
             satisfactorily; the  claimants'  case  is  that  they  do  not
             happily co-exist and that, when Part 5 of the  2002  Act  came
             into force, rule 353 became of  no  effect  in  practice,  and
             therefore could not be relied on by the Secretary of State.


         18.  At the time when the  2002  Act  was  enacted,  there  was  no
             attempt to  repeal  or  amend  rule  353,  and  it  has  stood
             unamended to this day.  Further, in recent legislation (albeit
             not so far brought into force),  Parliament  appears  to  have
             assumed that rule 353 still has a part to play.  Section 53 of
             the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  will  amend
             section 31A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 to  enable  transfer
             from the High Court to the Upper Tribunal of  judicial  review
             applications where -


                  'the application calls into question  a  decision  of  the
                  Secretary of State not to treat submissions as  an  asylum
                  claim or a human rights claim....wholly or partly  on  the
                  basis that  they  are  not  significantly  different  from
                  material that has previously been considered...'.


         19.  A rule, indeed even  primary  legislation,  can  be  impliedly
             repealed or rendered nugatory by later  legislation,  and  the
             neutering  of  a  rule  by  subsequent  legislation   can   be
             overlooked by a government  department,  even  when  promoting
             subsequent legislation.  However, it seems to me  that,  where
             the rule remains unamended, then at least where the  rule  and
             the  subsequent  legislation  are  in  pari  materia  and  are
             promoted or promulgated by  the  same  government  department,
             there must be a presumption that  the  rule  was  intended  to
             survive and have effect.  While  this  is  not,  I  accept,  a
             particularly strong presumption, it is strengthened in a  case
             such as this where, in a more recent statute,  Parliament  has
             plainly legislated on the basis that the rule or regulation is
             in  force;  indeed  section  53  of  the  2009  Act  would  be
             positively meaningless if rule 353 has no further function.


         20.  Having  said  that,  the  two  important  questions  on  these
             appeals, as it seems to me, are, first, whether in the absence
             of authority, on a fair reading of the relevant provisions  of
             Part 5 of the 2002 Act, rule 353 has no function, at least  in
             cases such as those of SM and  ZA.   The  second  question  is
             whether the conclusion one would otherwise reach on the  first
             question  is  undermined,  or  indeed  supported,  by  binding
             authority.  If the effect of the two relevant authorities  was
             clear,  it  might  be  inappropriate  to  consider  the  first
             question, but as there is a sharp difference of view as to the
             effect of the authorities, it is better to take the  questions
             in the order which I have indicated.


         21.  The first argument raised by the claimants SM and ZA  is  that
             rule 353 can no longer apply, because a decision to  reject  a
             claim under the  rule  would  be  a  decision  falling  within
             section 82, and could therefore be appealed.   That  will  not
             do, in my opinion.  If rule 353 can be  relied  on,  then,  on
             receipt of a purported renewed claim (which I shall  refer  to
             hereafter as 'further submissions'), the  Secretary  of  State
             can decide that it is not a 'fresh claim', and then decline to
             make a decision on whether or not to  refuse  leave  to  enter
             etc; in that event there would be no decision which could give
             rise to a right of appeal under section 82,  as  explained  in
             Cakabay v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (Nos  2
             and 3) [1999] Imm  AR  176,  180-181,  per  Schiemann  LJ.   A
             decision under rule 353 is not a decision to refuse the relief
             which the further submissions seek: it is a decision that  the
             further submissions do not amount to a fresh claim - i.e. that
             it is not a claim at all.   The  claimants'  further  argument
             that it is inherent in section 82 that the Secretary of  State
             must decide whether to grant or refuse the  relief  sought  in
             such further submissions involves  circular  reasoning:  there
             can be no such duty if rule 353 applies.


         .....


         23.  I accept that  it  is  obviously  right  to  consider  whether
             sections 94 and 96 render rule 353 valueless: that  indeed  is
             the central point on the first  issue.   However,  I  consider
             that SM and ZA put their case on the point too  high.   First,
             it overlooks  the  fact  that  Parliament  has,  albeit  in  a
             negative sense, approved subsequent amendments to  the  rules,
             which do not include the deletion of rule 353.  Further, it is
             rather paradoxical for the claimants to  invoke  the  will  of
             Parliament when  the  most  recent  relevant  statute  clearly
             proceeds on the basis that  rule  353  is  in  force  and  has
             practical effect: on  the  claimants'  case,  when  Parliament
             enacted section 53 of the 2009 Act, it was simply beating  the
             air.


         24.  Perhaps more importantly the issue between the parties  should
             not be determined simply by seeing whether sections 94 and  96
             can be interpreted  so  as  to  cover  every  application  and
             purported application falling within rule 353.  It is  equally
             valid to consider whether they can be  construed  consistently
             with rule 353 continuing to have an independent effect.


         25.  Section 94(2) differs from rule 353 in that  it  is  concerned
             with hopeless, or 'clearly unfounded' claims, whether original
             or renewed, whereas rule 353  covers  only  purported  renewed
             claims, ie further submissions, which merely  repeat  previous
             rejected claims by  the  same  claimant.   So  section  94(2),
             unlike rule 353, can apply not only to  a  renewed  claim  (or
             purported renewed claim) but also to the original  claim  made
             by a particular claimant.  That, no doubt, is the  reason  why
             section 94(2) envisages a claim  to  which  it  applies  being
             treated as a valid, albeit hopeless, claim, which  has  to  be
             considered on its merits: hence  its  machinery  involves  the
             Secretary of State certifying that it is clearly unfounded, so
             as to prevent an appeal.  On the other hand, as  rule  353  is
             concerned  with  purported  claims   which   repeat   earlier,
             rejected, claims, it envisages that such purported claims  are
             not to be considered or treated as claims at all.


         26.  Section 94(2) therefore does  not  relieve  the  Secretary  of
             State from making a decision to refuse leave to enter or entry
             clearance in respect of a claim  which  she  considers  to  be
             'clearly unfounded': she must consider it on its  merits  and,
             having no doubt refused it, she is then entitled, by virtue of
             section 94(2), to prevent the claimant raising an appeal under
             section 82 by issuing a certificate.  If  she  could  rely  on
             rule  353,  however,  and  she  considered  that  the  further
             submissions she has received raise no issues other than  those
             already raised by  an  earlier,  rejected,  claim,  she  would
             neither have to consider its merits nor  formally  refuse  it:
             she could merely reject the submissions.  Thus rule 353 can be
             operated as a sort of gatekeeper by the Secretary of State  to
             prevent further submissions amounting to, or being treated as,
             a claim, thereby not getting into Part 5 territory at all.


         27.  If further submissions on analysis merely repeat a claim which
             has already been  made,  it  is  a  perfectly  normal  use  of
             language to say that they do not really amount to a new claim,
             but should be treated as being no  more  than  an  attempt  to
             revive a previous unsuccessful claim.  None the less I  accept
             that the description of a 'clearly unfounded' claim in section
             94(2) is capable, as a matter of language, of being applied to
             such further submissions which,  on  analysis,  raise  no  new
             points over and above a previous, rejected,  claim.   However,
             given that the 2002 Act was passed at a  time  when  rule  353
             existed, I would incline to the view that it was not  intended
             to apply to such further submissions which do not amount to  a
             fresh claim.


         .....


         30.  Accordingly, while there is plainly a substantial argument  to
             the effect that the words of section 94(2) are wide enough  to
             catch further submissions which do not amount to a fresh claim
             within rule 353, I would hold, at  least  in  the  absence  of
             binding authority to the contrary, that it  does  not  do  so.
             Section 94(2) is concerned to prevent appeals in  relation  to
             any  claim  (whether  original  or  renewed)  which  has  been
             considered and refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  its
             merits, where she concludes that the merits are so  weak  that
             the claim was 'clearly unfounded'.  Rule 353 is  concerned  to
             prevent a purported renewed claim having to be  considered  on
             its merits and refused, where the Secretary of State considers
             that it is merely a repetition of a claim  which  has  already
             been made and refused.  As for section 96(1), it is  concerned
             with a different aspect of renewed claims from rule 353."


25.  At paragraph 44, Lord Neuberger noted the contention of the  applicants
    that the House of Lords in BA (Nigeria) had held that paragraph 353 had
    "effectively been replaced and neutered by Part 5 of the 2002 Act,  and
    in particular section 94(2) and that that conclusion is binding on this
    court....there are a number of observations in the speech of Lord  Hope
    DPSC which, at any rate if taken at face value, can fairly be  said  to
    support that proposition."

26.  Lord Neuberger continued:

         "51. Like the Administrative Court, I have not  found  it  entirely
             easy to resolve the issue of whether  the  Supreme  Court  was
             saying (a) as the claimants contend, that rule 353 has no part
             to play at all following the introduction of  Part  5  of  the
             2002 Act, or (b) as the Secretary of State argues,  that  rule
             353 has no part to play where there  has  been  an  appealable
             immigration decision and the only issue is whether the  appeal
             is of  a  kind  to  which  section  92  applies.   Ultimately,
             however, again like the Administrative Court, I have  come  to
             the conclusion that the  Secretary  of  State's  more  limited
             interpretation is to be preferred.


         52.  Mr Tam is plainly  right  in  his  argument  that  the  actual
             decision in the BA (Nigeria) case is not inconsistent with the
             ZT (Kosovo) case  or  is  not  determinative  of  the  present
             appeals in favour of the claimants.  The actual  decision  was
             that rule 353 had no further part to play for the purposes  of
             section 92(4) once there was an appeal against an  immigration
             decision.  The question therefore is whether, in the light  of
             the passages in the judgment of Lord Hope DPSC  relied  on  by
             the claimants, we should, as Mr Gill and  Mr  Jacobs  contend,
             conclude that a wider interpretation of the reasoning  in  the
             BA (Nigeria) case is appropriate, so that the binding ratio is
             that rule 353 is effectively a dead letter.   In  my  opinion,
             that contention,  which  I  might  very  well  otherwise  have
             accepted, is one which should be rejected on the  ground  that
             it is plainly inconsistent with the reasoning  and  conclusion
             of the House of Lords in the ZT (Kosovo)  case  [2009]  1  WLR
             348.


         53.  There is no statement in the judgments  of  the  BA  (Nigeria)
             case [2010] 1 AC 444 which says in terms that the reasoning in
             the  ZT  (Kosovo)  case  is  being  effectively  overruled  or
             departed from, but  that  is  the  effect  of  the  claimants'
             contention on the present appeals.  I accept, of course,  that
             the Supreme Court (an expression which  for  present  purposes
             includes the  House  of  Lords)  can  impliedly,  as  well  as
             expressly, depart from and effectively overrule  its  previous
             decisions.  However, in this case I have great difficulty with
             the notion that the later case  relied  on  by  the  claimants
             overruled the earlier case.  (i) Both decisions  relate  to  a
             much litigated issue, and the earlier decision was given  less
             than a year before the later decision; (ii) the point at issue
             was directly  addressed  and  decided  in  all  five  reasoned
             judgments in the earlier decision, and even the  reasoning  of
             the dissenter would have to be treated as overruled; (iii) the
             earlier decision is expressly referred to three times  in  the
             leading  judgment,  and  once  in  the  only  other   reasoned
             judgment, in the later decision without apparent  disapproval,
             and both judgments  were  given  by  judges  involved  in  the
             earlier  decision;  (iv)  the  actual  outcome  in  the  later
             decision can perfectly easily be reconciled with  the  earlier
             decision, namely on the  basis  that  the  later  decision  is
             limited to further submissions which have been  treated  as  a
             fresh claim; (v) this more limited interpretation of the later
             decision is consistent with the Court  of  Appeal's  reasoning
             and conclusion in that case, which was  specifically  approved
             by the Supreme Court; (vi) this more limited interpretation of
             the later decision is also consistent with a  recent  statute,
             whereas  the  wider  interpretation,   which   would   involve
             overruling the earlier decision, is not.
        ......
         57.  ... If the wider interpretation of the BA (Nigeria)  [2010]  1
             AC 444, overruling ZT (Kosovo)  [2009] 1 WLR 348, is  adopted,
             rule 353 has had no role to play since the 2002 Act came  into
             force; on that basis, section 53 of  the  Borders  Citizenship
             and Immigration Act 2009  would  have  been  misconceived  and
             pointless legislation. That would not be so  if  the  narrower
             interpretation is adopted. That factor was not  considered  in
             BA (Nigeria) [2010] 1 AC 444, nor should it  have  been  given
             the point actually at issue.  However,  it  should  have  been
             considered, and presumably would have been considered, if  the
             Supreme Court was deciding that rule 353 was a dead letter. It
             is true that in BA (Nigeria) [2010] 1  AC  444  paragraph  26,
             Lord Hope DPSC rejected an argument relating to rule 353 based
             on Section 12 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
             2006 on the ground that that section had not been brought into
             force. However, the argument was far less clear, as it is much
             less apparent from section 12 of the 2006 Act than it is  from
             section 53 of the 2009  Act  that  rule  353  was  assumed  by
             Parliament to be effective. Further, with all due respect,  it
             seems to me that, where  one  is  dealing  with  an  issue  of
             statutory  interpretation,  one  is   considering   what   the
             legislature intended or understood, so legislation as  enacted
             is relevant, whereas the question whether  the  executive  has
             chosen to bring that legislation into force is not relevant.
         58.  In all these circumstances, unless it is pellucidly clear from
             the judgments  in  BA  (Nigeria)  [2010]  1  AC  444,  and  in
             particular the passages relied on by the claimants,  at  paras
             29-33, in the judgment of Lord Hope DPSC, as  set  out  above,
             that the reasoning and conclusion in ZT (Kosovo) [2009] 1  WLR
             348 was being overruled, it seems to me that we should dismiss
             this appeal. Those passages (and in  particular  the  words  I
             have emphasised) undoubtedly give support  to  the  claimants'
             argument, if read on their own.
          1. However, as with any observations contained in a judgment, one
             cannot properly interpret the passages  other  than  in  their
             factual and juridical context. Given all the  factors  I  have
             mentioned, I have reached the conclusion that what was said in
             those passages can, and therefore should at any rate  in  this
             court, be read as being confined to cases where  there  is  an
             appealable  immigration  decision.  Once  there  is   such   a
             decision, the  complete  code  contained  in  the  legislative
             scheme applies and rule 353 has no part to play.  However,  as
             decided in ZT (Kosovo) [2009] 1 WLR 348, rule 353 still has 'a
             part to play': the Secretary of  State  can  decide  that  the
             further submissions are not a 'fresh claim', in which case one
             does not enter the territory governed by the  'complete  code'
             of 'the legislative scheme'."


R (Waqar) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 00169

27.  Reference has been made to this decision at paragraphs 9 and 10  above.
    The Upper Tribunal's conclusions were as follows:-
         "14. Paragraph 353 does not appear and is not  alluded  to  in  the
             legislative framework. It and its predecessor have never  been
             alluded to. The two systems exist  alongside  each  other.  It
             remains in the Rules and, despite the amendment of s82 of  the
             2002 Act from  20th  October  2014  and  despite  there  being
             amendments to the Rules since that  date  there  has  been  no
             amendment to paragraph 353.  Although  Ms  Akinbolu  submitted
             that the paragraph 353 process still applied  in  for  example
             asylum cases and therefore the Rules  could  not  be  amended,
             this is not the case. Had there been  an  intention  that  the
             paragraph  353  process  would  cease  to  apply  in   certain
             categories of cases this could and would have been set out  in
             amendments to the Immigration Rules.
         15.  Can paragraph 353 co-exist with  the  legislative  scheme?  Ms
             Akinbolu submits not, because the protections  that  exist  in
             the statutory scheme mean that  paragraph  353  is  no  longer
             required and thus the paragraph has been impliedly repealed or
             is of no effect and should not be utilised.
         16.  The current appeal scheme enables an appeal against a decision
             by the SSHD refusing the applicant's human rights claim. There
             has to be a claim and then a decision in order  to  enable  an
             appeal. The current scheme no longer enables an appeal against
             a decision refusing to revoke a deportation  order.  The  SSHD
             may, having decided to refuse a human rights claim, thereafter
             decide whether to invoke the certification process. Without  a
             claim (and without a decision) there is no appeal.
         17.  The history of paragraph 353 and the jurisprudence is set  out
             above. BA (Nigeria) was concerned with a decision, not whether
             there  had  been  a  decision.  ZT  (Kosovo)   concerned   the
             continuing  responsibility  of  the  respondent  to   consider
             representations made whilst an applicant remained  in  the  UK
             even though the initial claim had been refused and certified -
             again there had been a decision and the issue was what  to  do
             with submissions. ZA (Nigeria) confirmed that  the  respondent
             was not obliged to issue an  appealable  immigration  decision
             whenever further submissions were made.
         18.  If the applicant is correct and any submission made amounts to
             a claim, the response to which is an appealable decision, this
             would result in an  applicant  being  able  to  make  numerous
             consecutive claims that would result in  numerous  consecutive
             appeals. Although each of those could be certified,  the  mere
             existence  of  such  a  scenario  would  result  in  it  being
             virtually impossible to reach finality. BA  (Nigeria)  is  not
             authority for the proposition that  submissions  amount  to  a
             claim and that the response to those submissions is a decision
             within the meaning of Part 5. The current statutory  framework
             continues to provide for unmeritorious claims to be certified.
             There is nothing in this framework that precludes  the  making
             of a categorisation decision; paragraph 353 remains in force.
          19. The current statutory appeal context requires a decision to be
             made on a human rights claim. Without a claim  and  without  a
             decision there is no appeal. Submissions that purport to be  a
             human rights claim do not without  more  trigger  a  right  of
             appeal.  There   has   to   be   an   intermediate   step,   a
             categorisation, namely 'do the submissions amount to  a  claim
             at all'. Paragraph 353 of the Rules provides the mechanism  to
             determine whether they amount to a  claim;  if  not  then  the
             decision does not amount to  a  decision  to  refuse  a  human
             rights claim.
         20.  If an applicant is aggrieved by a decision not  to  categorise
             submissions as a claim, then s/he has  a  remedy  in  judicial
             review proceedings. Where a claim has already been determined,
             submissions made subsequent to that require a decision  as  to
             whether they amount to a claim. If determined to  be  a  claim
             the decision to refuse that claim  will  trigger  a  right  of
             appeal, subject  to  certification.  If  the  submissions  are
             determined not to be a claim, as here, there  is  no  decision
             and thus no right of appeal."


         The Court of Appeal's  decision  on  the  renewal  application  for
        permission to appeal against the Tribunal's decision in Waqar
28.  Although fully aware of the status  of  the  judgment  of  Beatson  LJ,
    given on 17 November 2015,  both  Counsel  in  the  present  case  made
    reference to it. The relevant passages are as follows:
         "6.  The Secretary of State in the submissions before the Tribunal,
             which were accepted, maintains that paragraph 353 continues to
             act as a gateway and relies on the decision  of  ZA  (Nigeria)
             for this.


         7.   Miss Akinbolu submits first, that  ZA  (Nigeria)  was  dealing
             with the previous statutory  regime.   Secondly,  she  submits
             that its approach contradicts that of the Supreme Court in  BA
             (Nigeria) that paragraph 353 has no  bearing.   She  maintains
             that if paragraph 353 is added as a  gloss  to  the  statutory
             scheme, it removes cases from the control  of  an  independent
             court.  That matter was a matter which concerned, for example,
             Lord Brown and Lord Hope in BA (Nigeria).


         ......


         12.  Permission to appeal was refused by Underhill LJ on 31st July,
             essentially on the grounds that  ZA  (Nigeria)  had  confirmed
             that  under  the  pre-2014  regime,  rule  353  permitted  the
             Secretary of State to decide that  a  purported  human  rights
             claim was not in fact such a claim but was  no  more  than  an
             attempt  to  revive  a  previously  unsuccessful  claim   (see
             paragraph 27).  Underhill LJ stated  that  if  she  did  that,
             there was  no  immigration  decision  within  the  meaning  of
             section 82 and that nothing in the changes introduced  by  the
             2014 Act undermined that reasoning.  He also stated that:


                  'If the rejection of  a  claim  under  rule  353  did  not
                  constitute an 'immigration decision' for the  purposes  of
                  the old section 82, there  is  no  reason  why  it  should
                  constitute a 'decision' for the purpose of  the  new  rule
                  (in fact the relevant word is 'decided',  not  'decision',
                  but the use of the very rather than the noun is  obviously
                  immaterial).  It is suggested that it makes  a  difference
                  that the  old  section  82  used  the  label  'immigration
                  decision', which was then defined to  cover  a  number  of
                  specific kinds of refusal, whereas the new section  refers
                  simply to a 'decision to  refuse';  but  that  is  just  a
                  matter of drafting technique and connotes no difference of
                  substance.'
         ......


         15.  There is no longer a right of appeal against a decision  about
             deportation unless the decision refuses a protection claim  or
             revokes a protection status.  The case advanced on  behalf  of
             HW below and today is that if a person makes  a  human  rights
             claim, then that person has a  right  of  appeal  against  the
             refusal of that claim and that the definition of human  rights
             claim is that in section 113.  As amended  by  the  2014  Act,
             section 113 provides that:


                  'human rights claim' means a claim made by a person to the
                  Secretary of State at a place designated by the  Secretary
                  of State that to remove the person [from or require him to
                  leave the United Kingdom or to refuse him entry  into  the
                  United Kingdom][6] would be unlawful under  section  6  of
                  the Human Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (public authority not  to
                  act contrary to Convention)...'


         16.  In this case the Upper Tribunal decided (see paragraphs 14 and
             following of its decision) that the regime in paragraph 353 co-
             exists with the legislative scheme.  The amendments to section
             82 do not refer to it  and  there  is  no  indication  in  the
             statute  that  paragraph  353  would  cease  to  apply.    The
             legislation is concerned with circumstances in which an appeal
             will lie against a refusal of a claim to protection.   Part  V
             of the 2002 Act does not affect what constitutes 'a claim',  a
             prior question to whether there is a decision refusing what is
             'a claim'.   The  tribunal  held  that  for  that  reason  the
             decision in BA (Nigeria) was not of assistance.


         ......


         20.  ...  My starting point is that it is not  legitimate  to  take
             isolated statements from BA (Nigeria) out of context.  In that
             case the context was a situation which, by section 82(2)(k), a
             decision to revoke a deportation order generated a right to an
             in-country appeal unless it was certified  under  section  94.
             Accordingly, it was not in issue that there was an  appealable
             decision, only the locus of the appeal.   The  right  to  that
             appeal  existed,  whether  or  not  it  was  repetitious.   BA
             (Nigeria) was not concerned with whether  a  right  of  appeal
             should arise at all.  That was what ZA (Nigeria) was concerned
             with.  This court, in a judgment given by the  Master  of  the
             Rolls, Lord Neuberger, held that BA (Nigeria) did not  require
             the Secretary of State  to  issue  an  appealable  immigration
             decision whenever further submissions were made.  He  gave  BA
             (Nigeria) a narrow reading: see Lord Neuberger at 21:


                  '...the Secretary of State can decide that  it  is  not  a
                  'fresh claim' and then  decline  to  make  a  decision  on
                  whether or not to refuse  leave  to  enter  etc;  in  that
                  event, there would be no decision which could give rise to
                  a right of appeal under section 82...'.


         21.  Secondly, ZA (Nigeria), which  binds  this  court,  recognised
             that the public interest in not affording scope for repetitive
             and abusive claims with a second right  of  appeal,  which  is
             reflected in paragraph 353, applies  notwithstanding  sections
             94 and 96.  Those provisions do not have the same function  of
             limiting access to a second right of appeal.


         22.  Thirdly, I respectfully  agree  with  Underhill  LJ  that  the
             difference between the term 'immigration decision' in the  old
             section 82 Act and 'decided' in the new section 82 is a matter
             of drafting technique, rather than  reflecting  a  fundamental
             difference in the nature of the decision.  I do  not  consider
             that the use of the word 'decision' in the letter assists Miss
             Akinbolu: it refers  to  not  reversing  the  rejection  of  a
             previous decision which had been the subject of appeal.


         23.  Fourthly, on the  applicant's  submission,  as  Miss  Akinbolu
             accepted, any person who makes an entirely  repetitive  second
             claim the day after appeal rights in relation to a first claim
             are exhausted will be entitled to a further right  of  appeal.
             I accept the argument that the process of leaving this  matter
             to a process of certification would not only impose  a  higher
             administrative burden on  the  Home  Office,  but  would  also
             completely forestall the ability of the Secretary of State  to
             decide whether some communication between  a  person  in  this
             country without status and the Secretary of State qualifies or
             does not  quality  as  a  relevant  decision.   Although  Miss
             Akinbolu's submissions about BA (Nigeria) would apply where  a
             submission purporting to be a  protection  claim  or  a  human
             rights claim are in fact such, I do not consider  that  it  is
             arguable that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  precluded  from
             deciding that submissions do not constitute such a claim.   In
             short, I do not  consider  that  BA  (Nigeria)  precludes  the
             Secretary of State from making a categorisation decision about
             a communication from an individual."




R (Robinson) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKUT 00133

29.  It will be apparent that what the Upper Tribunal said at  paragraph  14
    of Waqar is incorrect, in so far as the Tribunal thought that paragraph
    353 had not been "alluded to in the legislative framework".  As we have
    seen,  the  2006  Act,  if  brought  into  force,  would  provide   new
    definitions of "asylum claim" and "human rights claim",  paragraph  (b)
    of which is plainly intended to refer to paragraph 353.

30.   In Robinson, the Tribunal addressed this issue:-

         "23. At  this  point  I  must  address  Ms  Robinson's  submissions
             concerning the amendment to Section 113 of the 2002  Act.   In
             short she argues that it is implicit in the fact that the  new
             unimplemented version of the definition of  what  is  a  human
             rights claim specifically  excludes  from  that  definition  a
             claim that fails to meet the fresh claims  test  of  paragraph
             353 that the original version did not do so,  otherwise  there
             would have been no reason to provide for the exclusion in  the
             new version.


         24.   Mr  Fisher  contends  that  that  is  not  correct.   In  his
             submission the new version of the definition does no more than
             to clarify the position that pertained  before.   For  reasons
             that will be clear from the judgment,  I  do  not  accept  the
             analysis urged upon me by Ms Robinson.  I have no doubt at all
             that I should follow the  approach  to  Waqar  taken  by  Lord
             Justices Underhill and Beatson.  I cannot say  that  Waqar  is
             wrongly decided  and  in  fact  I  am  confident  that  it  is
             correctly decided and so will follow it  in  determining  this
             application.  In any event, as Mr Fisher has submitted,  I  am
             bound by the decision of the Court of Appeal in  ZA  (Nigeria)
             and so must accept the narrow reading  of  the  ration  in  BA
             (Nigeria)."







R (MG) v  First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  ("fresh
claim"; para 353: no appeal) [2016] UKUT 00283

31.  In this recent case, the Upper Tribunal  (per  Blake  J)  rejected  the
    submission that, although paragraph 353  remains  operative,  following
    the changes made by the 2014 Act, the First-tier Tribunal has power  to
    decide whether the Secretary of State has  lawfully  refused  to  treat
    submissions as a fresh claim:-

         "10. In fact Mr Mackenzie was at pains to submit  that  his  client
             took no issue with  the  decision  of  the  UT  in  Waqar  and
             therefore accepted that for present purposes s.82(2)(a) of the
             2002 Act should be read as meaning 'a person may appeal to the
             tribunal where (a) the  Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to
             refuse a protection claim (that is a fresh  claim  within  the
             meaning of para 353) made by P'.  He submits that the issue in
             the present application is who decides whether the claim is  a
             fresh claim.


         11.  Whereas the previous case law is clear that this is a question
             for the Secretary of  State  subject  to  the  supervision  of
             judicial review (see R v SSHD, ex parte Onibiyo [1996] QB 768;
             Cakabay v SSHD (No 2) [1998] Imm  AR  623;  and  ZA  (Nigeria)
             itself),  Mr  Mackenzie  contends  that   as   a   result   of
             Parliament's decision to  grant  a  right  of  appeal  from  a
             refusal  of  a  protection  claim,  then  the  FtT  judge  has
             jurisdiction to decide whether there had been  a  decision  to
             refuse a protection claim.


         12.  His argument proceeds as follows:-


             i.   If there has been a refusal of a protection claim,  there
                  is  an  appealable  decision.   If  there   has   not,   a
                  preliminary ruling will conclude that  there  is  no  such
                  decision and the FtT has no jurisdiction.
             ii.  As the issue of whether the further representations are a
                  fresh claim is an integral part of  the  question  whether
                  there has been a protection claim made and refused, it  is
                  necessary for the FtT judge to reach a view on that issue.
             iii. Whether or not the claim for protection is a fresh  claim
                  is a matter of fact for determination by the FtT judge  in
                  the same way as is a dispute as to whether a fee had  been
                  paid and accordingly whether a proper application had been
                  made is a matter for the FtT judge to decide:  see  Basnet
                  [2012] UKUT 113 (IAC) and R (Khan) v SSHD [2015] UKUT  353
                  (IAC).


         13.  Attractively as Mr Mackenzie has presented his submissions  to
             us, we are unable to agree with them.


         14.  In our view, notwithstanding the significant  change  in  s.82
             from a right of appeal against an immigration  decision  on  a
             protection ground to a right of appeal  against  a  protection
             decision itself, Parliament can be presumed to have legislated
             against the background of satisfaction with the  previous  law
             as declared in ZA (Nigeria).  There is no  indication  in  the
             amendments  made,   that   it   was   intended   to   transfer
             responsibility for the categorisation decision  of  whether  a
             claim is a fresh claim to the FtT.  Indeed the general purpose
             of  the  2014  amendments  was   to   reduce   the   appellate
             jurisdiction of the FtT.


         15.  Second, we do not  agree  that  an  assessment  of  whether  a
             protection  claim  is  a  fresh  claim  is   a   question   of
             jurisdictional fact to be determined by the FtT judge.  In our
             judgment it remains a matter of assessment and  evaluation  by
             the SSHD subject to supervision in judicial review.  Both  the
             High Court and the Court of Appeal decisions in Cakabay are to
             this effect and nothing in the  legislative  changes  suggests
             that a new approach must now be taken.  We do not accept  that
             these decisions are  explained  merely  because  the  judicial
             review court does not apply  the  approach  of  jurisdictional
             fact rather than public law review on nationality grounds.


         16.  Third, we do not accept that the Secretary of State refused  a
             protection claim when she rationally concludes that the  claim
             before her is not a fresh claim.  Mr Mackenzie's  reliance  on
             the decisions in Basnet and Khan does not avail him.   The  UT
             subsequently decided in the case of VED [2014] UKUT 150  (IAC)
             that a decision that no valid application has been made and no
             immigration decision is required  to  respond  to  it  is  not
             itself an appealable decision, and there is no jurisdiction in
             the FtT judge to examine the facts for  himself  and  conclude
             that as a valid application had in fact been made there  ought
             to have been an immigration decision in response to it.


         17.  Here, the rationality of the Secretary of State's decision  is
             not in issue.  Mr  Mackenzie  does  not  in  addition  to  the
             challenge  to  the  FtT  decision  contend  that  the   SSHD's
             assessment  was  flawed;  the   application   rests   on   the
             proposition that a new decision can be made by the  FtT  judge
             on this issue.  We consider that this case falls  on  the  VED
             side as opposed to the Basnet side of the line as regards  the
             limits of the  FtT's  ability  to  determine  whether  it  has
             jurisdiction to determine an appeal.  In our view there can be
             no  decision  to  refuse  a   protection   claim   where   the
             representations  are  not  recognised  (rationally)  to  be  a
             protection claim."



E.  Discussion

32.   We should begin by saying that we consider the parties  have  provided
    us with comprehensive submissions on the role of paragraph 353  in  the
    post-2014 Act world, which delve more deeply and widely than appears to
    have been the case with the arguments put to the Tribunal in Waqar  and
    Robinson. We are very grateful to Mr  Toal  and  Mr  Fisher  for  their
    thoroughness.

33.    Mr Toal  relies  heavily  upon  the  judgment  of  Lord  Hope  in  BA
    (Nigeria).  He submits that BA (Nigeria) involves  answering  the  same
    question that faces us: namely, what constitutes a "claim"?   At  [29],
    Lord Hope agreed with Sedley LJ in the Court of Appeal that there  was,
    in effect, no longer a need to gloss the words "a ........  claim",  as
    had been done in ex p Onibiyo because the appeal regime, including  the
    certification provisions of the 2002 Act, was now a "complete code", in
    which Parliament had made express provision in the primary  legislation
    for dealing with unmeritorious claims:

         "I would hold that claims which are not certified under section  94
         or excluded under section 96, if rejected,  should  be  allowed  to
         proceed to appeal in-country under sections 82 and 92,  whether  or
         not they are accepted by the Secretary of State as fresh claims."

34.  This  is,  however,  very  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  House's
    judgment in ZT (Kosovo).  In that case, there was  no  suggestion  that
    "Rule 353, as presently drafted, has no part to play in the legislative
    scheme" [cf BA (Nigeria)].  On the contrary, the issue in  ZT  (Kosovo)
    was whether the application of paragraph 353 extended to  cases  within
    the certification provisions of the legislation.  As we have seen,  the
    House of Lords held that it did.

35.  The relationship between ZT (Kosovo) and BA (Nigeria) was explained  by
    Lord Neuberger in ZA (Nigeria).  At paragraph 52 of his judgment,  Lord
    Neuberger made the crucial finding  that  "the  binding  ratio"  of  BA
    (Nigeria) is not "that rule 353 is effectively a  dead  letter".   Lord
    Neuberger held that the contrary contention, "which I might  very  well
    otherwise have accepted", had to be rejected on the ground that it  was
    "plainly inconsistent  with  the  reasoning  and  conclusion...  in  ZT
    (Kosovo)".  Lord Neuberger's conclusion was that  the  decision  in  BA
    (Nigeria) had turned on the crucial fact that, in each of the  appeals,
    the Secretary of State had made  an  appealable  immigration  decision;
    namely, the decision to refuse to revoke a deportation order.  In  that
    circumstance, paragraph 353 "had no further part to play" [52].   Since
    paragraph 353 serves as a means of enabling the Secretary of  State  to
    decide, in certain circumstances, whether submissions from  P,  should,
    if rejected, be the subject of an immigration decision,  the  Secretary
    of State's making of an  immigration  decision  placed  matters  firmly
    within the ambit of the "complete code" of the 2002 Act.

36.  This is made pellucid in paragraph 59 of ZA (Nigeria):-

         "59. ...I have reached the conclusion that what  was  said  in  [BA
             (Nigeria)] can and therefore should at any rate in this court,
             be  read  as  being  confined  to  cases  where  there  is  an
             appealable  immigration  decision.   Once  there  is  such   a
             decision, the  complete  code  contained  in  the  legislative
             scheme applies and rule 353 has no part to play.  However,  as
             decided in ZT (Kosovo) ....rule  353  still  has  a  'part  to
             play': the Secretary of State  can  decide  that  the  further
             submissions are not a 'fresh claim', in which  case  one  does
             not enter the territory governed by the 'complete code' of the
             legislative scheme."

37.  We are firmly of the view that the  Upper  Tribunal  is  bound  by  the
    ratio of ZA (Nigeria).  It is not open to the Tribunal to  depart  from
    that ratio and apply the judgments in BA (Nigeria) to the facts of  the
    present case, in the way for  which  Mr  Toal  contends.   The  result,
    therefore, is that the  present  applicant  must  fail  unless  he  can
    demonstrate that  the  legislative  regime,  as  it  stands  after  the
    amendments made by the 2014 Act, requires to be interpreted  in  a  way
    that changes the function of paragraph 353 of the Rules.

38.  In ZA (Nigeria) the Court of Appeal considered  the  issue  of  whether
    paragraph 353 had, in fact, been rendered  as  a  dead  letter  by  the
    advent of the 2002 Act, including  its  certification  provisions.   At
    [19] Lord Neuberger held that where a rule remains unamended  by  later
    legislation,  "then  at  least  where  the  rule  and  the   subsequent
    legislation are in pari materia and are promoted or promulgated by  the
    same government department, there must be a presumption that  the  rule
    was intended to survive and have effect".

39.  Lord Neuberger  accepted  that  this  was  not  a  particularly  strong
    presumption.  It was, however, strengthened because in  a  more  recent
    statute - that is to say section 53 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 - Parliament had amended section 31A of the Senior
    Courts Act 1981 to enable transfer from the High  Court  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal of judicial review applications where "the  application  calls
    into question a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  not  to  treat
    submissions as an asylum claim or a human  rights  claim...  wholly  or
    partly on the basis that they  are  not  significantly  different  from
    material that had previously been considered...".  The reference in new
    section 31A was, unarguably, to what was then (and still is)  paragraph
    353.

40.  Although section 31A has subsequently been amended so as to  widen  the
    jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal in respect of  immigration  judicial
    review, the fact of that amendment does not, in  our  view,  strengthen
    the argument that the changes made by  the  2014  Act  have  materially
    affected the operation of paragraph 353.

41.  It is evident that, in enacting the 2014 Act, Parliament was  intending
    to reduce the ability of persons faced with adverse  decisions  in  the
    immigration  field  to  appeal  against  those  decisions.   It   would
    therefore be strange if the result of those changes has been to  enable
    repeated claims raising asylum or international  protection  issues  to
    generate multiple appeals.  This is so, whether  or  not  such  appeals
    might be certified, with the result that they could be prosecuted  only
    from outside the United Kingdom.

42.   As can already be seen, despite the changes made by the 2014 Act,  the
    concept of a "claim" remains central to new section 82.  There  is,  on
    the face of it, nothing which suggests  that  paragraph  353  does  not
    apply to the  "categorisation"  issue  of  whether  submissions  are  a
    "claim" for the purposes of section 82.

43.  Mr Toal submits that the continued presence of  paragraph  353  can  be
    explained on the basis that, as a result of the  changes  made  by  the
    2014 Act and in the light of ZT  (Kosovo)  (see  paragraph  18  above),
    paragraph 353 is now relevant (only) to certification  decisions  under
    the amended 2002 Act.  We  are  unpersuaded  by  this  submission.   If
    Parliament had intended paragraph 353 to have such a restricted  ambit,
    following the changes of the 2014 Act, it is reasonable to suppose that
    paragraph  353  would  have  been  amended  to  make  it  clear   that,
    henceforth, it was to apply only in certification cases.

44.  This point is reinforced by the amendment to  paragraph  353,  made  in
    the wake of the 2014 Act, which ensures that paragraph 353 now  applies
    to human rights claims and protection  claims  (as  opposed  to  asylum
    claims): see paragraph  6  above  and  paragraph  47  below.  It  seems
    particularly strange that Parliament would be concerned  to  make  this
    amendment in the light of the 2014 Act and yet fail to make it  evident
    that the amended paragraph 353 was henceforth  to  have  a  drastically
    reduced ambit. In our view, not only does the amendment made by HC 1025
    demonstrate that paragraph 353 is intended by the legislature  to  have
    continued effect; the absence of an amendment limiting the paragraph to
    certification cases points to the fact  that  no  such  limitation  was
    intended.

45.  Mr Toal submits that the Secretary of State has  it  in  her  power  to
    commence the amendments to section 113 of the 2002 Act contained in the
    2006 Act, so as to  reverse  what  he  says  is  the  present  position
    concerning the ambit  of  paragraph  353.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    position, however, is that in the light of the case  law,  particularly
    ZA (Nigeria), there is no need to  commence  the  2006  Act  amendments
    because the legal position is sufficiently clear.  Paragraph 353 can be
    operated by the Secretary of State in such a way as to prevent  certain
    submissions from being treated as a "human rights claim".

46.  We are unable to accept Mr Toal's submission on this issue.   Far  from
    the 2014 Act  acting as a catalyst to bring the  2006  amendments  into
    force, Parliament chose,  in  the  2014  Act,  to  amend  the  existing
    definition of "human rights claim" (see paragraph 4  above).  The  fact
    that Parliament had been concerned to amend the definition was noted at
    paragraph 15 of the judgment of  Beatson  LJ,  refusing  permission  in
    Waqar (paragraph 23 above). The 2014 Act has inserted the phrase "or to
    refuse him entry into the United Kingdom" after the phrase "require him
    to leave the United Kingdom" into the definition, in order to cover the
    full range of situations in which a human rights claim can now be made.
    The decision to make  a  corresponding  amendment  to  the  prospective
    amendment of "human  rights  claim"  shows  beyond  question  that,  in
    enacting the 2014 Act, Parliament was very much aware of the  2006  Act
    amendments  and  deliberately  decided  that  nothing   in   that   Act
    necessitated their commencement.

47.   Furthermore, the 2014 Act has inserted into section 113  of  the  2002
    Act a definition of "protection claim" by reference  to  section  82(2)
    (see paragraph 2 above).  This shows that Mr Toal is, in fact, wrong to
    contend that, merely by commencing the amendments of the 2006 Act,  the
    Secretary of State can reverse the  effect  of  what  he  says  is  the
    present limited ambit of paragraph 353. The 2006 amendments are only to
    the definitions  of  "asylum  claim"  and  "human  rights  claim".   If
    commenced, they would result in the plainly anomalous position  that  -
    according to Mr Toal - paragraph 353 would  bite  with  full  force  on
    submissions purporting to be a human rights  claim  but  not  on  those
    purporting to be a protection claim, despite the fact that  submissions
    purporting to be a protection  claim  have  been  specifically  brought
    within the paragraph 353 regime by the  amendment  in  HC  1025,  which
    supplanted the previous reference in that paragraph to an asylum claim.



48.    In short, what Parliament has chosen to do by way of the  2014  Act's
    amendments to section 113, and by way of the April  2015  amendment  to
    paragraph 353 of  the  rules,  firmly  indicates  that  that  paragraph
    operates  as  a  gateway  to  section  82  appeals,  as  well   as   to
    certification.

49.  The Tribunal directed further written submissions on the  Secretary  of
    State's decision-making process  under  paragraph  353.   Both  parties
    complied with that direction.

50.  In his response of 27 May 2016, Mr Fisher  summarises  the  process  as
    follows:-

         "Stage 1: further submissions are  provided  to  the  Secretary  of
             State.


         Stage 2:  the Secretary of State considers whether the  submissions
         warrant a grant of leave.  No decision is or needs to  be  made  at
         this stage as to whether  those  submissions  amount  to  a  'fresh
         claim'.


         Stage 3:  if the submissions are accepted, leave  is  granted.   If
         the submissions are rejected, however, the Secretary of State  will
         go on to consider whether those  submissions  amount  to  a  'fresh
         claim'.  There are then two options:


         (i)   if,  as  here,  the  Secretary  of  State   determines   that
             submissions do not amount to a fresh claim, per ZA  (Nigeria),
             then the  further  submissions  are  'not  a  claim  at  all'.
             Accordingly,  there  is  no  'claim'  to  refuse.   In   these
             circumstances,  because  there  has  been  no  refusal  of   a
             protection/human rights claim, no appeal right arises;


         (ii) if, however,  the  Secretary  of  State  determines  that  the
             further submissions do constitute a 'fresh  claim',  she  will
             refuse the claim.  In these  circumstances,  an  appeal  right
             arises under section 82(1) of the 2002 Act."

51.  Mr Fisher submits that the order of  the  decision-making  process,  as
    set out above, follows the language of paragraph 353 and is the same as
    that which applied under the previous appeal regime.  The order  allows
    the Secretary of State discretion to grant leave to applicants who make
    entirely repetitious submissions if, on a re-assessment, it is  thought
    appropriate to do so.

52.  In his submissions of 9 June 2016, Mr  Toal  argues  that,  unless  and
    until  the  2006  Act  amendments  to  section  113  come  into  force,
    submissions which rely upon assertions that  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would be unlawful in human rights terms, or would  be  contrary
    to the United Kingdom's international  protection  obligations,  are  a
    "claim", the refusal of which is an appealable decision.  At  stage  2,
    the Secretary of State's consideration precedes a decision whether  the
    submissions are a fresh claim and so are not contingent upon a  finding
    that the submissions are such a claim.

53.  According to Mr Toal, the Secretary of  State  acknowledges  that  such
    consideration takes place even  in  response  to  entirely  repetitious
    submissions.  Mr Toal says the Secretary of State has to choose between
    two possible outcomes; namely, the grant of leave or the  rejection  of
    the applicant's assertion,  and  that  this  choice  involves  deciding
    whether to grant or  refuse  the  claim.   Only  after  making  such  a
    decision on the merits can the Secretary  of  State  go  on  to  decide
    "whether those submissions amount to a fresh claim".  Thus, by the time
    the Secretary of State turns to the question of whether a  claim  is  a
    fresh claim, she has already made a decision that is  appealable  under
    section 82.  This differs from the position under the previous  version
    of that section, where a decision to reject a claim was not,  as  such,
    appealable.  There had to be an immigration decision before  an  appeal
    could arise.

54.  Whilst there is a superficial attraction in Mr Toal's  submission  that
    the rejection of submissions falls to  be  treated  as  a  decision  to
    refuse a human rights or protection claim, within the ambit of  section
    82, we do not consider it to be the correct interpretation.   Paragraph
    353 is about the process by which the  Secretary  of  State  determines
    whether particular submissions, although not such as to  give  rise  to
    the grant  of  leave,  fall  to  be  categorised  as  human  rights  or
    protection claims, the refusal of which can  trigger  an  appeal  under
    section 82.  The expressions "submissions" and "if  rejected"  make  it
    clear that we are, at this point, removed  from  the  language  of  new
    section 82, which speaks of the Secretary of State having "decided"  to
    "refuse" a "protection/human rights claim".  Although  the  expressions
    "submissions" and "if rejected" pre-date the changes made by  the  2014
    Act, that  they  remain  in  place  is,  we  find,  indicative  of  the
    legislature's  view  that  they  continue  to  serve  the  function  of
    permitting the Secretary  of  State  to  categorise  cases  as  between
    paragraphs (i) and (ii) of stage 3, as set out in paragraph 50 above.

55.  The fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State  may  choose  to  accept  P's
    submissions, and grant P leave in order to comply with the Secretary of
    State's international obligations, does not mean the Secretary of State
    has to be viewed as treating those submissions as a "fresh claim".   On
    the contrary, under paragraph 353 a "fresh  claim"  is  a  claim  which
    necessarily  is  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State;   but   which,
    importantly,  gives  rise  to   a   right   of   appeal   (subject   to
    certification).

56.  We are strengthened in our conclusions on this issue by  the  following
    matter.  If Mr Toal is right, then contrary to what he submits  in  his
    response of 9 June, the bringing into force of the 2006 Act  amendments
    to section  113  would  not  assist  the  Secretary  of  State.   Those
    amendments exclude claims which fall to be  disregarded  in  accordance
    with immigration rules.  But, on Mr Toal's  construction  of  paragraph
    353, if the rejection of submissions automatically means that  a  human
    rights claim has been refused, then a right of appeal  will  have  been
    generated, irrespective of whether the remaining paragraph 353  process
    results in the submissions not being  a  fresh  claim.   At  best,  the
    status of  paragraph  (b)  of  the  2006  definitions  would,  on  this
    construction, be mired in uncertainty.

57.  It is important to make the following final point. The  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State can continue to operate paragraph 353 as a "gateway"
    to section 82 does not mean she is the sole arbiter of whether she has,
    in fact, made a decision to refuse a human rights claim, as opposed  to
    refusing to treat submissions as amounting to a fresh claim.

58.   The Secretary of State's letter of 26 June 2015, addressed  to  Wilson
    Solicitors, refers in various places to the applicant's "claim",  where
    it would plainly have been preferable to refer  to  his  "submissions".
    Nevertheless, the first substantive paragraph of the letter  refers  to
    "your letter of 24 June 2015 in  which  you  made  further  submissions
    about your client's deportation from the UK".  In the circumstances, we
    consider that the subsequent references to a claim in the  letter  need
    to be read as referring to those  submissions.   Overall,  we  consider
    that the letter of 26 June, properly construed, amounts to  a  decision
    to refuse to treat  the  applicant's  submissions  as  a  fresh  claim.
    Paragraph 353 is mentioned in terms in several places  and  the  letter
    makes it evident that the Secretary of  State  has  asked  herself  the
    correct questions in terms of WM (DRC) [2006] EWCA Civ  1495,  applying
    the requisite anxious scrutiny.



F.  Decision

59.  The application for judicial review  is  refused.   The  Tribunal  will
    hear Counsels' submissions as to costs, unless  these  can  be  agreed.
    ~~~~0~~~~
-----------------------
[1] Words underlined inserted by Schedule 9, Part 4, paragraph 53(2) to the
2014 Act: see paragraph 4 below.
[2] Definition inserted by the 2014 Act (Schedule 9, Part 4).
[3] Definition inserted by the 2014 Act (Schedule 9, Part 4).
[4] 2014 Act, Schedule 9, Part 4, paragraph 57(2).
[5] Formerly "asylum claim": see paragraph 6 below.
[6] The words in square brackets are correct. The judgment contains a
typographical error at this point.

