







R (on the application  of  Mustafa)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (2000 Order - notification of representation) [2017]  UKUT  00407
(IAC)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice




                The Queen on the application of Aqeel Mustafa
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


            Before The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                                     and
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr Rashid, of Counsel, instructed by Hebbar  and
Co Solicitors, on behalf of the  applicant  and  Mr  Adkinson,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  respondent,
at a hearing at Manchester on 10 July 2017.


   i) The effect of Article 8ZA of  the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and
      Remain) Order 2000 (SI No. 2000/1161), considered in tandem  with  the
      Home Office published policy, is that where the Home  Office  receives
      notification that an applicant has instructed a representative or  has
      a new representative and the specified requirements are satisfied, the
      notification must be accepted and the  Home  Office  internal  records
      must be updated accordingly.


  ii) Conversely, where the notification is rejected for non-compliance with
      any  of  the  specified  requirements,  both  the  applicant  and  the
      representative must be informed.





      Decision: the application for judicial review is granted


 1) The key dates and events in this case are as follows:

      i) On 3 December 2012 the applicant obtained entry clearance as a Tier
         4 (General) Student with leave to remain until 30  September  2013.
         That leave was extended in 2013 until 3 October 2016  to  study  at
         the University of South Wales.  On 17 December 2014  the  applicant
         made an application for further leave to remain on Form FLR(O).


     ii) The application was acknowledged by letter dated 30  December  2014
         addressed  to  the  applicant  at  D  Avenue  in  Manchester.   The
         letterhead bears the address - UK Visas and Immigration PO Box 3468
         Sheffield.  On an unknown date the applicant  changed  his  address
         but did not notify the Home Office.  In a letter dated  9  February
         2015 Pride Solicitors,  using  the  Royal  Mail  Recorded  Delivery
         service, wrote to the Home Office at its address  in  Sheffield  in
         these terms:

             "Application on Form FLR-O


             We act on behalf of the above-named client who  has  made  his
             application to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  Form  FLR-O
             which has  been  acknowledged  with  the  reference  mentioned
             above.  Please find enclosed herewith authority letter  signed
             by our client and a copy of acknowledgment letter [sic].


             Please note our interest in this matter and would  be  obliged
             if you would make further correspondence to  us  on  our  head
             office address mentioned below."


         That letter gave the full name of the applicant together  with  his
         date of birth and nationality and was accompanied by  an  authority
         dated 9 February 2015 on what appears to be a template provided  by
         Pride solicitors signed by the applicant whose address is  recorded
         as D Avenue Manchester.

    iii) On 10 February 2015 the Home Office refused the  application  under
         paragraph 322(1)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that
         variation of leave had been sought for a purpose not covered by the
         Rules.  She explained that she also considered the claim on Article
         8 grounds and gave reasons why she did not consider there  was  any
         breach.  The applicant was told that he was not entitled to  appeal
         the decision with reference to s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 which did not provide a right of  appeal  where
         an still had leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.   That
         letter was sent to the applicant at D Avenue and was not served  on
         his solicitors.


     iv) On 17 March 2015 the Home Office wrote again to the applicant.  The
         letter, addressed to D Avenue, is stated to be a decision served in
         compliance with the Immigration (Leave to Enter and  Remain)  Order
         2000 (SI No. 2000/1161).  Reference is made to  the  University  of
         South Wales having informed the Home Office on 17 October 2014 that
         the applicant had ceased studying with them.   In  the  absence  of
         evidence of any application to  change  sponsor  or  make  a  fresh
         application for entry clearance, leave to enter  or  to  remain  in
         "any capacity", leave was curtailed under paragraph  323A(a)(ii)(2)
         of the Rules until 19 May 2015.


      v) In a further  letter  also  dated  19  May  2015,  the  applicant's
         solicitors wrote again to the Home Office asking for an  update  on
         the "pending application".  This was in the following terms:


             "This is to inform you that we wrote you  a  letter  dated  28
             April 2015 which was posted via Royal Mail  Recorded  Delivery
             No:... [provided].  This letter was delivered to  your  office
             on 29 April  2015.   The  Home  Office  refused  our  client's
             application with a right of appeal, unfortunately this refusal
             along with the supporting documents were sent on our  client's
             old address.   Our  client  never  received  any  Home  Office
             refusal letter till date.  Therefore we request you to  please
             provide us a copy of the Home Office decision made in February
             2015.  Please note that we requested  you  in  our  letter  28
             April (copy enclosed) to provide us a  copy  of  our  client's
             Home Office decision, but still no  reply  from  your  office.
             Please treat this matter as urgent and provide us with a  copy
             urgently."

         The letter does not reveal how it is the solicitors became aware of
         the decision of 10 February.  Whatever the source, they were  under
         a misunderstanding that there had been a  right  of  appeal.   This
         letter, unlike the earlier one dated  9  February,  was  the  first
         indication it has to be said  in  oblique  terms  of  a  change  of
         address by the applicant.  The Home Office replied by letter  dated
         27 May 2015 on its Sheffield letterhead enclosing  a  copy  of  the
         letter "from February 2015" with the added comment  in  terms  that
         the applicant no longer held any leave to remain  and  should  make
         arrangements to leave.  The Home Office Case Record Sheet has  been
         obtained.  This records the receipt of the letter from Pride on  13
         February.  There is also reference to receipt  of  the  solicitors'
         letter on 9 February.  An internal note dated 22  May  records  the
         issue of the refusal to "Reps as requested - No ROA  so  unaffected
         by dates.  I note app's leave expired on 19/05/2015 so  longer  has
         leave- however this does not alter decision and  fact  no  ROA  was
         applicable at the date of decision-NFA".

     vi) Nothing further seems to have happened until 3 April 2016 when  the
         applicant was detained by the Home Office  Enforcement  Team  at  O
         Avenue Manchester.  It is suggested that they were looking  for  an
         absconder and the opportunity was taken to detain the applicant who
         is said to have protested that he had  not  been  served  with  any
         curtailment letter and was awaiting a decision on his  application.
         On the same day the Home Office made another  curtailment  decision
         so that the applicant's leave expired with immediate effect.

    vii) On 7 April the applicant was also served  with  Notice  of  Removal
         Window which included a notice under s. 120 of the 2002 Act.   Also
         on the same day the applicant made a  human  rights  claim  on  the
         basis of family life that he had established with  his  partner,  a
         British citizen.  The basis was set out  in  a  letter  from  Verax
         Solicitors dated 7 April 2016.  The letter explains,  inter alia:

         1.  The  applicant  became  homeless  in  February  2015  and   had
             instructed solicitors to notify the Home Office.


         2. The curtailment letter had not been sent to the  solicitors  (in
             May 2015).


         3. The caseworker had erred in sending the  curtailment  letter  to
             the applicant's previous address when the Home Office had been
             updated by his solicitors "about a  new  address  for  further
             correspondence."


         4. The applicant had established family life with a British Citizen
             with whom he had been living since February  2014.   Both  had
             encountered  hostility  from  their   families   as   to   the
             relationship.


         5. As a consequence the applicant had valid leave to remain as  the
             curtailment decision had not been served.

    The applicant is now married.

 2) Proceedings  were  issued  on  15  April  2016  seeking  permission  to
    challenge the decision to remove the applicant, the decision  to  serve
    the Removal Notice Window and  the  decision  to  curtail  leave  dated
    respectively 3 and 7 April 2016 and 10 February  2015.   The  challenge
    did not include the new curtailment decision.

 3) The grounds argue that the first curtailment decision was not  sent  or
    served in accordance with "article 8ZA(1)(c) of s.4(1)" of  (the  "H.O.
    Guidance").  In addition, the Home Office  had  not  followed  its  own
    published Policy (Guidance - Curtailment of Leave - version 15.0 EXT).

 4) Permission was granted by HHJ Stephen Davies on 21 November  2016.   He
    considered that it was at least arguable that the applicant had a  case
    based on the service of the curtailment decision being ineffective  but
    he also observed that no such  argument  existed  in  relation  to  the
    refusal decision dated 10 February 2015 a copy of which had  been  sent
    anyway in May 2015.   We  shall  revisit  the  issue  of  amending  the
    applicant's challenge infra.

Relevant Statutory Provisions

 5) Section 4(1) of the Immigration Act  1971  ("the  1971  Act")  requires
    notice in writing to be given of a decision,  inter  alia,  to  vary  a
    person's leave under s. 3(3)(a) of the 1971 Act.   So far  as  relevant
    s.4(1) provides as follows:

           "The power under this act to give or refuse leave to  enter  the
           United Kingdom shall be exercised by immigration  officers,  and
           the power to give leave to remain in the United Kingdom,  or  to
           vary  any  leave  under  section  3(3)(a)  (whether  as  regards
           duration or conditions), shall be exercised by the Secretary  of
           State; and, unless otherwise allowed by or under this act, those
           powers shall be exercised by notice  in  writing  given  to  the
           persons affected, except that the powers under  section  3(3)(a)
           may be exercised generally in respect of any class of persons by
           order made by statutory instrument."


 6) Section 3(3) of the 1971 Act confers  power  to  vary  an  individual's
    limited leave to enter or remain  by,  inter  alia,  "restricting...the
    limitation of its duration..."  That  power,  therefore,  includes  the
    power to curtail an individual's leave.   Section  4(1)  provides  that
    "notice in writing" of such a decision to curtail an individual's leave
    shall be "given" to the person affected.

 7) Section 3A of the 1971 Act empowers the Secretary of State by order  to
    make provision with respect  to  varying  leave  to  enter  in  the  UK
    (s.3A(1)) and, in particular, to provide for the "form  or  manner"  in
    which leave may be varied (s.3A(2)(a)).  The latter includes the  "form
    or manner" in which notice of a decision may be given.  Similar  powers
    can be found in s.3B of the 1971 Act in respect  of  varying  leave  to
    remain.

 8) In relation to decisions appealable under the Nationality,  Immigration
    & Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act  2002")  the  relevant  provisions  are
    contained within the Immigration (Notice) Regulations 2003 (SI 2003/658
    as amended).  Those regulations, however,  have  no  application  to  a
    decision which is not appealable under the NIA Act 2002.  A decision to
    curtail an individual's leave to a point in time in the future, and  so
    not with immediate effect, is not an appealable decision under  s.82(2)
    the NIA Act 2002 (see s.82(2)(e) - and "immigration decision includes a
    "variation...[of leave]...if when the variation takes effect the person
    has no leave to enter or remain).  Consequently, the 2000 Order has  no
    application to the giving of notice of a curtailment decision  such  as
    in this  case  where  the  individual's  leave  is  shortened  but  not
    immediately ended.


Article 8ZA

 9) Article 8ZA of the 2000 Order, which is the key statutory provision  in
    these proceedings, sets out the methods and means by which a notice  in
    writing may be "given":

         "Grant, refusal or variation of leave by notice in writing


         (1)      A notice in writing -


               a) giving leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom;


               b) refusing leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom:


               c) refusing to vary a person's leave to enter  or  remain  in
                  the United Kingdom: or


               d) varying a person's leave to enter or remain in the  United
                  Kingdom,


           may be given to the person affected as required by section  4(1)
           of the Act as follows:


         (2)      The notice may be -


               a) given by hand;


               b) sent by fax;


               c) sent by postal service to a postal  address  provided  for
                  correspondence   by   the   person   or    the    person's
                  representative;


               d) sent electronically to  an  e-mail  address  provided  for
                  correspondence   by   the   person   or    the    person's
                  representative;


               e) sent by document exchange to a document exchange number or
                  address; or


               f) sent by courier.
         (3)      Where no postal or e-mail address for  correspondence  has
             been provided, the notice may be sent -


               a) by postal service to -


                   i) the last-known or usual  place  of  abode,  place  of
                      study or place of business of the person; or


                  (ii)       the last-known or usual place  of  business  of
                      the person's representative; or


               b) electronically to -


                  (i)  the  last-known  e-mail  address   for   the   person
                      (including at the person's last-known place of  study
                      or place of business); or


                  (ii)  the  last-known  e-mail  address  of  the   person's
                      representative.


         (4)       Where  attempts  to  give  notice  in   accordance   with
             paragraphs (2) and (3) are not possible or have  failed,  when
             the decision-maker records the reasons for this and places the
             notice on file the notice shall be deemed to have been given.


         (5)      Where a notice is deemed to have been given in  accordance
             with  paragraph  (4)  and  then  subsequently  the  person  is
             located, the person shall as soon as is practicable be given a
             copy of the notice and details of when and how it was given.


         (6)      A notice given under this article may, in the  case  of  a
             person who in under 18 years  of  age  and  does  not  have  a
             representative, be given to the parent,  guardian  or  another
             adult who for the time  being  takes  responsibility  for  the
             child."


Home Office Guidance

10) This was published in April 2014 under the title, POINTS BASED  SYSTEM:
    MIGRANT CHANGE OF CIRCUMSTANCES FORM.  It states, in material part:

         "Representative's details:  The  applicant  should  notify  the  UK
         Border Agency if he/she changes his/her representative.  State  the
         name, full address (including postcode) and telephone number of the
         new representative.

         Their Unique Reference Number, OISC reference number or details of
         their exemption should be included.

         If the representative is completing the form he/ she should confirm
         in this section that he/she holds a letter  of  authorisation  from
         the migrant confirming the representative is  acting  on  his/  her
         behalf.  He/she must enclose the original letter with this form."

11) Further Guidance by Home Office with the title,  CURTAILMENT  OF  LEAVE
    version 12.0 valid from 31 July 2014 specifically deals with  a  change
    of representatives at page 135 et seq in the following  terms  relevant
    to the issue in this case.

          "If the applicant changes their representative, or  instructs  one
         for the first time, before you accept the instruction or change  of
         representative, you must check  the  migrant  has  given  the  Home
         Office written authorisation for the representative to act on their
         behalf, and any  new  representative  the  applicant  nominates  is
         either of the following:

           .  regulated  by  the  Office  of   the   Immigration   Services
             Commissioner (OISC)
           . a solicitor


         If the change of representative meets the above  requirements,  you
         must accept it and update CID with the new contact details.


         If the  representative  is  not  appropriately  regulated,  or  the
         migrant does not send the authorisation,  you  must  write  to  the
         applicant and their proposed  representative  to  inform  them  you
         cannot speak to the new representative or comment on the case.


         If you reject the migrant's change of representative this alone  is
         not a reason to reject the error correction request."


12) Our analysis of this instrument is as follows.  Where the  Home  Office
    receives notification that an applicant has instructed a representative
    or has a new  representative  two  options  arise.   If  the  specified
    requirements  are  satisfied   the   caseworker   "must"   accept   the
    notification and update the internal records  (The  "CID",  or  "GCID")
    accordingly.   Conversely  if  the  specified  requirements   are   not
    satisfied, the caseworker "must" inform  both  the  applicant  and  the
    representative concerned that the notification has been  rejected.   We
    consider the clear philosophy and intent of this guidance to be that in
    every case where a notification is accepted all subsequent dealings and
    communications will, subject to any material  development  or  relevant
    legal rule, be with the representative.  In the typical case this  will
    be to the advantage of the Home  Office  because  inter  alia  it  will
    promote efficiency and  expedition  and  will  be  unaffected  if,  for
    example, the client alters his place of residence or departs the United
    Kingdom.  In short, the acceptance  of  a  notification  establishes  a
    concrete mechanism  for  subsequent  dealings  and  communications  and
    promotes legal certainty.

13) Furthermore considerations of  reliance,  expectation,  predictability,
    good administration and representation arise.  Our  analysis  above  is
    harmonious with good administration.   Further,  the  acceptance  of  a
    notification will normally generate in the applicant an expectation and
    assumption that all subsequent Home Office dealings and  communications
    will  be  with  the  notified  representative.   The   acceptance,   in
    substance, constitutes a  representation  to  this  effect.   A  quasi-
    contractual arrangement,  which  benefits  both  parties,  is  born  in
    consequence.

14) Article 8ZA of the 2000  Order  establishes  several  options  for  the
    service of a written notice.  The legislature clearly intended to cater
    for as many situations as  possible.   We  consider  that  there  is  a
    clearly ascertainable legislative  intention  that  in  cases  where  a
    notification of representative has been  given  by  the  applicant  and
    accepted by the Home Office the latter will normally serve any  written
    notice on the representative.  This construction  accords  with  common
    sense,  practical  reality  and  reasonableness.   Furthermore  it   is
    reinforced by the public law framework which we have  outlined  in  the
    immediately preceding paragraph.

15) The matrix which we are addressing has a further public law  dimension.
    We consider that in cases where a notification has  been  accepted  the
    Home Office, if contemplating the service of a written  notice  on  the
    applicant rather than the accepted representative, must  as  a  minimum
    take into account the notification and its acceptance.  It seems to  us
    that the materiality of this factor is undeniable.   It  is  trite  law
    that where a choice (or discretion) exists all material factors must be
    considered as a matter of obligation.  Where there is a failure to this
    effect  the  ensuing  act  or  decision  will  normally  be   vitiated.
    Moreover, and independently, the Lumba principle applies:

         "The individual has a basic public law right to  have  his  or  her
         case considered under whatever policy the  executive  sees  fit  to
         adopt provided that the adopted policy is a lawful exercise of  the
         discretion conferred by the statute: see In re  Findlay  [1985]  AC
         318, 338E.   There  is  a  correlative  right  to  know  what  that
         currently existing policy is,  so  that  the  individual  can  make
         relevant representations in relation to it.  In  R  (Anufrijeva)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] UKHL 36, [2004] 1
         AC 604, para 26 Lord Steyn said:
             "Notice of a decision is  required  before  it  can  have  the
             character of a determination with  legal  effect  because  the
             individual concerned must be in a position  to  challenge  the
             decision in the courts if he or she wishes to do so.  This  is
             not a technical rule. It is simply an application of the right
             of access to justice." "

    Per Lord Dyson in Lumba v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2011] UKSC 12 at [35].


16) In applying the above approach to the factual matrix we  identify  four
    standout features, namely the terms in  which  the  solicitor's  letter
    dated 09 February 2015 and its attachment were couched,  the  immediate
    consequential updating of the Home Office records and  the  failure  of
    the Home Office to communicate to the applicant or the  solicitors  any
    rejection of the notification.  Furthermore,  the  inference  that  the
    notification and its internal registration were  simply  overlooked  by
    the case worker concerned is readily made.  This is reinforced  by  the
    absence of any evidence of  why  the  notice  was  not  served  on  the
    solicitors.  Giving effect to the public law template outlined above we
    conclude that the decision dated 17 March 2015 must be  quashed  as  it
    was not lawfully  served  and  involved  the  breach  of  several  well
    recognised principles.

17) We turn next to consider  the  further  curtailment  decision  and  the
    removal notice of 3 April 2016.  As noted in [4]  above  the  grant  of
    permission to apply for judicial review was restricted  to  challenging
    the decision dated 17 March 2015.  We are seized of an  application  to
    amend the applicant's challenge.

18)  The  Tribunal  invited   written   submissions   from   the   parties'
    representatives on the issue of remedy.  These have now  been  received
    and considered.  On behalf of the respondent it is  submitted  that  it
    will suffice for the applicant's purposes to make an order quashing the
    impugned decision of 17 March 2015.  This is based on the premise  that
    this decision gave rise to the applicant's outstanding Article  8  ECHR
    being refused on the basis that he was in  breach  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The written submission continues:

         "The respondent submits that the quashing of  the  decision  of  17
         March 2015  alone  would  result  in  the  applicant's  outstanding
         Article 8 application being considered substantively as if it  were
         an in time application. Thus  quashing  [said]  decision  would  be
         sufficient to resolve the applicant's difficulties as  outlined  to
         the court and provide an effective remedy."

    Having regard to this unequivocal acknowledgement, the Tribunal  orders
    that the impugned decision of 17 March 2015 be quashed.  The effect  of
    this order is that there is no requirement to revisit  the  restrictive
    terms of the grant of permission and consider an  enlargement  thereof,
    as debated at the hearing.  The mechanism of liberty to  apply  (below)
    will provide the applicant with effective protection.

19) There shall be liberty to apply.

Costs

20) Giving effect to the general rule that  costs  follow  the  event,  the
    respondent is ordered to pay the applicant's reasonable  costs,  to  be
    assessed in default of agreement.

Signed                                             Date:   24 August 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

