
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                      IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

R (on the application  of  Vassell)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (s.96 NIAA 2002, test; merits) IJR [2015] UKUT 0404 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                               30 March 2015

             In the matter of an application for judicial review

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON THE application OF

                                ADRIAN VASSELL

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr P Bonavero, Counsel, instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors  appeared on
behalf of the Applicant.

Mr D Mitchell, Counsel, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.

In J v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWHC  705  (Admin),
Stadlen J set out a four stage  process  that  must  be  undertaken  by  the
Secretary of State before she could  certify  a  claim  under  s.96  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The merits of any  new  matter
raised by an applicant are not relevant to this process.





                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE  latter:  This  is  an  application  for  judicial   review   of   the
    respondent's  decision  dated  5  March  2014  refusing  to  revoke   a
    deportation order and to  certify  that  decision  under  s.96  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In outline it is  argued
    on behalf of the applicant  that the decision to certify  was  unlawful
    because the application raised a  matter  which  could  not  have  been
    raised in an appeal against the decision to make  a  deportation  order
    and secondly, when considering whether to exercise  her  discretion  to
    certify the claim under s.96 the respondent failed to take into account
    the best interests of the applicant's son, a British citizen born on 13
    January 2011, which should have been a  primary  consideration  and  in
    particular the report from an independent social worker submitted  with
    the application.

2.   To set the application and the submissions in context  I  need  briefly
    to summarise the factual background.   The applicant is  a  citizen  of
    Jamaica, born on 13 June 1979.  He claims to have arrived in the UK  in
    June 1991 and the following year, on 22 October 1992,  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain as the dependant of his  mother,  a  British
    citizen.  On 9 June 1997 he was convicted of robbery and  sentenced  to
    three years' detention in a Young Offenders Institute.   From  1996  to
    2012 he had eleven further convictions for seventeen offences including
    theft, burglary, robbery, handling stolen goods, possessing a  Class  A
    drug, destroying or damaging property, driving whilst disqualified  and
    battery.

3.   On 25 May 2012 he was convicted of burglary and  theft  at  Wood  Green
    Crown Court and sentenced to  fifteen  months'  imprisonment.   He  was
    considered by the respondent  to  be  a  foreign  criminal  within  the
    meaning of s.32(1) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and on 24 September  2012
    a deportation order was made against him.   He  appealed  against  this
    decision but his appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on  24
    January 2013.  He was refused permission to appeal  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on  28  April
    2013.  However, on 5 July 2013 the Upper Tribunal dismissed his appeal,
    permission to appeal being refused by both the Upper Tribunal  and  the
    Court of Appeal.   His appeal rights  were  exhausted  on  2  September
    2013. The following day the Jamaican High Commission  agreed  to  issue
    emergency travel documentation and on 15 January 2014 the applicant was
    detained pending removal and  removal  directions  were  served  on  28
    January  2014.   On  20  February  2014  the  applicant  made   further
    representations and a stay on removal was granted by Foskett J for  the
    following reasons:

         "The claimant was involved in a  high  profile  piece  of  criminal
         activity which undoubtedly tells against him. However,  Ms  Brown's
         [the  independent  social  worker]  report  on  the   effect   that
         deportation would have on his young son is arguably powerful and it
         seems only appropriate that consideration should be given to it."

4.   The applicant's further submissions were set out in a letter  dated  20
    February 2014 and relied in substance on the  report  prepared  by  the
    independent  social  worker,  arguing   that   it   provided   evidence
    demonstrating that the applicant's deportation would directly harm  the
    best interests of his son and that as his  interests  were  of  primary
    importance, it followed that previous decisions made on the basis of an
    erroneous understanding of his interests could no longer be  sustained.



5.   In the decision of 5 March 2014 the respondent rejected this  argument.
    She specifically considered  the  provisions  of  para  399A.   It  was
    accepted that the applicant had lived continuously in  the  UK  for  at
    least twenty years immediately preceding the date  of  the  immigration
    decision but it was not considered  that  he  had  no  connection  with
    Jamaica, the  country to which he was to be deported.

6.   The applicant could not therefore meet the requirements of  para  399A.
    The respondent went on to consider exceptional circumstances  and  took
    into account the findings made by  the  Upper  Tribunal  which  in  its
    determination had considered the position of the applicant's child.  It
    was her view that the further representations and the  contents  of  Ms
    Brown's report offered nothing new for consideration but were merely  a
    different interpretation of the same circumstances previously addressed
    by the Tribunal. The respondent  went  on  to  consider  the  issue  of
    certification under s.96 of the 2002 Act referring to J v Secretary  of
    State [2009] EWHC 705 (Admin) and, taking into account the  four  stage
    process identified by Stadlen J,  concluded  that  the  application  to
    which the new decision related relied on a matter that could have  been
    raised in an appeal against the  previous  decision  and  that  in  the
    exercise of her  discretion  the  proper  course  was  to  certify  the
    application.

7.   In the Pre-action Protocol letter  of  11  March  2014  the  point  was
    explicitly taken about the applicant's length of residence and the fact
    that it was his argument that he could meet the  requirements  of  para
    399A(a).  This argument was rejected by the respondent  in  her  letter
    dated 19 March 2014.

8.   The relevant parts of the Rules relating to  this  application  are  as
    follows:

         "399A  - This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
             applies if -


         (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at least twenty
             years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
             decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and  he  has
             no ties  (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
             country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
             UK; or


         (b) the person is aged under 25 years, and he has  spent  at  least
             half his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK  immediately
             preceding the date of the  immigration  decision  (discounting
             any period of imprisonment) and  he  has  no  ties  (including
             social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK."

9.   Section 96 of the 2002 Act provides as follows:

         "(1) an appeal under Section 82(1) against an immigration  decision
             ("the new decision") in respect of a person may not be brought
             if the Secretary of State or an Immigration Officer  certifies
             -


             (a) that the person was notified of a right  of  appeal  under
                  that section against another  immigration  decision  ('the
                  old decision') (whether or not an appeal was  brought  and
                  whether or not any appeal brought has been determined);


             (b) that the claim or application to which  the  new  decision
                  relates relies on a matter that could have been raised  in
                  an appeal against the old decision; and


             (c) that in the opinion of  the  Secretary  of  State  or  the
                  Immigration Officer, there is no satisfactory  reason  for
                  that matter not having been raised in  an  appeal  against
                  the old decision."

10.  In J v Secretary of State, Stadlen J set out the following  four  stage
    process to be undertaken by the respondent before she could  certify  a
    claim under s.96:

         "Under s.96(1) and (2) before the Secretary of State  can  lawfully
         decided to certify, she has to go through  a  four  stage  process.
         First, she must  be satisfied that the person  was  notified  of  a
         right of appeal under s.82  against  another  immigration  decision
         (s.96(1))  ...   Second,  she  must  conclude  that  the  claim  or
         application to which the new decision relates relies  on  a  matter
         that could have been raised in the appeal against the old  decision
         (s.96(1)(b)) ... Third, she must form the opinion that there is  no
         satisfactory reason for that matter not having been  raised  in  an
         appeal against the old decision (s.96(1)(c)) ...  Fourth, she  must
         address her mind to whether, having regard to all relevant factors,
         she should exercise her discretion to certify and conclude that  it
         is  appropriate  to  exercise   the   discretion   in   favour   of
         certification."

Submissions

11.  Mr Bonavero submitted that it had not been open  to  the  applicant  to
    rely on para 399A at the hearing of his appeal against the decision  to
    make a deportation order either before  the  First-tier  or  the  Upper
    Tribunal as by that stage he had not completed twenty years'  residence
    within para 399A(a).  However, by the  time  of  the  decision  on  his
    application to revoke the deportation order  he  had  completed  twenty
    years.  That point had been conceded in the decision  letter  at  [36A]
    even though that concession had been revoked in the response to the Pre-
    action Protocol letter on 19 March 2014.  The argument in  that  letter
    that in fact twenty years residence had not  been  completed  was  ill-
    founded, so he argued, as the respondent had miscalculated  the  effect
    of the applicant's periods of imprisonment.  He submitted that this was
    therefore clearly a matter which could not have been pursued or  raised
    in the appeal against the previous decision.

12.  So far as his second  ground  was  concerned,  he  submitted  that  the
    respondent  had  failed  when  considering  whether  to  exercise   her
    discretion, to take properly into account the  best  interests  of  the
    applicant's child.  Although the decision did refer to the  independent
    social worker's report, no consideration was given  expressly  to  that
    issue when considering certification and it  followed,  so  he  argued,
    that a relevant matter had been left out of account in deciding whether
    certification was the proper course to take.

13.  Mr Mitchell submitted that the four  stage  process  set  out  in  J  v
    Secretary  of  State  had  been   properly   followed.    The   initial
    representations had focused on the applicant's  relationship  with  his
    son and the  issue  about  twenty  years'  residence  was  only  raised
    substantively in the Pre-action Protocol letter.   The  decision  under
    challenge had not dealt with the issue of continuity  of  residence  as
    that point had not  been  put  forward  in  the  representations.   The
    respondent  had  not  erred  in  her  application  of   s.96(1)(b)   in
    circumstances where there had been no reliance on the issue  of  length
    of residence.  Even if the respondent had  misunderstood  the  position
    about the actual length  of  residence,  that  did  not  undermine  the
    decision if the point was not a live one in issue between the  parties.



14.  So far as the second point was concerned, Mr Mitchell pointed out  that
    the report from Ms Brown  had  been  referred  to  extensively  in  the
    decision letter in paragraphs 14, 17, 18, 19, 34, 40, 43,  45,  46  and
    53.  It was simply not arguable, so he  submitted,  that  it  could  be
    inferred that the respondent had closed her mind to this evidence  when
    considering the issue of certification.  On the issue  of  whether  the
    applicant had ties to Jamaica, the respondent was entitled to take  the
    view that he was unable to show that he had no such ties.

15.  In reply, Mr Bonavero emphasised that a concession  had  been  made  to
    length of residence in the decision letter and even if  the  point  had
    not been raised substantively at that stage, it was dealt with,  albeit
    inaccurately, in the response to the Pre-action Protocol letter. If the
    respondent chose to go down the  route  of  using  s.96,  she  was  not
    entitled in this context to consider the merits of a ground not  raised
    before. This would be a matter for a Tribunal on appeal.

Assessment of the Issues

16.  The first challenge to the respondent's decision to certify under  s.96
    is  that  the  provisions  of  s.96(1)(b)  were  not  met  because  the
    application to which the new decision related relied on a  matter  that
    could not have been raised in an appeal against the old decision.   The
    argument put simply is that the applicant was entitled to rely  on  the
    provisions of para 399A(a) but had not  been  able  to  do  so  at  the
    hearing  of  his  original  appeal  against  the  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order because he had  not  by  that  stage  accrued  twenty
    years' continuous residence as required by para 399A(a).  It was agreed
    by Counsel that the length of the period of imprisonment to be deducted
    from continuous residence was the total of  the  two  periods  actually
    served.  The applicant served eighteen months in custody in 1997 and  7
    months and 14 days in 2012, a total of 25 months and 14 days.

17.  There is no evidence to contradict the  appellant's  evidence  that  he
    arrived in the UK in June 1991. The  respondent's  decision  was  on  5
    March 2014, a period of 22 years and 8 months after  his  arrival  from
    which has to be deducted  25  months  and  14  days.  Discounting  this
    period, he had lived continuously in the UK for more than twenty  years
    immediately preceding the date of the decision.

18.  The substantive argument  against  this  being  a  new  matter  falling
    within s.96(1)(b) is that it was not a matter on  which  the  applicant
    relied as his representations were based on the  evidence  relating  to
    his son, the effect on him of the applicant being removed and generally
    on their  relationship.   The  point  about  twenty  years'  continuous
    residence was, so it was argued, only picked up  substantively  in  the
    Pre-action Protocol letter and the fact that the matter was dealt  with
    in the response to that letter, even if inaccurately,  does  not  alter
    the fact that it was not  relied  on  so  far  as  the  decision  under
    challenge was concerned.  Even if it was, so  the  argument  goes,  the
    respondent had been entitled to take the view that  the  applicant  had
    failed to show that he had no ties with Jamaica.

19.  I am satisfied that by the date of the new decision it was open to  the
    applicant to rely on the provisions of para 399A(a) by  reason  of  the
    passage of time when he had not been able to do so  when  the  decision
    against the  deportation  order  was  under  challenge.   This  clearly
    amounts in my judgment to a new matter and would mean, subject  to  the
    argument about whether the issue had been raised and  relied  on,  that
    the decision could not be certified.

20.  I do not accept  the  respondent's  submission  that  no  reliance  was
    placed on para 399A and the issue of continuity of residence  when  the
    further representations were made.  It is true that the thrust  of  the
    submissions on the applicant's behalf went to  the  independent  social
    worker's report but the respondent's decision conceded there  had  been
    twenty years' continuous residence  and  specifically  considered  para
    399A, rejecting the argument on the basis that the respondent  did  not
    accept that the applicant had no ties with  Jamaica.   In  the  present
    case it would wholly artificial to exclude from  consideration  of  the
    lawfulness of the decision issues raised in the Pre-action Protocol and
    responded to in the respondent's subsequent letter.  The  fact  remains
    that a new matter had been  raised  and  this  prevented  certification
    regardless of the view  the  respondent  took  on  the  merits  of  the
    applicant's ties to Jamaica and  accordingly  the  respondent  was  not
    entitled to certify this decision under s.96.

21.  For the  sake  of  completeness  I  will  also  deal  with  the  second
    submission that when exercising her discretion the respondent failed to
    take into account the best interests of the applicant's child.  On this
    issue the applicant fails to make out his case.  The  decision  clearly
    identifies  the  thrust  of  the  representations  being  made  on  the
    applicant's behalf in [17].  As Mr Mitchell rightly  pointed  out,  the
    report was specifically considered and referred  to  in  at  least  ten
    paragraphs of the report.  Whilst it is correct that  when  considering
    the issue of discretion at [55] the respondent did not refer  in  terms
    to  the  report,  nonetheless  it  is  impossible  to  infer  that  the
    respondent either closed her mind to what had been the substance of the
    applicant's case or that she left it out of  account  when  considering
    her discretion.  To take such a view would  be  to  fail  to  read  the
    decision as a whole.  Therefore, the challenge to the certification  at
    the fourth stage of the process identified by Stadlen J fails.

22.  However, as the first challenge  is  made  out,  on  that  basis  I  am
    satisfied that the respondent's decision was  unlawful.  Accordingly  I
    quash the decision to certify the application to revoke the deportation
    order under s.96.  ~~~~0~~~~
