

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

        Okonkwo (legacy/Hakemi; health claim) [2013] UKUT 00401 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 July 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                             bertha joe-okonkwo
                               joseph okonkwo

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     D. Medhurst instructed by The Legal Resource
Partnership
For the Respondent:    N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





(1) It may be unfair for the Secretary of State to fail to apply  the  terms
of a policy to a case that fell within the terms of the policy when  it  was
in existence: Hakemi and others [2012]  EWHC  1967  (Admin),   and  Mohammed
[2012] EWHC 3091 Admin  considered.

(2)  Chapter 53 of the EIG Instructions as in force December  2011  did  not
mean that any adult who had lawfully resided in the UK for six years had  an
expectation of discretionary leave to  remain,  applying  former  rule  395C
together with the policy then in force.

(3) An appellant who has been provided with an  organ  transplant  during  a
period of lawful leave to remain, and the viability of the  success  of  the
transplant would be prejudiced  by  loss  of  effective  access  to  immune-
suppressant medication may well have a good claim to remain under Article  8
ECHR: see JA (Ivory Coast) ES (Tanzania) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1353;  GS
and EO (Article 3- health cases) [2012] UKUT 397; and Akhalu (health  claim:
ECHR Article 8)[2013] UKUT 400 (IAC)  considered;  but the argument must  be
advanced to the First tier judge before it can be said  that  there  was  an
error of law in failing to deal with it.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1.   The appellants are both citizens of Nigeria. They  are  husband  and
      wife. Bertha Joe-Okonkwo was born in  May  1968  and  arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom on 24th January 2006 to  study  and  was  then  granted
      extensions of stay as a Post-Study Work migrant. She  was  granted  an
      extension of stay until 2nd September 2011. Her husband  was  born  in
      1965. He came to the United Kingdom as a dependant of his student wife
      in March 2007 and was give leave to remain in line with  that  of  his
      wife thereafter. His case is entirely dependent on hers.


   2.    Eight months after her arrival in the UK Mrs Okonkwo was  diagnosed
      as suffering from kidney disease. This diagnosis  and  the  associated
      ill health delayed the completion of her MA in Health and Social  Care
      at Middlesex University.  She graduated in June 2009  but  was  unable
      thereafter to use  her  qualification  to  enter  the  Highly  Skilled
      Migrants Programme. She was given a period of limited  leave  for  two
      years for the purpose of post study work experience.   She  apparently
      found  employment  part  time  dealing  with  vulnerable  adults  with
      learning  difficulties  although  details  of  her  hours  worked  and
      remuneration were  sparse.  Her  husband  was  entitled  to  work  and
      contributed to the family budget.

   3.   Mrs Okonkwo's kidney disease was severe and  in  December  2010  she
      underwent surgery at the Royal Free Hospital North London when she was
      given a kidney transplant. From the medical reports of her  Consultant
      Nephrologist Mr Dupont, dated 13th May  and  11th  November  2011,  it
      appears that the transplant has been successful but for  the  replaced
      organ to endure she will need a steady  supply  of  immuno-suppressant
      drugs  to  prevent  rejection  of  the  organ.  She  will  also   need
      specialised tertiary-level medical care.  If  her  transplanted  organ
      fails she will need regular dialysis using a kidney machine.

   4.     In  August  2011  the  appellant  and  her  husband  applied   for
      discretionary leave to remain outside the Rules. They  relied  on  the
      length of lawful residence of Mrs Okonkwo (over five years);  the fact
      of her transplant;  the need for her to remain in the UK for follow up
      treatment and medication if the operation were to  remain  a  success;
      and the prospects for failure of the transplant  if  she  were  to  be
      returned to Nigeria where the immuno-suppressant drugs  were  both  in
      short supply and prohibitively expensive for the normal  citizen.  She
      pointed out that rule 395 C (viii) of the Immigration  Rules  required
      regard to be had to the compassionate circumstances of the case before
      any removal decision was made.

   5.   There was a prompt reply to this application made on 29th  September
      2011. The Secretary of State refused the application for an  extension
      of stay. It was pointed out that she was now fit enough for work,  and
      there was no evidence  that  treatment  for  kidney  disease  was  not
      available in Nigeria.  It was not accepted that  the  removal  of  the
      appellants to Nigeria 'reaches  the  high  threshold  of  severity  to
      breach Article 3 and Article 8'.  There was no reference to rule  395C
      and no removal decision was taken  in  addition  to  the  decision  to
      refuse an extension of stay.

   6.  The appellants appealed and the sequence of events may be  summarised
      as follows :

        i. On 27th November 2011 Judge Schaerf of the  First-tier  Tribunal
           concluded  that  the  decision   to   refuse   the   appellants'
           applications for further leave to remain was not  in  accordance
           with the law as it was not accompanied by a decision  to  remove
           them from the United Kingdom. Consequently  there  had  been  no
           consideration of the compassionate circumstances of the case and
           other aspects of rule 395 C (viii).  The  requirement  for  such
           'one stop' decision-making had recently  been  affirmed  by  the
           Court of Appeal in its decision in Sapkota v  SSHD  [2011]  EWCA
           Civ 1320,  15 November 2011.


          ii. On 13th February 2012 the Secretary of State  abrogated  rule
              395 C.


      iii. On 6th March 2012 a fresh decision was taken against Mrs Okonkwo
           only, refusing her an extension of stay and for her removal from
           the United Kingdom. A further appeal was  entered  against  this
           decision complaining that no reasons had been given for  it  and
           no equivalent decision had been taken in respect of Mr Okonwo.

       iv. On 1st June 2012 the Court of Appeal re-examined the decision in
           Sapkota (above) in Patel v Secretary of State  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
           741 and concluded it was per incuriam and that decision and  the
           earlier decision in Mirza on which it  was  based  were  wrongly
           decided; there was no duty to make a  removal  decision  at  the
           same time as a refusal of an extension of stay.

        v. On 4th October 2012 a new decision was made in respect  of  both
           appellants refusing  leave  to  remain  and  at  the  same  time
           removing them from the United Kingdom.  The human rights  aspect
           of the claim was examined  by reference to the  new  Immigration
           Rules that came into force on 9th July 2012; Appendix FM.

       vi. On 8th November 2012 a panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
           Judge Schaerf presiding again allowed the  appellants'  appeals,
           this time of the basis of the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
           Ahmadi ( s 47  decision:  validity;  Sapkota)  [2012]  UKUT  147
           (IAC)[1]  that it was not possible in law to make a decision  to
           refuse leave  to  remain  and  remove  at  the  same  time.  The
           statutory scheme contemplated a period of time  lapsing  between
           the first decision and the second.

      vii. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  On  28th
           December 2012 Judge Dawson set aside the decision of  the  panel
           on the basis  of  the  subsequent  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
           Adamally and Jaferi (s.47-removal  decisions)  [2012]  UKUT  414
           (IAC) 15 November 2012. This decision  explained  that  although
           the Ahmadi decision decided that refusal of leave to remain  and
           removal could not be combined, the First-tier Tribunal still had
           to decide whether the first decision was lawful and this had not
           been done.

     viii.  On 20th March 2013 the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was
           re-made by Judge Simpson. She dismissed the appeal  against  the
           refusal to extend leave but affirmed that the decision to remove
           the appellants was unlawful.

       ix.   The  appellants  appealed  against  Judge  Simpson's  decision
           dismissing  their  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of   State's
           decision to refuse an extension of stay. On 21st May 2013  Judge
           Peter Lane granted permission to appeal and this is  the  appeal
           that is now before us.


The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal

   7.   Before Judge Simpson,  the appellants argued as follows:-


        i. The Secretary of State was wrong to apply Appendix  FM  to  this
           case, as the appellants were still seeking a lawful response  to
           their applications for an extension of stay made in August  2011
           and Appendix FM only  applied  to  variation  applications  made
           after July 2012.

       ii. The Secretary of State was wrong to fail to make a  decision  in
           accordance with rule 395C and  substantive  injustice  had  been
           caused by the failure to do so.


      iii. If the Secretary of State had considered  rule  395  C  and  the
           associated statement of policy the appellants  would  have  been
           granted leave to remain because they had been resident in the UK
           for more than 6 years.


       iv. There were no adequate medical facilities in Nigeria to  monitor
           the appellant's medical condition.


        v. Removal of the claimant would be contrary to Article 3 and  this
           was one of the exceptional cases  recognised  by  the  House  of
           Lords in N v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]
           UKHL 31.  The United Kingdom has assumed responsibility for  the
           appellant's treatment.


       vi. The fact that the appellant had leave to remain for seven  years
           is a relevant to the Article 3 analysis: see JA (Ivory Coast) ES
           (Tanzania) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1353.


      vii.  In ZT [2005] EWCA Civ 1421  it  was  accepted  that  ostracism,
           humiliation and deprivation of basic rights might  amount  to  a
           sufficiently exceptional case to engage Article 3.


     viii. A period of lawful residence followed  by  a  kidney  transplant
           provided on the NHS is an exceptional  aspect  of  private  life
           making it wrong to interfere with her  treatment  at  the  Royal
           Free Hospital.


       ix. The kidney donor would not have expected that the transplant  of
           the kidney to Mrs Okonkwo would  be  undermined  by  removal  to
           Nigeria.


        x. The appellant's husband has now given up employment to  be  with
           her in the United Kingdom and the couple have a private life  in
           the form of church friends and community ties here.


   8.   The Judge accepted point i.  above,  but  nevertheless  went  on  to
      consider whether there was anything in Appendix FM that  might  assist
      the appellant but found there was not.

   9.   The Judge rejected points ii, iii, v, vi, and vii; as for points iv,
      and viii to x, the Judge applied the decision-making process  set  out
      in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] 2 AC 368 and undertook a  full  Article  8
      assessment of the impact of removal on a woman and her husband who had
      earning capacity and links to  Nigeria  where  they  had  both  worked
      previously with the strength of the public interest in removing  those
      who did not comply with the Immigration Rules. She concluded that  the
      interference with the right to respect to private life  was  justified
      and proportionate.

  10. The Judge noted that a valid decision to remove the appellants had yet
      to be made.

The grounds of appeal:

  11. The  appellants  identified  four  alleged  errors  of  law  in  Judge
      Simpson's decision that can be reduced to two  propositions:  (i)  the
      Judge had erred in rejecting the human rights claim having  regard  to
      the length of lawful residence and the kidney donation  and  (ii)  the
      Judge was wrong to reject the appellants'  case  that  relied  on  the
      unfairness in failing to apply previous policy.

  12. Judge Lane, in granting permission to appeal,  saw  no  merit  in  the
      first of these grounds, but considered the second was arguable.

  13. Mr Medhurst, doubtless taking his cue from this indication focused his
      submissions before us on Ground Two and submitted a skeleton  argument
      repeating the points made to Judge Simpson.

Error of law: Ground Two:


  14. Mr Medhurst's argument proceeds as follows.  In Sapkota at the CA said
      at [124]


         'In the case of RS I would allow  the  appeal.  In  his  case  the
        direction that I would give pursuant to section 87 of the 2002  Act
        is that the matter be remitted  to  the  SSHD  to  reconsider  RS's
        application for leave to remain and, in doing so, the  SSHD  should
        consider  all  relevant  factors  under  paragraph  395C   of   the
        Immigration Rules. At the same time the SSHD  should  consider  the
        issue of a possible removal direction pursuant to section 47 of the
        2006 Act. Before the SSHD considers these two issues,  RS  must  be
        given  a  reasonable  time  in   which   to   make   any   relevant
        representations  including  representations   concerning   relevant
        factors under paragraph 395C of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  SSHD
        will have to consider such representations when making her decision
        on leave to remain and any possible removal decision under  section
        47.'


  15.  He then submits that this is what Judge  Schaerf  was  directing  the
      Secretary of State to do by the November  2011  decision  and  it  was
      never done.


  16. Further, if it had been done any consideration of  rule  395  C  would
      have had to take into account the then  applicable  instructions  (EIG
      Chapter 53 as in force on 8 December 2011) as to how the rules  should
      be operated. The decision of  the  Administrative  Court  in  Mohammed
      [2012] EWHC 3091 Admin makes plain  that  a  failure  to  apply  those
      instructions to a decision where  they  should  previously  have  been
      applied can make a subsequent decision conspicuously unfair, and those
      instructions require in the normal case that a  person  who  has  been
      resident for six years to be given discretionary leave to remain.

  17. The proper meaning of the instructions in EIG Chapter 53  was  central
      to this submission. In our judgement, Mr  Medhurst  has  misunderstood
      them. By way of preface, we note that  the  instructions  (and  indeed
      rule 395 C itself) both clearly apply to decisions  of  administrative
      removal made by an immigration officer under  s.  10  Immigration  Act
      1999 or s.47 of the 2006 Act. By the time the case came before   Judge
      Simpson it was clear that that no lawful removal decision had yet been
      made and despite previous regrettable uncertainty in  the  law,  there
      was no obligation in law for the Secretary of State to make  decisions
      to remove at the same time as a decision to refuse leave to remain.

  18. More significantly, at 53.1.2  the instructions make plain that:

         'For those not meeting the long residence requirements elsewhere in
         the immigration rules, the length of residence is a  factor  to  be
         considered. In general, the longer a person has lived  in  the  UK,
         the stronger their ties will be with the UK. However,  more  weight
         should be attached to the length of time a child has spent  in  the
         UK compared to an adult.'

  19. Two paragraphs further on there is a sub-heading 'Residence accrued as
      a result of delay by UKBA' and  the  bullet-points  relied  on  by  Mr
      Medhurst are contained  in  this  section  of  the  instructions.  The
      instructions explain that they were created partly in response to  the
      decisions of the higher courts that delay by the Home Office can be  a
      significant  factor  in  the  assessment  of  whether  removal  is   a
      proportionate interference with human rights.


  20. The instructions  give  examples  of  the  kind  of  delay  considered
      significant: an application to the UKBA has been outstanding for  over
      two years and the individual has been making progress inquiries; an in-
      time application for further leave was submitted some time ago where a
      significant delay might be considered as three  to  five  years.  They
      then turn to the effect of delay in family cases where delays of  four
      to six years whilst a child is under  18  is  considered  significant;
      this is also the case where there has been residence  of  three  years
      following an individual  assessment  of  the  prospects  of  enforcing
      removal.


  21. Finally at the end of this section are the words Mr Medhurst relies on
      :


      'Any other case where delay by UKBA has contributed to  a  significant
      period  of  residence,  Following   (capital  F  sic)  an   individual
      assessment of the prospect  of  removal,  and   where  other  relevant
      factors apply, 4-6 years may be significant, but a more usual  example
      would be a period of 6-8 years'.

  22. Mr Medhurst says the appellant has been here for six years  and  there
      has been delay in making a decision on her case  between  August  2011
      and October 2012. Applying the words of the policy she  would  qualify
      for exceptional leave on length of residence alone. We disagree.


  23. Mrs Okonkwo's residence between January 2012 and August 2011  was  not
      because of any delay by the Home Office, but was a consequence of  the
      progress of her studies and the post-study work experience rule.  None
      of this residence was in a capacity that  led  to  an  expectation  of
      permanent residence, although there might once have  been  a  hope  to
      admission  for  such  residence  under  the  Highly  Skilled  Migrants
      programme.  It  is  well  known  that  in  the  case  of  adults,  the
      Immigration Rules (paragraph 276 B (i)  (a))  express  the  length  of
      residence considered necessary by the  long  standing  policy  of  the
      Secretary  of  State  reflecting  the  Council  of   Europe   European
      Convention on Establishment 1955 to which the UK is party[2].

  24. There was no delay by the Home Office in any decision making following
      the August 2011 application. There was a prompt refusal  in  September
      2011 and following appeal further decisions in March 2012 and  October
      2012 based on assertions  of  contentious  issues  of  law.  Thus  the
      necessary factual predicate for the operation  of  this  part  of  the
      policy does not exist.

  25. Further, in our view  the  proper  meaning  of  the  words  quoted  at
      paragraph 21 above, are that in the case of adults with  no  children,
      residence of between four to eight years may be considered significant
      but that is residence following an initial assessment of the  prospect
      of  removal.  Removal  was  only  considered  in  September  2011  and
      decisions to remove were made in March 2012 and October 2012 against a
      background of appeals and the clarification of a complex area of law.

  26. We have already expressed the view that there had been no undue  delay
      from August or September 2011.  There was certainly no delay  of  two,
      three or four years, that are the relevant periods  needed  under  the
      instructions depending on whether there has been delay  in  responding
      to  an  application,  or  inactivity  in  making  a  removal  decision
      following initial assessment of removal, and whether  such  period  of
      inactivity related to an adult or a family where there  were  children
      under 18.

  27. We  do  not  understand  that  this  construction  of  the  policy  is
      inconsistent with anything said by Deputy High Court Judge  Morris  in
      Mohammed  (above) or Burton J in Hakemi and others  [2012]  EWHC  1967
      (Admin), but if we are wrong about this, we  respectfully  prefer  our
      own reading of the words  of  the  policy  set  in  its  context.   Mr
      Medhurst's construction of the text on which he relies  would  suggest
      that adults with no children are treated as  favourably  in  terms  of
      length of qualifying residence as those that do, which is inconsistent
      with the express words of the policy, statutory obligation and  common
      sense.

  28. We accept that whilst  the  policy  remained  in  force  there  was  a
      difference in treatment in the cases of adults who had been present in
      the United Kingdom for the same period of time. Thus one claimant  who
      had six years lawful residence but  whose  application  for  leave  to
      remain outside the rules is promptly determined and did not  meet  the
      long residence threshold required by the Immigration Rules,  could  be
      lawfully removed applying the EIG policy. Another claimant who entered
      irregularly, then came  to  adverse  attention  and  is  assessed  for
      removal and then no action is taken for four to  six  years  would  be
      treated more favourably under the policy. An interested observer might
      consider it  peculiar  that  an  irregular  migrant  is  treated  more
      favourably than a regular one when both have been present for the same
      period of time but the two cases  are  distinct  and  the  distinction
      highlights the fact that this part of the policy is concerned with the
      effect of delay. Although it is always a relevant factor, pure  length
      of  residence  alone  has  never  been  a  decisive  consideration  in
      immigration decision making.

  29. In the light of our reading of the policy,  the  centre  piece  of  Mr
      Medhurst's claim  to  unfairness  falls  away.   We  accept  that  the
      Secretary of State has never in terms given  a  reasoned  decision  on
      compassionate circumstances, and it would probably have  been  helpful
      if she had done so, but she was plainly aware of all the facts  placed
      before her and was not persuaded that they led to the grant  of  leave
      on the three occasions in which she considered the matter.

  30. A health claim is capable of giving rise to a human rights claim,  and
      where it does not meet the human rights test, we are not aware of  any
      current  policy,   practice   or   interpretation   of   compassionate
      circumstances to suggest that a claimant's poor health gives rise to a
      decisive consideration in their favour. As there was no clear previous
      policy that would have given the appellants an expectation of  further
      leave to remain, we conclude that as a matter of generality  there  is
      no unfairness to them in the  change  of  those  policies  during  the
      period of time that the case has been under consideration. We  further
      note that any factors relevant to compassionate circumstances  can  be
      examined under Article 8.


  31. Further, we note that the question of unfairness was being  considered
      by Judge Simpson in March 2013 after it had become  clear  that  there
      was no duty on the Secretary of State to act in  the  way  that  Judge
      Schaerf had understandably concluded that she  should  have  acted  in
      November 2011, and so the supposed illegality of  the  September  2011
      decision has to be seen in the light of the clarification of  the  law
      in June 2012 in the case of Patel.

  32. Finally, we conclude that even if the convoluted history of the appeal
      did require the Secretary of State  to  take  account  of  her  former
      policy in making a decision to remove the appellants from  the  United
      Kingdom, that decision has yet to be taken, and  the  former  policies
      clearly only applied to such removal decisions.

  33. For all these reasons we are satisfied that Judge  Simpson's  decision
      on the accumulation of issues that we have described as Ground Two did
      not involve the making of an error of  law  and  the  appeal  on  this
      Ground fails.



   Ground One: Human Rights

  34. Both in his skeleton argument and before us, and below, Mr  Medhurst's
      submissions on this aspect of the issue were comparatively  brief  and
      principally directed at finding an exception  to  the  high  threshold
      required before a violation of Article 3 ECHR is made out.


  35. On this aspect we agree with the Judge that the case  law  binding  on
      the UT makes clear that what engages Article 3  is  the  circumstances
      likely to result in the place of return when the claimant is  deprived
      of the life supporting treatment received in the host country and that
      the length and nature of the residence here can have little impact  on
      that.

  36. It is surprising and unfortunate that neither below nor before us  did
      Mr Medhurst cite this Tribunal's decision in GS  and  EO  (Article  3-
      health cases) [2012] UKUT 397 reported on 24th  October  2012.  It  is
      surprising because this is the leading authority of  the  Tribunal  on
      health based human rights claims. The  decision  concerned  two  cases
      remitted for reconsideration by the Court of Appeal dealing  with  the
      impact of loss of life saving kidney dialysis  by  two  claimants  who
      would not be able to afford access to dialysis in their  countries  of
      origin India and Ghana with  the  consequences  that  they  would  die
      within a few weeks of their removal from the United Kingdom. The head-
      note records the Tribunal's conclusions:

        (i) The fact that life  expectancy  is  dramatically  shortened  by
        withdrawal of medical treatment in the  host  state  is  in  itself
        incapable of amounting to the highly exceptional case that  engages
        the Article 3 duty.


        (ii) There  are  recognised  departures  from  the  high  threshold
        approach in cases concerning  children,  discriminatory  denial  of
        treatment, absence of resources through civil war or similar  human
        agency.


        (iii) Article 8 cases may also require  a  different  approach  and
        will do so where health questions arise in the context of obstacles
        to relocation.


        (iv) Any extension of the principles set out in  N  v  SSHD  [2005]
        UKHL 31 and N v United Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 39 will  be  for  the
        higher courts.



  37. Holding (iii) above demonstrates why it  was  unfortunate  that  prior
      attention was not given  to  this  case.   At  paragraph  85  (8)  the
      Tribunal noted:



          '(a) We were invited not to consider the application of Art  8  in
          cases of this sort.  Neither appellant before us relied  upon  Art
          8.  In those circumstances, we do not express any  conclusions  on
          the issue.

          (b) However, in principle Art 8 can be relied on in cases of  this
          sort. The removal of the individual would,  on  the  face  of  it,
          engage Art 8(1) on the basis of an interference with  his  or  her
          private life as an aspect of that individual's 'physical and moral
          integrity' (see Bensaid v UK (2001) 33 EHRR 10).   Unlike  Art  3,
          however, Art 8 is not absolute  and  the  legitimate  aim  of  the
          economic  well-being  of  the  country  would   be   relevant   in
          determining whether a breach of Art 8 could be  established  given
          any financial implications that  continued  treatment  in  the  UK
          would entail (see also R (on the application  of  Razgar)  v  SSHD
          [2004] UKHL  27; [2004] 2 AC 368).

          (c)  It may be that although, in principle, the scope of Art 8  is
          wider than that of Art 3, in practical terms that in a  case  like
          this where the claimant has no right to remain it will be a  "very
          rare case" indeed  where  such  a  claim  could  succeed  (see  KH
          (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1354 and MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD
          [2012] EWCA Civ 279).[1]  That reality may lay at the heart of the
          majority's view of the Strasbourg Court in N  v  UK  when,  having
          rejected the individual's  claim  under  Art  3,  stated  that  no
          "separate issue" arose under Art 8 (compare the dissenting Judge's
          opinion at 1 to 6).

          (d) Again we note that in N v UK the minority disagreed  with  the
          failure to address Article 8.  We see some force in this. If it be
          the case that the Article 3 threshold is an exceptionally high one
          because of the absolute character of  the prohibition and concerns
          that Contracting States could be swamped by health tourism  claims
          by people with no  prior  connection  to  the  state  in  question
          seeking to enter or remain to gain  access  to  expensive  medical
          treatment, an Article 8 proportionality  analysis  might  yield  a
          different  outcome in other cases, possibly where the claimant had
          a lawful permission to reside in the host state before the disease
          was diagnosed.

          (e) In the medical evidence in the  present  cases,  for  example,
          there was some indication that if the claimants were  given  leave
          to remain for an appropriate period of time, one or other of  then
          might be eligible for a kidney transplant,  the  result  of  which
          would mean  that  they  were  no  longer  dependent  on  dialysis.
          However, in the light of the  case  law  to  date  and  the  clear
          submissions of both parties to us, we have not explored  the  case
          from this perspective.'


  38. Such submissions as Mr Medhurst did make as to Article  8  might  well
      have chimed with observation (e) above. Clearly Lord Justice  Sedley's
      remarks in JA (Ivory  Coast)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1353  were  precisely
      directed at Art 8 and could at least  have  found  the  argument  that
      where life saving medical treatment is provided  during  a  period  of
      lawful stay, and such  treatment  cannot  as  a  matter  of  financial
      practicality be replicated in the state of return, removal might  well
      be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  physical  and  moral
      integrity aspects of the right to respect for private life.


  39. Other advocates have been able to explore the questions left  open  in
      GS and EO.  In the case of  Akhalu  (health  claim:  ECHR  Article  8)
      [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC), an unreported decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      promulgated 19th July 2013, the Tribunal dismissed an  appeal  by  the
      Secretary of State against a determination of Judge Saffer sitting  in
      the First-tier Tribunal on 21st November  2012  where  he  allowed  an
      Article 8 health appeal in a kidney transplant case  on  the  detailed
      evidence and submissions made to him.

  40.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  relevant  National  Health  Service
      Regulations for providing free treatment for people from  abroad  were
      cited at  [35]  formed  part  of  the  background  to  the  successful
      submission. So  did  the  contention  that  the  mere  fact  of  organ
      transplant at public expense by the public health authorities makes  a
      difference. In such cases the claimant's body has been altered by  the
      provision of an organ  resulting  from  an  operation  that  has  been
      provided  by  the  public  health  authorities   applying   both   NHS
      regulations as to who was  able  to  access  this  treatment  and  the
      criteria for priority in transplant treatment where there is a waiting
      list.  Immigration  status  is  a  relevant  consideration   in   both
      circumstances.  The success of the operation depends on the  continued
      supply of medication to prevent the body  rejecting  the  implant  and
      removal where access to such medication is impractical would  directly
      threaten the availability of the operation and  undermine  the  health
      resources of the state allocated to this patient. This seems to us  to
      be a very direct incidence of the state needing to  respect  a  bodily
      and physical integrity it has  participated  in  creating  and  raises
      issues missing from cases where the claim is for  continued  treatment
      to address the symptoms of natural disease.  We  understand  from  the
      evidence in this case that the annual costs of kidney dialysis in  the
      UK would be �30,000 and much more  in  Nigeria,  while  the  costs  of
      medication and hospital check ups is significantly less, and in Akhalu
      at [19] assessed at �5,000 per annum.

  41. We are satisfied that the facts of the present  case  raise  seriously
      arguable issues that might well result in a successful outcome for the
      appellants. These issues have never been considered by  the  Secretary
      of State nor the Judge.

  42. Our jurisdiction is confined to cases where  the  Judge  has  made  an
      error of law and Mr Bramble accurately submits that the  Judge  cannot
      be said to have made an error of law where  the  relevant  submissions
      and authorities were not deployed before her.

  43. This was hardly a point that can be said to have been so obvious  that
      the Judge should have considered it for herself. Until Akhalu  we  are
      unaware of an authority where an Article 8 submission succeeded  in  a
      health case concerned solely with adults.  The UT in that case did not
      perform its  own  analysis  and  decide  the  issues  for  itself  but
      dismissed the appeal because it considered that on  the  evidence  and
      argument deployed before him the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
      conclusion that he did. We further note at  [19]  that  the  judge  in
      Akhalu rejected the submission that  the  removal  of  that  appellant
      would deter kidney donors from coming forward in the future, which was
      a submission very close to that made by Mr Medhurst in this case. As a
      distinct submission Judge Simpson was entitled to  reject  it  in  the
      present appeal without making an error of law.

  44. The problem before us is that a  coherent  Article  8  submission  was
      never developed and relevant material evidence was not  provided.  The
      appellants were represented by experienced counsel and solicitors  who
      had succeeded in two first instance appeals prior to the present  one.
      We are satisfied from the skeleton argument before the Judge that  the
      principal  submission  was  the  construction  of  the  policy  issues
      considered in Ground Two above, rather than an Article 8 challenge.

  45. The Judge did not repeat the mistake of  the  Secretary  of  State  in
      October 2012 and imagine that the private life issue was concluded  by
      the application of Appendix FM that was not applicable to a  pre  July
      2012 applications and was in any event silent on health  claims  under
      Article 8, no doubt because of their novelty and rarity. We also  note
      the instinctive response of Judge Lane, an extremely  experienced  and
      well informed judge of the Upper Tribunal  to  the  appellant's  human
      rights grounds.

  46. In these circumstances we conclude that we cannot find that the  Judge
      made an error of law in reaching the conclusions that she did for  the
      reasons that she did.  She was right to  reject  the  submission  that
      removal of the appellants was disproportionate because it  would  have
      contradicted the expectation of the donor. This was not the  issue  at
      all and that the length of residence alone or residence combined  with
      the church friendships the appellants had  made,  made  a  refusal  of
      extension of stay disproportionate.

Conclusions

  47. We accordingly reach the conclusion that neither ground of appeal  has
      been made out and there is no basis for concluding that the judge  has
      made an error of law in the determination.


  48. We would be rather concerned if this conclusion was the last  judicial
      examination of the issue and if it had been we would  have  positively
      invited the appellants to  submit  full  evidence  of  their  economic
      resources; their most likely residence in Nigeria  and  the  costs  of
      medication and care there and make a  fresh  claim  in  the  light  of
      Akhalu and the arguments reflected therein.

  49. It is not necessary to do so, because for  reasons  already  noted  no
      removal decision has been made and it will be need to made before  Mrs
      Okonkwo can be returned to Nigeria and face the health consequences of
      such a removal; that removal decision will have to take  into  account
      of all circumstances relevant to the exercise of the  statutory  power
      including a current assessment of  an  Article  8  health  claim,  any
      considerations relevant to removal under current policy  guidance  and
      perhaps a reflection on what the position would have been in 2011  had
      the former 395 C compassionate circumstances rule been addressed then.

  50. There is a fresh right  of  appeal  against  a  different  immigration
      decision and the previous rejection of the human rights claim by Judge
      Simpson will  not  preclude  examination  of  a  properly  argued  and
      evidentially supported Article 8 health claim  in  the  light  of  our
      comments at [41] above and the developing  case  law.  The  appellants
      will be well advised to put before the Secretary of State any  further
      information and submissions on which they rely, promptly on receipt of
      this determination.  The  appellate  history  recounted  above  is  an
      unfortunate one and it is in both the public interest and those of the
      appellants themselves that debate as to their future residence  should
      reach a conclusion.

  51. However, for the reasons set out above, these appeals are dismissed.



                           Signed
                           [pic]
                                  Chamber President of the Upper Tribunal


                             Date:  29 July 2013
-----------------------
[1]  Subsequently approved in the Court of Appeal   in  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department v Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512

[2]  Article 3 of which reads
        1. Nationals of any Contracting  Party  lawfully  residing  in  the
           territory of another Party may be expelled only if they endanger
           national security or offend against ordre public or morality.
        2. Except where  imperative  considerations  of  national  security
           otherwise require, a national of any Contracting Party  who  has
           been so lawfully  residing  for  more  than  two  years  in  the
           territory of any other Party shall not be expelled without first
           being allowed to submit reasons against  his  expulsion  and  to
           appeal  to,  and  be  represented  for  the  purpose  before,  a
           competent authority or a person or persons specially  designated
           by the competent authority.
        3. Nationals of  any  Contracting  Party  who  have  been  lawfully
           residing for more than ten years in the territory of  any  other
           Party may only be expelled for reasons of national  security  or
           if the other reasons mentioned in paragraph 1  of  this  article
           are of a particularly serious nature.


