
    [pic]
AI v16

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


        HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 April, 1-4 May and 12 October 2012      |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     HM
                                     rm
                                     hF

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Fordham QC, Ms S Naik and Ms B Poynor,
                    instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan in respect of the first
                    two appellants and Mr M Fordham QC and Mr T Hussain,
                    instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmott Solicitors in the
                    case of the third appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr C Staker and Mr D Blundell, instructed by the
                    Treasury Solicitor

A. Law
   a) The guidance as to the law relating to Article 15(c)  of  the  Refugee
      Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC given by the  Tribunal  in  HM  and
      Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC) ("HM1") at  [62]-
      [78] is reaffirmed. Of particular importance is the observation in HM1
      that decision-makers ensure that following  Elgafaji,  Case  C-465/07;
      [2009] EUECJ and QD (Iraq) [2009] EWCA Civ 620, in situations of armed
      conflict in which civilians are affected by the fighting, the approach
      to assessment of the level of risk of indiscriminate violence must  be
      an inclusive one,  subject  only  to  the  need  for  there  to  be  a
      sufficient causal nexus between the violence and the conflict.

   b) Given that country guidance cases may have an impact on a large number
      of asylum cases and appeals, their significance  in  saving  costs  in
      future cases,  quite  apart  from  their  general  importance,  should
      require consideration of the grant of legal aid for representation  in
      the public interest.

   c) Whilst the Upper Tribunal will do all it can to ensure  representation
      in a country guidance case, it  cannot  be  excluded  that  in  highly
      unusual circumstances such  a  case  would  proceed  without  claimant
      representation.

   d) Though very considerable weight is almost always  to  be  attached  to
      UNHCR guidelines on risk categories in particular countries, it is not
      accepted that departure from the guidelines should only take place for
      a cogent and identified reason. Cases are to be decided on  the  basis
      of all the evidence and arguments presented to the Tribunal.

B. Country guidance

   i. Whilst the focus of the present decision is the current  situation  in
      Iraq, nothing in the further evidence now available indicates that the
      conclusions that the Tribunal in HM1 reached about country  conditions
      in Iraq were wrong.

  ii. As regards the current situation, the evidence does not establish that
      the degree of indiscriminate violence characterising the current armed
      conflict taking place in the five central governorates in Iraq, namely
      Baghdad, Diyala, Tameen (Kirkuk), Ninewah, Salah Al-Din, is at such  a
      high level that substantial grounds have been shown for believing that
      any civilian returned there would solely on account  of  his  presence
      there face a real risk of being subject to that threat.


 iii. Nor does the evidence establish that there is a real risk  of  serious
      harm under Article 15(c) for civilians who are Sunni or Shi'a or Kurds
      or have former Ba'ath Party connections: these characteristics do  not
      in themselves amount  to  "enhanced  risk  categories"  under  Article
      15(c)'s "sliding scale" (see [39] of Elgafaji).

  iv. Further evidence that has become available since the Tribunal heard MK
      (documents - relocation) Iraq  CG  [2012]  UKUT  126  (IAC)  does  not
      warrant any departure from  its  conclusions  on  internal  relocation
      alternatives in the KRG or in central or southern Iraq save  that  the
      evidence is now sufficient to establish the  existence  of  a  Central
      Archive maintained by the Iraqi authorities retaining  civil  identity
      records on microfiche, which provides a further way in which a  person
      can identify themselves and obtain a copy of their CSID, whether  from
      abroad or within Iraq.

   v. Regarding the issue of whether there would  be  a  risk  of  treatment
      contrary to Article 3 ECHR arising from returns from the UK to Baghdad
      International Airport (BIAP):

     a. If a national of Iraq who has failed to establish  that  conditions
        inside  Iraq  are  unsafe  is  compulsorily  returned  to   Baghdad
        International Airport (BIAP) on either a current or  expired  Iraqi
        passport, there is no real risk of detention in the course of  BIAP
        procedures (except possibly in respect of those who are the subject
        of a judicial order or arrest warrant). Nor is there such a risk if
        such a person chooses to make a voluntary  return  with  a  laissez
        passer document which can be issued by the Iraqi embassy in the UK.




     b. If, however,  such  a  person  is  compulsorily  returned  to  BIAP
        without either a current or expired Iraqi passport, he  may  be  at
        risk of detention in the course of BIAP procedures and it cannot be
        excluded that the detention conditions might give rise  to  a  real
        risk of treatment contrary to  Article  3  ECHR.  Such  a  risk  is
        however, purely academic  in  the  UK  context  because  under  the
        current UK returns policy there will be  no  compulsory  return  of
        persons lacking such documents.



TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION                                                        6
HM1
HM2
Country guidance cases and representation
Inquisitorial role
The CG issues
Geographical application
UNHCR materials
Presentation of evidence

LEGAL FRAMEWORK
   15
The law relating to Article 15(c)

THE APPELLANTS                                                           19
HM and RM
HF

PROCEDURAL HISTORY                                                 21

UNHCHR ELIGIBILITY GUIDELINES ON IRAQ AND OTHER KEY MATERIALS
UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines on Iraq
  21
   2009
   2012
UKBA Iraq Operational Guidance Note (OGN)
Tribunal CG and related case law
Position in Europe
ECtHR cases

THE EVIDENCE                                                            32
Expert evidence
Dr George:
   written report
   oral evidence
Dr Fatah:
   written report
   oral evidence

BACKGROUND EVIDENCE                                               37
Statistics on violence
The inclusive approach

Iraq as a whole                                                        39
Parties to the conflict
      State and coalition actors
      Insurgents
Level and intensity of violence
Targeted violence
      Civilian casualties
      Targeting of civilians
      Combatant casualties
      Sunnis and Shi'as
      Kurds
      Former Ba'athists
Comparison with other conflicts
Population displacement
State weakness and protection issues
Socio-economic conditions
International assistance
Returns packages
Returns to Baghdad International Airport (BIAP)
Returns and documentation
Documentation and access to services
Internal travel
Returnees from the west

Provincial level                                                      55

Tameen Governorate and Kirkuk
Baghdad Governorate and Baghdad
Diyala Governorate
Ninewah Governorate and Mosul
Salah al Din Governorate
Al Anbar Governorate
Levels of violence in the five central governorates-overall picture
               63

KRG

SUBMISSIONS                                                          64
The appellants' case
The respondent's case
Submissions on internal relocation

OUR ASSESSMENT                                                  75
Confinement to Article 15(c)
The expert evidence
Initial observations
Comparison with other conflicts
 The inclusive approach
The inclusive approach: other metrics
The UNHCR Guidelines
Patterns of violence and trends
The situation province-by-province
Enhanced risk categories
    Sunni/Shi'a
    Kurds
    Former Ba'athists
State protection
Socio-economic conditions
Returnees from the west
Position in Europe
Documents relating to returns
Risk on return at BIAP
Returns to Erbil
Safety of internal travel
Documentation and access to services
The future situation
Internal relocation
    MK and internal relocation within the KRG
   Relocation to central and southern Iraq

CONCLUSIONS: GENERAL
    101

THE APPELLANTS' CASES                                          103
HM and RM
HF

APPENDIX                                                            105
GLOSSARY                                                            146






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     All  three  members  of  the  tribunal  hearing  these  appeals  have
    contributed to this determination. At the end there is  a  glossary  of
    terms so as to help readers follow the various acronyms.

2.    This is a country guidance (CG) case  which  is  concerned  to  decide
    whether  Article   15(c)   of   Council   Directive   2004/83/EC   (the
    Qualification Directive[1]) prevents removal  of  Iraqi  nationals  who
    have no particular reason to be at real risk of persecution within  the
    meaning of the Refugee Convention or of treatment which  requires  them
    to be accorded humanitarian protection under Article 15(a) or 15(b)  of
    the same directive.  The three appellants are young men whose accounts,
    which sought to establish that they would be at risk  on  return,  were
    rejected.  In each case, the immigration judge who heard their  appeals
    did not believe their account.  In the case of HM and RM, whose appeals
    were heard together, the judge  found  their  accounts  to  be  'deeply
    implausible'.  In HF's case, the judge decided that his account was not
    credible.  In the result, each appellant is to be regarded as  a  young
    man who has no distinguishing characteristics other than (1) his  place
    of residence in Iraq; (2) in the case of HM and RM, his Kurdish  ethnic
    origin; and (3) in the case of HF, his identity as a Sunni Muslim  Arab
    and possible indirect links with the Ba'ath Party.

3.    The appeals of RM and HM were heard by an immigration  judge  in  June
    2008.  The appeal of HF was heard by an immigration judge in June 2009.
     It will be necessary to refer to the procedural history to explain the
    unfortunate delay in dealing with these appeals.  That  delay  is  even
    more unfortunate since there has been a difference  of  view  among  EU
    Member States on whether return to Iraq or certain  parts  of  Iraq  is
    possible and certain aspects of this question are  pending  before  the
    European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in the case  of  YA  v  UK  (see
    below [80]) who have said they will postpone a decision until they have
    seen our determination.  The result of the delay  has  been  to  create
    legal uncertainty as to the  proper  disposal  of  a  very  significant
    number of cases involving Iraqis who fall into  the  same  category  as
    these appellants.

HM1

4.    The appeals of HM and RM together with two other  appellants  ASA  and
    AA were chosen as CG cases to determine the Article 15(c) issue.   They
    came before the Tribunal constituted by the President, Blake J, sitting
    with Upper Tribunal Judges Storey and Allen on 8 June 2010, having been
    fixed for 7 June 2010.  A report from an expert, a Dr Herring, had been
    obtained by Refugee and Migrant Justice (RMJ) who were then acting  for
    HM and RM.  It seems that that report was not obtained until the end of
    May.  In any event, on 1 June 2010 Wilson &  Co,  who  were  acting  on
    behalf of AA, indicated to  the  tribunal  that  in  the  light  of  Dr
    Herring's report, they could no longer continue to act on  his  behalf.
    On the same day RMJ indicated that they were no  longer  instructed  by
    their clients.  When the case  was  called  on  8  June  2010,  counsel
    appeared for the solicitors stating that instructions  were  withdrawn.
    HM and RM attended later in the day and  said  they  wished  for  their
    appeals to go ahead and to be represented by RMJ.

5.    The Tribunal for the reasons given in [36 - 39] of  its  decision,  HM
    and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2010]  UKUT  331  (IAC)  (hereafter
    "HM1"), indicated that in the circumstances it was unwilling to  accede
    to the request for the appeals to be  withdrawn.   There  was,  it  was
    said, an overriding public interest in proceeding  to  determine  them.
    ASA had not applied for his appeal to be  withdrawn,  but  he  was  not
    represented.   UNCHR  had  been  permitted  to  intervene  and  so   to
    participate in the  proceedings  and  had  submitted  detailed  written
    grounds putting forward its view that  compulsory  returns  should  not
    occur because of the application of Article 15(c).

6.    The Tribunal found itself facing a real dilemma.  Country guidance  on
    the application of Article 15(c) application in Iraq  was  required  as
    soon as practicably possible since the ECtHR and many other cases  were
    awaiting it.  Time and money had been spent preparing for  the  appeals
    and the delay, waste of  money  and  problems  which  would  result  in
    endeavouring  to  find  suitable  appeals  in  which  appellants   were
    represented were obvious.   In  [47]  of  its  decision,  the  Tribunal
    indicated why it decided that the  appeals  should  proceed.   It  said
    this:-

         "...We had the benefit of a detailed  skeleton  argument  from  the
         respondent, although it did not bear a  burden  of  establishing  a
         negative in this case, and it had been  sensibly  anticipated  that
         its skeleton argument should address the  appellants'  case  rather
         than deal with protection issues entirely  in  the  abstract.   The
         hearing took the form of an elaboration of aspects of  the  written
         arguments by reference to the factual materials, a formal  response
         to the written submissions of the UNHCR, and response to  questions
         put by members of the Tribunal as to various matters of  law,  fact
         and the practicalities of the intended return to Iraq.  At the  end
         of the hearing, some information remained outstanding or subject to
         confirmation in writing.  We asked that it be  provided  within  14
         days, RM and HM indicated they would like to receive a copy of this
         further information and we directed that it should be sent to them.
          Whilst our decision was under  consideration  further  information
         relating to the return of failed asylum seekers to Iraq came to our
         attention and we asked for further information from UNHCR and  from
         the respondent, the appellants again being  copied  in.   This  was
         provided to us in accordance  with  the  time  limits  set  and  is
         considered below.  We are again grateful to all those who  assisted
         us."

7.    In due course, the Tribunal decided that enforced returns  could  take
    place because the degree of indiscriminate violence did not reach  such
    a high level in any part of Iraq as to  show  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that any civilian returned  there  would  face  a  real  risk
    within the meaning of Article 15(c) and further, even if  such  a  risk
    had been shown to exist in some  areas  of  Iraq,  internal  relocation
    would achieve safety and would not in all the circumstances  be  unduly
    harsh.

HM2

8.     HM  and  RM  appealed  this  decision.  The  appeal  was  brought  on
    procedural and substantive grounds, but  the  Court  did  not  find  it
    necessary to deal with any of the substantive grounds since it  allowed
    the appeal on procedural grounds. In its judgment HM (Iraq) [2011] EWCA
    Civ 1536 (hereafter "HM2"), the Court  quashed  the  determination  and
    remitted the case to the Tribunal.  Most unfortunately, the decision of
    the Court of Appeal was not given until 15 December 2011.  It was  then
    necessary to ensure that there were appeals which could  represent  the
    proper scope of the Article 15(c) issue and that all relevant  material
    was available. Following three days of hearing  in  April/May,  it  was
    decided to reconvene for further submissions in October 2012, primarily
    to ensure that  the  Tribunal  had  full  argument  on  the  new  UNHCR
    Guidelines   (UNHCR   Eligibility   Guidelines   for   Assessing    the
    International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers From Iraq, 31 May 2012
    (hereafter "UNHCR Guidelines"), which had  become  available  in  early
    June 2012  The appellants were properly  represented  before  us  under
    legal aid and there were very experienced  counsel  and  solicitors  on
    both sides.  In addition,  we  had  written  representations  from  the
    UNHCR.  The appellants produced reports  from  two  experts,  who  have
    given evidence before the Tribunal in other cases involving  Iraq,  Drs
    Alan George and Rebwar Fatah.  Each gave oral evidence before us and we
    are grateful for their assistance which we found most helpful.

Country guidance cases and representation

9.    The main argument raised before the Court of Appeal in  HM2  was  that
    there must be, as Mr Fordham Q.C. put it, "a proper  contradictor",  as
    the authoritative status of a CG case was akin to a  declaration  given
    by a court.  While the Court did not  accept  Mr  Fordham's  contention
    that as  a  matter  of  legal  principle  there  had  to  be  a  proper
    contradictor in a CG case, it accepted his alternative submission  that
    the Tribunal erred in the exercise of its discretion in proceeding with
    the  particular  country  guidance   determination   without   adequate
    consideration of whether proper argument could be secured (see [49]  of
    Richards LJ's judgment).

10.   The Court's view was that there were steps which  the  Tribunal  could
    have taken but did not take in trying to secure that proper argument on
    the appellants' behalf might be secured.

11.   The first suggestion was that UNHCR might be  willing  to  participate
    beyond written submissions. However, in a letter to the Tribunal  dated
    5 March 2012 UNCHR has made it clear that it would  not,  even  in  the
    exceptional circumstances such as existed, be prepared to represent  an
    appellant directly since  that  could  compromise  its  objectivity  in
    future cases in which it was involved and was willing to intervene.

12.   The second possibility suggested was to invite  the  Attorney  General
    to appoint an amicus curiae.  An amicus is not normally instructed  'to
    lead evidence, cross-examine witnesses or investigate the facts' -  see
    the Memorandum from the Lord Chief Justice and the Attorney General set
    out in Volume 1 of the White Book at pp.1144-1148.   In  the  light  of
    this, it is difficult to see how in a case such as this, which involves
    close examination of expert witnesses and very  detailed  fact-finding,
    that an amicus could properly be provided. In a letter  dated  7  March
    2012, the Attorney General's reaction to a question from  the  Tribunal
    whether in the light of Richards  LJ's  judgment  an  amicus  would  be
    likely to be provided has been decidedly lukewarm since he has said  he
    would, as is entirely proper, follow the terms of the memorandum.

13.   The Legal Services Commission (LSC) was asked  whether  funding  could
    be supplied in circumstances such as arose in HM1.  Its response as set
    out in a letter of 8 February 2012  has  been  negative.  The  LSC  has
    explained that it can take the wider public interest  into  account  in
    determining an application for funding, but, in accordance with s.4  of
    the Access to Justice Act 1988, it must act to secure that  individuals
    have access to services that effectively meet their needs.  Thus it  is
    said that if an applicant's representative certifies that prospects  of
    success are poor rather than simply borderline, the LSC would  have  no
    discretion other than to refuse to fund the case.

14.   It is necessary to  take  stock.  Inquiries  made  of  UNHCR  and  the
    Attorney General have made clear  that  the  Tribunal  cannot  look  to
    either of them to assist with missing representation.  The  inquiry  of
    the LSC made clear that its statutory remit affords it no discretion to
    assist with the funding of a case where prospects of success are  poor.
    We are aware that the abolition of the LSC forms part of the Legal Aid,
    Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 which vests powers  and
    functions to the Lord Chancellor for the administration  of  legal  aid
    and the creation of a new  Executive  Agency  within  the  Ministry  of
    Justice.  The Court of Appeal has indicated that it is important that a
    claimant is represented in a CG case so that  proper  argument  can  be
    deployed.  This encompasses in addition to argument on law the 'drawing
    of relevant materials to the attention of the tribunal and  the  making
    of submissions as  to  the  effect  of  those  materials  so  that  the
    determination is based on as full and informed an analysis as possible.
     In the ordinary course that  is  achieved  through  both  sides  being
    legally represented': see per Richards LJ at  [39].   In  [42]  of  his
    judgment, Richards LJ said this:


         "The  features  of  the  legal  aid  system  which  precluded   the
         continuation of public  funding  before  the  tribunal  are  deeply
         regrettable, all the more so when it is borne in mind  that  public
         funding was granted for the appeal to this court  and  the  overall
         costs to public funds will have been far greater  than  if  funding
         had been continued at the  time  for  the  proceedings  before  the
         tribunal."

15.   CG cases are needed because a particular issue may be or is likely  to
    arise in other cases and  the  determination  will  save  the  need  to
    consider the issue and so waste time and  money  in  subsequent  cases.
    The issue is often contentious, as this one is, and so it can rarely if
    ever be said that the outcome is likely to be obvious.  It is necessary
    to ensure that all relevant material is properly considered.   In  this
    case, having regard in particular to UNHCR's position and the  possible
    contrary views of some other EU States, the  Home  Office's  contention
    might well not have prevailed and so on its facts there appeared to  be
    an arguable case on behalf of the appellants.  But whether or not  that
    was so, we would urge the government to recognise  that  CG  cases  are
    chosen with care and that their importance in saving  costs  in  future
    cases, quite apart from their general importance, makes  the  grant  of
    representation in the public interest highly desirable irrespective  of
    the view  formally  taken  of  the  appellant's/claimant's  chances  of
    establishing his or her need for international protection.

16.   We have indicated the importance of CG cases and the care  with  which
    they are chosen. Their importance has  been  implicitly  recognised  by
    Parliament  in  the  insertion  of  s.107(3)  into   the   Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  by  s.26(7)  of  the  Asylum   and
    Immigration Act 2004.  This enables the President to issue  a  Practice
    Direction which may  require  a  specified  decision  of  either  level
    Tribunal to be treated as authoritative  in  respect  of  a  particular
    matter.  The relevant Practice Direction states that determinations  of
    either Tribunal or of the AIT bearing the letters CG shall  be  treated
    as  an  authoritative  finding  on  the  CG  issue  identified  in  the
    determination, based on the evidence before the Tribunal which  decided
    it.  The Court of Appeal has stated that  a  failure  to  follow  a  CG
    decision would amount to an error of law unless there was a good reason
    for the failure (R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982).  Furthermore, the Tribunal's  refusal  to  permit
    argument to be advanced to challenge a CG decision unless supported  by
    fresh evidence has been  upheld  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  (Ariaya  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 48).

17.   Choice of appropriate cases which can constitute  CG  is  a  difficult
    and time consuming exercise.  It requires the  Tribunal  to  take  into
    consideration all relevant  evidence,  usually  consisting  of  country
    reports from various interested persons or bodies who have knowledge of
    the situation in the country in  question.   In  addition,  there  will
    often be statements obtained from individuals  who  have  a  particular
    knowledge of and expertise in the country and who will gather  together
    relevant reports and may be able to give evidence based  on  their  own
    knowledge or experiences.  These reports  will  usually  be  called  on
    behalf of appellants and will give their opinion on whether  return  is
    in the circumstances safe.

18.   It must be remembered that appeals  are  brought  by  individuals  who
    claim that they are entitled to asylum or to humanitarian protection or
    human rights protection.  Appeals in this jurisdiction are  essentially
    an adversarial process and frequently depend on whether  the  appellant
    is believed to be giving an honest and accurate account.  But it is  of
    obvious importance that the  situation  in  the  country  to  which  an
    appellant says he or she cannot return in  safety  should,  so  far  as
    material to that particular appellant's characteristics, be known.   If
    there is no CG case which covers an appellant, the Tribunal  will  have
    to decide for itself on such evidence as is available in the individual
    appeal whether safe return is possible.  But the existence of a CG case
    will enable the Tribunal, unless there is evidence that  the  situation
    has changed since the CG case was decided, to avoid  a  time  consuming
    need to  decide  whether  the  circumstances  found  to  apply  to  the
    appellant mean that safe return is or is not possible.  As observed  by
    the Court of Appeal in SG (Iraq) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 (13 July 2012):

         "46.     The system  of  Country  Guidance  determinations  enables
             appropriate resources, in terms of the representations of  the
             parties to the Country Guidance  appeal,  expert  and  factual
             evidence and the personnel and time of  the  Tribunal,  to  be
             applied to the determination of conditions in,  and  therefore
             the risks of return for persons such as the appellants in  the
             Country Guidance appeal to,  the  country  in  question.   The
             procedure is aimed at arriving at a reliable (in the sense  of
             accurate) determination.


          47.  It is for these reasons,  as  well  as  the  desirability  of
             consistency, that decision  makers  and  tribunal  judges  are
             required to take Country Guidance determination into  account,
             and to follow them unless very  strong  grounds  supported  by
             cogent evidence, are adduced justifying their not doing so."

19.   For these reasons country guidance cases  have  an  importance  beyond
    the determination of a particular appeal.  They are  one  of  the  ways
    that  a  specialist  Tribunal  with  judges  with  experience  of   the
    protection risks in various parts  of  the  world  and  expert  in  the
    application of legal principles to a frequently shapeless and  changing
    mass of country information, give effect to the over-riding  objectives
    of rule 2(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. One
    of the aspects of the over-riding objective is  that  the  parties  are
    under a duty to co-operate with the  Tribunal  to  achieve  them:  rule
    2(4).  Although the Upper Tribunal always hopes to have the  assistance
    of well-informed advocates for both parties, and hopes that  the  legal
    aid scheme will take into account  the  public  interest  in  advocates
    continuing to represent their clients where the  prospects  of  success
    are at best borderline, there may be cases where the claimant ceases to
    be represented for one reason or another.   Self-represented  litigants
    are not a novel problem in the courts and the tribunals.  There may  be
    alternative sources of representation that the Tribunal can facilitate,
    but for the reasons already given  it  is  unlikely  that  the  sources
    envisaged by the Court of Appeal will  be  available  in  circumstances
    that were before the  previous  tribunal.   In  any  event  the  public
    interest requires old  guidance  to  be  revoked  and  updated  by  new
    guidance reflecting  contemporary  conditions,  whether  one  party  is
    willing to continue to participate in  the  appeal  or  not.   For  the
    Tribunal to be unable to issue up to date guidance as intended  because
    a party makes a tactical withdrawal in the light of their assessment of
    the prospects of success, would pose  a  severe  threat  to  the  whole
    system and frustrate the Tribunal's function. Hence, whilst  the  Upper
    Tribunal will do all it can  to  ensure  representation  in  a  country
    guidance  case,  it  cannot  be  excluded  that   in   highly   unusual
    circumstances   such   a   case   would   proceed   without    claimant
    representation.

20.   Ordinarily a CG case will deal with relatively limited  issues  so  as
    to identify whether persons with a  significant  political  profile  or
    ethnic or religious background are at risk. But  in  relation  to  some
    countries it is inevitable  that  the  CG  case  considers  very  broad
    categories of persons and, as a consequence, has an impact on  a  large
    number of asylum claims and appeals.  So it is that this case is to  be
    a CG case on the issue whether  Article  15(c)  applies  in  effect  to
    prevent any removal to Iraq.   In  MK  (documents-relocation)  Iraq  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00126 (IAC) the Tribunal has  recently  given  guidance  on
    whether individuals including women and children can safely relocate in
    Iraq and whether an individual was required to return  to  his  or  her
    home area in order to transfer or obtain documents  and  food  rations.
    The  Tribunal  decided  (see  [88])  that  lack  of  documentation  was
    generally not an insuperable problem and not a factor  likely  to  make
    return to any part of Iraq unsafe or unreasonable.  As will be apparent
    in due course, this decision is material since it is accepted  by  both
    parties to these appeals (and is now accepted by UNHCR in its  May  31,
    2012 Guidelines) that Article 15(c) is not automatically applicable  to
    the situation in every governorate of Iraq.

21.   HM and RM together with two other appellants, known  as  ASA  and  AA,
    were chosen to constitute the CG appeals on the issue  whether  Article
    15(c) applied to show a real risk of relevant harm on return  to  Iraq.
    The identification of the cases was made  to  the  parties  in  October
    2009.  In accordance with its practice in CG  cases,  the  Home  Office
    produced such country material  as  was  relevant  amounting  to  three
    volumes.  In  addition,  the  UNCHR  was  invited  to  participate  and
    produced written submissions together  with  two  volumes  of  material
    which supported the appellants' contention that returns should not take
    place.  As is we think obvious, the importance of CG  cases  cannot  be
    underestimated  since  not  only  will  they  affect  and  probably  be
    determinative of other cases within the UK but decisions of  the  ECtHR
    and the courts or tribunals of other EU member States may consider them
    to have persuasive value.

Inquisitorial role

22.   We have said that an appeal before the Tribunal in  this  jurisdiction
    is  essentially  an  adversarial  process  so  far  as  the  individual
    appellant is concerned.  However, in deciding a CG issue  the  Tribunal
    must be sure so far as possible that it  has  considered  all  relevant
    material.  Thus it must have an inquisitorial role.  Neither Mr  Staker
    nor Mr Fordham, Q.C disputed this.   The  Tribunal  is  sometimes  able
    through its own library of material and research assistance to learn of
    relevant materials which it can then ask the parties to address. But it
    is essential that each party to  a  CG  appeal  produces  all  relevant
    material  or  evidence.   Mr  Staker  on  behalf  of  the  Home  Office
    recognised its obligation to put before the Tribunal material which did
    not necessarily support its case,  particularly  if  it  was  aware  of
    something which was not in the public domain.

23.   Mr Fordham submitted that, albeit the Tribunal  has  an  inquisitorial
    role in deciding a CG case, an appellant must be able to seek out, deal
    with and make submissions on the material  which  is  available.   Thus
    there must be representation.  The Court of Appeal's decision points in
    the same direction, but it does not go so far as to indicate  that  the
    law requires representation.  We have already given our reasons at [19]
    why we think the Court of Appeal was right not to lay down an  absolute
    rule. In addition to the circumstances identified in that paragraph, we
    would note that, for example, representation cannot  be  forced  on  an
    unwilling appellant. And it must be borne in mind that what  is  needed
    is competent representation and, regrettably, the Tribunal's experience
    is that that does not always result.  The Tribunal must, of course, act
    fairly and so if some relevant evidence comes to  its  attention  which
    the parties have not noted, it must draw it to their attention so  that
    they can deal with it.

The CG issues

24.   In case management directions the Tribunal said as follows:

         "The case will be a country guidance case on the following issues:


         (i)       whether  there  is  a   risk   to   the   appellants   of
             indiscriminate violence arising from armed conflict within the
             meaning of Article 15(c) of the EU Qualification Directive  in
             their home areas in Iraq (in the case of HM and RM Kirkuk  and
             in HF Baghdad);


         (ii)     apart from their age and gender it is envisaged  that  the
             other characteristics of the appellants that may  be  relevant
             to assessment of risk of indiscriminate harm are: they are all
             Sunni Muslims, they  speak  respectively  Kurdish  Sorani  and
             Arabic (HF), and may be of Kurdish ethnicity;


         (iii)    whether any of  the  appellants  will  suffer  inhuman  or
             degrading treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR and/or  Article
             15(b) of the Qualification  Directive  on  return  to  Baghdad
             Airport or any place connected with the process of return;


         (iv)     if there is such a risk  as  in  (i)  above  then  whether
             internal relocation to any part of Iraq is available  to  them
             and whether they  will  be  able  to  access  such  protection
             without suffering ill-treatment as per (iii) above.  In so far
             as prospects of safe relocation  are  affected  by  the  issue
             whether the  appellants  will  be  able  to  access  necessary
             documentation in Iraq,  the  parties  are  informed  that  the
             Tribunal will have regard to the pending decision in MK (Iraq)
             where promulgation is imminent, whether or not this  authority
             is reported as a country guidance case by  the  start  of  the
             hearing."


Geographical application

25.   It is material that it is accepted that return  to  some  governorates
    will not engage Article 15(c).  That entails acceptance that it may  be
    possible for individuals to live in such governorates. This may in many
    cases mean that even if we were persuaded that Article 15(c) applied in
    the  five  central  governorates,  Baghdad,  Diyala,  Tameen  (Kirkuk),
    Ninewah, Salah Al-Din, returns could  be  made  since  there  could  be
    either returns to a safe home area or returns  to  an  area  of  viable
    internal relocation.  It is not to be assumed that the  situation  will
    remain static.


UNHCR materials


26.   Much reliance has been placed by Mr Fordham on the views of the  UNHCR
    and of an unspecified number of  EU  States  that  in  the  context  of
    present-day Iraq or certain parts of  it  Article  15(c)  does,  or  is
    likely to, prevent removal. We shall say more about these matters below
    but it may assist to clarify our concluded position at this  stage.  We
    will attach weight to those views and consider  carefully  the  reasons
    given for them.  But we have to make our minds up based on the full and
    detailed material put before us.  We pay great respect to the views  of
    UNHCR in particular, whose sources include not  only  widely  available
    background data but also feedback from UNHCR  operations,  UN  agencies
    and other partners in Iraq. At the same time we cannot ignore the  fact
    that UNHCR is a  major  international  actor  in  Iraq,  being  heavily
    involved, inter alia, in  programmes  to  assist  returns  to  Iraq  by
    externally displaced persons (EDPs) among  others.  We  are  not  in  a
    position to say whether UNHCR's role in Iraq means that its  assessment
    of risk on return is influenced by its concerns about the viability  of
    returning refugee flows. Nor are we in a position to know why, at least
    prior to 31 May 2012, UNHCR felt able to say on the one  hand  that  no
    one from the 5 central governorates should be forcibly returned to Iraq
    because of high levels of indiscriminate violence  there,  yet  on  the
    other hand to engage in UNHCR-facilitated voluntary  returns  to  Iraq,
    including to those governorates. We know from the ECtHR case  of  FH  v
    Sweden App.no.3261/06 (see below at [80])  that  on  two  occasions  in
    2007/8 (December 2007 and February 2008) UNHCR stated that it  did  not
    support any returns to Iraq. What these factors do demonstrate  to  us,
    however, is that we must make our own assessment of Article 15(c) risks
    based on the evidence as a whole and the UNHCR  materials  are  only  a
    part of that evidence.

27.   So far as alleged risk of maltreatment by detention  of  returnees  at
    Baghdad International Airport (BIAP) is concerned, the appellants  must
    show that there are substantial grounds for believing that there  is  a
    real risk that those returning  will  be  treated  in  such  a  way  as
    breaches their human rights.  It is the  respondent's  contention  that
    they are unable to surmount this hurdle.

28.   At  the  April/May  hearings  Mr  Fordham  submitted  that  there  was
    evidence which showed that there was a real risk that  those  who  were
    subject to compulsory returns would be detained  on  arrival  at  BIAP.
    The conditions of such  detention  were  so  unpleasant  as  to  breach
    Article 3 of the ECHR.  While  such  detention  would  usually  not  be
    lengthy, the conditions were such that even a short period of detention
    would breach Article 3.  It seemed that  much  might  turn  on  whether
    those removed had proper paperwork which could be provided by the  Iraq
    Embassy in London.  Since this was a general,  albeit  discrete,  issue
    which would potentially apply to all who might be  removed,  it  seemed
    desirable that we should deal with it at the same time as  the  Article
    15(c) issue. However, there was a need for further evidence and  so  we
    gave time to enable that to be produced and further argument  (if  that
    was considered necessary) to be produced. We also  heard  further  oral
    submissions on this matter on October 12.

Presentation of evidence

29.   Before turning to the law and to the facts, we should mention that  we
    discussed with the parties in the course of the hearing  the  practical
    problems arising from the unprecedented volume  of  materials  adduced.
    Produced for each member of the panel was a large number of lever  arch
    files of documents which ran to thousands of pages.

30.   We saw the necessity for one copy of all  source  material  but  found
    that for the hearing itself each of  us  was  able  to  work  with  the
    equivalent of one A4 ring binder containing materials which the parties
    had extracted from the larger set of files as being the most relevant.


LEGAL FRAMEWORK


The law relating to Article 15(c)

31.   The Tribunal in HM1 considered the correct approach in law to  Article
    15(c) in some detail in [62] to [98].  The only  matter  raised  by  Mr
    Fordham  has  related  to  the  extent  to  which  there  should  be  a
    discounting of the overall figures of deaths by bombings or  shootings,
    whether specific or general.  Otherwise,  he  has  not  criticised  the
    approach set out in some detail by the Tribunal.  We must,  of  course,
    set out and explain our approach in law, but in  the  circumstances  we
    see no need to repeat in great detail what the Tribunal  said  in  HM1.
    For those who  wish  to  consider  more  detail  than  we  consider  it
    necessary to spell out in this determination, we can say that we  adopt
    what was said in HM1.

32.   We have  been  referred  to  a  number  of  authorities  dealing  with
    interpretation and application of Article 15(c).   However,  there  are
    two which bind us, namely  Elgafaji  v  Straatsscretaris  van  Justitie
    [2009] 1 WLR 2100, a decision of the Court of Justice of  the  European
    Communities (ECJ, now known as the Court of  Justice  of  the  European
    Union or CJEU)) and QD  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] 1 WLR 689, a decision of the Court of  Appeal.   Each
    of these is binding on us and QD helpfully explains and  indicates  how
    Elgafaji should be applied.

33.   Article 15(c) itself provides as follows, under the  heading  'Serious
    Harm':-

         "Serious harm consist of


         (a)      death penalty or execution;


         (b)      torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of
             an Applicant in the country of origin; and


         (c)      serious and individual threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
             person by reason of indiscriminate violence in  situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict."


34.   Article 15 is applied by Article 2(e) which defines a person  eligible
    for  subsidiary  protection  (a  term  which  has  been  described   as
    humanitarian protection in paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    which applies Article 15  using  the  same  terminology  save  for  the
    addition of 'unlawful killing') thus, so far as material:

         "... a third country national ... person who does not qualify as  a
         refugee but in respect of whom substantial grounds have been  shown
         for disbelieving that the person concerned, if returned to  his  or
         her country of origin ... would  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
         serious harm as defined in Article 15 ... and is unable  or,  owing
         to such risk, unable to avail himself or herself of the  protection
         of the country."

35.   It is necessary in construing Article 15(c) to have regard to  recital
    (26) of the preamble to the Directive which provides:

         "Risks to which a population of a  country  or  a  section  of  the
         population  is  generally  exposed  do  normally  not   create   in
         themselves an individual threat  which  would  qualify  as  serious
         harm."

36.   These provisions are not well drafted, as Sedley LJ observed  in  [19]
    of QD.  As Advocate  General  Maduro  points  out  in  his  opinion  in
    Elgafaji Case C-465/07 ([31]) the use of the words 'indiscriminate' and
    'individual' in Article 15(c) requires an  attempt  to  reconcile  what
    seems prima facie irreconcilable.  But this is not the only difficulty.
     The others are, first, the difficulty created  by  the  definition  in
    Article 15(c) which refers to a 'threat' coupled with the reference  in
    Article 2(e) to a risk.  One thus has the problem of  applying  a  test
    which concerns a  real  risk  of  a  threat.   Secondly  there  is  the
    reference to internal armed conflict.  This latter problem was resolved
    in QD by an agreement of all counsel involved which the court  accepted
    that it had an autonomous meaning which was "broad  enough  to  capture
    any situation of indiscriminate violence, whether caused by one or more
    armed factions or by a state, which reaches the level described by  the
    CJEU in Elgafaji" ([35]).  That such an armed conflict existed in  Iraq
    was accepted by the Home Secretary in QD and Mr Staker has  not  sought
    to argue the contrary before us.  Sedley LJ went on in  QD  to  observe
    that the armed conflict itself need not be exceptional, but that  there
    must be an intensity of indiscriminate violence great  enough  to  meet
    the test spelt out  by  the  CJEU.   That  would  not  apply  in  every
    situation.  Furthermore, a civilian must mean a genuine  non-combatant.
    Anyone who involves himself in an armed conflict is not to be  regarded
    as a civilian and the same applies to a member of the armed  forces  or
    police in the country in question.

37.   So far as the risk of a threat  is  concerned,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    indicated that a pragmatic approach must be adopted.   The  grammar  of
    Article 15(c) requires that the threat be serious.  That is the natural
    reading of the words used  and  that  it  is  the  proper  reading  was
    confirmed by the Court in QD.  It emphasises the point that the  threat
    must result from indiscriminate acts of violence and the  existence  of
    such acts affecting the individual civilian  must  be  shown  to  be  a
    reality.  As Sedley LJ observed in [21] of QD, not every threat is real
    and not every real threat is serious.

38.   It seems clear to us that what lay behind Article 15(c) was  the  need
    to enable those who were likely  to  be  caught  up  in  indiscriminate
    violence and so to  suffer  death  or  injury  to  be  able  to  obtain
    protection.  They were to be contrasted  with  those  who  fell  within
    15(a) or (b) who could show a real risk of a breach of Articles 2 or 3.
     The reference to 'execution' in 15(a) we would  read  as  intended  to
    cover unlawful killing since it is incomprehensible that the  Directive
    would deliberately have omitted the risk of death where  there  was  no
    question of internal armed conflict.  Thus  it  is  not  in  the  least
    surprising that in Elgafaji the  ECJ  should  have  regarded  15(c)  as
    dealing with a more general risk of harm than that covered by 15(a) and
    (b).

39.   The CJEU had to construe recital  26  of  the  preamble  with  Article
    15(c).  The two are not easy to reconcile.  As the Court noted, the use
    of the word 'normally' in the recital recognised the "possibility of an
    exceptional situation which would be  characterised  by  such  a   high
    degree of risk that substantial grounds would be  shown  for  believing
    that the person would be subject individually to the risk in question".
             ([37]).  The Court went on in [38] to say that the exceptional
    nature of that situation was  also  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the
    relevant protection was subsidiary, and by the broad logic  of  Article
    15, as the harm defined in paragraphs  (a)  and  (b)  of  that  Article
    required a high degree of individualisation.  According to the Court at
    [39] of its ruling, it followed that "the more the applicant is able to
    show that he is specifically affected by reason of  factors  particular
    to his personal circumstances, the lower the  level  of  indiscriminate
    violence required for him to be eligible  for  subsidiary  protection."
    This is what UNHCR has referred to as the "sliding-scale" notion.

40.   The Court there seems to be considering that a person who is  at  real
    risk  of  being  either  a  specific  or  a  more  general  target   of
    indiscriminate violence may be accorded  protection  when  the  general
    level of violence would not be sufficient to  establish  the  necessary
    risk to one who could not show any specific reason for  being  affected
    by violence unless it reached a high level.  We are not  in  this  case
    concerned to consider  all  those  who  are  specifically  affected  by
    factors particular to their own  personal  circumstances,  although  we
    must address submissions that being a Sunni or Shi'a or an ethnic  Kurd
    (or being a former Ba'athist) constitute characteristics which  may  in
    particular areas give rise to Article 15(c) risk  under  the  "sliding-
    scale" identified by the Court in [39].  But, as will become  apparent,
    we do not think that there is anything in this ethnicity  or  religious
    (or former Ba'athist) affiliation which will add to the risk of general
    harm.

41.   The ruling by the Court in Elgafaji was in these terms:-

         ...


         "37.     While [recital 26 of Council Directive  2004/83/EC  of  29
             April 2004]  implies that the objective  finding  alone  of  a
             risk linked to the general situation in a country is not, as a
             rule, sufficient to establish that the conditions set  out  in
             Article 15(c) of the Directive have been met in respect  of  a
             specific person, its wording nevertheless allows by the use of
             the word 'normally' for  the  possibility  of  an  exceptional
             situation which would be characterised by such a  high  degree
             of risk that substantial grounds would be shown for  believing
             that that person would be subject individually to the risk  in
             question.


         38.      The exceptional nature of that situation is also confirmed
             by the fact that the relevant protection is subsidiary, and by
             the broad logic of Article 15 of the Directive,  as  the  harm
             defined in paragraphs (a) and (b) of that article  requires  a
             clear degree of individualisation. While it is admittedly true
             that  collective  factors  play  a  significant  role  in  the
             application of Article 15(c) of the  Directive,  in  that  the
             person concerned belongs, like other people, to  a  circle  of
             potential victims of indiscriminate violence in situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict, it  is  nevertheless
             the case that that provision must be  subject  to  a  coherent
             interpretation  in  relation  to  the  other  two   situations
             referred  to  in  Article  15  of  the  Directive  and   must,
             therefore,  be  interpreted  by  close   reference   to   that
             individualisation.
         39.      In that regard, the more the applicant  is  able  to  show
             that  he  is  specifically  affected  by  reason  of   factors
             particular to his personal circumstances, the lower the  level
             of indiscriminate violence required for him to be eligible for
             subsidiary protection.
         ...
         43.      Having regard to all of the foregoing considerations,  the
             answer to the questions referred is that Article 15(c) of  the
             Directive, in conjunction with Article 2(e) of the  Directive,
             must be interpreted as meaning that:
             the existence of a serious and individual threat to  the  life
             or person of an applicant for  subsidiary  protection  is  not
             subject to the condition that that applicant  adduce  evidence
             that  he  is  specifically  targeted  by  reason  of   factors
             particular to his personal circumstances;
             the existence of such a threat can exceptionally be considered
             to be established where the degree of indiscriminate  violence
             characterising the armed conflict taking place assessed by the
             competent national authorities before which an application for
             subsidiary protection is made, or by the courts  of  a  Member
             State to which a decision  refusing  such  an  application  is
             referred reaches such a high level  that  substantial  grounds
             are shown for believing  that  a  civilian,  returned  to  the
             relevant country or, as the  case  may  be,  to  the  relevant
             region, would, solely  on  account  of  his  presence  on  the
             territory of that country or region, face a real risk of being
             subject to that threat."
42.   We recognise that the threat to life or person of an  individual  need
    not come directly from armed conflict.  It will suffice that the result
    of such conflict is a breakdown of law and order which has  the  effect
    of creating the necessary risk.  It is obvious that the  risk  is  most
    likely to result from indiscriminate bombings or shootings.  These  can
    properly be regarded as indiscriminate in the sense that,  albeit  they
    may have specific  or  general  targets,  they  inevitably  expose  the
    ordinary civilian who happens to be at  the  scene  to  what  has  been
    described in argument as collateral damage.  By  specific  targets,  we
    refer to individuals or gatherings  of  individuals  such  as  army  or
    police officers. The means adopted  may  be  bombs,  which  can  affect
    others besides the target, or shootings, which  produce  a  lesser  but
    nonetheless real risk of collateral  damage.   By  general  targets  we
    refer to more indiscriminate attacks on, for example, Sunnis or  Shi'as
    or vice versa.  Such attacks can involve explosions of bombs in crowded
    places such as markets or where religious processions or gatherings are
    taking place.

43.   The CJEU requires us to decide whether the  degree  of  indiscriminate
    violence characterising the armed conflict taking place reaches such  a
    high level as to show the existence for an ordinary civilian of a  real
    risk of serious harm in the country or in a particular region.  When we
    refer below to the "Article 15(c) threshold", this is what we  have  in
    mind. Thus it is necessary to assess whether the level of  violence  is
    such as to meet the test.  Thus there were put before us reports  which
    assessed the number of killings in recent years resulting from acts  of
    violence which could properly be regarded as  resulting  from  internal
    armed conflict.  While the ECJ used the word 'exceptional', it  may  be
    too restrictive to use this term to describe  the  test  and  we  would
    follow the approach in QD which stated at [36] that the armed  conflict
    itself need not be exceptional but that there must be 'an intensity  of
    indiscriminate violence - which will  self-evidently  not  characterise
    every such situation - great enough to meet the test spelt out  by  the
    ECJ'.

44.   In HM1 at [73] the Tribunal decided that  an  attempt  to  distinguish
    between a real risk of targeted and  incidental  killing  of  civilians
    during armed conflict was not a helpful exercise.   We  agree,  but  in
    assessing whether the risk reaches the  level  required  by  the  CJEU,
    focus on the evidence about the numbers of civilians killed or  wounded
    is obviously of prime importance. Thus we  have  been  told  that  each
    death can be multiplied up to seven times when considering injuries  to
    bystanders.  This is somewhat speculative and it must be  obvious  that
    the risk  of  what  has  been  called  collateral  damage  will  differ
    depending on the nature of the killing.  A bomb is likely to cause  far
    greater "collateral damage" than an assassination by shooting.  But the
    incidence and numbers of death are a helpful starting point.

45.   The  harm  in  question  must  be  serious  enough  to  merit  medical
    treatment.  It is not limited to physical harm and can include  serious
    mental harm such as, for example, post-traumatic stress  disorder.   We
    repeat and adopt what the Tribunal said in HM1 at [80]:

         "In our judgment the nexus between the generalised  armed  conflict
         and the indiscriminate violence posing  a  real  risk  to  life  or
         person is met when the intensity of the conflict involves means  of
         combat (whether permissible under the laws  of  war  or  not)  that
         seriously endanger non-combatants as  well  as  result  in  such  a
         general breakdown of  law  and  order  as  to  permit  anarchy  and
         criminality  occasioning  the  serious  harm  referred  to  in  the
         Directive.  Such violence is indiscriminate in effect even  if  not
         necessarily in aim.  As  the  French  Conseil  d'Etat  observed  in
         Baskarathas, it is not necessary for the threat to life  or  person
         to derive from protagonists in the armed conflict in  question:  it
         can simply be a product of the breakdown of law and order."

THE APPELLANTS

46.   The appellants are  nationals  of  Iraq.   All  three  appeal  against
    decisions of the respondent that they are to be removed from the United
    Kingdom by way of directions under section 10 of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.

HM & RM

47.   In the case of the first two appellants,  HM  and  RM,  their  appeals
    were dismissed on 20 March 2008.  It was accepted  by  the  immigration
    judge that their father was a former resident of the  Kurdish  Regional
    Government (KRG) concerned with the oil business, who  had  experienced
    difficulties with the Kurdish  authorities.   He  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 1998 and sought asylum in 1999.  He was granted  exceptional
    leave to remain.  Since 1998, the two appellants  had  been  living  in
    Kirkuk, in the Tameem Governorate (falling within  what  are  known  as
    "the disputed territories").  They came to the UK in 2007  and  claimed
    asylum.  When  their  claims  were  rejected  and  they  appealed,  the
    immigration judge did not accept the core elements of  their  claim  to
    protection and concluded that they did not have a well founded fear  of
    persecution  in  Kirkuk.   He  rejected  their  claim   to   subsidiary
    protection and concluded that the high  threshold  required  to  engage
    Article 3 was not met.

48.   The two appellants sought and were granted orders for  reconsideration
    of this decision, after an initial  refusal  by  a  Senior  Immigration
    Judge, by Blake J in the High Court.  Subsequently, after the  judgment
    of the ECJ in Elgafaji, and the decision of the Court of Appeal in  QD,
    following a Case Management Review, on 26 August 2009, the decision  of
    the immigration judge was set aside. It was found that  by  considering
    that the  appellants  could  not  succeed  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds solely because they had not succeeded on asylum grounds  was  a
    material error of law.  However, the findings of  fact  were  preserved
    and the case proceeded  to  second  stage  reconsideration  on  whether
    "considered  simply  as  two  male  civilians  from  Kirkuk  these  two
    appellants would face a real risk of serious harm under paragraph  339C
    of  the  Immigration  Rules  (Article  15(c)   of   the   Qualification
    Directive)".  Thereafter the cases  were  joined  with  two  others  to
    proceed as country guidance cases. Neither has  a  current  or  expired
    Iraqi passport and neither  currently  holds  an  Iraqi  laissez-passer
    document.

49.   As already noted, the country guidance case was  heard  in  June  2010
    and the appeals were dismissed.  Subsequently,  the  decision  was  set
    aside by the Court of Appeal in HM2.

HF

50.   HF's appeal against refusal of asylum was dismissed by an  immigration
    judge on 22 June 2009.  He is from  Baghdad.   He  was  found  to  lack
    credibility.  The judge noted the submission that he was at  particular
    risk because he was a young male Sunni Muslim who  had  indirect  links
    with the Ba'ath party via his father, but the  judge  considered  there
    was no credible assessment of his father's position in the  party.   He
    did not think that the  appellant's  links  with  the  party,  if  they
    existed at all, were such as to cause any anxiety on his behalf.

51.   The appeal  having  been  dismissed,  the  appellant  sought  and  was
    granted a reconsideration of the judge's decision.  On 9 December 2009,
    it was ordered by a senior immigration judge that the immigration judge
    had materially erred in law in relying in part for his guidance  as  to
    the law relating to Article 15(c) on the Tribunal determination  in  KH
    (Article 15(c) Qualification Directive) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 46,  which
    the Court of Appeal had subsequently held in QD was not to be followed.
     It was ordered that the judge's credibility findings were to stand, so
    the appellant was to be considered as a young  Sunni  male  whose  home
    area was Baghdad and who might have had indirect links with the  Ba'ath
    party.  Subsequently, it  was  decided  that  HF's  case  would  be  an
    appropriate one to join HM and RM as cases for fresh  country  guidance
    in light of the quashing of the  decision  in  HM2  since  HF  is  from
    Baghdad and it was thought that it would be helpful to have guidance in
    respect of an appellant from a part of Iraq other than Kirkuk where  HM
    and RM are from. HF has an expired Iraqi passport.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

52.   In addition to the steps just  described,  a  Case  Management  Review
    hearing took place at Field House on 16 January  2012,  setting  out  a
    timetable  for  the  serving  of  detailed  grounds  of   appeal,   the
    identification of relevant country information material, the service of
    expert reports, and the  provision  of  paginated  and  indexed  appeal
    bundles.

53.   A further Case Management Review hearing took place on 16  April  2012
    at which further directions were given in respect  of  timetabling  for
    the service of a response by one of the experts and skeleton arguments.
     It was also clarified that permission was refused for  HM  and  RM  to
    seek to challenge the decision of the immigration judge with respect to
    the Refugee Convention and Article 8.

54.   After concluding the hearing of the appeals in May 2012,  we  received
    a number of further submissions.  On 25 May we received  the  Secretary
    of State's Note on Returns, and her Note on Statistics on 6  June.   On
    26 June the Secretary of State filed her submissions on the  UNHCR  May
    2012 Guidelines, and on 29 June the appellants filed their response  to
    the above three matters.  The appellants put in further submissions  on
    the UNHCR Guidelines on 11 July, the Secretary of State replied to  the
    appellants' post-hearing submissions on 18  July,  and  the  appellants
    filed their final reply note on  25  July.  Following  the  hearing  on
    October 12, we sought  and  received  within  a  short  period  further
    factual information relating to documentation for returnees.

THE UNHCR ELIGIBILITY GUIDELINES ON IRAQ AND OTHER KEY MATERIALS

UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines

55.   As noted earlier and will be made clearer below,  Mr  Fordham  made  a
    central plank of the  appellants'  submissions  the  UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines on Iraq which he asked us to make the centrepiece of our own
    country guidance. It is of particular importance, therefore, to set out
    what these guidelines say before going on to summarise  the  background
    evidence otherwise. As already  noted,  when  we  began  hearing  these
    appeals the current guidance was  the  April  2009  "UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection  Needs  of  Iraqi
    Asylum Seekers" (April 2009 Guidelines) and the July 2010 "Note on  the
    Continued  Applicability".  Very  recently  UNHCR  has  issued  revised
    Eligibility Guidelines on 31 May 2012. It is pertinent,  therefore,  to
    summarise both.

2009 Guidelines

56.    The  2009  UNHCR  Guidelines  identified  two  main  types  of   risk
    categories: (1) specific risk categories consisting of specific  groups
    who are targeted by the insurgents; and  (2)  general  risk  categories
    based on geographical considerations.

57.    As  to  (1),  UNHCR  considered  that  for  international  protection
    purposes 'favourable consideration' should be given to persons  in  the
    following categories: Iraqis affiliated with political parties in power
    struggles; government officials and other persons associated  with  the
    current  Iraqi  government,  administration  or  institutions;   Iraqis
    (perceived to be) opposing armed groups or political  factions;  Iraqis
    affiliated with the MNF-1 or foreign companies;  members  of  religious
    and  ethnic  minorities;  certain  professionals  (academics,   judges,
    doctors); journalists and media workers;  UN  and  NGO  workers,  human
    rights  activists;  homosexuals;  women  and  children  with   specific
    profiles. It was made clear that the above list was not intended to  be
    exhaustive.

58.   As to (2), UNHCR considered all Iraqi asylum  seekers  from  the  five
    central governorates of Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah and  Salah-Al-
    Din to be "in need of international protection".

59.    The  2009  Guidelines  and  subsequent  documents  confirming   their
    continued applicability were of course the focus of submissions at  the
    hearing before us in April and May.


2012 Guidelines


60.   Subsequent to that hearing, UNHCR has issued new guidance: the  "UNHCR
    Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs
    of Asylum Seekers from Iraq", 31 May 2012.  These are divided into four
    parts: I (Introduction);  II (Background Information); III (Main Actors
    of Persecution  and  Violence  and  Indiscriminate  Violence);  and  IV
    (Eligibility for International Protection). The opening passages of the
    Guidelines state:

         "Introduction


         These  Eligibility  Guidelines  replace  the   April   2009   UNHCR
         Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the  International  Protection
         Needs of  Asylum-Seekers  from  Iraq  and  the  2010  Note  on  the
         Continued  Applicability  of  the  April  2009  UNHCR   Eligibility
         Guidelines for Assessing  the  International  Protection  Needs  of
         Iraqi Asylum-Seekers.
         The purpose of these Eligibility  Guidelines  is  to  set  out  the
         profiles of asylum-seekers for whom international protection  needs
         are likely to arise in the current context in Iraq.


         The current situation in  Iraq  can  be  characterized  as  one  of
         ongoing uncertainty due to several factors, including:


         (i)      high levels of political and sectarian violence;


         (ii)       the   unpredictable   security   situation,    including
             significant numbers of civilian  casualties  as  a  result  of
             attacks by armed groups;


         (iii)    the full withdrawal of US forces from Iraq at the  end  of
             2011; and


         (iv)     continuing challenges with regard to establishment of  the
             rule of law, provision of services, distribution of land,  and
             respect for human rights.


         UNHCR's recommendations with regard to assessing the  international
         protection needs of asylum seekers from Iraq, as set out  in  these
         Eligibility Guidelines, may be summarized as follows.


         All claims lodged by asylum-seekers - whether on the basis  of  the
         refugee criteria contained in the 1951 Convention relating  to  the
         Status of Refugees 3 and/or its 1967 Protocol 4 (1951  Convention),
         or   broader   international   protection    criteria,    including
         complementary forms of protection - need to be considered on  their
         own merits in fair and efficient  status  determination  procedures
         and based on up to-date and relevant country of origin information.


         UNHCR considers that asylum-seekers from Iraq  with  the  following
         profiles, and depending on  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
         individual case, are likely to be in need of international  refugee
         protection. These risk profiles are not necessarily exhaustive, nor
         is there any hierarchy implied in  the  order  in  which  they  are
         presented:


         (i)       individuals  associated  with   (or   perceived   to   be
             supporting) the Iraqi authorities, the Iraqi  Security  Forces
             (ISF) or the former  foreign  forces  in  Iraq  (Multinational
             Forces in Iraq, MNF-I or US Forces in Iraq, USF-I);


         (ii)     individuals (perceived as) opposing the Iraqi authorities;


         (iii)    individuals (perceived as) opposing the  Kurdish  Regional
             Government (KRG);


         (iv)     certain professionals;


         (v)      individuals with religion-based claims,


         (vi)     individuals with ethnicity-based claims;


         (vii)    women with specific profiles or in specific circumstances;


         (viii)    children  with   specific   profiles   or   in   specific
             circumstances;


         (ix)     victims or persons at risk of trafficking; and


         (x)      lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and  intersex  (LGBTI)
             individuals.


         In light of the ongoing  non-international  armed  conflict-related
         civilian  casualties,  security  incidents   and   conflict-induced
         displacement, in particular in central Iraq,  UNHCR recommends that
         international protection applications lodged by Iraqis claiming  to
         flee high levels of and/or intense violence should each be assessed
         carefully, in light of the evidence presented by the applicant  and
         other current and reliable information on  their  place  of  former
         residence. This will include an assessment of whether the  violence
         in the place of former residence is of such a level  and  intensity
         that  international  protection  is  required  under  complementary
         protection regimes, even if the protection need cannot  be  related
         to a 1951 Convention ground.


         UNHCR  considers  that  internal  flight  options  are  often   not
         available in Iraq due to serious risks faced by  Iraqis  throughout
         the  country,   including   threats   to   safety   and   security,
         accessibility problems and lack of livelihood opportunities."

61.   At p.7 it is explained that:

         "In preparing these Eligibility Guidelines, UNHCR has analysed  the
         most up-to-date and relevant  information  available  from  a  wide
         variety of sources at 18  March  2012.  However,  access  to  fully
         comprehensive information on the situation in Iraq  is  not  always
         accessible for a  variety  of  reasons.  In  addition  to  publicly
         available sources, the  analysis  contained  in  these  Eligibility
         Guidelines is also informed by reliable reports  provided  by:  (i)
         Iraqi asylum-seekers and refugees around the world; (ii) internally
         displaced person (IDP) and returnee monitoring operations in  Iraq;
         and (iii) UNHCR operations,  UN  agencies  and  other  partners  in
         Iraq."

62.   As regards risk arising from indiscriminate and generalised  violence,
    the Guidelines state in its summary  at pp. 47-48 that:

         "Summary


         The levels of violence in Iraq have declined from that  experienced
         at the height of the conflict in 2006 and 2007. However, while  the
         violence appears to have stabilized, is still at a high  level  and
         continues to affect a large number of Iraqis.


         As described above, based on information  known  and  available  to
         UNHCR as  at  18  March  2012,  the  situation  in  certain  areas,
         principally in central Iraq,  continues  to  be  affected  by:  (i)
         significant numbers of civilian casualties; (ii) frequent  security
         incidents; and (iii) significant  numbers  of  persons  who  remain
         displaced. Consequently, Iraqi asylum-seekers who do not  meet  the
         1951  Convention  criteria  and  who  were  formerly  residing   in
         governorates, districts, cities, towns, villages or  neighbourhoods
         where, at the time of adjudication of the asylum claim, high levels
         and a high intensity of violence continue to be reported, are,  for
         reason of the foreseen impact on the individual  concerned,  likely
         to be in need of complementary forms of protection on the basis  of
         a fear  of  serious  and  indiscriminate  harm  arising  from  that
         violence.


         Information on the levels, intensity and impact of violence  in  an
         asylum-seeker's  governorate,  district,  city,  town,  village  or
         neighbourhood of origin is needed to assess the possible protection
         needs of persons found not to  meet  the  1951  Convention  refugee
         criteria  under  broader  international  protection  criteria.  The
         current  situation  in  Iraq  does  not   allow   for   generalised
         conclusions in  this  regard  on  the  basis  of  broad  geographic
         distinctions. Therefore, adjudicators will need to assess on a case-
         by-case basis whether an  individual  asylum-seeker  who  has  been
         found not to meet the refugee criteria of the 1951 Convention  will
         run a risk of serious and indiscriminate harm upon return. In doing
         so, the principle of the shared burden of proof requires that  both
         the asylum-seeker and the adjudicator make every reasonable  effort
         to provide specific and up-to-date information on the situation  in
         the asylum-seeker's former place  of  residence  to  support  their
         position."


63.   In Part IV, dealing with  Eligibility  for  International  Protection,
    the Guidelines summarise matters as follows.

         "IV. Eligibility for International Protection


         UNHCR recommends that all claims by  asylum-seekers  from  Iraq  be
         considered on their individual merits in fair and efficient refugee
         status determination procedures, taking into account up-to-date and
         relevant country  of  origin  information.  UNHCR  considers  that,
         depending on the particular details of  their  claims,  individuals
         with profiles and in circumstances similar to those outlined  below
         are likely to be in need of international refugee protection in the
         sense of the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol.


         This  listing  is  not  exhaustive  and  is  based  on  information
         available to UNHCR as at 18 March 2012. An  individual's  claim  is
         not without merit simply because he or she does not fall within any
         of the  profiles  identified  below.  Similarly,  not  all  persons
         falling within these risk profiles will necessarily be in  need  of
         international refugee protection: in the assessment of  whether  or
         not a claimant would be likely to  be  exposed  to  persecution  or
         serious harm upon return, the specific elements of  the  individual
         claim are decisive. Certain claims  by  asylum-seekers  from  Iraq,
         including of those possibly falling within risk profiles  described
         in  these  guidelines,  will  require  examination   for   possible
         exclusion from refugee status.


         For persons who have already been  recognized  as  refugees,  their
         status may be  reviewed  only  if  there  are  indications,  in  an
         individual case, that there are grounds for cancellation of refugee
         status which was wrongly granted in the first instance;  revocation
         of refugee status  on  the  grounds  of  Article  1F  of  the  1951
         Convention; or cessation of refugee status on the basis of  Article
         1C(1-4) of the 1951 Convention. UNHCR considers  that  the  current
         situation in Iraq does not warrant cessation of refugee  status  on
         the basis of Article 1C(5) of the 1951 Convention."


UKBA Iraq Operational Guidance Note (OGN)

64.   The Iraq Operational Guidance Note (OGN) of  December  2011  says,  at
    [2.3.4] that violence in Iraq, albeit still far above what ought to  be
    tolerable, has levelled off in the past two years.  It is said that  if
    insurgents remain as weak as  they  are  and  find  no  opportunity  to
    exploit political fractures, security forces  operating  at  less-than-
    optimal levels should still face no serious difficulty  in  confronting
    them.  However, although oversight by the MoI and  MoD  was  increased,
    problems continue with all  security  forces,  arising  from  sectarian
    divisions, corruption and unwillingness to serve outside the  areas  in
    which personnel were  recruited.   In  the  KRG,  though  the  security
    situation is considerably better than in the rest of  Iraq,  there  are
    concerns about human rights violations.

65.   Roadside  terrorist  attacks  occur  frequently,  especially  on  main
    routes, though the central provinces are not as hazardous as  in  2005-
    2008.  Iraq is seen (referring to the Internal Displacement  Monitoring
    Centre (IDMC) report of June 2011) as moving  away  from  an  emergency
    situation to a development  phase.   However,  new  displacement  still
    occurs, and a large number of people have unmet humanitarian needs.

66.   At [3.6.2] it is noted that the security situation in  Iraq  continues
    to affect the civilian population, who face ongoing  acts  of  violence
    perpetrated  by  armed  opposition  groups  and  criminal  gangs.    In
    particular, armed groups continue to employ tactics  that  deliberately
    target   crowded   public   areas   and   kill   and   maim   civilians
    indiscriminately.  Some attacks  appear  to  be  sectarian  but  others
    appear random, aimed at terrorising the population at large and casting
    doubt over the ability of the Government and the Iraqi security  forces
    to stem the  violence.   Targeted  assassinations  persist  across  the
    country.  It is said that steady progress is being  made  and  security
    incidents are remaining near the lowest levels in more than five years,
    despite a spike in attacks during the March 2010 election.  In 2010 the
    overall level of violence in Iraq was about 90% lower than the peak  in
    2007.  AQI, other Sunni Islamist  factions  and  various  neo-Ba'athist
    groups still carry out bombings and targeted attacks in  parts  of  the
    country and continue to try to trigger a  new  round  of  Sunni-Shi-ite
    fighting.  Security remains a key challenge.

Tribunal CG and related case law

67.    Leaving  aside  cases  pre-dating  the  coming  into  force  of   the
    Qualification Directive, the cases which  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal and its successor the Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) have designated as  country  guidance  cases  are  (with  full
    citations) as follows. Specific comment is only made on those that have
    implications for the issue of Article 15(c)-related risk or  the  issue
    of internal relocation. It should be noted that even in respect of  the
    two cases overturned  by  the  Court  of  Appeal,  KH  and  HMI,  those
    decisions contain a record of evidence relating to  background  country
    evidence and expert evidence as given to those tribunals.

- NS (Iraq; perceived collaborator; relocation) Iraq CG [2007] UKAIT 00046

- KH (Article 15(c) Qualification Directive) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00023


68.   The Tribunal concluded that whilst Iraq was  considered  to  be  in  a
    state of internal armed conflict, it did not consider that  there  were
    significantly high levels of indiscriminate violence throughout Iraq so
    as to make all civilians at risk of serious harm.


69.   This case was overturned by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  QD  (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 620,  [2011]
    1 WLR 689.

- NA (Palestinians - risk) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00046

- SI (expert evidence - Kurd- SM confirmed) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00094

70.   The relevant passage of the headnote stated:

         "3.      The guidance given in SM [SM and Others (Kurds-Protection-
             Relocation) Iraq CG [2005] UKAIT 00111]  regarding  relocation
             of a Kurd from the KRG to central or southern Iraq, which  was
             that it can in general be effected without this  being  unduly
             harsh and without giving rise to a real risk "in all  but  the
             most exceptional high profile cases" of their relocation being
             brought to the attention of [any of the KRG authorities], also
             remains valid."


- SR (Iraqi/Arab Christian: relocation to KRG) Iraq CG [2009] UKAIT 00038

71.   The headnote stated:


         "An Iraqi Arab Christian at risk in his home  area  and  throughout
         central and southern Iraq is  likely  to  be  able  to  obtain  the
         documentation needed by a person wishing to relocate  within  Iraq,
         and is likely to be able to relocate to the KRG with the assistance
         of a sponsor, in particular, on the basis of the latest  statistics
         available, in Erbil or Dohuk".

 - ZQ (serving soldier) Iraq CG [2009] UKAIT 00048

72.   The relevant part of the headnote stated:


         "v)      Insofar as the risk categories of NS (Iraq; perceived NS
             collaborator; relocation) Iraq CG [2007] UKAIT 00046  may
             cover persons who by virtue of their work have become members
             of the Multinational Forces or the Coalition Provisional
             Authority, application of its guidance will need to bear in
             mind that the state's duty to protect them will be very
             limited".


- HM and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC) ("HM1")

73.   The Tribunal concluded at [278(viii)] that:

         "In short, the risk for mere  civilians  of  being  the  victim  of
         indiscriminate harm is not so substantial, the ability of  the  GoI
         is  not  so  negligible  and  the  willingness  of  the   displaced
         populations of Iraq is not  so  compromised  that  return  to  that
         country would require international protection".

74.   The Tribunal also held that internal  relocation  would  be  a  viable
    option for Kurds both within the KRG and in southern governorates.

75.   This case was overturned by the Court of Appeal in HM (Iraq) & Anor  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1536  (13
    December 2011) ("HM2"). Albeit overturning  HMI  solely  on  procedural
    grounds the Court of Appeal nevertheless expressly  set  aside    HMI's
    country guidance as well.

- EA (Sunni/Shi'a mixed marriages) Iraq CG [2011] UKUT 342 (IAC)

76.   The headnote stated:


         "(1)     In general there is not a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
             other significant harm to parties to a Sunni/Shi'a marriage in
             Iraq.


         (2)      It may, however, be shown that there are  enhanced  risks,
             crossing the relevant risk thresholds,  in  rural  and  tribal
             areas, and in areas where though a Sunni man may marry a Shi'a
             woman without risk, the converse may not pertain.


         (3)      Even if an  appellant  is  able  to  demonstrate  risk  in
             his/her  home  area,  in  general  it  will  be  feasible  for
             relocation to be effected, either to an area in a city such  a
             Baghdad, where mixed Sunni and Shi'a families  live  together,
             or to the Kurdistan region."

    The most recent country guidance case is MK.

- MK (documents - relocation) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 126 (IAC) (25 April 2012)

77.   Its headnote states:


         "(1)     Since the lack of documentation relating  to  identity  in
             the form of the Civil  Status  ID  (CSID),  Iraqi  Nationality
             Certificate (INC) and Public Distribution  System  (PDS)  card
             (food ration card) is not ordinarily an  insuperable  problem,
             it is not a factor likely to make return to any part  of  Iraq
             unsafe or unreasonable.


             (a)       The CSID is an important document, both in  its  own
                  right and as a  gateway  to  obtaining  other  significant
                  documents such the  INC  and  the  PDS.  An  inability  to
                  replace the CSID is likely to entail inability  to  access
                  the INC and PDS.


             (b)       Although the general position is that a  person  who
                  wishes to replace a lost CSID is  required  to  return  to
                  their home area in order to do so, there are procedures as
                  described in this determination available  which  make  it
                  possible (i) for Iraqis abroad to secure the  issue  of  a
                  new CSID to them through the offices of  the  local  Iraqi
                  Embassy; (ii) for Iraqis returned to Iraq without  a  CSID
                  to obtain one without  necessarily  having  to  travel  to
                  their home area. Such procedures permit family members  to
                  obtain such documentation from  their  home  areas  on  an
                  applicant's behalf or allow for a person  to  be  given  a
                  power of attorney to obtain the same. Those who are unable
                  immediately to establish  their  identity  can  ordinarily
                  obtain documentation by being  presented  before  a  judge
                  from the Civil Status Court, so as to facilitate return to
                  their place of origin.


         (2)      (a)  Entry into and residence in the KRG can  be  effected
                  by any Iraqi national with a  CSID,  INC  and  PDS,  after
                  registration with the Asayish (local security office).  An
                  Arab may need a sponsor; a Kurd will not.


             (b)       Living conditions in the KRG for a  person  who  has
                  relocated there are not without  difficulties,  but  there
                  are  jobs,  and  there  is  access  to  free  health  care
                  facilities, education, rented accommodation and  financial
                  and other support from UNHCR.


         (3)      Despite bureaucratic difficulties  with  registration  and
             the difficulties faced by IDPs, it is wrong to say that  there
             is, in  general,  no  internal  flight  alternative  in  Iraq,
             bearing in mind in particular the levels of  governmental  and
             NGO support available.


         (4)      Whilst the situation for women in Iraq is, in general, not
             such as to give rise to a real risk of persecution or  serious
             harm, there may be particular problems affecting female headed
             households where family support is lacking and jobs and  other
             means of support may be harder to come by. Careful examination
             of the particular circumstances of the individual's case  will
             be especially important."

Position in Europe

78.   A September 2010 report by the Washington  Post,  mentioned  countries
    sending back Iraqis  as  being  Sweden,  Norway,  Denmark  and  Britain
    (quoted by Dr Fatah at [684] of his report). Amnesty  International  in
    2010 also included the Netherlands among countries undertaking forcible
    returns (see also the COIS Bulletin of 22 November 2011,  collation  of
    IGC Member States Responses on Returns to Iraq).  According  to  UNHCR,
    there are  five  other  European  countries  which  undertake  forcible
    returns to Iraq. In its July 2011 study, Safe  At  Last?,  UNHCR  noted
    that the determining  authorities  of  Germany,  the  UK,  Netherlands,
    Sweden and France, with the concurrence of the judicial bodies in those
    countries, have not considered that the  Article  15(c)  threshold  for
    mere civilians has been met in Iraq or in any region  within  it.  (The
    only country mentioned as one where the courts had  found  the  Article
    15(c) threshold to be met was Belgium, in relation to central Iraq.)

79.   The appellants cited a June 2010  judgment  of  the  (First  Instance)
    Finnish Administrative Court appearing to find that the  Article  15(c)
    threshold was met in Iraq which  was  upheld  by  the  Finnish  Supreme
    Administrative Court in December 2010.

ECtHR cases

80.   The  two  most  notable  ECtHR  cases  dealing  with  Iraq  since  the
    beginning of 2009 have been F.H. v Sweden and Al Hamdani v  Bosnia  and
    Herzogovina 7 February 2012.  The  latter  is  significant  because  it
    illustrates that although (as already noted) the ECtHR has  stayed  its
    decision on the case of  YA  v  UK,  App.No.  65580/10,  lodged  on  10
    November 2010 to await the outcome of the HM cases this has not  caused
    it to adjourn all Iraqi cases reliant on a claim that there  exists  an
    Article 15(c)/Article 3 general risk from high levels of violence.

F.H. v. Sweden, no. 32621/06,  9320, January 2009

81.   Dealing first  with  F.H.  v  Sweden,  the  Court  had  noted  in  its
    admissibility decision at [ 62] that in December 2007 and again  on  15
    February 2008 the UNHCR had stated that it did not promote  returns  to
    Iraq in the present circumstances since its criteria on the  conditions
    needed for the voluntary  return  of  refugees  were  not  met  by  the
    situation in Iraq at that time. In its decision on the merits the ECtHR
    addressed the argument that the security situation in Iraq was  so  bad
    that to return anyone to that country  would  violate  Article  3.  The
    Court stated:


         "91.     In the present case, the Court recognises the  problematic
             security  situation  in  Iraq.  However,  it  notes  that  the
             situation  has  improved  over  the   last   year   which   is
             demonstrated,   inter   alia,    through    the    progressive
             relinquishment of security responsibility over Iraqi provinces
             from US forces to  Iraqi  forces,  the  indefinite  cease-fire
             declared by the Madhi  Army  in  August  2008,  a  significant
             decrease in civilian deaths and the fact that some Iraqis  are
             voluntarily starting to return to their homes,  encouraged  by
             the  Iraqi  Government's  financial  incentives  and   subsidy
             programme. Although the Court is aware that the UNHCR, UN  and
             IOM recommend that countries refrain from  forcibly  returning
             refugees to Iraq, they have stated that they are committed  to
             providing assistance to those who return. Moreover, the  Court
             observes that their recommendations are partly  based  on  the
             security situation and partly due to  practical  problems  for
             returnees  such  as  shelter,   health   care   and   property
             restitution.


         92.      In this connection, the Court stresses  that  it  attaches
             importance to information contained  in  recent  reports  from
             independent  international  human  rights   organisations   or
             governmental sources (see, among others, Saadi v. Italy, cited
             above,  131). However, its  own  assessment  of  the  general
             situation in the country of destination is carried out only to
             determine whether there would be a violation of Article  3  if
             the  applicant  were  to  be   returned   to   that   country.
             Consequently, where reports  are  focused  on  general  socio-
             economic and  humanitarian  conditions,  the  Court  has  been
             inclined to accord less weight to them, since such  conditions
             do not necessarily have a bearing on the question  of  a  real
             risk to an individual applicant of  ill-treatment  within  the
             meaning of Article 3 (see NA  v.  the  United  Kingdom,  cited
             above,  122).


         93.      Hence, in the  present  case,  the  Court  concludes  that
             whilst the general situation  in  Iraq,  and  in  Baghdad,  is
             insecure and problematic, it is not so serious as to cause, by
             itself, a violation of Article 3  of  the  Convention  if  the
             applicant were to return to that country. The Court  therefore
             has to establish whether the applicant's personal situation is
             such that his return to Iraq would contravene Articles 2 or  3
             of the Convention."

82.   The Court went on to address the applicant's contention that he  would
    be at risk on return to Iraq on several other  grounds,  including  his
    Christian faith. At [97] it held:


         "97.     The Court will first consider the applicant's  claim  that
             he would risk being killed because he belongs to the Christian
             faith. In this respect, the Court observes that Iraqi national
             identity cards explicitly note the  holder's  religion.  Thus,
             even if the applicant  were  not  to  manifest  his  religious
             beliefs openly, it is likely that  his  religious  affiliation
             would become known to others as he  would  have  to  show  his
             identity card to the authorities in  the  course  of  everyday
             life. The Court also takes into account that there  have  been
             several incidents directed  against  Christians  in  Iraq,  as
             recently as October 2008  twelve  Christians  were  killed  in
             attacks in the town of Mosul. However, Christian congregations
             are  still  functioning  in  Iraq  and,   from   the   general
             information  available,  it  can  be  seen  that   the   Iraqi
             Government has condemned all attacks against  this  group  and
             that they intervened with police and  military  following  the
             October attack to ensure their safety. Hence, it is clear that
             there is no State-sanctioned persecution  of  Christians  and,
             since the attacks were also condemned by Islamic groups and no
             one has accepted responsibility for them, it appears that  the
             reported attacks were carried out by individuals  rather  than
             by organised groups. In these circumstances, the  Court  finds
             that the applicant would be able to seek the protection of the
             Iraqi  authorities  if  he  felt  threatened  and   that   the
             authorities would be willing and in a position  to  help  him.
             Thus, the Court considers that he would not face a  real  risk
             of persecution or ill-treatment on the basis of his  religious
             affiliation."

Al Hamdani v Bosnia and Herzogovina 7 February 2012

83.   In Al Hamdani v Bosnia and Herzogovina  7  February  2012  the  Fourth
    Section reminded  itself  at  [49]-[51]  that  it  never  excluded  the
    possibility that the general situation of  violence  in  a  country  of
    destination may be of a sufficient level of intensity as to entail that
    any removal to it would necessarily breach Article 3 of the Convention.
    At [50]-[52] it stated:

         "50.     Turning to the present case,  the  Court  notes  that  the
             applicant has visited Iraq twice since the change  of  regime,
             in 2003 and 2004. However, the applicant claimed  that  during
             these visits he had been forced to hide in fear of the Kurdish
             authorities as his friend had  told  him  that  he  was  under
             surveillance and that his name was  on  a  "black  list",  and
             that, after he had left Iraq, the Kurds searched his  family's
             home looking for him. On the other hand, not only did  he  not
             provide any evidence in support of these statements, they also
             seem to be in contradiction to what he previously  said  about
             his  visits  (see  paragraph  23  above).  From  his  previous
             statements it would appear that he moved freely in and out  of
             public buildings and on the streets during his visits  (taking
             his  sick  father  to  hospital  and,  afterwards,  holding  a
             commemoration for him). Moreover, on both visits the applicant
             stayed in Kirkuk for more than one month. It should  be  noted
             that the security situation in Iraq was much more dangerous at
             the time of the applicant's visits than it is  now  (according
             to Iraq Body Count there were 12,087 civilian deaths  reported
             in   2003,   11,   072   in   2004   and   4,045   in    2010;
             www.iraqbodycount.org as downloaded on 16 November 2011).  The
             Court has already had an opportunity  to  assess  the  general
             security situation in Iraq (see F.H. v. Sweden, no.  32621/06,
              9320, January 2009). In that case, the Court held that while
             the general situation in Iraq was insecure and problematic, it
             was not so serious as to cause,  by  itself,  a  violation  of
             Article 3 if that applicant, a Christian and a member  of  the
             Ba'ath party, were to be returned there (see  also  Mslim  v.
             Turkey, no. 53566/99, 26 April 2005; for a  recent  assessment
             of the security situation in  Kirkuk,  see  Agalar  v.  Norway
             (dec.), no. 55120/09, 8 November 2011).


         51.      Although the Court is aware that the UNHCR, the UN and the
             IOM recommend that countries refrain from  forcibly  returning
             refugees to Iraq, they have stated that they are committed  to
             providing assistance to those who return. Moreover, the  Court
             observes that their recommendations are partly  based  on  the
             security situation and partly due to  practical  problems  for
             returnees  such  as  shelter,   health   care   and   property
             restitution. In this connection, the Court  stresses  that  it
             attaches importance to information contained in recent reports
             from independent international human rights  organisations  or
             governmental sources (see, among others, Saadi v. Italy, cited
             above,  131). However, its  own  assessment  of  the  general
             situation in the country of destination is carried out only to
             determine whether there are substantial grounds for  believing
             that the applicant would be at a real risk of being  subjected
             to treatment prohibited by Article 3 if he were to be returned
             to that country. Consequently, where reports  are  focused  on
             general socio-economic and humanitarian conditions, the  Court
             has been inclined to accord less weight to  them,  since  such
             conditions do not necessarily have a bearing on  the  question
             of a real risk to an individual  applicant  of  ill treatment
             within the meaning of Article 3 (see NA, cited above,  122).


         52.      Hence, in the present case, having  regard  to  the  above
             considerations and the fact that the  applicant  visited  Iraq
             twice, at the time of the upsurge of violence in that country,
             without any consequences, the Court concludes that he did  not
             adduce  any  evidence  capable  of  proving  that  there   are
             substantial grounds for believing that, if deported, he  would
             be exposed to a real risk  of  being  subjected  to  treatment
             contrary to Article 3. Therefore, this complaint is manifestly
             ill-founded and must be rejected pursuant to Article 35    3
             (a) and 4 of the Convention. In view of this conclusion, it is
             appropriate to discontinue the application of Rule 39  of  the
             Rules of Court."

THE EVIDENCE

Expert Evidence

Dr George

Written report

84.   Dr George's report prepared for this  case  is  dated  26  March  2012
    (plus addendum report of the same date).  There is also his response to
    the Secretary of State's questions of 9 April 2012.

85.   His principal focus is on the general security situation. At [157]  Dr
    George states that "all three appellants in this case would be at  risk
    in the centre and to a lesser extent,  in  the  south  of  the  country
    because of the general security situation" and at [154]  he  says  that
    "all three appellants would be at risk in Iraq, or at least  in  Shi'a-
    dominated and mixed Sunni-Shi'a communities  in  central  and  southern
    parts of the country,  on  account  of  their  Sunni  religio-political
    identity".

86.   Dr George writes that the security situation has changed  little  from
    that described by the UNHCR in April 2009: "If anything,  the  position
    has deteriorated somewhat"  due  to  political  uncertainties  and  the
    withdrawal of US troops.   At  the  same  time  "the  period  since  US
    withdrawal has not seen a major increase in violence  or  a  return  of
    generalised sectarian violence".

87.   He states that  despite  the  relative  improvement  in  the  security
    situation since 2007 the return of IDPs and  EDPs  has  been  slow  and
    halting.

88.   At [133] (see also 155), Dr George states that:

         "Certain risks will  apply  to  all  returnees  from  the  UK.   In
         particular, they will be at risk of kidnap because, as persons  who
         have spent time in the  west,  they  will  be  perceived  as  being
         wealthy; and all  returnees  will  be  at  risk  from  the  general
         violence in Iraq."


89.   Dr George considers that Kurdish  ethnicity  gives  rise  to  a  "real
    risk....at least in certain parts of the country.  Kurds in Iraq  south
    of the KRG-controlled zone have been targeted as part  of  the  strife"
    ([141]).

90.   He also considers it "plausible that the close relatives of actual  or
    perceived abusive or high-ranking former Ba'athists would be liable  to
    be targeted for revenge..."   ([140]).

Oral evidence

91.   In cross-examination, Dr  George  was  asked  whether  there  was  any
    evidence of an IDP ever relocating without family support and  he  said
    that, of course, there were always exceptions and  he  was  sure  there
    were such cases, but the general position was as  he  described  it  at
    [221] and [222] of his  report.   The  more  assistance  there  was  in
    relocation,  the  easier  it  was  to  relocate,  but  that  would  not
    necessarily surmount a problem, for example for a Sunni in Shi'a  area.
    It was put to him that, although his view was that it was not  possible
    to relocate within central governorates, it was  the  case  that  there
    were significant numbers of IDPs in those areas and there was help from
    NGOs.  He said that in most cases help for IDPs would be trumped by the
    other factors.  There would  be  a  risk  to  returned  asylum  seekers
    because of a perception of wealth.  There was no  statistical  evidence
    of which he was aware about risk in that regard, but perceptions in the
    Middle East often mattered more than reality.

92.   Dr George was referred to his reference in  [232]  to  the  appellants
    facing a real risk of being kidnapped.  He said it  depended  what  you
    meant by real.  It was real but not very high.  He was asked whether it
    could be the case that in the report, where he said risk or real  risk,
    it could include low risk.  He said  it  could.   It  depended  on  the
    context.  He would think in future about the adjectives  to  attach  to
    the term "risk".  In his  report  he  had  used  "real  risk"  to  mean
    something more than genuine  and  also  something  slightly  more  than
    nothing.

93.   He said that he could show from figures that Kurds were more  at  risk
    in the disputed areas than in Baghdad, but the data was very poor.   He
    could not say whether and to  what  extent  attacks  on  Kurds  in  the
    disputed territories were ethnically based.  A person could be  in  the
    wrong place at the wrong time in the specific context of  the  disputed
    territories.  With regard to the data on killings, the statistics would
    not always say whether the victim was a Kurd  or  who  the  perpetrator
    was.  The statistical data was very poor.  He could  not  take  it  any
    further than his report.  Statistical analysis was to be looked at with
    caution.

94.   Dr George had been unimpressed by the FCO letters about Iraq  produced
    for the hearing.  He was referred specifically to the letter of 7 April
    2012.  The Iraq Body Count's (IBC's) daily list of  attacks  in  Kirkuk
    and also his report showed far more casualties than the FCO  said.   He
    questioned what the basis for what they  said  was.   Certainly,  Sunni
    extremists were very active, but it was much more than  that.   He  was
    not sure that there was such a thing as an indiscriminate  attack.   He
    was not aware of any  evidence  of  Kurds  fleeing  Baghdad  or  Kirkuk
    recently.  There had not been mass flight and a lot of Kurds  had  come
    back to reclaim properties seized during Saddam Hussein's regime.  They
    were discouraged from entering the KRG who wished them to stay there to
    support the referendum that would  occur  one  day  concerning  Kirkuk.
    There was movement in and out of the  disputed  territories.   Being  a
    Sunni or Shi'a was a general risk factor and not  high  up  the  league
    table of risk.  It was a genuine risk factor if circumstances were such
    as to make it a risk, for example  living  near  to  a  Shi'a  area  in
    Baghdad for a Sunni or encountering a Sunni checkpoint for a Shi'a.  It
    was the same for both.  It was a  question  of  context.   Sectarianism
    could be irrelevant or important.  He would expect  the  appellants  as
    Sunnis to return to a Sunni area.

95.   It was put to Dr George that in the five  central  governorates  there
    seemed to be no evidence to show that life in general did  not  go  on.
    He said that as a general statement that was right and likewise in  the
    south.  It was the case also in Baghdad and Kirkuk that life  went  on.
    It was put to him that evidence did not show that people were modifying
    their lives because of the violence and he said he was not  sure  about
    that, citing the separatism and high  walls  in  Baghdad  and  security
    checks.  Life had been affected  by  violence  and  the  potential  for
    violence.  He thought that IBC was reliable.  He thought it  needed two
    reports for each figure.   He  accepted,  broadly  speaking,  that  the
    levels of violence in 2012 had been roughly the same  as  in  2010  and
    2011, as far as was known.  It was put to him that if there were  4,100
    deaths a year  in  a  population  of  29  million  (taking  the  lowest
    population estimate), that was 14 or 15 per 100,000.   Dr  George  said
    yes, but it was not spread evenly across Iraq and there was  a  lot  of
    desert.

96.   Dr George accepted there was not a risk of  general  violence  in  the
    KRG or the south.  The central governorates were  more  dangerous  than
    the others.  In some areas, the risk might be quite  low,  for  example
    for a Sunni in a Sunni area who, in  general,  would  not  be  at  risk
    there.  He was referred to  the  point  he  made  at  [147]  concerning
    Kurdish families from the disputed Jalawla district in Diyala  province
    who had left for other cities in the province.  He said that in  Kirkuk
    province, around 50% of the IDPs had relocated within  the  governorate
    and there was a general pattern which emphasised  the  significance  of
    family support.  Family support network would be at the top of the list
    for a relocating family. Although it could be that people would  prefer
    to live there, the KRG discouraged relocation  of  Kurds  to  the  KRG.
    He agreed that there were a lot of reasons  independently  of  violence
    for people moving, for example lack of water.   There  were  a  lot  of
    Kurds in the south, so family connections were likely to be the reason.
     Sunnis could do the same.  He understood that  there  were  a  lot  of
    Kurds in Kirkuk because of family connections in the KRG  or  elsewhere
    in  the  Kirkuk  Governorate.   He  was  referred  to  the  IOM  report
    concerning Kirkuk at C9, Q15.  He noted the point about difficulties of
    transferring PDS cards.  That had an impact on the ability to relocate.
     It was human nature to want to go home.  Quite a  high  proportion  of
    returnees to Iraq regretted  returning.   The  evidence  did  not  show
    starvation, people got  by,  Dr  George  agreed.   He  said  there  was
    malnutrition and the MoDM was ineffective.

97.   He was referred to the reasons given for displacement  in  respect  of
    Kirkuk, including drought and others.  He said none of the others could
    be excluded.

98.   Although he thought the IBC figures were  usable,  he  did  not  think
    that its figures were comprehensive as not all deaths  would  meet  its
    criteria and the real figures were likely  to  be  higher.   A  lot  of
    deaths were not reported.  The criteria of the IBC were on its website.
     The IBC table included a wide variety and was intended to include  all
    deaths resulting from violence.  It would record mass casualty attacks.
     He was asked whether there was anything between assassination and mass
    casualty attacks and he said yes, a grenade at a checkpoint  killing  a
    civilian who happened to be there but who was not the key  target.   As
    regards "woundings" and its meaning, he would take it to mean more than
    a  scratch  but  rather  a  significant  injury  which  could   involve
    hospitalisation.  It would be an injury needing medical treatment.   He
    had never seen statistics on bruises or grazes.  There might be  trauma
    that did not show up on an attack.  The British Embassy letters  seemed
    based on a very limited range of sources  and  it  did  not  say  which
    security companies were involved and what  level  of  person.  The  IBC
    corroboration system seemed better.  It was necessary to  approach  all
    data in Iraq with caution.  There was  a  view  that  no  violence  was
    indiscriminate in that  all  except  criminal  action  was  politically
    motivated and  directed  at  a  particular  target  with  a  particular
    direction.

99.   As regards attacks in disputed areas, it was very  difficult  to  know
    whether they were ethnically motivated or were  the  consequence  of  a
    power issue.  The  disputed  areas  were  a  main  area  of  risk.   He
    considered Kurds to be at risk especially in the disputed areas because
    of their ethnicity.

100.  It was the case that  the  numbers  of  those  leaving  Iraq  now  was
    certainly reduced.  It was a complex pattern.  There was not a  massive
    surge of Iraqis leaving Iraq and it could be economic.

Dr Fatah

Written report

101.  In his very lengthy report  of  28  March  2012,  Dr  Fatah,  like  Dr
    George, addresses the general security situation in Iraq in some detail
    and then  goes  on  to  analyse  the  situation  in  the  five  central
    governorates in particular, dealing in especial detail with Kirkuk.  He
    also provides a detailed analysis of the KRG, assessing  in  particular
    security issues in the  region.   Thereafter  he  considers  relocation
    within Iraq, both within the GoI areas and the KRG, commenting  on  the
    Danish Fact-Finding Mission Report of 2010, contrasting its conclusions
    with his own findings in  respect  of  a  number  of  issues  including
    documentation matters, a topic on  which  he  sets  out  more  detailed
    evidence  subsequently.   He   includes   information   obtained   from
    interviews with several people, including a Kurdish police  officer  in
    Kirkuk, covering such matters as the security situation in  Kirkuk  and
    contrasting the position  of  Arabs  and  Kurds  in  Kirkuk.   He  also
    provides telephone interview transcripts with  several  asylum  seekers
    returned from European countries.

Oral evidence

102.  Dr Fatah said that he thought that figures cited in his report  showed
    that from 2010 to today the  killing  had  become  more  targeted,  for
    example bombs in cars.  It could not be  said  that  an  ordinary  Kurd
    would be at risk per se in Iraq.  You had to know where to go.  You had
    to be with someone local and to know where to  go.   An  ordinary  Kurd
    should not have a problem passing into an Arab area, but if  there  was
    political tension he would be at risk and there might be a reaction  to
    an incident.  Targeting could be  of  a  known  individual  or  of  the
    public.  There were always more civilians killed than security  people.
    Dr Fatah agreed that people in the KRG face very little  violence.   He
    was asked whether it was the same in the other governorates and he said
    that where there was one ethnic group  in  the  region  it  was  fairly
    stable, but in mixed areas such as Baghdad, Mosul, Salah Al-Din, Diyala
    and Kirkuk there was more violence.  It depended on the place.  He  was
    asked whether there were areas within, for example, the Tameen (Kirkuk)
    governorate without problems and he said that the patterns of  movement
    by people depended on the structure of  the  area.   The  violence  was
    never everywhere and there were random bombs.  He was asked  whether  a
    family in one part of Diyala, for example, could move to  another  part
    with a lesser level of violence and he said that it was possible that a
    person could move to a mainly Kurdish area there.  He was asked whether
    this was true for all the central governorates, that they could move to
    an area where they would be all right, and he said that this  would  be
    the case for a Sunni and a Shi'a.  He agreed that generally  in  Tameen
    or Diyala governorate a Sunni or a Shi'a in  their  own  majority  area
    would generally not be at risk of violence apart from general  violence
    unless they were a person in the UNHCR risk profile.  If a Kurd was  in
    a Kurdish area, there would be no problem, but he had not looked  at  a
    map of the violence and did not know what the distribution of  violence
    in Kirkuk was.  The violence did not prevent daily life from going  on,
    though people got killed.  There was a psychological impact.

103.  With regard to deaths, death by the roadside might  not  be  recorded.
    He was not sure if IBC would include every death, but those given  were
    sourced.  You could rely on trends.   The  graphs  all  took  the  same
    shape.  It was put to him that there did not seem to  be  any  increase
    since the US troops left and he said it was too early  to  say.   There
    were slightly higher figures, but only over a few  months.   There  had
    not been much change since 2010.

104.  He was asked  how  broad  would  support  networks  be  for  a  person
    relocating and he said that political groups were the best example  and
    that it was all around political groups.  If he were Sunni and  wanting
    to leave, for example, Kirkuk, then he would look  to  go  where  there
    were other Sunnis if you were from a big tribe.  Family was  important.
    You would look for the tribe initially, which would be Sunni or  Shi'a.
    He was asked whether, if a person was not influential in the tribe, the
    latter would  feel obliged to help him and he said not  the  tribe  but
    more a political organisation.  If a person had no influence, then they
    would look for a job.  It was put to  him  that  his   [705]  was  very
    general and he said that if he were from a city the neighbour would  be
    like a social network and like the tribe might  help  with  connections
    for jobs, etc.  It was put to him that although there were job problems
    for IDPs, there was no evidence of starvation or a humanitarian  crisis
    and he said he accepted that there was not a humanitarian  crisis,  but
    life was harsh.  It was put to him that most IDPs lived in  houses  and
    not in apartments or towns and he said  there  were  people  living  in
    camps.  HF was single and of working age and would have to find a  job.



105.  There were no more Kurdish neighbourhoods in Baghdad after  the  Shi'a
    Kurds were deported by Saddam Hussein. Kurds in Baghdad would  live  in
    mixed neighbourhoods.  Some had become Arabised.  He agreed that if you
    were a Kurd you would know where to  go.   There  were  checkpoints  to
    avoid.  With regard to the examples he gave immediately after [181]  of
    his report, it was suggested to him that it was often unclear  who  had
    attacked and why and who the victim was and he said you could tell from
    the figures.  Dr George had given an example of a sectarian attack.

106.  He said the Shi'a militia was powerful in Baghdad.   As  regards  risk
    to a Sunni Kurd who was a failed asylum seeker in Baghdad,  he  had  to
    know his way around and if he was in the wrong neighbourhood  he  would
    be at more risk.  There was more violence where  there  was  a  greater
    population.  He could not say how  the  first  appellants  could  avoid
    violence in Kirkuk.  As regards the departure of the US troops, it  had
    not reduced the exposure of civilians to high levels of violence.

BACKGROUND EVIDENCE

Statistics on Violence

107.  Before noting key statistics relating to conflict-related violence  in
    Iraq, we need to clarify our approach to the varying figures  given  by
    different data-gatherers. In  HMI  the  Tribunal  noted  the  need  for
    caution when analysing figures relating to  incidents  of  violence  in
    Iraq.  We sound the same note.   If  anything,  the  withdrawal  of  US
    troops appears to have resulted in  fewer  sources  of  rigorous  data-
    gathering: as noted by the FCO letter dated  7  April  2012,  with  the
    withdrawal of US  forces,  there  is  less  corroborated  reporting  of
    incidents.

108.  Before us the experts made much the same point  and  there  was  broad
    agreement between the parties that (1) allowance should continue to  be
    made for underreporting;  but  that  (2)  the  Iraq  Body  Count  (IBC)
    figures, being based on  actual  reports  of  specific  deaths,  afford
    reasonably reliable estimates.  As regards (1), we would agree with the
    respondent that this is not a fixed feature of  the  reporting  of  all
    armed conflicts but is based on the empirical evidence we have from the
    data gatherers themselves who continue to  report  on  Iraqi  violence.
               .

109.  We are conscious that there are other sources that give lower  figures
    for civilian casualties than IBC.  The latest Brookings Institute  Iraq
    Index, for example, gives recent figures for deaths ( for  2010,  2,500
    and 2011, 1,578) which are much lower than the IBC figures  (for  2010,
    4,053 and for 2011, 4,103). As accessed on 4 October 2012, the  figures
    IBC  gives  for  Jan-September  inclusive  total  2,157.  The   Special
    Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction (SIGIR) quarterly  report  of
    30 January 2012 also gives lower figures for civilian deaths (e.g.  for
    2011, 2,645).  The Iraq Health, Interior  and  Defence  Ministers  also
    give lower  figures  and  indeed,  as  noted  by  the  May  2012  UNHCR
    guidelines at p.44, "Iraqi  Governments  sources  provide  consistently
    lower casualty figures than media reports by international  observers".



110.  We continue nonetheless to  regard  the  IBC  figures  as  being  more
    reliable because of their use of multiple sources.  The IBC notes  that
    of the 4,087 recorded civilian deaths for 2011, "[e]vidence of these...
    was extracted from some 6,828 distinct reports  from  over  90  sources
    covering 1,884 incidents, each of which is openly  listed  on  the  IBC
    website".  (We note  that  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  also  utilise  these
    figures.) When considering the IBC figures, it must be  borne  in  mind
    that they do not include police deaths,  although  IBC  describes  this
    group as having been "a major target".  It may assist if we  produce  a
    graph showing the documented number of Iraqi civilian  fatalities  from
    2003 to August 2012.

      [pic]
111.  The IBC statistics of  civilian  casualties  disclose  two  things  in
    particular.  First, that the figures from 2009 onwards are  five  times
    lower than they were in 2006 and 2007 (whereas in 2006 and 2007 figures
    were 28,212 and 25,025 respectively, since 2009 the  figures  have  not
    risen above 4,704).  Second, that although there was a further drop  in
    2010 (to 4,045 from the  2009  figure  of  4,704)  there  has  been  no
    significant decrease since 2009 (the figure for 2011 being 4,087).   On
    the basis of IBC figures for Jan-September 2012 inclusive, 2012 appears
    to be on course to show broadly comparable figure to the 2011 one.

112.  One matter the Tribunal sought  to  ascertain  from  the  parties  was
    whether available studies clarified what was the ratio of those  killed
    to those injured (it being agreed that  a  working  definition  of  the
    latter category would be persons requiring hospital treatment following
    an incident of violence).  Whilst, there are some studies that  suggest
    that this ratio has decreased in recent years (e.g.  the  Lancet  study
    covering March 2003 - December 2010 gives a ratio of 2.5), we  continue
    to think we should  take  the  highest  ratio  suggested  by  reputable
    sources which it was agreed was in the region of between 4 to 1  and  7
    to 1.  The CSIS Report of 9  February  2011  states  that  as  a  rough
    estimate "injured and wounded would have totalled 5-7 times the  number
    killed" and notes that this ratio is far higher than in Afghanistan.

The inclusive approach

113.  In HMI at [75] the  Tribunal  explained  why  it  considered  that  in
    seeking to assess whether the Article 15(c) threshold was met  in  Iraq
    it had to adopt an inclusive approach.

114.  One aspect of the inclusive approach is  an  appreciation  that  there
    are threats to the physical safety and integrity  of  civilians  beyond
    those measured in the civilian  casualty  rates.   As  put  by  Michael
    Knights of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy in a report of
    16 February, 2012 entitled "A Violent New Year in  Iraq,  The  National
    Interest (cited at n. 217 of the May 2012  UNHCR  Guidelines),  "[m]ass
    casualty attacks tell only part of the story of violence in  Iraq,  and
    mortality statistics  overlook  the  targeted  nature  of  violence  in
    today's  Iraq,  where  a  high  proportion   of   victims   are   local
    progovernment community leaders. For every one person of this kind  who
    is killed, an exponential number of others are intimidated into passive
    support  for  insurgent  groups".  Whilst  our  principal  focus   when
    examining levels of violence is physical harm causing death or  injury,
    it is important that we also take account of indirect forms of violence
    such as threats, intimidation, blackmail, seizure of property, raids on
    homes and businesses, use of checkpoints to push  out  other  factions,
    kidnapping and extortion. To adopt Mr Fordham's metaphor, these factors
    mean that most Iraqis (outside the KRG) l continue to "live  under  the
    shadow of violence".

Iraq as a whole

115.  As already noted,  it  is  not  the  appellants'  position  that  Iraq
    overall is presently afflicted by a level of violence at or  above  the
    Article 15(c) threshold  and,  of  course,  it  has  not  been  UNHCR's
    position since 2009 that  it  is  either.   Indeed,  in  its  May  2012
    Guidelines UNHCR observes (see above [61]) that the  current  situation
    "does not allow for generalised  conclusions  on  the  basis  of  broad
    geographical  distinctions".   Nevertheless  it  is  clear   from   the
    background evidence that Iraq remains a country seriously  affected  by
    violence.

116.  Up until 2011, Iraq had been ranked by the Global  Peace  Index  (GPI)
    as the world's least peaceful country for four consecutive  years.  The
    5th edition of the GPI for 2011 ranks Iraq as the world's second least-
    peaceful country after Somalia.  In its July 2011 report  the  Minority
    Rights Group placed Iraqis fourth  on  a  list  of  people  most  under
    threat, after Somalis, Sudanese and Afghans.

117.  According to  UNHCR's  statistical  overview  of  asylum  applications
    lodged in Europe and selected non-European industrialised countries, 18
    October 2011, Iraq is the fourth largest country of  origin  of  asylum
    seekers.  The proportion of its population who  are  displaced  persons
    (15.4%) is the third highest in the world according to data from UNHCR.



118.  According to  an  August  2010  IOM  study  identifying  an  estimated
    339,000 Iraqis as being returning IDPs, 55% of returnee families  cited
    improved security as their primary reason  for  return.   At  the  same
    time, 25% of returnee families say they have no  access  to  healthcare
    and only 61% have water in their homes.

Parties to the conflict

State and coalition actors

119.  The withdrawal of US troops was completed on 18  December  2011.   The
    Iraqi security apparatus is said to number roughly 900,000 soldiers and
    police. Different figures can be found for just how many of the overall
    number of approx. 900,000 are police: according to the UNSC  Report  of
    SG on Children and Armed Conflict - Iraq,  15  June  2011,  the  police
    number approximately 400,000; according to a source cited by  the  2012
    UNHCR Guidelines, n.217, the figure for police  is  650,000  out  of  a
    total of 939,000 ISF.

120.  The pro-government Awakening Councils or Sahwa  are  now  regarded  as
    part of the Iraqi security forces (Dr Fatah,  [72]).   Dr  Fatah  notes
    that the size of the Kurdish peshmerga forces and the  security  forces
    under the administration of the PUK and KDP is about 190,000.

Insurgents

121.  The main Shi'a insurgent groups are the Sadr militia or  Promised  Day
    Brigade, various Shi'a Factions like  the  Special  Groups,  and  Shi'a
    extremist groups such as Kata'ib Hizbullah (KH).   It  remains  unclear
    whether the Mahdi Army, responsible for a great  deal  of  politically-
    orientated violence since 2003, has disbanded.

122.  The main Sunni  insurgent  groups,  estimated  at  around  200,000  in
    number, include former  Ba'athist  regime  elements,  Sunni  Islamists,
    Salafists, remnants of the Kurdish Ansar al-Islam and foreign  Islamist
    volunteers.  AQI remains the group responsible for  most  of  the  mass
    casualty attacks since the US withdrawal.

123.  According to the SIGIR 30 October 2011  Quarterly  Report  to  the  US
    Congress, a US commander described the decline in the number of foreign
    fighters as "dramatic".  Whilst AQI continues to operate  primarily  in
    regions with  majority  Sunni  Arab  populations,  particularly  around
    Baghdad  and  Ninewah,  it  appears  unable  to  command  territory  or
    population  centres.   According  to  JSCRA  Iraq,   21   March   2011,
    "[t]errorist insurgent groups have been whittled down to a  hard  core,
    with many less committed elements having been paved  away.   Completely
    reducing this remaining cadre will be a slow and difficult process".

124.  Many militias have ties with criminal networks.  Violent crime  is  at
    high levels. According to the 2012 UNHCR Guidelines p  8,  "[c]rime  is
    widespread and  some  armed  groups  reportedly  engage  in  extortion,
    kidnapping and armed robberies to fund their other,  politically  -  or
    religiously, or ideologically - motivated activities,  conflating  acts
    of persecution and criminality..."

Level and intensity of violence

125.  In HMI at [260] the Tribunal said:

         "Like UNHCR we are wary of assuming that various  insurgent  groups
         will not, once again, when it suits, revert to tactics such as  the
         bombing of market places  that  maximise  civilian  casualties  and
         deploy methods suited to achieving that. However, we do think  that
         it can properly be said that in  August/early  September  2010  the
         various insurgent groups, AQI included, are weaker organisationally
         and militarily and that the evidence does  not  suggest  that  this
         will change in the foreseeable future. To that extent we  do  think
         it is correct to regard the levels of  indiscriminate  violence  as
         being not only lower presently but likely not to revert to anything
         like the levels  they  reached  in  2006/2007.  Whilst  the  US  is
         committed to a responsible  "draw-down"  it  is  clear  that  there
         continues to be a great deal of US  and  international  involvement
         in, and support for, the Iraqi government. The main Sunni and Shi'a
         parties  and  organisations  appear   increasingly   committed   to
         distributing power through civil rather than military means."

126.  There are significant items of evidence that indicate that the  nature
    and intensity of the violence in Iraq is less serious than  it  was  in
    2009.  For example, the Global Peace  Index  notes  that  Iraq's  score
    "improved substantially" in 2011 and that (albeit at slow rates)  there
    has continued to be year-on-year improvements every  year  since  2007.
    And according to UN statistics, there were a total  of  5,470  security
    incidents in 2011, as compared to 8,909 and  9,213  such  incidents  in
    2009 and 2010 respectively.

127.  On the other hand, there are some other  studies  that  consider  that
    violence in Iraq is again getting worse. For example, as noted  by  the
    2012 UNHCR Guidelines  at  n.38,  Michael  Knights  of  the  Washington
    Institute for Near East Policy, which collates  security  metrics  from
    the  Iraqi  government,  observes  that  Iraq  witnessed  36  confirmed
    attempted mass-casualty attacks in January 2012, a significant increase
    of the average of 23 attacks a month in the last quarter  of  2011.  It
    further notes 561 reported attacks in January  2012,  compared  to  494
    reported attacks in December 2011 and 302 reported attacks in  November
    2011. The Iraq Brookings Institute as accessed  4  October  2012  notes
    that the UN has reported that in the first  6  months  of  2012,  2,101
    Iraqis were killed in violent attacks compared to  1,832  in  the  same
    period of 2011. The SIGIR report of 30 July 2012 (accessed on the same)
    date notes that a series of attacks on 23 July  in  Taji,  Baghdad  and
    Kirkuk resulted in the largest one day death toll in more than 2 years.



128.  The thrust of the background evidence is  that  overall  there  is  no
    clear trend demonstrating either an increase or decrease in  the  level
    and intensity of violence assessed on a year by year basis.  So far  as
    concerns the figures for civilian casualties for 2011, they are similar
    to those for 2010.  It was agreed by both Dr George and Dr  Fatah  that
    January was an unusual month and that overall there was no evidence  to
    show any increase in that   level  in  2012.  The  Brookings  Institute
    figures for the first 6 months of 2012 suggest that  2012  may  see  an
    increase over the figure for 2011 but only a very small one.

129.   So  far  as  concerns  trends  relating  to  the  level  of  civilian
    casualties, the May 2012 UNHCR Guidelines state that, that  taking  the
    most recent figures, "it appears that there is no  noticeable  downward
    trend in civilian casualty figures since mid 2009"  and  that,  in  the
    words of the IBC in a January  2012  report,  a  "persistent  low-level
    conflict" has taken root in the country, which "will continue  to  kill
    civilians  at  a  similar  rate  for  years  to  come  ("an  impassable
    minimum")." The great majority of  civilian  deaths  and  injuries  are
    caused by the insurgents, although according  to  the  IBC  in  January
    2012, the rate of civilian deaths caused by the ISF has increased  from
    96 in 2010 to 141 in 2011.

130.  So far as concerns combatant casualty figures, all  sources  record  a
    decline in figures.  The  CSIS  Report,  Iraq:  Patterns  of  Violence,
    Casualty  Trends  and  Emerging  Security  Threats,  9  February   2011
    discloses that since 2009 there have  been  roughly  similar  falls  in
    combatant casualty figures as there  have  been  in  civilian  casualty
    figures.

131.  It would appear that the use of IEDs has become the modus operandi  of
    militants for the last two years.  That appears to  show  a  change  of
    tactics as insurgents and militias are using  smaller  bombs  and  more
    indirect tactics (source cited by Dr George, [172]).  At the same time,
    although they only account for a  small  proportion  of  attacks,  mass
    casualty attacks have remained a key part of insurgent tactics ([176]).

132.  The USDD Report, Measuring Stability and Security in Iraq, March  2010
    noted that the pattern of  violence  emerging  was  that  of  periodic,
    spectacular, multiple-device high-profile attacks  as  the  extremists'
    preferred  method  to  create  outsized   effects   whilst   harbouring
    resources.

133.  Dr George said that "there does not appear to be any firm,  consistent
    trend towards increased or decreased use of more targeted,  or  indeed,
    more indiscriminate, modes of attack".

Targeted violence

134.  In line with our earlier observations at [42], rather than  conceiving
    targeted and indiscriminate violence as  dichotomous  it  would  appear
    that they are both part of a   complex  spectrum.   Thus,  for  example
    within the category of targeted violence, there  can  be  (1)  specific
    targeting, i.e. very precise attacks, e.g.  by  way  of  an  assassin's
    bullet; (2) general targeting, i.e. targeting which by  virtue  of  its
    method and sometimes purpose harms civilians as well as their  intended
    targets e.g. a long-range  mortar  fired  at  a  police  station  in  a
    civilian area or a suicide bombing aimed at a mosque belonging  to  one
    refugee group or another. And of course, as we shall  return  to  in  a
    moment, sometimes civilians as such can be targeted.

Civilian casualties

135.  The Danish Immigration Service report  from  fact-finding  mission  to
    Amman,  Jordan  and  Baghdad  of  September  2010  concluded  that  the
    proportion of civilian casualties had increased steadily, with  figures
    for 2009 showing over 70% of all casualties classified as civilians and
    one could no longer speak of an improvement in security for Iraqis.  In
    Kirkuk the situation was particularly fragile.

136.  The ICRC briefing dated 8 November 2011 states that:

         "The level of violence linked to the conflict is slowly decreasing,
         but its cost remains high in terms of civilian casualties.  Central
         Iraq and Baghdad  especially  remain  volatile,  unpredictable  and
         often dangerous due to acts of violence that still claim the  lives
         of tens of persons every month.


         Civilians often die in random attacks designed to spread  fear  and
         discord among the general populace.  Even in  attacks  designed  to
         destabilise state services, civilians  are  often  the  unfortunate
         victims."


Targeting of civilians

137.  Whilst the overall casualty figures have  not  changed  significantly,
    the evidence shows that there has been an increase within  the  overall
    figures in the number of incidents of targeted violence.  According  to
    Dr Fatah, the use of targeted  attacks  "has  only  recently  become  a
    feature of violence in Iraq" ([125]).  Of  course,  what  is  meant  by
    "targeted" violence is not always clear, since it  is  possible  to  be
    generally targeted (e.g. by being a member of an identifiable group) as
    well as specifically targeted and studies  also  refer  to  "civilians"
    being targeted: see above at [42], [133].

138.  There appears to be a trend  towards  increasing  targeting  of  Iraqi
    security forces and government employees, although the UNAMI Report for
    the January to December 2010 period makes clear  that  in  addition  to
    public  officials,  persons  whose  jobs  are  clearly  civilian,  e.g.
    community and religious leaders,  journalists,  medical  and  education
    professionals, were the main targets.  The UN  SIGIR  Report  dated  26
    November 2010 states that with US forces being less of a target  "armed
    opposition groups have changed  tactics,  relying  more  on  long-range
    weapons that target indiscriminately.  It is also clear that the  means
    and methods used in a number of attacks - Vehicle Borne IEDs and  Small
    Arms Fire are frequently carried out in public spaces heedless  of  the
    toll on civilian lives...".

139.  However, even if the trend is towards greater  targeting  of  soldiers
    and police, it is clear that attacks targeting civilians continue.  The
    various reports reveal that in addition  to  government  buildings  and
    officials, assailants have  targeted  a  wide  range  of  places  where
    civilians live or  frequent:  embassies,  hotels,  factories,  markets,
    mosques, checkpoints.   People  gathering  for  religious  pilgrimages,
    weddings and funerals have also been attacked  mainly  in  Shi'a  areas
    (HRW, 2011). A vivid example of an attack wounding  many  civilians  is
    provided in the SIGIR  Quarterly  Report  dated  30  April  2012  which
    contains the following entry: "24 January: car bomb killed 11 people in
    Sadr City; multiple vehicle-borne improvised explosive  device  (VBIED)
    and improvised explosive device (IED) attacks killed 12 and wounded  80
    in predominantly Shi'a areas of Baghdad."

Combatant casualties

140.  According to the 2010 US  State  Department  Report  on  Terrorism  in
    Iraq, the main targets  of  bomb  attacks  during  2010  "were  against
    security forces, government buildings and western targets".

141.  Among the state actors in Iraq  the  police  have  been  a  particular
    target.  According to the IBC the police have  been  "a  major  target"
    with "by far the largest toll of any professional group".   It  records
    that between 2003-2011 there have been 8,991 police deaths. At p.15 the
    2012 UNHCR Guidelines note that:


         "members of the Iraqi Police are often particularly targeted:  they
         do not have heavy weapons and equipment and receive  less  training
         than the Iraqi Army, and are accordingly reportedly considered  the
         weakest element of the ISP. In 2011, according to Iraqi  Government
         statistics, about 40% of Iraqis killed were ISF members,  including
         609 Iraqi Police and 458 soldiers".

142.  For insurgent casualties: the IBC has estimated that 20,000 "enemy"  -
    i.e. insurgent/anti-Coalition - deaths in respect of the period January
    2004-December 2009.

Comparison with other conflicts

143.  In the body of evidence before us there is some  material  seeking  to
    compare levels of violence in  Iraq  with  those  prevailing  in  other
    countries. According to the CSIS study by Cordemann  and  Khazai,  Iraq
    and the Challenge of Continuing Violence,  6  February  2012,  in  2011
    there were fewer attacks, fewer deaths and fewer acts of hostage-taking
    place in Iraq than in Afghanistan although the number  of  wounded  was
    higher.  However the CSIS Report on the Real Outcome of the Iraq War, 8
    March 2012, notes that data from  the  UN  National  Counter  Terrorism
    Center (NCTC) show  that  Iraq  had  a  consistently  higher  level  of
    violence than Afghanistan during 2009-2011 with no consistent reduction
    in violence since mid-2009.    In  AK  (Afghanistan)  [2012]  UKUT  163
    (IAC) at [201]-[207]) the Tribunal dealt with the principal findings of
    the CSIS study in relation to a comparison of the  armed  conflicts  in
    Afghanistan and Iraq and also submissions as to  the  relative  figures
    for levels of violence in Somalia.

144.  In a similar vein, in relation to the  comparison  between  levels  of
    violence in Iraq and Somalia, Mr Fordham (whose  submissions  we  shall
    summarise in due course) pointed out that according to AMM [2011]  UKUT
    445 (IAC) in Mogadishu in Somalia, a  city  of  around  2  million  in
    population, there were 918 deaths in 2010.

Sunnis and Shi'as

145.  As regards identity as a Sunni or Shi'a, the  population  of  Iraq  is
    about 55-60% Shi'a and 12-15% Sunni Arab. In the 2012 UNHCR Eligibility
    Guidelines at pp.25-6 it is said that "[d]epending  on  the  individual
    circumstances of the case, persons with the  profiles  described  below
    are likely to be in need of international refugee protection on account
    of their religion or perceived religious (or  non-religious)  identity"
    and under (a) states the following:

         "a) Sunnis and Shi'as

         While open sectarian violence between Arab Sunnis and  Arab  Shi'as
         ended  in  2008,  armed  Sunni  groups  continue  to  target  Shi'a
         civilians with the apparent aim of  reigniting  sectarian  tension.
         Sectarian-motivated  violence   includes:   mass-casualty   attacks
         targeting Shit'ite civilians and pilgrims; threats  against  Sunnis
         in Shi'a majority areas and Shi'as in Sunni majority areas; as well
         as targeted killings of both Sunni and Shi'a clerics and  scholars.
         Baathist ties and/or purported engagement in  terrorism  are  often
         equated to sectarianism by the Iraqi Government and the  ISF.  Many
         individuals accused of Ba'athist ties  and/or  terrorism  and  thus
         perceived to be engaged in sectarianism are of Sunni background.

         i. Shi'a civilans, including pilgrims

         Shi'a civilians - in particular, Shi'as performing their  religious
         duties at the mosque, during funerals  or  mournings,  or  when  on
         pilgrimage - are a key target for Sunni armed groups. The main  aim
         of these attacks appears to be to  divide  Iraqis  along  sectarian
         lines in order to reignite tensions and violence. Attacks are  most
         frequent  on  religious  holidays,  when  thousands  of   pilgrims,
         including from Iran, march to and gather at  Shi'a  holy  sites  in
         Baghdad, Kerbala and Najef, but also in  other  areas  of  southern
         Iraq. Attacks on Shi'a pilgrims and civilians have also taken place
         in the mixed governorates of  Diyala,  Ninewa,  Salah  Al-Din   and
         Kirkuk, where Shi'a Turkmen, Shabak  or  Kurds  (Faili  Kurds)  may
         also be targeted, and in the mainly Sunni  Al-  Anbar  Governorate.
         Shi'a civilians have also frequently been attacked in their  homes,
         in restaurants  or  other  public  places  in  predominantly  Shi'a
         governorates, towns  or neighbourhoods.

         ii. Sunni Arabs in Majority Shi'a Arab areas  and  Shi'a  Arabs  in
         Majority Sunni Arab Areas

         During the period of heightened  sectarian  violence  in  2006  and
         2007, the social and demographic make-up of many areas were altered
         as Sunni and Shi'a armed groups sought  to  seize  control  and  to
         cleanse "mixed" areas of the rival sect. This occurred  principally
         in Baghdad, Iraq's most diverse city, but also in the  mixed  towns
         and villages surrounding it. During that period,  many  members  of
         both sects were internally displaced or fled abroad. To date,  most
         of  Baghdad's  formerly   mixed   neighbourhoods   remain   largely
         homogenized, preventing many from returning to their  former  areas
         of residence. In only a few neighbourhoods of Baghdad do members of
         both sects live side by side. Most returnees have returned to areas
         under the control of their  own  community.  The  recent  political
         crisis, combined with a series of attacks  by  Sunni  armed  groups
         targeting Shi'a neighbourhoods and pilgrims, has deepened sectarian
         tensions.  Anecdotal  evidence  from  UNHCR  protection  monitoring
         activities  suggests  that  some  Sunnis  are  leaving  mixed   and
         predominantly Shi'a neighbourhoods in Baghdad fearing  retaliation.
         While previously many Iraqi Sunnis fled  to  Syria  and  Jordan  to
         escape sectarian violence, reportedly most  now  seek  to  relocate
         within Iraq given tightened visa requirements  in  these  countries
         and the ongoing violence in Syria.

         Both Sunnis and Shi'as living in or returning  to  areas  in  which
         they would  constitute  a  minority  may  be  exposed  to  targeted
         violence on account of their religious  identity.  Both  Shi'as  in
         Sunni  dominated  neighbourhoods  and  Sunnis  in   Shi'a-dominated
         neighbourhoods  have  reportedly  been  subjected  to   threatening
         letters demanding that they vacate  their  homes.  In  cases  where
         individuals do  not  comply,  there  are  reports  of  violence  or
         harassment, including killings."

146.  At  (b)  on  p.26  the  Guidelines  deal  with  members  of  religious
    minorities Christians, Sabaean-Mandaeans, Yazidis, Shabak, Kaka'i etc.

Kurds

147.  As regards Kurdish ethnicity, no  major  report  classes  Kurds  as  a
    minority group in Iraq; Kurds are one  of  the  second  largest  ethnic
    groups in Iraq, comprising some  20%  of  the  population.   Dr  George
    estimates that there are 1.2 million Kurds living in Iraq  outside  the
    KRG (compared with 3.8 million in the  KRG)  concentrated  in  Baghdad,
    Kirkuk, Mosul and Diyala.

148.  At [581] of his report, Dr Fatah notes that the security situation  in
    the KRG is rather different from the rest of  Iraq.   The  KRG  is  not
    plagued by daily insurgent attacks and bombings, such as occur  in  the
    central and southern governorates, although there  are  occasional  car
    bombs, kidnappings and insurgent attacks.  However, he says, the region
    is still a tribal society, and thus honour crimes,  tribal  feuds,  and
    political assassinations are part of daily life in the KRG.

149.  Dr George, at [141]-[148] of his main  report  says  that  Kurds  have
    been targeted in Iraq south of the KRG zone, and there is a history  of
    antagonism between the Kurds and the  Sunni  Arabs.   Kurds  living  in
    Sunni areas have been attacked by insurgents  as  "collaborators"  with
    the US occupiers and driven from their homes.  He  cites  a  number  of
    instances of attacks on Kurds, particularly in mixed Arab/Kurdish areas
    in the north, where there are tensions over oil.

Former Ba'athists

150.  According to the UNHCR  2012 Guidelines at p.  18,  "[t]oday,  members
    of the former Ba'ath Party or  the  former  regime's  armed  forces  or
    security  and  intelligence   services   are   reportedly   no   longer
    systematically singled  out  for  attack  by  armed  groups",  although
    "[t]hey may still be targeted in individual cases"...". The same report
    notes at p. 18, however, that the Iraqi  Government  continues  to  use
    accusations of "Ba'athism" to sideline political opponents  and  settle
    political scores and in October/November 2011 more than 600 individuals
    were arrested on charges of terrorism and alleged Ba'ath Party ties".

Population displacement

151.  The Brookings Iraq Index November 2011 records  that  between  October
    2009 and July 2011 there had been  400,740  returns  to  Iraq.   As  at
    January 2011 there were estimated to be  1,343,568  post-2006  IDPs  in
    Iraq. According to the  UNSG  Report,  July  2011,  approximately  1.75
    Iraqis  are  estimated  to  be  internally  displaced  or  refugees  in
    neighbouring countries.  According to UNHCR's Iraq Returnee Monitoring,
    August-December 2011, the year  2011  saw  a  significant  increase  in
    registered returns compared to previous  years.  The  reasons  included
    stabilisation in the security situation and improvement in the economic
    situation. UNHCR's Monthly Statistical Update on Return - January 2012,
    lists the number of  IDP  returns  for  the  period  February  2011  to
    February 2012 as 212, 490 across all governorates. The UNHCR Iraq  Fact
    Sheet, July 2012 estimates the number of IDPs to be 1,332,382 and lists
    the number of IDP returns in 2012 up to that point to be 133,610,  with
    Baghdad being the main governorate of return accounting for some 72%.

152.  Whilst there continue to be new displacements, according to  the  2012
    UNHCR Guidelines,  "new  instances  of  large-scale  displacement  have
    decreased significantly in 2010 and 2011". In broad terms, this  is  as
    true of the five central governorates as of Iraq as a whole  and  where
    there are displacements in the  former  they  often  happen  by  moving
    elsewhere within the area, e.g. in October 2010 nearly  1,000  families
    were displaced within the Diyala Governorate from Jalawla, Saadiya  and
    Qaratap to Khanaqeen, Kalar and Kifri. A  significant  number  of  IDPs
    originating in Kirkuk or Baghdad  governorates  have  relocated  within
    their home governorates or within one of the  five  central  provinces.
    According to the UNHCR Iraq Returnee Monitoring  August  2011  results,
    more refugees returned to Baghdad in 2011 than was the case in 2010 and
    64% did so out of a positive response to improvements in  the  security
    and  political  situation.   Further,  in  terms  of  the  geographical
    distribution of IDPs, the  IOM  evidence  indicates  that  the  largest
    numbers are in Baghdad and the third largest in Kirkuk.

153.  Socio-economic conditions for IDPs are  dealt  with  below  at  [162]-
    [167].

State weakness and protection issues

154.  According to the  UNAMI  Report  covering  the  January-December  2010
    period, significant  problems  remain  with  law  enforcement  and  the
    administration of justice, especially in relation to the  provision  of
    and respect for due process and fair trial rights.

155.  Citing the US State Department Report for 2010, published in  February
    2011, the 2012 UNHCR Guidelines state that:

         "In Iraq,  the  main  perpetrators  of  persecution  are  non-state
         actors. However, protection by national authorities is unlikely  to
         be available in most cases, given  that  the  national  authorities
         have limited capacity to enforce law and order. The ISF, which  now
         have around 930,000 members are widely acknowledged as increasingly
         capable and united, reportedly remain vulnerable to corruption, and
         infiltration by militants, and continue to be  themselves  a  major
         target of attacks. In addition, political disunity  has  reportedly
         limited the effectiveness of the   ISP" (p.13).

156.  At p.49 it states that in the  KRG,  however,  generally  the  Kurdish
    authorities are able and willing to provide protection.

157.  In reply to a question from the Tribunal the respondent has  confirmed
    that her current position on protection has  changed  since  June  2009
    when her OGN stated at 3.6.8 that the authorities in Iraq  were  unable
    to provide sufficiency of protection.  Her position since October  2010
    has been that the security situation in  Iraq  has  improved  and  that
    whilst ongoing violence in Iraq undermines the government's ability  to
    protect human rights, there is no general inability  of  the  state  to
    protect its population.

158.  Dr George stated that he endorsed UNHCR's view as stated in  its  2009
    Eligibility Guidelines, with reference to central  and  southern  Iraq,
    that  "generally  protection  by  national  authorities  will  not   be
    available,  given  that  the  national  authorities  have  yet  limited
    capacity to enforce law and  order,  the  ISF  may  be  infiltrated  by
    radical elements  and  the  judiciary  is  prone  to  intimidation  and
    corruption".

159.  Dr Fatah assesses the Iraqi authorities' capacity to protect those  in
    need as weak.  The police  and  security  forces  are  ill-trained  and
    infiltration by insurgents  within  the  state  security  apparatus  is
    extensive.  In the political and security vacuum, non-state actors  are
    operating actively across the territory.  The absence of a  centralised
    state enables conflict between regions, governorates  and  the  central
    government and allows local rulers the freedom to create  fiefdoms  and
    solidify their own power bases.

160.  Corruption is  rife.   Transparency  International's  2011  Corruption
    Index, which measures the perceived levels of public sector corruption,
    placed Iraq at 175  on  a  list  of  185  countries.   The  2012  UNHCR
    Guidelines note that "[t]he persistent problem of corruption is said to
    prevent progress  with  respect  to  governance,  public  services  and
    security in Iraq. Efforts to combat corruption are  reported  hampered,
    inter alia, by an inadequate legal and  institutional  framework,  weak
    parliamentary  oversight,  ongoing   attacks   against   anticorruption
    officials, as well as government interference and political pressures."
    All major reports note that  the  rule  of  law  in  Iraq  is  lacking,
    although branches of law enforcement are making progress.  The judicial
    system is highly vulnerable to political pressure.  Traditional systems
    of social and legal protection have been severely  compromised  by  the
    conflict.  The Economist Intelligence Unit paper  January  2011  states
    that in addition to the malady of corruption, the  unclear  delineation
    of power between the government in  Baghdad  and  the  KRG,  the  local
    authorities and the tribally-oriented Awakening Movement "also  hinders
    governance".

161.  The Brookings Institute notes that a new Index of  State  Weakness  in
    the Developing World, as of 27 October 2011, lists Iraq fourth  out  of
    141 weakest states.  On the Economist Intelligence Unit 2010  Democracy
    Index Iraq ranked 112th out of 167 countries (COIS, August 2011, 7.07).
      Another  aspect  of  governance  in  Iraq  concerns  compliance  with
    international human rights norms.  Major reports, e.g. those by Amnesty
    International 2011 and  Human  Rights  Watch  2011  and  the  US  State
    Department Report 2011 continue to regard human  rights  conditions  in
    Iraq as extremely poor, albeit there has been a slight improvement.

Socio-economic conditions

162.  According to January 2009 statistics cited  in  the  COIS,  30  August
    2011, unemployment in Iraq is 18% and a further 10% of the labour force
    are part-time workers.  According to the UNSG Report, 7 July 2011,  the
    country's poverty index remains high (22.9%). The  UNICEF  Humanitarian
    Action for Children, 2011 report states that 23% of  Iraqis  reportedly
    live on less than US $2  per  day  (cited  in  2012  UNHCR  Guidelines,
    p.165). Illiteracy is also high. There are ongoing  problems  with  the
    delivery of essential services.  Public services continue to be plagued
    by severe deficiencies, notably widespread  corruption.   Iraq's  crime
    rate is high.  According to Dr George, the  great  majority  of  Iraqis
    depend heavily on subsidised rations ([224]).

163.  In the 30 June 2012 issue  of  Measuring  Stability  and  Security  in
    Iraq, a New York consulting firm is quoted as ranking Baghdad  as  last
    of 221 cities in a survey of quality of  life  and  personal  security,
    describing it as 'the world's least safe city'.

164.  According to Dr George,  there  is  an  economic  crisis  and  housing
    shortage afflicting Iraq.  Persons without  a  family  support  network
    would encounter difficulties finding a means of  supporting  themselves
    and places to live (at [221], [61]-[71]).  Access  to  jobs  relies  on
    corruption, patronage, nepotism or being a political appointee: a Wasta
    (person of influence) is needed.

165.  The ICRC Report, 29 March 2012, states that Iraq is the  country  most
    heavily contaminated by  unexploded  munitions  and  access  to  public
    services, such as  clean  water  and  public  health  care,  remains  a
    challenge for many.

166.  According to IMF and  CIA  World  Factbook  figures,  Iraq's  GDP  has
    increased 11% in 2011, making it one  of  the  world's  fastest-growing
    economies. The January 2011  Inspector  General  Report  commenting  on
    reconstruction noted that the growth rate of Iraq's GDP has surged from
    a reported 2.6% in 2010 to 11.5% in 2011 and 11% in 2012, "placing Iraq
    amongst the world's fastest  growing  economies".  Since  mid-2009  oil
    export earnings have returned to levels  seen  before  Operation  Iraqi
    Freedom.  As global  oil  prices  remained  high,  government  revenues
    increased  accordingly.   However  the  GoI  remain   hard-pressed   to
    translate macroeconomic gains into  an  improved  standard  of  living.
    Iraq still ranked only 161st in the world in per  capita  income  (CSIS
    Study, "The Outcome of Invasion: US and Iranian  Strategic  Competition
    in Iraq, November 28, 2011).

167.  According to the UN Development Assistance Framework Iraq,  2011-2014,
    nearly 100% of Iraqis receive  food  and  non-food  items  through  the
    Public Distribution System (PDS)  although  the  system  has  met  with
    challenges. The 2012 UNHCR Guidelines note evidence  that  the  overall
    food situation has improved (p.51).  The prevalence of food  insecurity
    is estimated at 3%.  However, poverty is still widespread in Iraq.

International assistance

168.  Several UN and numerous international NGOs and local NGOs are  present
    in Iraq, usually working alongside relevant Iraqi state  agencies  such
    as the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Human Rights and the Ministry of
    Displacement and Migration.  Dr George describes the cumulative  impact
    of these bodies as significant (at [228]).

169.  According to an NCCI April 2011 Report,  there  are  estimated  to  be
    between 8,000-12,000  traditional  and  modern  "CSOs"  (Civil  Society
    Organisations) in Iraq which provide support for local  communities  on
    religious, tribal, sectarian and ethnic lines.  Their rapid growth  has
    been fuelled by the  international  humanitarian  community's  pressing
    need  to  find  local  parties  for  project   implementation.    These
    organisations compensate to some extent for the inability of the GoI to
    provide social services and promote economic development.

170.  In 2011 the US government provided more than 225  million  dollars  in
    humanitarian assistance.

Returns packages

171.  The IOM set up its IOM-Iraq Mission in April 2003.  Since then it  has
    channelled more than $76 million into projects for  Iraq.  It  provides
    emergency food and non-food items as well as integration assistance and
    durable solutions.  It has established a Programme for  Human  Security
    and Stabilisation in Iraq, which aims for the urgent  stabilisation  of
    disenfranchised Iraqi families  and  communities  by  providing  socio-
    economic reintegration initiatives as alternatives to  armed  conflict.
    It has a Regional Operations Centre which, among other things,  assists
    voluntary  returns  and  supports  the  Ministry  of  Displacement  and
    Migration (MoDM) in developing its institutional framework.

172.  Refugee Action have several programmes  which  provide  assistance  to
    returnees, such as AVRIM, which explains what support the returnee  may
    be entitled to under the Assisted Voluntary Return  Irregular  Migrants
    Programme (AVRIM); a programme explaining  what  support  is  available
    under the Assisted Voluntary Returns for Families and Children (AVRFC),
    including financial  support;  and  a  programme  explaining  available
    support under the Voluntary Assisted Return and  Integration  Programme
    (VARRP), again including financial support.

173.  Assistance is also available from UNHCR.  $100 per adult and  $50  per
    child, up to a maximum of $500  per  family  may  be  provided.   UNHCR
    Return Integration & Community Centres (RICC) in Iraq  provide  support
    and referral services to government and other relevant bodies to assist
    in return and reintegration.  UNHCR Protection Assistance Centres (PAC)
    and mobile teams provide  free  legal  counselling  and  assistance  in
    obtaining civil status documents as  well  as  social  counselling  and
    other referrals.  Further UNHCR assistance includes access to  shelters
    and help with water and sanitation.  UNHCR has been informed  that  the
    Government of Iraq (GoI) may provide assistance to  eligible  returnees
    (i.e. people who fled between 01/01/06 and  01/01/08,  being  displaced
    for not less than eight months outside Iraq; people who fled  Iraq  one
    year prior to 09/04/03 and returned after 09/04/03; formerly internally
    displaced returnees who fled from their place of origin in  Iraq  after
    01/01/06 to 01/01/08 and  registered  with  MoDM  in  the  location  of
    displacement).  Such assistance may  include  up  to  1  million  Iraqi
    Dinars (Return Grant, proposed to be increased to 1.5 million as of May
    2010) and assistance with utility bills  and  regaining  public  sector
    employment.

Returns to Baghdad International Airport (BIAP)

174.  We received a considerable body of evidence relating to the  treatment
    experienced by returnees from the UK on June 2010  charter  flights  in
    particular.

175.  The issue was raised  before  the  Tribunal  in   HM1.   The  evidence
    included a witness statement dated 8 July 2010, from  Mark  Walker,  an
    Assistant Director in the Country Specific Policy  Team  in  the  UKBA.
    Among other things, Mr Walker said that  the  UKBA  did  not  routinely
    monitor the treatment of individual returnees, and IOM did not  monitor
    voluntary  returns.   There  is   a   detailed   description   of   the
    circumstances surrounding the 9 June 2010  and  16  June  2010  charter
    flights to Baghdad.  With regard to  the  former,  eleven  people  were
    returned, all on EU letters, detained at the airport, seen by  a  judge
    on 14 June and, in the case of  one,  released,  in  the  case  of  the
    others, who were found to be from the KRG, flown to Erbil on the  16th,
    nine being released by the 21st, the last by the 28th.  The periods  of
    delay before release in the cases of the 16th  June  returnees  (42  in
    total) were similar (10 days maximum).  Restraint had to be employed on
    the flight in the case of three of the returnees.  The entire  boarding
    process was recorded and has been reviewed.   The  UKBA's  Professional
    Standards Unit (PSU) was conducting an investigation  into  allegations
    of mistreatment of some of the returnees, as  a  consequence  of  media
    allegations, but no complaint of mistreatment had been made directly to
    the UKBA.  Subsequently (14 December  2010),  the  PSU  concluded  that
    claims of mistreatment from six people  made  to  UNHCR  could  not  be
    substantiated to the required level of proof.

176.  As regards issues of ill-treatment of individuals while  in  detention
    at  BIAP,  Karen  Abdel-Hady,  a  Deputy  Director  in  UKBA's  Returns
    Directorate states (statement dated 22 November 2011)  that  UKBA  does
    not have jurisdiction to conduct such investigations, though  enquiries
    were made by UKBA's Migration Delivery Officer (MDO) based in  Baghdad.
    These enquiries led to only limited responses,  Iraqi  Al-Amal  stating
    that they were  not  aware  of  returnees  facing  mistreatment  during
    detention at BIAP, but noting the significant  number  of  accounts  of
    detainees being abused while  in  detention  in  Iraq  and  the  Danish
    Ambassador to Iraq stating that he had no information of  such  alleged
    mistreatment, though he was of the view that the level of human  rights
    monitoring of detainees in Iraq had deteriorated over the  last  twelve
    months.  A representative of the MoDM declined to comment on  questions
    relating to the treatment of returnees and issues around  human  rights
    monitoring, and it is relevant also to note that Al-Amal  said  it  was
    difficult for independent organisations to  gain  access  to  those  in
    detention at the airport.

177.  A letter from Amnesty International of 15 June  2010  raises  concerns
    about ill-treatment of returnees on charters to Baghdad on  15  October
    2009 and 30 March 2010.  A BBC report of 26 June 2010 said that one  of
    the deportees on the 9 June  flight  told  the  BBC  that  ten  British
    returnees were being held in a single room without adequate facilities.
    Tori Sicher, now the solicitor for HM and RM, previously with IAS,  set
    out evidence of what she was told by HH about  detention  after  the  9
    June 2010 charter flight  (13  people  in  one  small  room,  appalling
    conditions, no food, unable to sleep, 7/8 days'  detention).   HH  also
    claimed to have had a  gun  pointed  to  his  head  and  to  have  been
    threatened and others were kicked.  In statements to a solicitor from a
    different firm, Sean McLoughlin, other detainees from the  same  flight
    claimed ill-treatment. In the  context  of  Iraq  as  a  whole,   UNAMI
    (January 2011) refer to evidence of torture and ill-treatment routinely
    taking place at the time of arrest  and  while  in  detention,  and  to
    lengthy detention without  charge  and  bad  conditions.   The  OGN  of
    December 2011 says that MOI and MOD prisons and detention facilities in
    Iraq are likely to breach the Article 3 threshold and concerns are also
    expressed by the FCO, and by the USSD  in  its  8  April  2011  Country
    Report, concerning detention and prison facilities in Iraq.  Dr George,
    in his Addendum Report of 26 March 2012 was told by a contact that,  as
    of a year ago at least, general conditions in the detention  facilities
    at the BIAP police station were very  poor,  including  the  fact  that
    there was no special cell/room for women and children.  With respect to
    the appellants, he expresses concerns about "possible delays  and  with
    possible risk of maltreatment during detention".

178.  Dr Fatah's report contains an analysis based on an unspecified  number
    of telephone interviews conducted in  November  2011  with  six  asylum
    seekers who told him they had been returned to Iraq on various dates in
    2010, including several who were on the 16 June flight. These  led  him
    to conclude that  in  practice  the  Iraqi  authorities  do  not  allow
    returnees to  leave  the  airport  unless  they  have  a  guarantor  in
    attendance who can confirm their identity.  Returnees who did not  have
    their civil status IDs had to pay bribes at  checkpoints  in  order  to
    continue their journey.  All his interviewees were detained until their
    identity was proven, some for a matter of hours, others for  more  than
    ten to fifteen days.  Most food and water  had  to  be  bought  by  the
    detainees or guards had to be bribed to bring  it  to  the  cells.   He
    notes, however, that on the basis of a 17 November 2011 letter from the
    British Embassy  in   Baghdad  as  a  result  of  the  introduction  of
    biometric capture equipment (fingerprint scanners),  returnees  are  no
    longer subject to further questioning after the  immigration  officials
    have processed them, unless biometric details require otherwise.

Returns and documentation

179.  We asked for and received further written submissions  concerning  the
    position on return to Iraq via BIAP. The specific  issue  on  which  we
    requested further submissions was the  approach  of  the  Secretary  of
    State in circumstances where an  individual  refused  to  cooperate  in
    obtaining a laissez passer document on which they could be returned.

180.  It is clear from the evidence identified in these  submissions  (which
    were updated to the last week in October 2012)  that currently enforced
    returns of Iraqi nationals take place by air to BIAP, whereas voluntary
    returns in the case of people from the KRG can take place  directly  to
    that area.  The current position, as  set  out  in  the  third  witness
    statement of Declan O'Neill,  is  that  Iraqi  nationals  may  only  be
    returned on an Iraqi passport, an expired Iraqi passport, or a  laissez
    passer document.  The last-mentioned  is  a  one  way  travel  document
    issued by the Iraqi Embassy in London.  It requires the cooperation  of
    the returnee in order to be issued  (see  [219]).   This  represents  a
    change from the previous  position  when  the  Iraqi  authorities  were
    prepared to accept EU letters.

181.  From the British Embassy letter of 5 March  2012  and  the  subsequent
    letter from the Embassy of 8 April 2012 it is said that  the  procedure
    for documenting returnees is relatively  straightforward.   The  latter
    letter quotes the Ministry of  Displacement  and  Migration  (MoDM)  as
    being satisfied that there is no  risk  of  mistreatment  or  abuse  of
    returnees at BIAP.  The IOM concur, saying that the Immigration Officer
    checks the passport or travel document issued by the Iraqi authorities.
     If they are correct then the  passenger  can  proceed  and  leave  the
    airport.  The point is that enforced returns from the UK are  now  pre-
    cleared during pre-clearance visits to  the  UK  by  Iraqi  Immigration
    Officers so the risks are further minimised.

182.  The letter goes on to say that since the introduction of  the  October
    2011 Iraqi returns policy, there have been no cases of any UK  enforced
    returnees being detained who have returned on a valid or expired  Iraqi
    passport and that this has been confirmed by the IOM  and  Ministry  of
    Interior.  To date, it is said, no  enforced  returnees  have  returned
    using a laissez passer travel document as the Iraqi Embassy  in  London
    will not currently issue them to enforced  returnees.   Only  voluntary
    returnees have returned using laissez passer travel documents  and  the
    Embassy has received no reports of them being detained on arrival.   It
    is said that there are no detention facilities within the BIAP complex.
     The only circumstance in which a person would be detained would be  if
    there was a judicial order or warrant for their arrest due to  previous
    criminal activity.  It is emphasised in evidence  from  the  MoDM,  the
    MOI, the IOM and Qandil (a  Swedish  human  rights  organisation)  that
    there have been no reports of procedures involving ethnic or  religious
    discrimination towards Kurds.  Qandil have  confirmed  that  all  cases
    they have managed under the assisted voluntary returns  programme  have
    been processed satisfactorily.

Documentation and access to services

183.  The relevant documentation  required  for  movement  around  Iraq  and
    access to services is described and analysed  in  some  detail  in  MK.
    Paragraph 88 of MK summarises the Tribunal's findings on this issue. Dr
    George and Dr Fatah have, essentially, repeated to us their evidence to
    the Tribunal in MK.

Internal travel

184.  As regards safety of internal travel, the 2012 UNHCR  Guidelines  deal
    separately with travel between the KRG and the rest of  Iraq  and  then
    with travel within central and southern  Iraq.  On  the  former  it  is
    stated at p.49:

         "In terms of access, roads between the Kurdistan Region and central
         Iraq cannot  be  considered  safe.  Roads  from  Erbil,  Dahuk  and
         Sulaymaniyah to Kirkuk or Mosul are generally only safe when  under
         the protection of the KRG forces, although attacks on civilians and
         security forces in areas under their control  have  also  occurred.
         Roads that  are  not  under  the  control  of  Kurdish  forces  are
         unpredictable and have reportedly been the site of a  high  numbers
         of attacks. There are  several  official  checkpoints  between  the
         central part of the country and the  KRG-administered  area.  There
         are also random  checkpoints  set  up  depending  on  the  security
         situation. Further, the borders of the Kurdistan Region,  including
         between its own governorates, have been observed to  close  without
         advance warning due to security concerns.  Other  areas  along  the
         unofficial border have been heavily mined in the  past  decade  and
         are regularly patrolled by Kurdish Security Forces. Such conditions
         make it nearly impossible for  persons  to  cross  into  the  three
         northern  governorates  through  the  countryside  without  danger.
         Therefore, entry through the major roads and their checkpoints  is,
         practically, the only option available to most  Iraqis  seeking  to
         enter the Kurdistan Region. In addition, there are regular  flights
         from Baghdad and Basrah to Erbil and Sulaymaniyah,  but  a  one-way
         ticket from Baghdad to Erbil or Sulaymaniyah  costs  101,000  Iraqi
         Dinars (approximately US$85), an amount many Iraqis are not able to
         afford. Travelling from Baghdad or Basrah to Erbil or  Sulaymaniyah
         by air is considered fairly safe and  there  have  been  no  recent
         security incidents involving civilian  aircraft.  There  have  been
         infrequent indirect fire attacks on or near the Baghdad and  Basrah
         airports, causing no casualties."


185.  As regards travel within central and southern Iraq it is  said  at  p.
    53:

         "Travel by  road  within  the  central  and  southern  governorates
         remains dangerous,  especially  at  night.  Roadside  bombings  and
         shootings, robberies, kidnappings and carjackings  seem  to  remain
         daily occurrences, in addition to attacks on  civilian,  government
         and military vehicles on roads and highways in both urban and rural
         areas  throughout  the  country.  Travelling  prior  to  or  during
         religious festivities also involves  a  heightened  risk  as  armed
         groups are said to aim at launching mass casualty attacks on  Shi'a
         pilgrims on the road. Military operations among  armed  groups  and
         the  ISF/Sahwa  continue  mainly  in  the   central   governorates.
         Travelling is reportedly often impaired and  delayed  by  ISF/Sahwa
         checkpoints and convoys, where there is also an increased  risk  of
         being harmed given the frequent targeting of the  ISF/Sahwa.  False
         checkpoints have also reportedly been  erected  to  stage  attacks.
         Freedom of movement is  also  impacted  by  checks  at  governorate
         borders, sometimes reportedly resulting  in  arrests.  Moving  near
         official government  or  military/police  convoys  is  said  to  be
         particularly dangerous as they  are  a  frequent  target  of  armed
         groups, including by roadside bombs  and  "sticky  bombs"  attached
         under vehicles. There have also been incidents reported of roadside
         bombs hitting public buses or "sticky bombs"  being  placed  inside
         buses or taxis  or bombings at bus terminals. Movement may  further
         be limited by curfews and vehicle bans, which can  be  enforced  at
         short notice. Travel by air from Baghdad International  Airport  is
         said to have improved. No recent attacks on civilian aircraft  have
         been reported, but there are reports of  infrequent  indirect  fire
         attacks on or near the Baghdad and Basrah  airports.  Attacks  also
         occur  regularly  on  the  road   between   Baghdad   and   Baghdad
         International Airport."


186.   Whilst  highlighting  that  roadside  attacks   remain   a   frequent
    occurrence, Dr Fatah notes  that  the  central  provinces  are  not  as
    hazardous as during 2005-2008 although caution is still  required  when
    travelling in the area ([644]).

Returnees from the west

187.  Dr George refers (at [80]-[81] of his report) to a UNHCR  Report  from
    2004 concerning risk of kidnapping to Iraqis who  return  from  Western
    countries as they are perceived as being  financially  privileged.   He
    also cites a more recent (July 2009) report of the  Danish  Immigration
    Service,  the  Danish  Refugee  Council  and  Landinfo  (the  Norwegian
    equivalent of the COIS), which makes essentially the same  point.   SSI
    Amman (the United Nations  security  section)  explained  that,  having
    lived  in  Europe  for  a  while  people  walked,  talked  and  dressed
    differently.  They were perceived to have money and were easy to  spot.
    Also they were considered to be easy targets since they  usually  enjoy
    very little support from tribes of the receiving community in general.

188.  Dr Fatah (at [621] of  his  report)  was  told  by  a  businessman  he
    interviewed that returnees to  Kirkuk  from  the  USA  or  the  UK  are
    regarded as traitors and spies by the Arabs and insurgents  there,  and
    thus they become automatic targets for insurgents.  He also  notes  (at
    [705]) that arguably an individual returning after  many  years  abroad
    might find it hard to re-enter their tribal network.

Provincial level

Tameem Governorate and Kirkuk

189.  The home area of the first two appellants is Kirkuk, which is  in  the
    Tameem Governorate (also referred to frequently as Kirkuk Governorate).
     As already noted, the population of the Governorate  is  estimated  as
    1,395,000. The city's population is estimated as being between  0.9-1.6
    million (975,000 according to  Government  statistics  for  July  2011,
    902,019 according to recent IAU figures).

190.  As was pointed out at [186] in HM1, most violence in  the  governorate
    is described as being linked to the as  yet  unresolved  administrative
    status of Kirkuk, and related power struggles between the various Arab,
    Kurdish and Turkmen actors, accentuated by the  fact  that  Kirkuk  has
    huge oil reserves.  This point is emphasised in particular in the April
    2009 UNHCR Guidelines at [202] to [204].  The same report refers to the
    fact that insurgent groups such as AQI also aim to stir  inter-communal
    violence by attacking proponents of ethnic/religious groups.  There are
    concerns, which to an extent we have seen set out in the evidence of Dr
    Fatah, that tensions among ethnic groups over the unresolved status  of
    Kirkuk could turn into another civil war.  There are  regular  roadside
    bombings, shootings and  occasional  car  bombs  and  suicide  attacks.
    Kirkuk's  Arab  and  Turkmen  communities   complain   of   harassment,
    intimidation, arbitrary arrests and  demographic  manipulation  at  the
    hands of the  Kurds,  who  dominate  the  governorate's  political  and
    security institutions.  The UNHCR's concerns  were  reiterated  in  the
    briefing note of 11 December 2009 and the 28  July  2010  Note  on  the
    Continued Applicability of the April 2009 Guidelines and in their  2012
    Guidelines they note that the Governorate continues to be volatile.

191.  The ICG report of 28 March  2011  entitled  "Iraq  Kurds:  Confronting
    Withdrawal Fears" refers  to  the  existence  of  strong  tensions  and
    politically motivated provocations  aimed  at  sparking  inter-communal
    conflict in areas with a rich ethnic mix  such  as  Kirkuk  City.   The
    reports of the UN Secretary General for the UN Security Council  of  31
    March 2011, 7 July 2011, and 28 November 2011 refer to the  number  and
    range of incidents involving troop movements, terrorist attacks and car
    bombs killing and injuring civilians.  It is said  that  the  political
    and security situation and the disputed internal boundaries  remains  a
    matter of particular concern.  The Danish Immigration Service Report of
    10 September 2010 entitled "Security and Human Rights in  South-Central
    Iraq", notes that the situation in Kirkuk is fragile and Iraqi security
    forces (ISF) and US Forces at the time had a  strong  presence  in  the
    area.  The presence of AQI and insurgent groups contributed  to  making
    the situation particularly volatile and there were reports that AQI was
    using children as suicide bombers or combatants in Kirkuk.

192.  As regards the situation of IDPs, the  IOM  report  of  February  2010
    entitled "Kirkuk Governorate Profile" noted that  the  disputed  Kirkuk
    Governorate remained unstable, combining continued  fears  of  violence
    with the already difficult living conditions faced by IDP and  returnee
    families  there.   It  is  said  in  the  report  that,  unlike   other
    governorates in Iraq, post-2006 displacement in Kirkuk did not peak  in
    2006 and 2007 but rather displacement has been a gradual flow from 2006
    to present, rooted in ethnic, political and territorial disputes.   The
    number of families leaving their homes did increase in  late  2007  and
    early 2008 before dropping lower once again.   The  IOM  assessed  that
    most families displaced in Kirkuk fled in fear after being targeted for
    religion, sect, ethnicity or political opinion.  Over a third  reported
    fleeing after receiving direct threats to their lives. The IOM, in  its
    February 2010 assessment, considered that there remained a  possibility
    of additional return flows to Kirkuk.  It is said that gradual  returns
    are occurring now and they may continue.  It is said that, however, due
    to the contested nature of Kirkuk's land and  population  distribution,
    return is a complex prospect for those who wish to do so.

193.  The IOM's November 2010 Profile report notes that over 2,000  families
    were displaced from Kirkuk in the period 2003 to 2006.  IOM  notes  the
    precariousness of life  for  many  of  the  families  displaced  in  or
    returning  to  Kirkuk.   Displacement   from   Kirkuk   has   decreased
    considerably since 2007, but continues to occur though in comparatively
    small numbers and many families are being displaced from  one  part  of
    Kirkuk to another.  49% of IDPs in Kirkuk stayed  within  the  province
    and intend to integrate in current places  of  displacement.   The  IDP
    population going to the KRG is relatively low. Nearly 60% of IDPs  from
    Kirkuk assessed  by  IOM  intended  to  integrate  into  their  current
    location.  34% of IDP families living in  Kirkuk  intend  to  integrate
    into their current locations. According to UNHCR Iraq Operation Monthly
    Statistical Update on Returns April 2012,  the  total  number  of  IDPs
    returning to Kirkuk in Sept 2011-Aug 2012 was 2,260.

194.  Both Dr George and Dr Fatah  consider  that  Kirkuk  is  volatile  and
    violent and there are particular risk factors existing there.  Dr Fatah
    notes that ethnic divisions run deeper in Kirkuk than elsewhere in  the
    disputed territories and points to the  level  of  violent  attacks  in
    Kirkuk in the last three months  with  a  high  number  of  police  and
    civilian casualties.  He finds that the tensions there are  exacerbated
    by the existence of KRG and GoI security.  Dr  Fatah  states  that  the
    undecided fate of the "disputed territories", Kirkuk in particular, and
    manipulations by various political factions have created  chaos  there.
    Kirkuk remains a fault-line in Iraq and at the epicentre of  the  Kurd-
    Arabs divide in Iraq.   He  considers  that  inter-ethnic  tension  has
    increased. Dr Fatah notes that Kirkuk is one of the centres of  Kurdish
    national identity and the KRG has symbolically named it as its regional
    capital.  At an interview with a Kurdish Kirkuk police officer in March
    2012, Dr Fatah was told that most insurgents in Kirkuk are  Arabs  from
    outside the city who enter it in order to conduct attacks.  He was told
    by a Kurdish businessman that Kurdish  neighbourhoods  of  Kirkuk  were
    much safer than others because  the  Peshmerga  safeguarded  them.   He
    provides a number of recent examples of violent attacks carried out  in
    Kirkuk, most of which appear to have involved specific  targeting,  but
    several involved roadside bombs.

         The USDD Report Measuring Stability  and  Security  in  Iraq,  June
    2010 records an average of 1.3 daily executed attacks in Kirkuk.

         In the CSIS report of February 9 2011, figures for  roadside  bombs
    and car bombs in Kirkuk show a gradual decline from 919 roadside  bombs
    and 69 car bombs in 2007 to 142 and 2 respectively in 2010.  There  are
    regular attacks and assassinations, mainly  targeted  against  ISF  and
    government institutions and officials, but also civilians.  Kirkuk  has
    recently seen a sharp increase in targeted abductions and  killings  of
    professionals

195.  Dr George quotes from the Iraq Body Count (IBC) website in respect  of
    the killings reported in and around Kirkuk  City  in  the  past  twelve
    months. (The IBC states that in 2011 there were 232 deaths in  Kirkuk.)
    Dr George, noting that in 2011 there had been  417  attacks  in  Kirkuk
    (Tameen), described it as "amongst the most violent locations in Iraq",
    although he adds that the level of violence there is not much different
    from those in other parts of central Iraq when account is taken of  the
    size of its population.  This figure  amounted  to   7%  of  the  Iraqi
    total. In 2011, attacks in Kirkuk were 1.7 times the share  that  would
    be expected given the country's population (compared with  between  1.4
    to 1.8 times for Baghdad, Anbar and Mosul, 2.3 times for Diyala and 2.9
    times for Salahuddin). The UN Agency Information Unit ("IAU") estimates
    that in Kirkuk in 2011 there were 280 civilian  deaths.  In  an  agreed
    Note of 6 June 2012 on Province by Province Casualties, the  respondent
    states that on available figures "the  level  of  civilian  deaths  for
    Kirkuk is roughly double the  national  average  (as  compared  to  1.8
    estimated by Dr George)".

196.  In the 7 April 2012 FCO letter,  Tameem  is  recorded  as  having  one
    security incident a day.  The  30  November  2011  Brookings  Institute
    Report covering insurgent attacks per province February 2005-May  2010,
    shows a decline of violence in Tameem.  The USDD June 2010  Report  and
    the CSIS Report "Iraq and the US: Creating  a  Strategic  Partnership",
    June 2010 show similar reduced levels.

197.  As already noted, the 2012 UNHCR Guidelines refer  to  the  continuing
    volatility of the governorate.

198.  In MK, whilst describing Kirkuk as a "hazardous place" there  being  a
    good deal of evidence of random and targeted violence in that city  (at
    [98]), the Tribunal did not consider that it revealed an Article  15(c)
    level in that city.

Baghdad Governorate and Baghdad

199.  Baghdad is the home governorate of appellant HF. This governorate  has
    a population of some 6 to  7  million  (7,145,470  according  to  IAU);
    Baghdad City, the country's capital, has a population of  approximately
    6.5 million.

200.  As Dr Fatah explains in his report, a number of factors contribute  to
    the extent and nature of the security incidents and civilian casualties
    in Baghdad.  He says that Baghdad has experienced  violent  attacks  by
    various groups for a long time and the main reasons are  it  being  the
    capital city, its being highly demographically diverse,  and  also  the
    presence of Sadr City in Baghdad.  (It houses the base of Shi'a  cleric
    and politician Muqtada  al-Sadr's  popular  support,  and  has  been  a
    breeding ground since the invasion for cadres of the  Mahdi  Army,  the
    militia of Muqtada al-Sadr and Al-Sadr  Trend,  the  Sadrist  political
    bloc.)  The UNHCR Guidelines for April 2009  refer  to  the  fact  that
    violence levels in Baghdad had  significantly  fallen  since  the  last
    quarter of 2007, but it continued to be  the  case  that  armed  troops
    targeted members of the ISF/MNF-I and the SoI, as  well  as  government
    and party officials and also continued to target  civilians,  often  in
    populated places such as markets, mosques, bus stations or restaurants.
    The May 2012 UNHCR Guidelines at p. 45 state that the large majority of
    attacks in Iraq take place in Baghdad. A number of  attacks  with  high
    casualty numbers were reported in 2011 and 2012, resulting in scores of
    people killed and injured. These attacks are said to have  taken  place
    in Sunni, Shi'a and mixed areas across the capital. In addition,  daily
    roadside bombs, shootings  and  "sticky  bombs"  attached  to  vehicles
    result in a high number of casualties. In 2011 Baghdad  has  also  been
    the centre for popular  protests.  The  ISF  has  reportedly  responded
    violently, arresting, beating and even  killing  protestors.  The  same
    Guidelines  note  also  that  Baghdad  has  a  high  number  of   often
    politically  motivated  killings  of  security  officials,   government
    officials   and   employees,   party   officials,   journalists,    and
    professionals.  Insurgent groups continue to aim at stirring  sectarian
    violence.    Most frequently, members of the ISF and Sahwa,  government
    officials and employees, religious figures, politicians,  professionals
    and LGBTI persons are targeted.

201.  According to the UNAMI Human Rights Office/OHCHR Baghdad  2010  Report
    on human rights in Iraq, January 2011, some 2,953 civilians were killed
    during 2010 with some 10,434 civilian injuries, and the worst  affected
    region was the Baghdad Governorate with 1,284 civilian deaths and 5,011
    injured.  In its annual report on  Iraq,  2011,  Amnesty  International
    noted three particular incidents referred to, three coordinated suicide
    car bombs exploding in  quick  succession  in  Central  Baghdad  on  25
    January, killing at least 41 people and injuring more than 75 others, a
    detonation by a woman walking with Shi'a  pilgrims  in  Baghdad  of  an
    explosive belt killing at least 54 people and injuring  more  than  100
    others, and  an  attack  by  the  Islamic  State  of  Iraq  (which  was
    responsible for the 25 January attack also), on a  Catholic  church  in
    Baghdad where more than 40 worshippers were killed.  Further  incidents
    are described in other reports, some of which pre-date the  hearing  in
    HM1. The USDD Report, Measuring Stability and Security  in  Iraq,  June
    2010, records an average of  six  daily  executed  attacks  in  Baghdad
    province.   At  the  hearing  in  October  Mr   Fordham   produced   an
    illustrative map of security  incidents  in  the  city.  The  US  State
    Department Report for 2010 stated that in Baghdad in March to  May  the
    figure was six attacks per day.  Figures given  by  Cordemann  for  the
    CSIS paper, "Iraq: Patterns of Violence,  Casualty  Trends  and  Energy
    Security Threats, 9 February 2011, gives a figure  of  just  over  five
    attacks a day on 28 February 2010. It  details  that  violence  in  the
    areas north and west of Baghdad province largely involved and  affected
    Sunnis, with some directed against  Kurds  and  Christians.   South  of
    Baghdad it largely affected Shi'as.   Baghdad  province  was  the  main
    scene of violence throughout the US led phase of the fighting, violence
    which was largely Sunni versus Shi'a.  Baghdad remained a key centre of
    bombing,  certified  attacks  and  crime.   A  non-exhaustive  list  of
    incidents post-dating 18 December 2011 US withdrawal is set out  in  Mr
    Fordham's skeleton to illustrate  the  current  security  situation  in
    Baghdad.   The  IRIN  report  of  19  January  2012  refers  to  people
    considering fleeing as the violence  increases,  and  suicide  attacks,
    assassinations and bombings in Iraq have claimed the lives of at  least
    265 people and injured hundreds of others since  18  December.   It  is
    said that the attacks were mainly carried out by Sunni extremists  from
    Al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) against Shi'a communities.  The Sunni  community
    complains that it has been marginalised by  the  Shi'a-led  government.
    There are fears of  a  return  to  the  days  of  2006/2007  where  the
    Shi'a/Sunni conflict left thousands of  people  dead  and  millions  of
    others displaced.  The examples  set  out  are  across  a  spectrum  of
    specific targeting to roadside and suicide and sticky bombs.  According
    to the Washington  Institute  for  Near  East  Policy,  February  2012,
    Baghdad is one of three areas of Iraq that are "sectarian melting pots"
    where Sunnis groups target Shi'a civilians as well as Sahwa members and
    violence is said to be "rising sharply" in these areas.

202.  According to the FCO letter of 7 April 2012, the  figure  for  Baghdad
    is 2-3 attacks per day.  That is what is stated  by  the  British  risk
    mitigation company AKE in its analysis of 2011 trends.  In 2010,  UNAMI
    stated that of the 2,953 civilians killed during that year  and  10,434
    civilians  injured,  Baghdad  Governorate  was  responsible  for  1,284
    civilian  deaths  and  5,011  civilians  injured.   Shortly  after  the
    December 2011 US withdrawal, the city was hit by a wave of high profile
    attacks against Shi'a districts.  The IAU figures for deaths in Baghdad
    governorate in 2011 is 1,238.

203.  Mr Staker cited the UN Habitat  document  "Urban  Baghdad:  Impact  of
    Conflict on Daily Life" which states that:

         "Since the height of  the  violence  in  2006-2007,  conditions  in
         Baghdad have improved.  Nearly a  third  of  those  displaced  have
         returned and conflict-related  deaths  have  dropped  considerably.
         Improved security has  allowed  greater  freedom  of  movement  and
         recreation in daily life.  Access to jobs and  services  remains  a
         challenge."


204.  This same report also notes that whilst the conflict has  taken  close
    up a heavy toll on the city, causing one tenth  of  its  population  to
    flee during its height, the city's IDPs live in public  buildings,  old
    military encampments or  improvised  squatter  settlements.   Nearly  a
    third of IDPs have returned and improved security has  allowed  greater
    freedom of movement. According to Dr Fatah, the majority of  those  who
    die or who are wounded in Baghdad do so in attacks designed to fuel the
    sectarian conflict.  Those who are in positions of power  or  influence
    are particularly at risk, especially in the case of Ministry officials,
    police and intelligence officers and their family members (at [230]).

205.  Dr George quotes from the 30 January 2012 issue of the  US  Department
    of Defence's "Measuring Stability and Security in Iraq", itself quoting
    from a survey by the New York consulting firm Mercer on the quality  of
    life and personal security in 221 cities worldwide, describing  Baghdad
    as "the world's least safe  city".   The  IOM  note  that  81%  of  the
    families they assessed who were forced to leave their homes in  Baghdad
    remained within the governorate.  Return to Baghdad has been  slow  but
    continuous, and improved security in their area of origin was the  most
    prevalent reason for families to return.

Diyala Governorate

206.  It is said by the UNHCR  that  Diyala  has  been  plagued  by  attacks
    against the ISF/MNF-I and widespread  sectarian  violence.   It  has  a
    diverse religious and ethnic population and is of strategic importance,
    given its proximity to Iran and Baghdad, and there is also the issue of
    the unresolved status of  so-called  "disputed  areas",  in  particular
    Khalaqeen and as a consequence the governorate has been contested since
    the fall of the former regime in 2003.  The ethnic and religious mix of
    Sunnis and Shi'as, Arabs, Kurds, and Turkmen have  made  it  a  fertile
    ground for militant groups and the scene of brutal sectarian  violence.
    When AQI was pushed out of Al Anbar in  late  2006,  it  relocated  its
    power base to Diyala, controlling much of the governorate including the
    capital.  However, as a result of successive military operations by the
    MNF-I/ISF between June 2007 and May 2008, and supported by the SoI, AQI
    was largely pushed out of Diyala's main urban centres although it  kept
    hold of more  rural  areas.   Overall,  violence  in  Diyala  decreased
    significantly as of mid-2007, but AQI maintained its ability to conduct
    attacks through the  governorate,  including  in  the  populated  urban
    areas, while keeping strict control of  rural  areas,  terrorising  the
    local   population   with   intimidation,   detention,   torture,   and
    extrajudicial executions.  Civilians were also targeted by  mortar  and
    small arms fire, assassinations and kidnappings.  Crackdowns  on  Shi'a
    militias  by  the  Iraqi  government,  in  particular  on   JAM,   have
    significantly reduced their presence and activities in the governorate.
     The underlying sectarian tensions in the governorate remained.   There
    were ongoing tensions between Kurdish parties and the Shi'a  coalition.
    Despite massive  military  crackdowns,  Diyala  remained  volatile  and
    continued to see  car  bombs  and  suicide  bombings,  often  targeting
    members of the ISF/MNF-I and SoI, but also civilians.   Dr  George  (at
    [147] of his report) quotes from a Kurdistan News Agency  report  of  2
    March 2012, referring to the departure in the last week of at least 170
    Kurdish families from the disputed Jalawla district in Diyala Province,
    leaving for other cities in the province,  fearing  terrorist  attacks,
    and it is said that since the fall of the Ba'ath regime  in  2003  more
    than 1,300 Kurdish citizens from the disputed areas of Diyala have been
    killed, and more than 1,700 families have been displaced,  fearing  for
    their lives.  In 2011 Diyala experienced 551 attacks, comprising 10% of
    the Iraqi total.

207.  The IOM in a report of November 2010 on Diyala said that it  continues
    to be one of the most volatile and unstable governorates in  Iraq,  and
    it is described in the 2012 UNHCR Guidelines as  reportedly  among  the
    most  unstable  governorates,  with  attacks  mainly  directed  against
    security and civilian government institutions, but also civilians, e.g.
    in cafes or mosques.  There have been attacks on  Shi'a  civilians  and
    pilgrims as well as high numbers of targeted killings.  Dr Fatah refers
    to the  declaration  in  December  2011  by  Diyala  of  itself  as  an
    autonomous region, which led to a mix of violent protests, arrests  and
    mobilisation of state security forces.  The bid for autonomy  has  been
    rejected by the GoI in Baghdad, and seems to have stalled,  though  the
    issue has not gone away.  Dr Fatah says that violence has remained high
    in the governorate.

208.  According to an IOM February  2010  Governorate  Profile,  along  with
    Baghdad and Ninewah, Diyala was one of the governorates  that  saw  the
    highest  rates  of  displacement  following  the  2006  Samarra  mosque
    bombing, but Diyala was starting to receive returns and  85%  of  those
    returning cited  the  reason  as  improved  security;  albeit  returnee
    families face many hardships and uncertainties on return. The IOM  note
    that 44% of the families displaced from their  homes  in  Diyala  moved
    elsewhere within the governorate.   Despite  the  difficulties  in  the
    governorate, families continue to return to  their  homes,  most  being
    prompted by improved security in their area of  origin.   There  remain
    security issues, however, 42% reporting that they do not feel safe,  or
    only feel safe sometimes.

Ninewah Governorate and Mosul

209.   According  to  the  UNHCR's  April  2009  assessment,   the   Ninewah
    Governorate has a very diverse population of mostly Arabs,  Kurds,  and
    Turkmen, in addition to various religious and ethnic  minority  groups.
    A combination of the demographic make-up and the fact that large  parts
    of the governorate are  contested  between  the  KRG  and  the  central
    government make it a breeding ground for extremist  groups  seeking  to
    destabilise the country.  After AQI was forced out of most urban  areas
    of Al Anbar, Diyala and Baghdad Governorates, Mosul City, where a large
    majority of the  population  is  living,  has  become  its  last  urban
    stronghold.  There is only  a  limited  presence  of  the  SoI  in  the
    southern parts of Ninewah: the main reason  for  this  is  the  Kurdish
    opposition to  the  establishment  of  an  Arab  Tribal  Council.   The
    relative security improvements in many parts of the  country  have  not
    yet taken hold in Mosul, Iraq's second largest  city,  despite  a  wide
    scale military operation launched in May 2008 to root out AQI and other
    insurgent groups.  Mass  casualty  attacks,  kidnappings  and  targeted
    assassinations continue to occur on an almost daily  basis.   Ninewah's
    second city, Tal Afar, which  is  inhabited  by  many  ethnic  Turkmen,
    remains a stronghold of Sunni insurgents and sees  regular  attacks  on
    the ISF, and to a lesser extent on the MNF-I.  Civilians  are  targeted
    on  a  regular  basis,  mostly  in  public  places  such  as   mosques,
    restaurants and markets.  Many attacks target Shi'a Turkmen in  an  aim
    to reignite sectarian violence.  Due to the ongoing presence  of  Sunni
    extremist groups and the potential for ethnic political  violence,  the
    governorate of Nineweh remains highly unstable.  In addition to suicide
    and IED attacks on the ISF/MNF-I, Ninewah continues to see  significant
    numbers  of  targeted  assassinations  and  kidnappings   of   security
    officials, local government officials, and employees, party  officials,
    and officers in particular from the KDP/PUK,  the  IIP  and  the  Iraqi
    Communist Party officers, religious  figures  and  tribal  leaders/SoI,
    members  of  religious  minorities  as  well   as   professionals   and
    journalists.  Dr Fatah provides  recent  examples  of  violent  attacks
    carried out in Ninewah.  They serve, he says, to  reveal  the  insecure
    and  unstable  environment  of  the  governorate,  and  of   Mosul   in
    particular, which he says is one of the most unstable and unsafe places
    in Iraq today.  Dr George says that in  2011  Ninewah  experienced  803
    attacks, accounting for 14% of the Iraqi total.  According to the  2012
    UNHCR  Guidelines,  Ninewah  (particularly  Mosul)  continues   to   be
    volatile,  with  attacks  mainly  against  ISF,  Sahwa  and  government
    institutions, but also civilians.  There are  regular  kidnappings  and
    assassinations, including members of the ISF, government officials  and
    employees and tribal and  religious  figures  and  there  are  frequent
    reports of attacks on professionals.

210.  The IOM has assessed that 1,123 families from Ninewah have left  their
    homes due to water scarcity since 2006.  Nearly half of the 17,216  IDP
    families originating from Ninewah assessed by IOM fled to  other  parts
    of the governorate.  Most of those families were displaced in 2006  and
    2007.  Despite the harsh conditions and continuing sectarian  violence,
    113 of IDP families from Ninewah intend to return to the governorate.

Salah Al-Din Governorate

211.  According to UNHCR, Salah Al-Din was one of  the  strongholds  of  AQI
    and  other  insurgent  groups  between  2004  and   2007.    With   the
    establishment of the SoI, made up of tribal members as well  as  former
    insurgent fighters, these groups have been  weakened  and  the  overall
    number of attacks decreased in 2008.  The security  situation  remained
    unstable, however, as insurgents continued to have a presence in  parts
    of the governorate.  They engaged in battles  with  the  ISF/MNF-I  and
    SoI, and launched regular attacks on  them.   In  addition,  insurgents
    were said to be still capable of launching attacks  against  civilians,
    including sectarian attacks targeting minority Arab and Turkmen Shi'as.
     AQI is reportedly trying to  re-infiltrate  Samarra  and  recruit  the
    city's unemployed youth.  Salah  Al-Din  continues  to  see  shootings,
    kidnappings and targeted assassinations of security  officials,  tribal
    leaders, SoI, and government and party officials.  Dr George notes that
    substantial  parts  of  the  governorate  form  part  of  the  disputed
    territories, which are among the most violent parts of Iraq.   In  2011
    Salah Al-Din experienced 695  attacks,  comprising  12%  of  the  Iraqi
    total.  He also makes the broader point that the level of  violence  in
    the disputed areas is not much different from that in  other  parts  of
    central Iraq when allowance is made for  population  distribution.   Dr
    Fatah refers to a note on 27 October 2011 by the Sunni Arab majority of
    the  provincial  council  to  declare  the  province  economically  and
    administratively autonomous from the central government.  The  decision
    cannot be enforced until a public  referendum  is  held  and  the  move
    approved by the province's residents.  He cites a number of attacks and
    killings in the province, as do the reports of the UN Secretary-General
    to the UN Security Council, dated 31 March 2011, 7  July  2011  and  28
    November 2011.   The  2012  UNHCR  Guidelines  note  frequent  security
    incidents in the governorate, which they describe as one  of  the  most
    unstable governorates.  Attacks are mainly  directed  against  security
    and civilian government institutions, but also civilians, e.g. in cafes
    and mosques, and also attacks on Shi'a  civilians  and  pilgrims,  with
    high numbers of targeted killings.

212.  The IOM assess that almost 1 in 3 of the families that were  displaced
    remained in the governorate.  The rate of returns  has  slowed.   There
    was a significant fall  between  February  and  November  2010  in  the
    numbers of IDPs from the governorate who wanted  to  return,  which  is
    seen as the effect of changes in the security situation  and  political
    uncertainties, though intentions varied according to the governorate to
    which they had moved.  Over 50% of IDPs in the governorate  when  asked
    in November 2010 wished to stay and integrate in their current location
    said yes, a significant increase over the 19% figure in February 2010.

Al Anbar Governorate

213.  Although not one of  the  5  central  governorates  we  shall  briefly
    summarise for completeness the situation  in  the  only  other  central
    governorate, Al Anbar, which  the 2009 Guidelines note as being  Iraq's
    largest governorate and  as  having  a  predominantly  tribal  oriented
    society that is almost  entirely  Sunni  Arab.   It  was  a  long  time
    stronghold of AQI until local tribes established  the  Anbar  Salvation
    Council in late 2006 and largely drove out AQI.   Since  2007  security
    improvements have been significant as overall levels of  violence  have
    sharply  decreased.   Nevertheless,  there  remains  a  lingering   AQI
    presence in Al Anbar which is capable of  targeted  assassinations  and
    mass casualty attacks by suicide and car bombs.  Most attacks occur  in
    and around the city of  Fallujah  and  in  areas  east  of  it  towards
    Baghdad, as the proximity to Baghdad makes  insurgent  activities  more
    permissive.  Acts are mostly directed against the  ISF,  the  MNF-I  as
    well as members of the Awakening Councils, often resulting in  civilian
    casualties.  A number of examples of this are provided for  the  period
    November 2008 to February 2009, including  car  bombings  and  roadside
    bombs.  Also there has been targeting of security officials, government
    and party officials, and religious figures on the part of armed groups.
     An example is given of an attack on a bus  of  Shi'a  pilgrims  on  12
    September 2011 in a report dated 28 November 2011 of the  UN  Security-
    General for the UN Security Council.  The governorate is said to be  in
    dire need of reconstruction and public services but to date efforts  in
    this regard have been slow and have met with resistance by  the  Shi'a-
    dominated central government.  The 2012 UNHCR Guidelines state that  Al
    Anbar has seen a surge in violence since the summer of 2009.  There  is
    speculation that ISI/AQI is  attempting  to  undermine  the  provincial
    authorities and the ISF in order to increase tension between Sunnis and
    Shi'as.  There were about 10 reported attacks per week in 2010 and  201
    in the governorate.  Attacks were frequently targeted, but bomb attacks
    in areas frequented by  civilians,  such  as  markets  and  a  cultural
    centre, as well  as  attacks  on  ISF  convoys  and  checkpoints  often
    resulted in civilian casualties.  The  IOM  has  identified  more  than
    7,000  families  displaced  after  2006  who  have  returned   to   the
    governorate.  Improved security in their area of origin  is  frequently
    reported as a reason for returning.

214.  In Al Anbar, a November 2010  IOM  Governorate  Profile  said  it  had
    identified more than  7,000  families  displaced  after  2006  who  had
    returned.  Improved security is frequently given as  the  main  reason.
    New displacements still occur, but  on  a  small  scale.  The  IOM  has
    assessed  4,284  families  displaced  from  Anbar,  most  of  whom  who
    relocated to Baghdad and  Muthanna,  wish  to  stay  in  their  current
    locations.

Levels of violence in the five central governorates-overall picture

215.  Iraqi government statistics give the following population figures  for
    the relevant governorates as at July 2011: Baghdad  7,055,200;  Tameen,
    1,395,600;   Ninewah,   3,270,400;   Salahuddin,    1,408,200;   Diyala
    1,443,200; and Al-Anbar,  1,561,000.

216.  According to Dr George  at  [172]  of  his  report,  in  2011  Ninewah
    experienced 803 attacks, amounting to  14%  of  the  Iraq  total.   The
    equivalent figures were Salahuddin, 695, i.e. 12%;  Diyala,  551,  i.e.
    10% and Kirkuk 417, i.e. 7%.

217.  Dr George's report notes at [173]  that  in  Kirkuk  and  Baghdad  the
    levels of violence were 1.7 and 1.5 times greater than  what  would  be
    expected given the proportion their population bears to that of Iraq as
    a whole.

218.  At [172]  he  notes  by  reference  to  UN  statistics  that  security
    incidents and attacks even in Baghdad (which in 2011 accounted for  32%
    of the total) had declined.  Ninewah had the second highest  number  of
    attacks (14%) whilst Tameen was ranked sixth with 7%.

219.  Dr George states that it is important to read the various  indices  of
    violence in the  context  of  the  ratio  their  numbers  bear  to  the
    population of the particular governorate. At [173] he estimates that in
    this context the most violent governorate is  Salahaddin,  then  Diyala
    and Muthania, followed by Kirkuk.

220.  n a June 2012 note the respondent states  that  on  available  figures
    the level of violence in Baghdad is the same as the  national  average,
    although she accepts that for Kirkuk it is  now  about  two  times  the
    national average.

KRG

221.  As we have noted above, at [132],  Dr  Fatah's  evidence  indicates  a
    greater degree of security in the KRG than elsewhere in Iraq.   In  the
    2012 Guidelines, UNHCR describe the situation in the KRG as "relatively
    more stable", though  it  remains  a  potential  target  for  terrorist
    operations.  The general human rights situation in the KRG has improved
    in recent years, but observers report on continued abuses.  As  regards
    entry to the KRG, we consider this below, together  with  the  relevant
    submissions, when we assess internal relocation in  the  light  of  the
    country guidance in MK and evidence that has been adduced subsequent to
    that decision.

SUBMISSIONS

The appellants' case

222.  We do not  propose  to  fully  summarise  the  very  lengthy  sets  of
    submissions we had from both  parties,  although  we  have  found  them
    immensely helpful in identifying relevant evidence  and  issues.  Where
    appropriate we will refer to what they say, as we have done already, in
    relation to key points as and when they arise.

223.  The appellants' case at the  hearing  was  that  the  Tribunal  should
    follow the position taken in the 2009 UNHCR Eligibility  Guidelines  in
    finding that in Iraq the Article 15(c) threshold is met in five of  the
    central governorates.  As revised in the light of  the  publication  of
    the new UNHCR Guidelines of 31 May 2012, their  position  was  that  we
    should again adopt UNHCR's position which was now that whilst decision-
    makers should assess on a case-by-case basis whether an individual from
    Iraq qualified  for  international  protection,  those  from  the  five
    central governorates were "likely" to qualify by  virtue  of  the  high
    levels and the intensity of violence there.

224.  In approaching our assessment Mr Fordham for the appellants  contended
    that we should take an inclusive approach and be on guard not to  strip
    out any of the recorded violence simply because  it  is  classified  as
    "targeted" violence.  Civilians include everybody;  you  look  at  risk
    experienced by the citizenry as a whole; there is no subcategory to  be
    deducted from them.  Even targeted violence affects  the  civilians  in
    the area; it  degrades  the  security  environment  and  leaves  almost
    everyone living "in the shadow of violence".

225.  As regards Article 15(c), Mr Fordham submitted  that  there  were  two
    distinct issues the Tribunal had to decide:  (1)  whether  the  Article
    15(c) threshold of indiscriminate violence was met - or "likely" to  be
    met - for ordinary civilians in  the  five  central  governorates;  (2)
    whether even if the answer to (1) was no, there were certain categories
    of Iraqi civilians in respect of whom there was an enhanced  risk.   In
    this regard he drew attention to the acceptance by the CJEU in Elgafaji
    that there was a basic dualism to Article 15(c),  in  that  it  covered
    risk to civilians as such but it also operated a "sliding  scale"  such
    that whenever there was a relevant characteristic giving rise to  risk,
    Article 15(c) could protect an individual even if the level of violence
    was less than needed to show risk to civilians as such. In this context
    he submitted that we should find that being a Sunni or Shi'ia or  being
    a Kurd placed one in an enhanced risk category, at least when one faced
    return to a home area where one's religious identity or ethnic identity
    meant  one was in a minority.

226.  With regard to the question of return to  BIAP  in  2010,  Mr  Fordham
    urged us to find that the mass of evidence provided showed  that  there
    had been ill-treatment crossing the Article 3 threshold, in  particular
    in respect of  the  June  10  and  June  16  returns.   The  degree  of
    concurrence between the various accounts as regards such matters as the
    number of detainees, the nature of the ill-treatment and  the  duration
    of the detention underlined the credibility of the  evidence.   It  was
    clear that the Secretary of State  was  not  able  to  investigate  the
    alleged incidents at the police station near the airport.  There was no
    good reason to suppose that the situation would be any different today.
     The conditions in detention near the airport breached  the  Article  3
    threshold as identified in MSS v Belgium & Greece [2011] 53 EHRR2.

227.  In relation to the UNHCR Guidelines, Mr Fordham  urged  that  we  find
    them to be authoritative or at least highly persuasive on the issue  of
    Article 15(c) risks in Iraq.  Given that UNHCR had  concluded  in  2009
    that in the five central governorates the Article 15(c)  threshold  was
    crossed for ordinary civilians, and had made  clear  in  its  new  2012
    Guidelines that those from such areas were "likely" to be  in  need  of
    international protection, it was  incumbent  on  the  Tribunal  not  to
    depart  from  the  UNHCR  view  unless  there  were  highly  compelling
    circumstances caused by a "step-change" analogous to the way  in  which
    cessation provisions operated under the Refugee  Convention.  The  fact
    that the Strasbourg Court had not found the situation in Iraq or Kirkuk
    to reach the threshold of Article 3 was not conclusive since  the  CJEU
    in Elgafaji had made clear that Article 15(c) had an additional scope.

228.  Whilst it may be that the violence in Iraq had levelled off in  recent
    years, it was still above what is tolerable.

229.  Although they did not initially seek to  argue that problems with  the
    safety of internal travel in Iraq gave rise to an  extra  dimension  to
    risk of Article 15(c) harm on return, the appellants in  further  post-
    hearing submissions have  argued  with  reference  to  the  2012  UNHCR
    Guidelines that for a person  fleeing  the  effects  of  indiscriminate
    violence, it is of  particular  importance  to  consider  the  concrete
    prospects of safely accessing areas of Iraq  not  affected  by  general
    violence, including risk en route from IEDs and bombs throughout  Iraq,
    and attacks on busy  roads,  and  also  the  inherent  difficulties  of
    identifying potential safe zones, given the volatility and fluidity  of
    the conflict.

230.  As regards the individual appellants, with respect to HM  and  RM,  it
    was submitted that they have no Iraqi documentation, and cannot  safely
    pass into Iraq without the risk of detention, nor travel to their place
    of origin without risk of being refused  at  checkpoints  for  lack  of
    proper documentation.  This also affects their ability  to  survive  in
    the absence of access to their PDS cards.  In addition,  as  Kurds  and
    IDPs, they are at risk in the central and southern governorates.

231.  As regards HF, who is a Sunni of  Arab  ethnicity  and  from  Baghdad,
    where he has family, internal relocation is  not  a  viable  option  on
    account of the levels of violence in the central governorates  and  the
    position of IDPs elsewhere, and on account of his Ba'athist links.

The respondent's case

232.  The respondent's case is that there was no reason to take a  different
    view of Article 15(c) levels of risk in Iraq than the Tribunal took  in
    HMI and that in any event the evidence as to the current  position  did
    not demonstrate that either in Iraq or  in  any  of  the  five  central
    governorates the Article 15(c) threshold  was  met.  The  latest  UNHCR
    Guidelines of May 2012 seemed largely to recognise this.  Even  if  the
    Article 15(c)  threshold was met - or likely to be met - in one or more
    of those governorates, there would be scope  for  safe  and  reasonable
    internal relocation.  There would be no risk on return at BIAP.  So far
    as concerned the appellants, therefore:  (1)  none  of  the  appellants
    would be at risk on return to their home areas in Iraq; (2)  if,  which
    is denied, they would be at risk in their home areas, then  they  could
    relocate anywhere else in Iraq including  the  KRG;  (3)  the  intended
    route of enforced return would  be  by  air  to  BIAP  from  where  the
    appellants could travel in safety to their home areas; and (4) none  of
    the appellants has established that  he  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR on return to BIAP or in any  place
    connected with the process of return.  There were no  serious  problems
    with internal travel within Iraq.

233.  The respondent did not accept that being a Sunni or a  Shi'a  Arab  or
    Kurd or someone connected with the former Ba'ath Party sufficed to give
    rise to an "enhanced risk category".   The  respondent's  position  was
    that in order for this to be so it would be necessary to establish that
    those of Kurdish ethnicity or Sunni or Shi'a religion have a materially
    higher risk than the generality of the  population  of  suffering  harm
    from indiscriminate violence; yet the appellants have  failed  to  show
    this.

234.  The Secretary of State's submissions urge the Tribunal to assess  risk
    on return at the airport  on  the  factual  basis  that  only  enforced
    returnees with an expired or current Iraqi passport would be  returned.
    In relation to a returnee who refuses to cooperate with the process for
    obtaining a laissez passer and, in so  doing,  frustrates  the  removal
    process, the Secretary of State's intention in such cases is to enforce
    their removal once a document meeting the  requirements  of  the  Iraqi
    authorities becomes available, but  in  the  meantime  they  cannot  be
    removed.  This is because without the necessary documentation there was
    no guarantee that they would be accepted by the  Iraqi  authorities  in
    Baghdad.

235.  The submissions point out that refusal to  cooperate  in  obtaining  a
    laissez passer would amount to a criminal offence  under  s.35  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004  ("the
    2004 Act").

236.  It is clear, therefore, that a person who refused to cooperate in  the
    obtaining of a laissez passer document would be at risk of  prosecution
    under s. 35.  It is submitted that  this  should  amount  to  a  strong
    incentive for individuals in such a position to  comply  with  the  re-
    documentation process.  It is made clear that  if  a  person  does  not
    cooperate  he  will  not  be  able  to  be  removed  whilst  the  Iraqi
    authorities' position on documentation remains the  same,  but  if  the
    Iraqi authorities' position changes to allow return on  EU  letters  as
    had previously been the case, then it  is  argued  there  would  be  no
    reason to suppose that Iraqi nationals would be returned to  Iraq  with
    any risk of detention let alone a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.
     The point is also made that it is now possible for  voluntary  returns
    to take place directly to the KRG and that is therefore an  option  for
    appellants such as the first two appellants in this case, which  avoids
    entirely any question of how they would be treated at BIAP.

237.  The Secretary of State's position is therefore that there is  no  risk
    of ill-treatment at  BIAP  because  anybody  returned  there  would  be
    returning on documentation which would enable them to leave the airport
    without delay (subject to them being a person in respect of whom  there
    was a judicial order or warrant for their arrest), and as such there is
    no risk on return.

238.  Despite considering there to  be  no  real  risk  of  even  short-term
    detention at BIAP  for  enforced  returnees,  the  Secretary  of  State
    requested the Tribunal to make an assessment of risk  of  ill-treatment
    at BIAP for an Iraqi national returned there from the  United  Kingdom,
    bearing in mind there are a number of cases in the High  Court  raising
    the issue of ill-treatment at BIAP as an alleged  barrier  to  removal,
    and in light of the accounts of ill-treatment given  by  failed  asylum
    seekers returned on charter flights  on  9  and  16  June  2010  and  6
    September 2010.

239.  In relation to the June 2010 charter flights, the first point made  in
    the Secretary of State's submissions is that investigations  by  UKBA's
    Professional Support Unit (PSU) found that the  returnees'  stories  of
    abuse during the returns process by UKBA  officials  and  their  agents
    were untrue.  The point is made that despite having had the opportunity
    to do so, none of the returnees has challenged those findings  and,  as
    was held in R (Qader) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2001] EWHC 1785 (Admin), at [22], that  makes  it  very  difficult  to
    accept them as witnesses of truth.  .

240.  The point is also made that most, if not all, of  the  returnees  were
    individuals who were failed asylum seekers and as such were individuals
    who had been found not to have been credible  in  their  asylum  claims
    which diminished the likelihood of  them  telling  the  truth  in  this
    regard.

241.  The point is  further  made  that  the  appellants  can  point  to  no
    independent evidence to support the allegations of  ill-treatment.   It
    is contended that the only reports  upon  which  they  rely  from,  for
    example,  UNHCR  and  newspapers,  are   based   not   on   independent
    investigations but rather the unsupported allegations of the returnees.
     It is said that the extent  to  which  the  appellants  rely  on,  for
    example,  photographs  and  medical  evidence  relating   to   injuries
    allegedly received from  ill-treatment  by,  for  example,  Mr  AA  (at
    B/121), none of this material demonstrates that any injuries  were  the
    result of mistreatment by the Iraqi authorities.

242.  It is also pointed out that since the June and September 2010  charter
    flights, there have been a number of returns from Iraq, as detailed  in
    the Secretary of State's evidence for these appeals  and  that  despite
    British Embassy inquiries of a number of reliable sources,  there  have
    been no reports of detention in poor conditions following any of  those
    flights.  It is noted that the appellants do not rely on  any  evidence
    relating to such issues  and  it  is  suggested  that  that  is  strong
    evidence not only that the reports of the returnees  on  the  June  and
    September 2010 flights were not true but also that there is no risk  on
    return at BIAP now.  Accordingly, it is argued that the case for  there
    being a real risk of ill-treatment at  BIAP  on  return  on  a  charter
    flight is not made out.

243.  Consideration  is  also  given  in  the  written  submissions  to  the
    authorities from the ECtHR relied on by the appellants.   NA  v  United
    Kingdom [2009] 48  EHRR  15,  which  is  cited  as  authority  for  the
    proposition that once an individual has  adduced  evidence  capable  of
    demonstrating substantial grounds for believing that there would  be  a
    real risk of the prescribed ill-treatment, the  burden  shifts  to  the
    respondent state to dispel any doubts about it, is said not to help the
    appellants  since  the  only  evidence  they  can  point  to  is   from
    individuals whose accounts are incapable of belief and  hence  they  do
    not get over the first threshold.  Even if they were considered to have
    passed that threshold, then they would fail at the second threshold for
    the reasons set out above.  With regard to MSS v Belgium [2011] 53 EHRR
    2, a contrast is drawn  between  the  evidence  that  existed  of  poor
    conditions for reception of asylum seekers in Greece and the absence of
    reports on detention of returnees at  BIAP.   It  is  argued  that  the
    appellants are not assisted by their references to reports  from  other
    organisations or detention conditions generally in  Iraq,  as  none  of
    those reports deals specifically with the situation  at  BIAP  and  the
    treatment of the issue by the experts does  not  take  the  matter  any
    further.  Reference is made also to the argument made by the appellants
    that conditions of detention "are not disputed". That, said Mr  Staker,
    was incorrect because the  Secretary  of  State  does  not  accept  the
    evidence concerning the conditions in which returnees  on  the  charter
    flights were held, for the reasons set out above.  The  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State cannot launch her own independent investigation into
    the conditions in detention facilities associated with BIAP, since Iraq
    is a sovereign state, is not the same as accepting allegations made  by
    others in respect of those conditions.  It is argued that the  evidence
    produced by the Secretary of State shows that she has in fact  gone  to
    considerable lengths  to  investigate  the  matter  with  a  number  of
    relevant and reliable interlocutors in Iraq, and it  is  asserted  that
    the allegations are not credible.

244.  The point is made in conclusion that the appellants are  not  assisted
    by their submissions on conditions in detention at BIAP.  The point is,
    it is said, in effect academic, given changes in procedures and as such
    no issue of risk at the airport arises, but again it is reiterated that
    it remains very important for the Tribunal to deal with the question of
    detention at BIAP and the allegations  on  which  the  appellants  rely
    concerning the June and September 2010 charter flights.

Submissions on internal relocation

245.  On the first day of the hearing we said we saw  no  reason  to  depart
    from the findings  of  the  Tribunal  in  its  recent  decision  in  MK
    (Documents - relocation) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT  00126  (IAC),  though  of
    course we did not rule out fresh  evidence  about  such  matters  being
    adduced which had not been  considered  in  MK.   In  MK  the  Tribunal
    concluded that it is wrong  to  say  that  there  is,  in  general,  no
    internal flight alternative in Iraq, bearing in mind in particular  the
    levels of governmental and NGO support available. In full  its  country
    guidance conclusions were as follows:

        "General Conclusions


         88(1)    Since the lack of documentation relating  to  identity  in
             the form of the Civil  Status  ID  (CSID),  Iraqi  Nationality
             Certificate (INC) and public Distribution  System  (PDS)  card
             (food ration card) is not ordinarily an  insuperable  problem,
             it is not a factor likely to make return to any part  of  Iraq
             unsafe or unreasonable.


             (a)       The CSID is an important document, both in  its  own
                  right and as a  gateway  to  obtaining  other  significant
                  documents such as the INC and the PDS.   An  inability  to
                  replace the CSID is likely to entail inability  to  access
                  the INC and PDS.


             (b)       Although the general position is that a  person  who
                  wishes to replace a lost CSID is  required  to  return  to
                  their home area in order to do so, there are procedures as
                  described in this determination available  which  make  it
                  possible (i) for Iraqis abroad to secure the  issue  of  a
                  new CSID to them through the offices of  the  local  Iraqi
                  Embassy; (ii) for Iraqis returned to Iraq without  a  CSID
                  to obtain one without  necessarily  having  to  travel  to
                  their home area.  Such procedures permit family members to
                  obtain such documentation from  their  home  areas  on  an
                  applicant's behalf or allow for a person to be given power
                  of attorney to obtain the  same.   Those  who  are  unable
                  immediately to establish  their  identity  can  ordinarily
                  obtain such documentation  by  being  presented  before  a
                  judge from the Civil Status Court,  so  as  to  facilitate
                  return to their place of origin.


         (2)      relocation to the KRG is in general reasonable.


             (a)       Entry into and residence in the KRG can be  effected
                  by any Iraqi national with a  CSID,  INC  and  PDS,  after
                  registration with the Asayish (local security office).  An
                  Arab may need a sponsor; a Kurd will not.


             (b)       Living conditions in the KRG for a  person  who  has
                  relocated there are not without  difficulties,  but  there
                  are  jobs,  and  there  is  access  to  free  health  care
                  facilities, education, rented accommodation and  financial
                  and other support from UNCHR.


         (3)      Despite bureaucratic difficulties  with  registration  and
             the difficulties faced by IDPs, it is wrong to say that  there
             is, in general, no internal alternative in  Iraq,  bearing  in
             mind in particular the levels of governmental and NGO  support
             available.


         (4)      Whilst the situation for women in Iraq is, in general, not
             such as to give rise to a real risk of persecution or  serious
             harm, there may be particular problems affecting female headed
             households where family support is lacking, and jobs and other
             means  of  support  may  be  harder  to  come   by.    Careful
             examination   of   the   particular   circumstances   of   the
             individual's case will be especially important."

246.  Mr Fordham put in lengthy written submissions in a  skeleton  argument
    on internal relocation, in which he relied heavily on section C of  the
    UNHCR April 2009 Guidelines on Iraq.  UNHCR's conclusion  was  that  in
    general there was no internal flight alternative within the central and
    southern governorates of Iraq  because  of  the  ability  of  non-state
    agents of persecution to perpetrate acts  of  violence  with  impunity,
    given the ongoing  levels  of  violence  in  mainly  the  five  central
    governorates of Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk,  Ninewah  and  Salah  Al  Din,
    access and residency restrictions, and the hardship faced  in  ensuring
    even basic survival in areas  of  relocation.   The  UNHCR  noted  that
    registration with the Ministry of Displacement and Migration (MoDM) was
    a condition for access  to  a  range  of  basic  services  as  well  as
    government assistance.  UNHCR also had concerns about  access  to  food
    for  IDPs,  problems  with  housing,  generally  poor  functioning  and
    dilapidated water and sewerage systems and significant deterioration in
    the healthcare system.  IDPs also had very poor access  to  income  and
    employment.  A significant number of IDPs  surveyed  in  Iraq  had  not
    received any humanitarian assistance since their displacement.

247.  The 2012 UNHCR Guidelines note, with  respect  to  relocation  to  the
    KRG, that the influx of IDPs has had an important impact  on  the  host
    communities, placing additional pressure  on  already  strained  public
    services, though at the same time  the  area  has  benefited  from  the
    immigration of professionals whose skills and disposable incomes  boost
    the local economy,  and  unskilled  IDPs  have  provided  a  source  of
    affordable labour for the construction industry.  A  person  fleeing  a
    state agent of persecution would remain at risk, but  others  might  be
    out of reach of their persecutors as generally the Kurdish  authorities
    are able and willing to provide protection.  It is said that  in  terms
    of access, roads between the KRG and central Iraq cannot be  considered
    safe.  Entry through the major roads and their checkpoints is  said  to
    be, practically, the only option available to most  Iraqis  seeking  to
    enter the KRG; flights are available but at  a  price  unaffordable  to
    many Iraqis.  We deal with issues of documentation below.

248.  The UNHCR say that most IDPs  in  the  KRG  live  in  rented  housing,
    though some live in improvised dwellings,  and  cite  health  problems.
    IDPs in the KRG have not had access to their food rations  through  the
    Public Distribution System (PDS) since November 2011, which means  they
    have to spend a high proportion of their income on food, often  leaving
    them without other essential items such  as  fuel  or  furniture.   IDP
    children can generally enrol in schools, provided  their  families  are
    registered with the security department and have an  information  card,
    but there is a shortage of Arabic-language schools and a  problem  with
    overcrowding.  Only those registered with the security department  have
    access to employment, so generally they must have a sponsor, and access
    to employment may be difficult in the  absence  of  family,  tribal  or
    political connections in the KRG.  Also, employees are usually required
    to speak Kurdish.  IDPs have access to the public  health  system,  but
    there are problems of inadequate supplies,  insufficient  staffing  and
    overcrowding of public hospitals.  As regards  relocation  to  southern
    and central Iraq, the UNHCR say that it is not feasible if  the  person
    is fleeing a state agent of persecution, and it is also not  likely  to
    be possible for a person fleeing an  armed  group.   Lack  of  physical
    safety is a general concern for returnees, and generally protection  by
    national authorities will not be available.   Ethno-religious  violence
    in the "disputed areas" (i.e. Kirkuk,  Ninewah,  parts  of  Diyala  and
    Salah  Al-Din)  compounded  by  land  and   property   disputes,   high
    unemployment and drought needs to be considered in respect of  possible
    relocation to those areas.

249.  The Guidelines state that relocation  for  categories  of  individuals
    fearing harm as a result of traditional practices and  religious  norms
    of a persecutory nature may be problematic.  Travel by road within  the
    central and southern governorates is dangerous,  especially  at  night.
    Lack of access to essential services  such  as  food,  drinking  water,
    sanitation, electricity and education remains a problem.   Housing  may
    also be problematic.  Nearly half a  million  Iraqis  are  reported  to
    remain in more than 382 informal housing  settlements,  which  are  not
    connected to regular networks.  Access to food including the PDS may be
    difficult,  and  access  to  education  has  reportedly  been  severely
    impacted by years of conflict.  Access to health care  is  said  to  be
    particularly difficult in rural areas where many IDPs are located,  and
    unemployment is a major concern for IDPs.  Common ethnic  or  religious
    backgrounds and  existing  tribal  and  family  ties  in  the  area  of
    relocation are said to be crucial when assessing  the  availability  of
    relocation, as they generally  assume  a  certain  level  of  community
    protection and access to services.

250.  As regards the northern governorates, it  was  noted  that  travel  to
    them is fraught with risks,  and  there  were  bureaucratic  and  other
    difficulties in accessing the three governorates.  Access to  food  via
    the PDS was uneven across the three governorates,  and  IDPs  were  not
    able to obtain food rations in their place of displacement.  Access  to
    housing was restricted in all three governorates and Kurdish  IDPs  did
    not have the right to purchase or own property and could only  rent  it
    if they had successfully registered with the Asayish (security).  There
    were also restrictions on access to public  education  and  in  certain
    areas, in particular in more  rural  or  homogenous  areas,  relocation
    would be difficult on account of a serious risk  of  rejection  by  the
    community.  At pp. 59 to 60 of the  UNHCR  Report  a  non-comprehensive
    list of groups of people who might not be able to  find  protection  on
    relocation in the three northern  governorates  was  set  out.  It  was
    argued that there was no good, still  less  no  cogent  or  compelling,
    reason for rejecting the UNHCR analysis.

251.  Reliance was also placed on the expert reports of  Dr  George  and  Dr
    Fatah in respect of the  individual  circumstances  of  the  particular
    appellants and more generally.  Mr Fordham also referred to a letter of
    8 April 2012 from the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  concerning  the
    process of returns and noting  that  the  returnee  requires  either  a
    passport, an expired passport, or potentially a laissez passer passport
    (if the Iraqi Embassy will issue such a document).

252.  The skeleton argument also deals with issues  concerning  travel  from
    Baghdad to the KRG and related evidence from Dr Fatah.

253.  A further section of the skeleton deals  with  entry  procedures  into
    and residence in the KRG.  Again reliance is placed on the UNHCR  April
    2009 Report and the evidence of Dr George and Dr Fatah.  Criticisms are
    made of the Danish Immigration Service Report  of  April  2010  on  the
    basis that it is said not to be reliable and that it should  not  begin
    to displace the UNHCR  position,  in  particular  with  regard  to  the
    security measures  introduced  by  the  Kurdish  authorities  at  their
    checkpoints.  A more recent report from the Danish Immigration Service,
    based on  the  Fact-Finding  Mission  between  7  and  24  March  2011,
    maintains the earlier position in relation to entry procedures and  the
    requirement of a sponsor.  However, it is noted that there has  been  a
    more recent report, which was not before  the  Tribunal  in  MK,  dated
    March 2012  and  entitled  "Joint  Report  of  the  Danish  Immigration
    Service/UK Border Agency  Fact-Finding  Mission  to  Erbil  and  Dahuk,
    Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI) conducted 11 to 22 November 2011  Update
    (2) on entry procedures at Kurdistan  Regional  Government  Checkpoints
    (KRG); residence procedures in  Kurdistan  region  of  Iraq  (KRI)  and
    arrival procedures at  Erbil  and  Sulaymaniyah  Airports  (for  Iraqis
    travelling from non-KRI areas of Iraq)".   It  is  said  that  in  this
    report it is accepted by the head  of  the  Asayish  that  there  is  a
    varying requirement for a reference (or sponsor) and that the  security
    procedures involve differential treatment for Arabs.

254.  The skeleton argument also quotes from another  report  that  was  not
    before the Tribunal in MK, "Joint Finish-Swiss Fact-Finding Mission  to
    Amman and the Kurdish Regional  Government  (KRG)  area  in  May  10-22
    2011", dated 1 February 2012.  This is quoted as  stating  that  anyone
    who does not originate from  the  KRG  needs  a  sponsor.   The  report
    comments on entry procedures to  the  KRG  and  also  addresses  issues
    concerning Arabs in the KRG area and also the position of IDPs  in  the
    KRG.  In the 2012 Guidelines, UNHCR say that  since  the  fall  of  the
    former regime, the KRG authorities are very vigilant about  who  enters
    the area,  and  have  introduced  strict  security  measures  at  their
    checkpoints.  It is said that an ad hoc and often inconsistent approach
    can be expected in terms of who is granted  access,  varying  not  only
    from governorate to governorate but also from checkpoint to checkpoint.
     A sponsor may be required to be physically present at  the  checkpoint
    to secure the person's entering:  in other cases a letter notarised  by
    a court clerk attesting to the person's connection to the  sponsor  may
    suffice, or a telephone call by the officer at the  checkpoint  to  the
    sponsor will be enough.  It is said that single Arab  males,  including
    minors, are likely either to be refused entry  to  the  KRG  or  to  be
    allowed entry only after a lengthy administrative procedure  and  heavy
    interrogation.  An information card to be obtained from the Asayish, is
    required for a person wishing to stay for more  than  30  days,  and  a
    sponsor may be required in order to obtain an information card.

255.  In his skeleton, Mr Fordham goes on to address  issues  of  relocation
    in the central and southern governorates, quoting Dr George as  stating
    that there is no  part  of  central  or  southern  Iraq  in  which  the
    appellants in these appeals could live in safety due  to  the  security
    situation in those parts of the country.  Reference is also made to  Dr
    Fatah's evidence in respect of  the  absence  of  any  internal  flight
    alternative in Iraq.  With regard to  the  situation  of  IDPs  in  the
    central and southern governorates, the Internal Displacement Monitoring
    Centre (IDMC) Norwegian Refugee Council, is quoted in  respect  of  the
    difficulties for the 2.8 million Iraqis internally displaced,  referred
    to in its report of 4  March  2010.   There  are  restrictions  on  the
    freedom of movement due to the security situation, and difficulties  in
    replacing lost documents.  Reference is also made to a  report  of  the
    IOM, dated 18 March 2008 concerning problems  experienced  by  refugees
    and IDPs in Iraq due to insecurity and problems with the infrastructure
    in Iraq.  A further report  of  the  IOM  dated  13  April  2010  notes
    problems  with  shelter  and  basic  services  such  as  clean   water,
    sanitation and electricity and noting that much of the Iraqi population
    depends upon the PDS food rationing system and that across the  country
    46% of post-Samarra IDPs had periodic access to rations at best.  There
    were also serious concerns  about  access  to  healthcare.   A  further
    report  of  February  2011  from  the  same  organisation   refers   to
    difficulties for the 1.6 million  Iraqis  who  are  displaced  and  the
    ongoing  problems  despite   comparatively   smaller   rates   of   new
    displacements  since  the  peak  in  2006.   There  is   reference   to
    difficulties in access to PDS rations and the problem of the  inability
    to transfer ration cards being a concern throughout  Iraq.   The  Joint
    Finnish-Swiss  Fact-Finding  Mission  also  contains   evidence   about
    difficulties for unregistered IDPs.  A contrast is  drawn  between  the
    evidence of Dr Fatah, who said that IDPs could  access  "support"  from
    the MoDM, and the experience of returnees whose evidence is set out  at
    section 20.3 of Dr Fatah's report.  Thereafter, the skeleton goes on to
    address the particular position of the appellants in this appeal.

256.  With regard to MK it is said that not only  is  further  and  detailed
    evidence provided from the experts, but  that  it  is  clear  that  the
    Danish Immigration Service report of March 2012 and  the  Swiss-Finnish
    report of 1 February 2012 were not before the Tribunal in that case and
    therefore various of the findings of the Tribunal fell to be reassessed
    in light of the evidence adduced above.

257.  In his oral submissions, Mr Fordham  addressed  the  specific  country
    guidance issues summarised at [88] in  MK.   He  argued  firstly,  with
    regard to what was said at [88(2)], that there was an  ambiguity  where
    it was said: "An Arab may need a sponsor; a Kurd will not" and that  it
    was unclear whether this was concerned with entry or registration.   It
    was argued that it was right that a Kurd would not need  a  sponsor  to
    enter the KRG but that an Arab might well  do,  and  might  be  refused
    entry in the absence of a sufficient family  or  support  network.   He
    referred to [57] of MK in this regard.  It could not be said that there
    was an internal flight alternative to the KRG for an Arab,  as  at  the
    point of entry they might need a sponsor and in the absence  of  family
    or contacts in the KRG, they would not get one.  Also, they  would  not
    be able to access food rations.  The fact  that  it  was  unlikely  the
    third appellant, a Sunni Arab, would want to relocate to the KRG was by
    the way.  There were relevant passages in  the  Danish/UKBA  report  at
    [3.08] and [4.01], [4.11] and [4.35].  It was clear from MK that access
    to services in the KRG was dependent upon having  been  authorised  for
    residence.  Paragraph 8.16 of the  Danish/UKBA  report  supported  this
    point.  In addition, there was relevant evidence in the Joint  Finnish-
    Swiss report at pages 61, 64 to 65 and 90.  A  person  required  to  be
    registered in order to have access to services.  A sponsor or reference
    would be required for residence.   This  was  dealt  with  at  [8]  and
    various sub-paragraphs in the Danish/UKBA report.  The evidence did not
    support the conclusion in MK that a sponsor was  not  needed.   A  Kurd
    from the disputed areas would be refused residence.  Dr George referred
    to this in [18] and [40] of his third witness statement.  Food  rations
    were clearly important.  Anyone, whether a Kurd or an Arab, who did not
    originate from the KRG  would  not  be  able  to  transfer  their  food
    rations.  This would be even more so  for  a  Kurd  from  the  disputed
    areas.  The situation was that there existed an essential safety net in
    the form of the PDS card but there was  a  refusal  to  facilitate  its
    provision in the area of residence.  That might not be too  problematic
    for a person whose home area was close to the  KRG  and  who  therefore
    would be able to go there in order to collect  their  rations  monthly,
    but otherwise a person would be bereft of  subsistence  protection  and
    this would not be remedied by the profile of humanitarian assistance.

258.  The evidence was that in the southern governorates,  displaced  people
    faced the prospect that one  in  three  would  be  without  their  food
    rations and 85% would only have partial rations.  This could be seen at
    [83] of MK.  The Secretary of State argued that  this  would  not  make
    relocation unduly harsh even if the person had no family or network  of
    friends.  Paragraphs 84 and 87 of MK were striking with regard  to  the
    relevant governorates.

OUR ASSESSMENT

Confinement to the Article 15(c) issue

259.  The burden of proof in these appeals rests on the  appellants,  albeit
    the standard of proof is relatively low  and  the  seriousness  of  the
    issues at stake requires us to apply anxious scrutiny. In deciding this
    case we have to have regard to the entirety of the evidence. This being
    a CG case we have set out the enormous amount of evidence with which we
    have been presented in Appendix A.

260.  Our primary focus in these appeals is  strictly  confined  to  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive, and a discrete issue relating  to
    risk on return to BIAP. However, since this case deals with the current
    situation in Iraq it will inevitably be a reference point for decision-
    makers deciding asylum-related appeals brought by Iraqis that  are  not
    confined to the Article 15(c) issue. In this context we would reiterate
    the observations made recently by the Tribunal in AK  (Afghanistan)  at
    [154]-[156] that in the general run of appeals  decision-makers  should
    ordinarily deal first with the issue of refugee  eligibility  and  only
    deal with the issue of subsidiary protection (including  Article  15(c)
    second. They should not deal with Article 3 until last:

         "154.    That is so for two main reasons. First of  all,  decision-
             makers are obliged  by  the  structure  of  the  Qualification
             Directive to give primacy to  the  issue  of  eligibility  for
             refugee protection; whereas Articles 15(b) and (c) are species
             of "subsidiary" protection: see recitals 3, 5. Second, to skip
             over refugee eligibility would  be  to  lend  support  to  the
             misconception that persons fleeing armed conflict cannot  fall
             within the Article 1A(2) Refugee Convention  definition.  That
             has never been so, even if there has been recurrent hesitation
             about the criteria that should apply to such cases: see  AM  &
             AM (armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia CG  [2008]  UKAIT
             00091, paras 17, 68.


         155.     In relation to why Article 3 ECHR  should  be  dealt  with
             last, the reason is simple. By virtue of Article 15(b) of  the
             Qualification Directive, a person who can establish an Article
             3 risk, will (save in one limited respect  relating  to  heath
             cases)  be  able  to  show  he  is  entitled   to   subsidiary
             (humanitarian  protection)  under  15(b).  By  contrast   with
             Article   3   ECHR,   subsidiary   protection    (humanitarian
             protection),  including  under  Article  15(b),  entitles  the
             beneficiary to a legal status both at  the  level  of  EU  law
             (Article 24(2) of the Qualification Directive) and in  UK  law
             (para 339C of the Immigration Rules).


         156.     As regards whether or not to deal with  Article  15(b)  or
             15(c) first, it might seem that because the Court  of  Justice
             in Elgafaji has held that  Article  15(c)  has  an  additional
             scope to Article 3 ECHR that it  would  always  be  easier  to
             address Article 15(c)  first  as  having  broader  scope.  But
             establishing subsidiary protection eligibility  under  Article
             15(b) may sometimes be more straightforward than seeking to do
             so under Article 15(c). This may arise where, for example, the
             claimant falls within  a  risk  category  but  cannot  show  a
             Refugee Convention ground (e.g. where he is at  real  risk  of
             persecution/serious harm at the hands of a  powerful  criminal
             gang). It may also arise where there is  a  recent  ECHR  case
             that   establishes   comprehensively   that   there   is    an
             exceptionally  high  level  of  generalised  violence  in  the
             claimant's country that amounts to a violation  of  Article  3
             ECHR (see NA v UK Application  no.  25904/07,  paras  115-116;
             Sufi and Elmi v UK Applications  nos.  8319/07  and  11449/07,
             paras 218, 250) and  there  is  no  valid  reason  to  take  a
             different view. Another problem  is  that  whilst  it  is  now
             established that Article 15(c)  has  an  additional  scope  to
             Article 3 ECHR (a near equivalent  to  Article  15(b)  of  the
             Qualification Directive), the ascertainment of that additional
             scope may not always be a simple matter."

The expert evidence

261.  We found Dr George's evidence of considerable  assistance  and  attach
    significant weight to it.  Nevertheless it is notable, we  think,  that
    in his oral testimony he agreed that the opinions he had  expressed  in
    his written reports on the levels of risk or of persons being "at risk"
    or "at real risk" did not necessarily  mean  anything  more  than  that
    "some" risk existed.  Similarly when he used the term "plausible" (e.g.
    at [40] in relation to former Ba'ath Party members) he agreed this  did
    not necessarily mean anything more  than  that  the  particular  matter
    "could" have happened.

262.  Whilst such usages are entirely understandable in the context of  such
    a report, they limit the report's value  to  us  as  an  assessment  of
    levels of risk in respect of Article 15(c) eligibility. If Dr  George's
    references about risk and real risk were taken to  mean  Article  15(c)
    risk, then his report would be at odds with  a  central  tenet  of  the
    appellants' case. Whereas for the appellants it is  only  in  the  five
    central governorates that the Article 15(c) threshold is  reached,  his
    position would then be more wide-ranging:  he  described  the  security
    situation" in all parts of Iraq other than the KRG area"  being   "such
    as to pose very real risks to the population at large" (at  [191];  see
    also [220]).

263.  We also  found  Dr  Fatah's  evidence  extremely  helpful  and  attach
    significant weight to it also, particularly his oral evidence which was
    generally more ready to recognise nuances. As with Dr George,  we  note
    that Dr Fatah used terms like  "risk"  and  "real  risk"  loosely.  For
    example, whereas in his written report he spoke of a  significant  risk
    of kidnapping of returnees from the west, he  was  prepared  to  accept
    during his oral testimony that the evidence for saying this was a  real
    risk was lacking and it was no more than "a possibility".

264.  What the proceedings have revealed is that neither expert was able  to
    give much assistance to the Tribunal in deciding the core issue of  the
    levels of violence in Iraq beyond highlighting various aspects  of  the
    existing documentary studies  dealing  with   civilian  casualties  and
    related matters. We would emphasise, however, that we do not mean these
    observations as a criticism of either expert, since it is not their job
    to apply legal criteria.  And their presentation of relevant background
    evidence has assisted our understanding  of  trends.   On  one  or  two
    matters, in particular the issue of whether armed attacks in Iraq  have
    become more targeted, we have preferred the evidence of Dr  Fatah,  but
    that is largely a function of the fact that he gave  more  sources  and
    that his analysis was corroborated by them.

Initial observations

265.  Mr Fordham seeks to rely on the fact that in HMI  the  Tribunal  noted
    that the casualty figures for 2006 and 2007 suggested that the  Article
    15(c) threshold might have been met in parts of Iraq at that  time  and
    expressed particular concerns as to the situation in Mosul  in  Ninewah
    Province.  Given such findings it was incumbent  on  the  Tribunal,  he
    said, not to find that the Article 15(c) threshold was  no  longer  met
    unless there were compelling reasons.

266.  However in HMI the Tribunal observed that it was not its task "to  re-
    evaluate what the Tribunal in KH should have concluded as to the  level
    of risk to civilians in early 2008" and in relation to the situation of
    Iraq in 2006 and 2007 and in Mosul in 2009 it stopped short  of  making
    any definitive finding on such matters.  It saw  its  express  task  as
    assessment of the current situation.  We entirely agree with Mr  Staker
    that the attempt in the appellants' skeleton to invoke a  principle  of
    cessation in this respect, analogous  to  Article  1C  of  the  Refugee
    Convention, is misconceived.

267.  In the present appeals we wish to make it  just  as  clear  throughout
    that our concern is to assess the current level of Article  15(c)  risk
    in Iraq.  Of course, for such purposes  evidence  as  to  the  historic
    situation is relevant and the previous findings of  fact  made  by  the
    Tribunal in both KH and HMI  do  afford  helpful  reference  points  in
    certain respects; particularly  as  we  know  precisely  what  body  of
    background evidence they had before them when reaching their decisions.
     But plainly the fact that both were overturned by the Court of  Appeal
    means that their findings on the evidence before them cannot be treated
    as starting points.  The effect of the Court  of  Appeal  decisions  is
    that we must approach this case on the basis that there is no  previous
    binding country guidance case on the application of  Article  15(c)  to
    Iraq.

Comparison with other conflicts

268.  As regards evidence and submissions drawing a comparison  between  the
    conflict in Iraq and those in Afghanistan and Somalia, we take it  into
    account but do not find it  of  much  assistance,  for  much  the  same
    reasons as were given by the Tribunal in HM1 at [258]:

         "258.    Although we would agree that in  principle  it  should  be
             possible to achieve objective indicators of violence that  can
             be  applied  in  a  comparative   fashion   across   different
             countries, we have some doubts  that  current  studies/surveys
             have yet resolved problems of different methodologies. Figures
             in any event only furnish  a  part  of  the  overall  evidence
             needed to assess Article 15(c)  risk.  So  at  best  we  would
             regard this particular comparison (which  of  course  is  only
             valid if at all in relation  to  the  levels  of  violence  in
             Afghanistan at the time GS was heard, not now) as a very rough
             guide and not one to which we should  attach  any  significant
             weight)."


269.  As to the reference made to the  recent  determination  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AMM and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2011] UKUT 00448, in that case the Tribunal decided that Article 15(c)
    should  prohibit  removals  to  Mogadishu  unless  the  individual  had
    connections with powerful individuals or  belonged  to  a  category  of
    middle class or professional persons who could  live  to  a  reasonable
    standard.  Outside Mogadishu, unless at a particular time fighting  was
    in progress in a particular area in which 15(c)  would  apply  to  that
    area, in general 15(c) should not prevent removals.  That  decision  is
    based on its own facts as is the case in all CG decisions.  One  cannot
    on its facts be used as an authority for another.  But it does make the
    point that  the  whole  circumstances  including  the  lack  of  normal
    facilities which make life tolerable and which result from the national
    armed conflict must be taken into account.

The inclusive approach

270.  In HM1 at [75]-[84] the  Tribunal  explained  the  need  to  adopt  an
    inclusive approach.

271.  AK (Afghanistan) at [163], reaffirmed this approach. Having  explained
    the need for proper  allowance  to  be  made  for  underreporting,  the
    Tribunal added this comment:

         "...Further, whilst the  inclusive  approach  is  an  indispensable
         safeguard against any artificial exclusion  of  relevant  types  of
         violence, it must not lead the  decision-maker  to  run  everything
         together and to overlook or blur important features of the  ongoing
         conflict, for it is only by a careful delineation and understanding
         of these features that a proper assessment can be  made  about  the
         levels of indiscriminate violence for Article 15(c) purposes.  Ours
         must be a qualitative as well as a quantitative analysis. Thus, for
         example, in AMM at  para  339  the  Tribunal  considered  that,  in
         addition to  the  level  of  civilian  casualties,  another  factor
         leading them to  conclude  that  in  Mogadishu  the  Article  15(c)
         threshold had been crossed related to the "conduct of the  parties"
         by  reference  to  the  highlighting  in  background  evidence   of
         widespread violations of international humanitarian law."

272.  A further dimension to the  inclusive  approach  is  an  understanding
    that even when focusing on civilian deaths and injuries it is necessary
    to take account of the impact of threats of violence  as  well  as  the
    physical violence itself.

273.  In addition, where armed conflict has been ongoing for  some  time   -
    and in Iraq it has been going for fifteen years - assessment must  take
    into account its long-term  cumulative  effects,  not  just  annualised
    figures.

The inclusive approach: other metrics

274.  In line with our inclusive approach, we  continue  to  take  the  view
    expressed in HM1 and in subsequent country guidance cases dealing  with
    Article 15(c) issues - see e.g.  [162]  -  that  in  assessing  Article
    15(c) considerations it is  valid  to  consider  "metrics"  other  than
    civilian casualties/"battlefield deaths", two such other metrics  being
     population displacement and the degree of state failure.

The UNHCR Guidelines

275.  It has been the appellants' consistent position throughout  this  case
    that it was not appropriate for the Tribunal  to  depart  from  UNHCR's
    informed and cogently reasoned guidance  assessment.   At  the  hearing
    this was  advanced  in  relation  to  the  April  2009  Guidelines  and
    subsequent UNHCR notes confirming their  continued  applicability.   In
    subsequent submissions it was advanced in  relation  to  the  May  2012
    Guidelines.

276.  In previous country guidance cases  the  Tribunal  has  almost  always
    attached  very  considerable  weight  to  UNHCR  guidelines   on   risk
    categories in particular countries, although it has seen the degree  of
    weight to be attached to be dependent on a number of factors  including
    whether or not UNHCR has a  presence  on  the  ground  in  the  country
    concerned.  A similar approach has been adopted by the ECtHR,  e.g.  in
    NA v UK and Sufi and Elmi.

277.  Mr Fordham sought to persuade us that we should indeed accord  a  more
    primary status to UNHCR Guidelines so as  to  reflect  its  status  and
    mandate,  its  detailed  assessment  and  rigorous  standards  of   due
    diligence such that it is not appropriate to depart, "save for a cogent
    and identified reason", from UNHCR's guidelines.  We recognise that, as
    highlighted by Sir Stephen Sedley in EM (Eritrea) & Ors v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1336 at [41] that  UNHCR,
    "is today the holder of an internationally  respected  office  with  an
    expert staff (numbering 7,190 in 120 different states, according to its
    website), able to assemble and monitor information from  year  to  year
    and to apply to it  standards  of  knowledge  and  judgment  which  are
    ordinarily beyond the reach of a court. In doing this, and in  reaching
    his conclusions, [the UNHCR] has the authority of the General  Assembly
    of the United Nations, by whom he is appointed and to whom he reports".
    We also recognise  that  in  Iraq  UNHCR's  sources  include  IDPs  and
    returnees who have made contact  with  UNHCR  in  the  context  of  its
    monitoring operations as well as other agencies and  persons  in  Iraq.
    However, we are unable to accept Mr Fordham's proposition, not  out  of
    lack of respect for UNHCR's considered views on country  conditions  or
    its immensely thorough and heavily footnoted 2012 Guidelines,  but  out
    of concern to ensure we discharge our duty to decide cases on the basis
    of the evidence and arguments presented to us; bearing in mind that  in
    this,  as  well  as  most  country  guidance  cases,  we  have  a  very
    comprehensive body of background evidence together with expert  reports
    and detailed submissions to put  alongside  the  UNHCR  materials.   We
    would be very surprised if indeed UNHCR took a different view  of  what
    should be our function, but in any event, as Mr Staker pointed out,  Mr
    Fordham's submission on this matter is also contrary to authority:  see
    Mhute v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1029 and R (Golfa) v SSHD [2005] EWHC 2282
    (Admin).

278.  Observing that in HMI one reason why the Tribunal did not  follow  the
    (then) UNHCR Guidelines was because it considered UNHCR  had  strategic
    concerns (at [274]), Mr Fordham averred that UNHCR  had  not  said  its
    risk assessment on Iraq was affected by strategic concerns.  Mr Fordham
    also questioned the Tribunal's doubting of UNHCR's  consistency,  given
    its heavy involvement in return and reintegration programmes  in  Iraq.
    They were voluntary, not enforced returns and it was  only  the  latter
    that was in issue in this case.  One could not regard  UNHCR's  Article
    15(c)  assessment  as  being  flawed  by  reason  of  its  support  for
    internationally supervised returns.

279.  We find it difficult to overlook altogether the apparent  conflict  in
    UNHCR's position in relation to risk on return to Iraq.   In  order  to
    qualify for UNHCR "facilitation" of voluntary repatriation,  applicants
    are required to fulfil various criteria, one of which is stated  to  be
    that "Conditions in specific areas of intended return in Iraq  must  be
    assessed by UNHCR as being sustainable".  Yet it is not in dispute that
    sometime after February 2008 UNHCR chose to  recommence  assistance  to
    Iraqi voluntary returnees even though: (i) its view (at least up to May
    2012) was that because of the high level of indiscriminate violence the
    5 central governorates were unsafe; and (ii)  some  of  those  assisted
    proposed returns to these governorates.  We note that in Al  Hamdami  v
    Bosnia and Herzogovina 7 February 2012 the Strasbourg  Court  has  also
    seen this apparent conflict as problematic.  The Court observed at [51]
    that:

         "Although the Court is aware that the UNHCR, the  UN  and  the  IOM
         recommend that countries refrain from forcibly  returning  refugees
         to Iraq, they have stated that  they  are  committed  to  providing
         assistance to those who return.  Moreover, the Court observes  that
         their recommendations are partly based on  the  security  situation
         and partly due to practical problems for returnees such as shelter,
         health care and property restitution."

      The court went on to find that there  was  no  generalised  Article  3
    risk in Iraq.

280.   We  acknowledge  that  UNHCR  exercises  considerable  care  in   its
    assistance to voluntary returnees. In its literature UNHCR states  that
    it provides assistance on an individual  case  basis  to  persons  who,
    "being fully informed of the situation in their places of origin, chose
    voluntarily to return".  We acknowledge too that UNHCR's assistance has
    not taken the strong form of "promotion" of returns, but only of  their
    "facilitation". It must also be emphasised that inside Iraq  UNHCR  has
    well-established Protection and Assistance Centers (PACs)  and  Return,
    Integration and  Community  Centers  (RICCs),  now  renamed  Protection
    Assistance Reintegration Centers (PARCs) to assist returnees who decide
    to return.  That demonstrates  that  UNHCR  plays  an  active  part  in
    seeking to ensure those who choose to  return  voluntarily,  do  so  in
    safety and with assistance.

281.  We also accept that we are not in a position to assess to what  extent
    if at all UNHCR's strategic concerns about orderly returns  affect  its
    assessment of the need for international protection under  the  Refugee
    Convention or Qualification Directive. We further accept  that  we  are
    not in a position to know to what  extent  choices  made  by  voluntary
    returnees are influenced by considerations such  as  the  awfulness  of
    their situation outside Iraq  or  their  own  imperviousness  to  risk.
    However, we would be wrong not to bear this dimension of  UNHCR's  work
    in mind. Whilst therefore we  continue to have unanswered questions  as
    to how UNHCR can reconcile its "facilitation" of voluntary returns with
    a position (such as was taken in  the  2009  Guidelines)  that  certain
    areas of Iraq are unsafe, we do not propose to treat that as  a  reason
    for attaching any  less  weight  to  its  assessment  of  international
    protection needs.

282.  Following UNHCR's publication post-hearing of  new  guidelines,  there
    was also an issue between the parties as to the nature  and  extent  of
    the change in UNHCR's position in relation to  Article  15(c)  and  its
    applicability.  Mr Fordham accepted that the new Guidelines  no  longer
    supported the blanket "geographical" position that  specific  provinces
    could be identified as crossing the  Article  15(c)  threshold  without
    more, although they did support, he contended,  the position that those
    from the five central governorates were likely to be  able  to  succeed
    under Article 15(c).  Mr Staker argued that the new Guidelines not only
    do not set out any blanket position but they also do  not  specifically
    apply the Article 15(c) test.  Their  primary  position  was  that  all
    claims for complementary (subsidiary) protection have to be  considered
    on an individual basis.  If the Guidelines considered that  there  were
    specific governorates or towns or cities where Article  15(c)  criteria
    are met at present, it was to be expected that they would have said so.
     Insofar as the new Guidelines suggest that certain asylum-seekers  are
    "likely" to be in need of complementary protection,  the  Secretary  of
    State considers that to be inconsistent with the remainder of the  2012
    Guidelines which rely on a case-by-case basis of approach.

283.  In relation to these submissions we have four responses.

284.  First, we cannot agree with Mr Staker  that  the  2012  Guidelines  no
    longer seek to give guidance on the  application  to  Iraq  of  Article
    15(c), although it is true they do not refer in terms, as was  done  in
    the  2009  guidelines,  to  the  case  of  Elgafaji.   Whilst  the  new
    Guidelines do not as such  refer  to  Article  15(c),  their  plentiful
    references to complementary protection "on the basis of  a  fear  of  a
    serious and indiscriminate harm arising  from  that  violence"  clearly
    encompass Article 15(c). The introductory Note to the Guidelines refers
    to   the   Qualification   Directive   and   comments   that    UNHCR's
    recommendations also touch upon relevant "complementary  or  subsidiary
    protection regimes".

285.  Second, we  cannot  agree  that  the  new  guidelines  are  internally
    inconsistent because they maintain on the one hand that assessment must
    be on a case-by-case basis and on the other that those from areas where
    there is a high level and high intensity of violence  are  "likely"  to
    qualify  for  complementary  protection.   It  seems  to  us  that   in
    articulating both of these propositions UNHCR is making it  clear  that
    even though it no longer considers it justified to identify risk on the
    basis of "broad geographic  distinctions"  as  such,  it  continues  to
    regard geographical indicators (including ones related to  governorates
    as well as sub-governorate areas) as  of  very  significant  weight  in
    assessing risk in individual cases.  The plain inference from  its  new
    guidelines is that if an individual is accepted as  "formerly  residing
    in governorates, districts, cities, towns, villages  or  neighbourhoods
    where high levels of violence continue  to  be  reported",  the  likely
    impact on him is that he will be in  need  of  complementary  forms  of
    protection [emphasis added].  This makes it clear  that  the  level  of
    violence in "governorates" as well as smaller geographical  areas,  can
    be a basis for deciding whether an individual qualifies.

286.  Third, we are unable nevertheless  to  accept  UNHCR's  assessment  in
    these new Guidelines that in  any  of  the  five  central  governorates
    current level and intensity of violence is sufficiently high to make it
    likely that persons from those governorates face an Article 15(c)  risk
    merely by being present there as civilians, certainly not if the  terms
    "likely" is intended to denote a real  risk  or  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood. We do not consider that the evidence  we  have  as  to  the
    level of violence  in  each  of  these  governorates  supports  such  a
    conclusion. We note in any event  that  the  statement  in  the  second
    paragraph of the Summary (see above at [61]) about  the  likelihood  of
    Iraqi asylum seekers being in need of complementary forms of protection
    is  predicated  on  there  being  locations  "where,  at  the  time  of
    adjudication of the asylum claim, high levels and a high  intensity  of
    violence continue to be reported..." - which must mean that  if  it  is
    assessed  that  the  level  of  intensity  of  the  violence   is   not
    sufficiently high, the need for protection is no longer "likely".

287.  Fourth, although the new UNHCR  Guidelines  do  not  specify  anything
    about whether applicants  from  Iraq  can  fall  within  enhanced  risk
    categories under Article 15(c)'s "sliding-scale", it would appear  that
    they do not exclude that being a Kurd or being a  Sunni  or  Shi'a  (or
    being connected to former Ba'athist Party members) may qualify a person
    under Article 15(c) depending on the particular  circumstances  of  the
    case.  Whilst we do not disagree  that in an individual case,  being  a
    Kurd or a Sunni or Shi'a (or being connected to former Ba'athist  Party
    members) may, taken together with other risk characteristics,  place  a
    person  at  Article  15(c)   risk   (and   indeed,   if   those   other
    characteristics are significant enough, at real risk of persecution  or
    Article 15(b) serious harm), we  do  not  consider  that  the  evidence
    establishes that a civilian will be at Article  15(c)  risk  merely  by
    virtue of being a Kurd or Sunni  or  Shi'a  (or  someone  connected  to
    former Ba'athist Party members).

Patterns of violence and trends

288.  There are, of course, various question marks over the future  security
    of Iraq including the unresolved issue of  the  referendum  on  Kurdish
    territories; ongoing Sunni concerns about being marginalised in the new
    political system; and the  ability  of  the  GoI  to  provide  adequate
    security following the departure of close  to  100,000  US  forces  and
    their allies since January 2009.  Al Qaeda  in  Iraq  (AQI)  and  other
    insurgent groups have shifted their forces  to  concentrate  on  fewer,
    larger, attacks. Their agenda remains using terror to destabilise.

289.  At the same time, the  evidence  we  have  does  reveal  a  number  of
    trends.  The Sons of Iraq (SoI) programme has done much to  reintegrate
    Sunni elements into  the  political  mainstream  and  to  reduce  Sunni
    extremism.  There has been  a  significant  decline  in  Shi'a  militia
    activity due to political realignments.  Sadr  and  the  Sadrist  Party
    maintain their  militia  but  are  now  part  of  the  Shi'a  political
    alliance.  Some extremist movements such as Asaib Ahl al-Haq (AAH) have
    accepted a partial ceasefire and held reconciliation talks.  The  March
    2010 parliamentary elections did not see major  upsurges.   The  phased
    withdrawal of US  forces  has  not  led  to  a  return  to  generalised
    sectarian conflict and indeed appears to have resulted in a significant
    annualised drop in the number of security incidents, the average number
    of weekly incidents  having  fallen  by  December  2011  to  below  50,
    compared with 300 seen in early 2009 (15 December 2011 Cordesman  paper
    for CSIS).  The International Crisis Group has assessed that  the  Iraq
    security forces  are  "faring  relatively  well"  (COIS,  August  2011,
    [10.05]).  Whilst AQI's switch to  fewer,  larger  attacks  means  that
    civilians  are  still  at  risk  from  their  attacks,  it  is  broadly
    recognised that its  general  military  capacity  and  that  of  allied
    insurgent groups has been downgraded.   According  to  Jane's  Sentinel
    Country  Risk  Assessment  for  Iraq,  21  March  2011,  terrorist  and
    insurgent groups have been whittled down to a hard core.   Patterns  of
    ethno-sectarian violence also demonstrate a decline.

290.  It seems to us that the appellants' submissions  broadly  acknowledged
    these developments: for example the  appellant's  skeleton  highlighted
    the latest UNAMI Report dated January 2011 recording a rate of  decline
    in civilian casualties, albeit at a slowed rate.

291.  Whilst it would be possible to infer from evidence such as  the  above
    that violence in Iraq is continuing to decline, we consider it  prudent
    to approach this case on the  basis  that  presently  violence  remains
    broadly at the same level as in 2010 and 2011, since there continue  to
    be some commentators who consider that the security  situation  has  in
    fact deteriorated and we note that on the  basis  of  figures  for  the
    first 6 -9 months of 2012 it is possible the figures for 2012 may  show
    a small increase.

292.  What is clear from the evidence is that  in  recent  years  there  has
    been an increase in targeted killings.  We are  unable  to  accept  the
    respondent's  position  (as  most  forcefully  expressed  in  the  July
    submissions) that the fact of more targeted violence per se means  less
    indiscriminate  violence.   As   noted   earlier,   targeted   violence
    encompasses both specific  and  general  targeting.   As  both  parties
    acknowledge, some violence, albeit  targeted,  can  harm  civilians  in
    significant numbers. Sometimes civilians themselves can be  the  target
    (see e.g. the observation in the 2012 UNHCR  Guidelines  at  p.10  that
    "[u]nlike  other  armed  groups,  Al-Qa'eda  in  Iraq  has   reportedly
    deliberately targeted Iraqi civilians at large, in  particular  Shi'as,
    apparently with the aim of (re)igniting violence  among  Iraq's  ethnic
    and religious groups"). Sometimes, although the target is a  government
    building or police station, its location is such  that  many  civilians
    become collateral victims.  Further, as we have explained earlier, even
    carefully targeted killings that harm  no  civilians  contribute  to  a
    climate of fear and insecurity which in an indirect  way  adds  to  the
    intensity of the violence. As noted by the Tribunal in AK (Afghanistan)
    at [207]:

         "We  bear  in  mind,  of  course,  that  the  targeted  killing  of
         particular types of  civilians  is  not  only  murderous  but  also
         contrary to  international  humanitarian  law  and  its  occurrence
         degrades the security environment for ordinary civilians not in the
         targeted  categories:  the  effects  of  civilian  deaths,  however
         caused, on any population may be extreme and long-lasting.  Because
         targeted killing  is  one  of  "the  varieties  of  ways  in  which
         civilians come to harm" (to borrow  from  the  formulation  in  the
         Tribunal case of [HM1]  [82]), it does indirectly impact on risk to
         ordinary civilians. That is why it can never be  right  to  attempt
         some simple subtraction of targeted violence from the  overall  sum
         of indiscriminate violence...."

293.  At the same time, we do  not  think  that  the  increase  in  targeted
    violence is incapable of pointing towards a diminution in the level  of
    risk to civilians. The fact, for example, that in  2011,  according  to
    Iraqi Government statistics of numbers  killed,  about  40%  of  Iraqis
    killed were ISF members, including 609 Iraqi police  and  458  soldiers
    (UNHCIR 2012 Guidelines,  p.15),  does  represent  one  indicator  that
    civilians are not suffering harm in the endemic way that  was  apparent
    in 2006/2007.

The situation province-by-province

294.  We have set  out  above  the  evidence  concerning  the  five  central
    governorates.  That evidence does not, in our view, identify a level of
    violence in any of the governorates such as to cross the Article  15(c)
    threshold. Civilian casualties are not the only  indice  of  relevance,
    but as a percentage of the respective populations of Baghdad and Kirkuk
    (see above [215]-[219]) we do not find the 2011 figures supplied by IAU
    of some 1,338 deaths in Baghdad  and  some  280  deaths  in  Kirkuk  as
    indicative  of  the  level  of  intensity  of  indiscriminate  violence
    envisaged by the CJEU as being  sufficiently  high  to  engage  Article
    15(c) in relation to mere civilians.

295.  In reaching this view we have also borne in mind such matters  as  the
    number and range of incidents, displacement and returns and  the  views
    of the experts and human rights organisations.  As an example, we  note
    relevant  evidence  in  respect  of  Tameen  and  Baghdad,  which   the
    appellants say are two of the worst affected areas of Iraq.  In  Tameen
    governorate which has a population of around 1,395,000, there  are   an
    average of 1.3 daily executed attacks in Kirkuk city. Displacement  has
    decreased considerably. Gradual returns are  occurring  and  there  has
    been a significant reduction in  roadside  bombs  and  car  bombs.   In
    Baghdad governorate, with a population of  6-7  million,  there  is  an
    average of 6 daily executed attacks. Nearly a third of those  displaced
    have returned, the main reason for returns being improved  security  in
    the area of origin.

         We bear in mind Mr Fordham's contention  that  the  fact  that  the
    ECtHR in recent cases (see above [ 80] to [83]) has not found the level
    of violence in Iraq as a  whole  or  Kirkuk  to  reach  the  Article  3
    threshold is not conclusive as to the issue of  risk  of  serious  harm
    under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. We agree  with  him
    that the latter has an additional scope:  see  Elgafaji  [36]  and  AMM
    [334]. However, our findings as regards the Article 15(c) situation  in
    Iraq as a whole and in the 5 central governorates  have  been  made  on
    their own terms.

Enhanced risk categories

296.  There is some confusion over  the  term  "enhanced  risk  categories".
    The appellant's original skeleton argument, for example,  equates  them
    with what are generally understood as risk categories (e.g.  government
    officials and other officials associated with the GoI  as  set  out  in
    UNHCR's 2012 Eligibility Guidelines in their  Introduction  (see  above
    [60]; whereas in the context of Article  15(c),  what  is  relevant  in
    terms of the Elgafaji sliding scale is individual  characteristics  and
    they are not necessarily limited in that  way.  Let  us,  nevertheless,
    consider  the  proposed  categories/characteristics  advanced  by   the
    appellants.  Mr Fordham submits that even if we find that in  the  five
    central governorates the level of indiscriminate violence is  not  such
    as to place mere civilians at risk, we should find the picture  changes
    once we factor in everyone's religious identity as  a  Sunni  or  Shi'a
    and/or their ethnic identity as  a  Kurd  and/or  former  Ba'ath  Party
    connections.

Sunni/Shi'a

297.  There is evidence indicating that as well as  targeting  ISF  and  GoI
    employees, Sunni extremists have targeted Shi'as. This is noted e.g. in
    the FCO letter dated 7 April, 2012 and in the 2012 UNHCR Guidelines but
    such incidents have not risen to the extent  that  they  demonstrate  a
    real risk of serious  harm  to  Shi'as  in  general.  We  observe  that
    although the May 2012 UNHCR Guidelines emphasise the harm caused by the
    ethno-sectarian conflict between different communities, especially that
    between Sunni and Shi'a,  they  do  not  state  there  is  a  need  for
    international refugee protection purely because a person is a Sunni  or
    Shi'a and we do not consider that the evidence shows that  there  is  a
    real risk of Article 15(c) harm arising solely because a  person  is  a
    Sunni or Shi'a civilian. And even where concern is expressed about both
    Sunnis and Shi'as living in or returning to areas in which  they  would
    constitute a minority, the substance of what UNHCR  is  saying  is  not
    that Sunni Arabs living in majority Shi'a areas and Shi'a Arabs  living
    in majority Sunni Arab areas "will" be at Article 15(c) risk but simply
    that "they may be exposed to targeted  violence  on  account  of  their
    religious identity". In our judgement the other  evidence  relating  to
    Sunnis and Shi'as reveals a similar picture. However,  whilst  for  the
    above reasons we find the evidence as a whole insufficient to establish
    Sunni or Shi'a identity as in itself an "enhanced risk category"  under
    Article  15(c),  we  do  accept  that  depending  on   the   individual
    circumstances, and in particular on their  facing  return  to  an  area
    where their Sunni or Shi'a brethren are in a minority, a person may  be
    able to establish a real risk of Article 15(c).  (They may, of  course,
    also be able to establish a real risk of persecution under the  Refugee
    Convention or of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR).

298.  We  would  add  that  in  coming  to  the  above  conclusion  we  have
    discounted  Mr  Fordham's  contention  in  the   appellants'   skeleton
    argument, that when UNHCR refers to particular  categories/profiles  as
    at risk and to religious and ethnic minorities, this  was  intended  to
    embrace Sunnis or Shi'as.

Kurds

299.  As regards Kurdish ethnicity,  we  accept  that  discounting  the  3.8
    million Kurds in the KRG, there are some 1.2 million Kurds in Iraq  and
    that this number constitutes  a  relatively  small  percentage  of  the
    population of central and southern Iraq, but being one  of  the  second
    largest ethnic groups in Iraq, comprising some 20%  of  the  population
    (concentrated mainly in Baghdad, Kirkuk, Mosul and Diyala),  Kurds  are
    unsurprisingly not classed by UNHCR or other major international bodies
    as a minority group in Iraq.

300.  There is nothing in the 2012 UNHCR Guidelines to  suggest  that  Kurds
    per se are an enhanced risk category. Some  support  is  given  to  the
    notion of Kurds as an enhanced risk category by Dr George  who  in  his
    written report referred to Kurds in central Iraq "remain[ing] at  risk"
    [146]), and by Dr Fatah who in his report refers to  Kurds  in  Baghdad
    being "more vulnerable" ([179]) but in neither instance did the experts
    seek to say that the number of attacks on  Kurds  were  at  significant
    levels.  According to Dr Fatah, the  number  of  Kurds  in  Baghdad  is
    around 100,000-150,000,  far  fewer  than  previously.  In  Kirkuk,  of
    course, Kurds are the largest ethnic grouping.

Former Ba'athists

301.  It was also suggested in the written reports of the two  experts  that
    being  a  former  Ba'athist  or  member  of  his/her  family  would  be
    sufficient to place one in an enhanced risk category for Article  15(c)
    purposes.  However, the evidence as a whole does not indicate that such
    persons are at  real  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence.   Rather,  it
    indicates that whether former Ba'athists are targeted depends very much
    on their individual circumstances. Family members of former  Ba'athists
    do not appear to be of concern as a group in their own right. As  noted
    by UNHCR in its 2012 Guidelines at p.  18,  "[t]oday,  members  of  the
    former Ba'ath Party or the former regime's armed forces or security and
    intelligence services are reportedly no longer  systematically  singled
    out for attack by armed groups", although "[t]hey may still be targeted
    in individual cases"...". Given that in the wake of  ongoing  US  troop
    withdrawal, thousands of people were arrested all  around  Iraq  in  an
    operation launched by the security forces against members of the banned
    Ba'ath Party (as noted by the OCHA report of February 2012 and  by  the
    2012 UNHCR Guidelines), persons who can establish that they  themselves
    are former members of the Ba'athist Party may be able to show they will
    face targeting likely to qualify them either as refugees under  Article
    1A(2) or (if not) as persons in need of international protection  under
    Article 15(b) or Article 15(c).

State protection

302.  With reference to  the  evidence  relating  to  the  extent  of  state
    failure (one of the  further  "metrics"  for  assessing  the  level  of
    indiscriminate violence) , it  is  clear  that  there  are  significant
    shortcomings in the  ability  and  sometimes  the  willingness  of  the
    authorities in central and southern Iraq to protect  their  population.
    Iraq remains second in global indexes of failed  states.  At  the  same
    time, like the Tribunal in HM1  at [211], we would observe  that,  this
    "metric" must be considered in the context of the  existing  levels  of
    physical violence and the related threats they  pose  to  the  civilian
    population. The protection concerned is principally about that which  a
    state is able to afford its citizens in a time of war and emergency; it
    is not principally about whether, for  example,  there  is  a  criminal
    justice system ensuring punishment of offenders.  In  this  context  we
    observe that in terms of the basic task of the Iraqi state in providing
    security, the evidence indicates that the ISF is widely acknowledged as
    increasingly capable and united notwithstanding problems of  corruption
    and infiltration by militants and political disunity. Bearing  in  mind
    that there is still a state of armed conflict  in  Iraq  and  that  the
    situation is not one in which the state is  required  by  international
    human rights law to guarantee all human rights (derogable  as  well  as
    non-derogable), we consider that despite serious shortcomings the state
    authorities have been able to keep the level of indiscriminate violence
    significantly below what it was in 2006 and 2007. So  far  as  concerns
    the significance of this "metric" in the context of Iraq, we note  that
    it is not  one  upon  which  the  appellants  sought  to  rely  to  any
    significant extent.

Socio-economic conditions

303.  We noted earlier evidence describing Iraq's socio-economic  conditions
    as poor. At the same time, we identified sources referring  to  growing
    signs that economic conditions are improving and that reconstruction is
    taking place.  The January 2011 Inspector General Report noted that the
    growth rate of Iraq's GDP has surged from a reported 2.6%  in  2010  to
    11.5% in 2011 and 11%  in  2012,  "placing  Iraq  amongst  the  world's
    fastest growing economies".  At the hearing both experts accepted  that
    despite the ongoing violence there was no  evidence  to  show  that  in
    general people in Iraq faced food  shortages  or  were  prevented  from
    going to work or school  or  obtaining  access  to  medical  treatment,
    although roadblocks and checkpoints in certain areas  caused  practical
    problems such as traffic congestion. It has also to be  borne  in  mind
    that there are numerous international NGOs active in  Iraq  working  in
    conjunction  with  state  agencies   and/or   "CSOs"   (Civil   Society
    Organisations) and that in 2011 alone the US government  provided  more
    than 225 million dollars in humanitarian assistance: see  above  [157]-
    [159].

304.  In the context of asylum-related appeals we must  also  bear  in  mind
    the evidence that UK  returnees  to  Iraq  have  available  return  and
    reintegration assistance packages. Albeit designed to meet  the  short-
    term problems of return the  effect  of  such  packages  is  to  enable
    returnees to start from a better position  to  those  IDPs  and  others
    trapped below the poverty line, who live on less than US $2 a day.

305.  In any event, as regards the situation of IDPs, whilst in  Dr  Fatah's
    words, life for many IDPs is "harsh", it is  clear  that  there  is  no
    humanitarian crisis and that even if there are continuing  difficulties
    of access, there are various sources  of  assistance,  e.g.  assistance
    centres and mobile units and various other agencies offering help  with
    shelter, jobs and access to essential services.  According to the  IOM,
    58% of IOM-assessed IDPs live in rented homes and only about  15%  live
    in collective settlements, public buildings or camps. UNHCR is right to
    highlight that the IDPs,  returnees  and  squatters  who  live  in  the
    settlements often  face  overcrowding  and  lack  sanitation  services,
    drinkable water and electricity as well as the threat of  eviction  and
    secondary displacement, but partly because of the  assistance  provided
    by agencies such as UNHCR it cannot be said that such persons  live  in
    conditions that are at the level of  serious  harm  or  ill  treatment.
    Further, whilst regard  to  socio-economic  conditions  is  a  relevant
    consideration to assessment of Article 15(c) violence, it  is  hard  to
    see that such conditions significantly  affect  the  intensity  of  the
    level of violence.

Returnees from the west

306.  In his written report at [155-6], Dr George referred to a 9 June  2004
    Report by the UN High Commission for  Human  Rights  and  a  July  2009
    Report by the Danish  Immigration  Service,  stating  that  Iraqis  who
    return from western  countries  may  well  be  exposed  to  dangers  in
    relation to kidnapping because they are perceived as being  financially
    privileged ([232]).  Dr Fatah did not identify  such  Iraqis  as  being
    generally at risk but considered that time spent in the west could make
    the three appellants a target of extremist groups ([338]). We  bear  in
    mind that both experts accepted that their references to  such  persons
    being at risk did not necessarily  mean  anything  more  than  possible
    risk. We are confident that if there was any significant occurrence  of
    harm to such persons it would have come to the  attention  of  relevant
    NGOs who would have  been  able  to  document  it,  whereas  there  are
    virtually no documented cases. In our judgement the evidence on risk to
    returnees from the West really does no more than establish  a  possible
    or remote risk. It does not establish  a  real  risk  or  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that returnees  will  face  serious  harm  or  ill
    treatment

Position in Europe

307.  We have set out  at  [77-8]  the  state  of  the  information  we  had
    regarding the approach to  enforced  returns  of  Iraqi  failed  asylum
    seekers taken by other European countries. Whilst  this  confirms  that
    apart from the  UK  there  are  five  other  European  countries  which
    undertake forcible returns to  Iraq,  it  does  not  specify  what  the
    approach or procedures are in other European countries.

308.  We know that the courts of at least one Member State,  Belgium,   have
    considered the Article 15(c) threshold to be met at least in  one  part
    of Iraq: see above [78]. The appellants have cited a June 2010 judgment
    of the (First Instance) Finnish Administrative Court appearing to  find
    that the Article 15(c) threshold was met in Iraq, which was  upheld  by
    the Finnish Supreme Administrative  Court  in  December  2010.   It  is
    unclear from the decision whether the specific facts of  the  case  may
    have influenced the decision, nor is it clear what materials by way  of
    COI the First-instance Court had before it. Further, and in any  event,
    whatever has been decided previously by governments/courts or tribunals
    in other Member States, we have to decide what the position is in  Iraq
    now on the basis of the very comprehensive body of evidence before us.

309.  We noted earlier ([79]) that there is a case pending before the  ECtHR
    in Strasbourg, YA v UK, App.No. 65580/10, lodged on  10  November  2010
    stayed to await the outcome of the HM cases.  We do not understand  the
    Court to have said anything in its proceedings so far to indicate  what
    its view is of the substance of the case in relation to  Article  3  of
    the ECHR and, as we have seen, it has not seen the fact that this  case
    is pending as preventing them from expressly finding that the situation
    in Iraq generally or Kirkuk in particular does not meet the  Article  3
    threshold.

Documentation relating to returns

310.  Earlier we noted evidence that the Iraqi authorities will  now  accept
    as sufficient documentation to permit admission to Iraq  either  (i)  a
    passport; (ii) an expired passport; or (iii) a laissez passer document,
    albeit the last-mentioned is currently  only  accepted  in  respect  of
    voluntary returnees.  It would appear that with the replacement of  the
    old system based on EU letters there have not been  any  detentions  of
    returnees from the UK upon  arrival  in  Iraq,  since  the  new  system
    ensures stronger evidence linking nationality and identity.

311.  In response to questions from the Tribunal, Mr Staker  confirmed  that
    if a returnee does not possess either of the first  two  aforementioned
    forms of documentation, he will not be the subject of  an  enforced  or
    compulsory return. That was confirmed  in  subsequent  submissions.  Mr
    Staker points out that a person who refuses to co-operate with  the  UK
    authorities  in  obtaining  such  documentation  may  be  committing  a
    criminal offence.  That may be so, but for our  purposes  all  that  is
    relevant is whether if returned to Iraq with  one  of  these  forms  of
    documentation an individual would be at risk of serious  harm  or  ill-
    treatment.  Absent any basis for considering  that  one  of  the  three
    aforementioned forms of documentation would not be  made  available  if
    the individual co-operated (e.g. where a country of origin  refuses  to
    document certain of its residents), it cannot be said that such persons
    are at real risk  on  return  of  persecution,  serious  harm  or  ill-
    treatment.

312.  On 3 July 2012 the Guardian reported that  the  Iraqi  Parliament  has
    passed a motion banning the forced return of failed asylum seekers.  Mr
    Staker makes the point in his Reply that there is no indication in  the
    article that the "ban" is in any way binding on the Iraqi  authorities.
    The Secretary of State had received  no  notification  from  the  Iraqi
    authorities of any change in their  policy  on  the  return  of  failed
    asylum seekers, and she intended to continue to return such people  who
    met the documentary requirements outlined above.  The appellants say it
    is for the Secretary of State to provide information to the Tribunal as
    to the operational impact of the Iraqi  Parliament  vote,  rather  than
    awaiting the notification referred to.

313.  It is unclear to us precisely what is the effect of  what  appears  to
    be a motion by the (or a part of) the Iraqi legislature.  A letter of 4
    October 2012 from the First Secretary  (Policy  and  Projects)  of  the
    British Embassy, Baghdad, writes, inter alia, that the motion  is  non-
    binding, and  that  documented  returns  can  continue.  We  note  that
    according to the COIS report of August, 2011 at [6.03], even in respect
    of legislation, the Iraqi  executive  through  the  President  or  Vice
    Presidents can veto it and such a veto can  only  be  overridden  by  a
    three-fifths majority of the Parliament.   Taking  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, we conclude that the motion does not prevent documented returns.
    (Moreover, if despite current indications this motion for a ban were to
    become law, then the Secretary of State would plainly  need  to  modify
    her returns policy in response.)

Risk on return at BIAP

314.  In HMI the Tribunal had to address the issue of whether  the  evidence
    relating to charter flight returnees on 9 and 16 June 2010 demonstrated
    that there was a real risk of Article  3  ill-treatment  on  return  at
    BIAP.  HMI decided that such evidence failed to establish such  a  risk
    largely because of a lack  of  supporting  evidence  coupled  with  the
    difficulties in accepting the claims made by several  Iraqis  on  these
    flights in the light  of  their  apparent  lack  of  credibility  about
    certain other matters.

315.  In relation to the June charter  flights  we  now  have  significantly
    more detailed evidence than was available to the panel  in  HM1.   This
    helps us in a number of ways. First it makes very clear  that  although
    BIAP itself does not have a  detention  facility,  there  is  a  police
    station some few kilometres away which BIAP officials have used in  the
    past in order to undertake further inquiries of certain  categories  of
    returnees and is widely referred to in background evidence as the "BIAP
    police station". Second, it also makes clear that a significant  number
    of returnees on the 9 and 16 June 2010 charter  flights  were  kept  in
    this detention facility.  Third,  there  is  a  dearth  of  independent
    evidence as to the  precise  conditions  at  this  detention  facility.
    Neither party as we understand it disputes these three points.

316.  It is also apparent  to  us  that  the  various  accounts  of  adverse
    conditions in this police station during the June 2010  returns  before
    us, although based solely  on  what  informants  have  told  them,  are
    nevertheless ones given at different  times  to  different  persons  or
    bodies which broadly concur in what they describe  about  the  physical
    conditions of detention. In  addition  to  the  accounts  given  to  Ms
    Sicher, Mr McLoughlin and Dr Fatah, the account  of  RJH  to  UNHCR  in
    respect of  the  June  16  flight  adds  further  corroboration.   Mark
    Walker's statement confirms duration of 7 days' detention  for  10  KRG
    returnees on the 9 June flight, and 11 days' detention in the  case  of
    12 KRG returnees on the 16 June flight.  The fact that  a  PSU  inquiry
    found insufficient evidence to substantiate claims of  mistreatment  by
    UK officials on the 16  June  flight  does  not  demonstrate  that  the
    detainees from that flight and the June 10 flight  were  untruthful  in
    their accounts of the conditions of detention at  this  police  station
    near BIAP.  The inquiries made by  UKBA's  Migration  Delivery  Officer
    (MDO) in Baghdad are essentially inconclusive.   We  see  force  in  Mr
    Fordham's submission that the absence of  any  reference  to  detention
    conditions at the airport in the  May  2012  UNHCR  Guidelines  is  not
    significant, as that report is concerned with Iraq in mid-2012, not  in
    2010 and in any event we would be cautious of treating such omission as
    necessarily considered omission.

317.  We accept therefore that up to a dozen or so people from  the  9  June
    flight were detained for some 7 days in a room of some  4  metres  x  4
    metres and fed once daily and had to sleep on the  floor.   As  regards
    the June 16 flight, 30 or so people appear to have  been  detained  for
    some 10-11 days in one room, and had to pay for food and water.   There
    is a conflict in the evidence as to whether they  were  ill-treated  by
    Iraqi officials (cf the  evidence  of  RM  and  SA  to  Dr  Fatah)  but
    agreement that those detained had to sleep on the floor and that  there
    were inadequate toilet and washing facilities.

318.  Taking stock of this evidence we note first of all  (and  again)  that
    it  is  considerably  more  than  was  before  the  Tribunal  in   HM1.
    Nevertheless, we bear in mind: (i) that we have not seen  any  response
    from the Iraqi  authorities  to  such  allegations;  (ii)  the  country
    guidance issue we  have  to  decide  are  concerned  with  the  current
    position, not the 2010 position; and (iii) that we are being  asked  to
    consider conditions in detention without either party  having  assisted
    us in detail with the numerous Strasbourg cases dealing with  detention
    conditions: see e.g. Babar Ahmad and Others  v  UK,  App.no.   24027/07
    [2012] ECHR 609, paras 166-179.  Given  these  considerations,  we  are
    cautious of attempting any definitive findings. In relation to the main
    case on which Mr Fordham seeks to rely, MSS v Belgium and Greece [2011]
    53 EHRR 2 and the cases it cites at [222],  they  only  deal  with  the
    detention of asylum seekers by European states, not detention on return
    to the country of origin. In MSS there were a number of  detainees  who
    had to sleep on the floor; there was no access to  the  water  fountain
    outside, and detainees were obliged to drink water from the toilet;  in
    the sector for arrested persons there  were  195  detainees  in  a  110
    sq.metre space; in a number of cells there was only one bed  for  14-17
    people; there was a lack of  sufficient  ventilation;  the  cells  were
    unbearably hot and access to the toilets was severely restricted; there
    was no soap or toilet paper and  sanitary  and  other  facilities  were
    dirty. The Court attached  some  significance  to  the  fact  that  the
    applicants were asylum seekers and hence particularly vulnerable. There
    were also complaints that the  detainees  were  subjected  to  insults,
    including racist insults and of the use of violence by guards.

319. Against this background, all we would venture to say  on  the  historic
    issue of the accepted detention by the Iraqi authorities of a number of
    persons returned by the UK on the June 2010 charter flights is that  we
    consider that the evidence as to the likely duration of the  detentions
    (up to 7 days on 10 June and 10-11 days on 16 June),  the  overcrowding
    and the lack of basic toilet and washing facilities indicates  that  it
    is possible that the Iraqi authorities may have violated the Article  3
    rights of the returnees concerned.

320.  As regards the 6 September 2010 flight,  there  are  detailed  witness
    statements from two persons both  of  whom  describe  ill-treatment  in
    unpleasant conditions on return for a number of days.  Again,  in  view
    of its close resemblance to the conditions described by those  detained
    in June 2010, we consider the evidence about them also  points  to  the
    possibility that the Iraqi authorities may  also  have  breached  their
    Article 3 rights.

321.   As  to  whether  the  procedures  now  in  place  are   significantly
    different, we do not have full evidence and what we have is not all one
    way. In his supplementary report of 26 March 2012 Dr  George's  contact
    stated that in respect of  one  year  ago  general  conditions  in  the
    detention facilities were very poor. In a 3  November  2011  memorandum
    UNHCR states that persons who enter BIAP "will  be  held  at  the  BIAP
    police station until their identity is  established."  The  same  UNHCR
    memorandum states that "UNHCR and implementing police staff  have  been
    monitoring the arrival of deportee flights at BIAP  since  early  2010.
    This  has  greatly  enhanced  the  agencies'  ability  to  monitor  and
    interview deportees, enabling the provision of legal advice, assistance
    and referrals".  UNHCR  adds  that  deportees  reported  that  checking
    procedures could sometimes continue overnight and that facilities  were
    not adequate.

322.  However, neither of these sources identifies ill  treatment  and  that
    is consistent with much of the other evidence. In this regard  we  note
    that a number of sources, including UNHCR, have confirmed more recently
    that there have been no reports of ill-treatment by the authorities  at
    BIAP: see UNHCR's response to an inquiry regarding returnees/deportees:
    documentation, assistance and conditions at  BIAP,  interviews  between
    British  Embassy,  Baghdad,  officials  and  the  head  of  the   Iraqi
    Parliamentary Human Rights Committee and the Iraqi  Al-Amal  Associates
    in September 2011. This is in addition to 2012 confirmation  from  both
    the Iraqi Ministry of  Displacement  and  Migration  and  IOM  that  no
    mistreatment of returnees is occurring.  The respondent notes that  she
    made  specific  inquiries  of  the  17  participating  states  of   the
    Intergovernmental  Consultations  on  Migration,  Asylum  and  Refugees
    whether any of them were accused of  allegations  of  ill-treatment  on
    return at the airport in Baghdad.  All confirmed they were not aware of
    any such allegations.

323.  We accept that  the focus of  this  evidence  concerns  conditions  at
    BIAP, but we have considerable doubts that  these  sources  would  have
    been unaware that there was a nearby police station which was used as a
    detention facility and would not have made  mention  of  this  facility
    being inadequate if it was.

324.  At the same time, we  recognise  that  in  view  of  the  limited  and
    conflicting nature of the evidence we have about  the  post-2010  Iraqi
    procedures, we cannot make any firm findings. We can only observe  that
    (i) we think  it  possible  that  there  may  well  have  been  adverse
    detention procedures in use in June 2010  and  September  2010  in  the
    context of charter flight returns to Iraq from the UK; and that (ii) it
    remains unclear, however, whether  any  returnees  seen  by  the  Iraqi
    authorities to require detention following arrival at BIAP would  today
    face similar conditions.  In such circumstances, it seems to us that if
    the Secretary of State were to revert to  her  earlier  returns  policy
    (which we have found may possibly have led to some  returnees  in  2010
    being detained in adverse conditions), then it would  be  incumbent  on
    her to demonstrate that Iraqi BIAP procedures making use  of  detention
    would not result in adverse treatment contrary to Article 3.

325.  But all this is, and is likely to continue to be, academic  since,  in
    light of the evidence from the respondent relating to new procedures in
    force since October  2011  regarding  minimum  acceptable  documents  -
    there is no real risk (except possibly in respect of those who are  the
    subject of  a judicial order or arrest warrant) that an Iraqi  national
    who has failed to show he is in need of  international  protection  and
    who faces compulsory return would face  detention either at the  police
    station used by BIAP or anywhere else, since in effect they would  have
    been pre-cleared and/or because they are in possession of a current  or
    expired Iraqi passport or (if a voluntary returnee)  a  laissez  passer
    document and so  would be allowed to proceed from the  airport  without
    any detention. Of course, it is implicit in the  Secretary  of  State's
    position that for so long as  Iraqi asylum seekers who have  failed  in
    their international protection claims lack relevant documentation  they
    will not be the subject of any attempts to enforce their  removal;  but
    we remind ourselves that such a scenario does not  make  their  removal
    contrary  to  either  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human   Rights
    Convention: see e.g. MS (Palestinian Territories) [2009] EWCA  Civ  17,
    [30]; CG (suspension  of  removal-lawfulness-proportionality)  Zimbabwe
    [2010] UKUT 272, SC (Article 8 - in accordance with the  law)  Zimbabwe
    [2012] 00056 (IAC). Whilst our Article 3 ECHR assessment must  consider
    the consequences of removal on a hypothetical  basis,  that  must  have
    regard to the realities of the procedures relating to documentation.

Returns to Erbil

326.  Since Mr Staker confirmed to us  that  it  is  the  intention  of  the
    Secretary of State to return each of the appellants  in  this  case  to
    BIAP, it is not strictly necessary for us in determining their  appeals
    to deal with the issue of whether there is not now another option  open
    to  Iraqis  faced  with  rejection  of  their  asylum-related  appeals,
    especially since Erbil is even now not proposed as  a  route  available
    for compulsory (enforced) returns.

Safety of internal travel

327.  In MK the Tribunal did not find the road between  Baghdad  and  Kirkuk
    to be generally unsafe (see [94]).  The respondent produced a number of
    documents including a letter from the FCO of 7 June 2010, a  number  of
    items from Iraq Business News and  an  IOM  publication  "Returning  to
    Iraq" indicating that travel throughout Iraq by road, air  or  rail  is
    generally safe. In opposition to this the  appellants  have  sought  in
    further submissions to argue that there is evidence, in  particular  in
    the UNHCR Guidelines, to show that travel within certain parts of  Iraq
    is unsafe. Earlier we quoted at length from what is said  in  the  2012
    UNHCR Guidelines about this subject. We  would  make  two  observations
    about the relevant passages in the Guidelines and the evidence to which
    they refer. First, they does not say  in  terms  that  the  dangers  of
    travel by road within central and southern Iraq are insuperable; it  is
    noted for example that travel is more dangerous at night, travelling is
    more dangerous prior to or  during  religious  festivities,  travelling
    near official government or military/police convoys is said to increase
    the level of danger. And in relation  to  roads  between  the  KRG  and
    central Iraq, it is only in respect of routes through  the  countryside
    that it is said to be "nearly impossible for persons to cross into  the
    three northern governorates without danger". They go on to say  without
    comment that "[t]herefore, entry through  the  major  roads  and  their
    checkpoints is, practically, the only option available to  most  Iraqis
    seeking to enter the Kurdistan Region". Second,  it  is  not  suggested
    that the same dangers affect travel by air from BIAP  and  it  is  also
    said that "[t]ravelling from Baghdad or Basrah to Erbil or Sulaymaniyah
    by air is considered fairly safe and there have been no recent security
    incidents involving civilian aircraft".  The thrust of the evidence  is
    therefore that if due caution is exercised the main  highways  in  Iraq
    can be travelled on in relative safety and that people  are  travelling
    freely around Iraq.

Documentation and access to services

328.  We set out below at [330] a summary  of  the  guidance  given  by  the
    Tribunal in MK relating to documentation and access to services and our
    consideration of whether it needs modification.

329.  In short, the most important document is the CSIS, as it is a  gateway
    to obtaining other significant documents such as the INC and  the  PDS.
    There are various procedures which make it practicable for  persons  to
    replace a lost CSIS without necessarily having to travel to their  home
    area to get it.

The future situation

330.  Both experts gave their views on the likely future situation.  We,  of
    course, are only concerned with the current situation but must  make  a
    prospective assessment of risk.  There are many different views on  how
    events will unfold in Iraq.  The CSIS Report, the Real Outcome  of  the
    Iraq War, 8 March 2010 considers that whilst "there is no one  scenario
    that is probable", the most likely scenario as one of lower  levels  of
    continued sectarian and ethnic rivalry without going back to the  civil
    war of 2005-2006.  Dr Fatah, by contrast, said he  fears  an  Arab-Kurd
    civil war.  Reports reveal that there are fears by Iraqis of  increased
    terrorism and economic deterioration. The May 2012 UNHCR Guidelines  at
    p.61  cite the view of Elizabeth O'Bagay of the Institute for the Study
    of War, 2 February 2012, that "[p]olitics in Iraq remain  paralyzed  as
    deliberations among Iraqi political factions and  parties  continue  to
    falter, despite a promising sign with Iraqivya's return to  parliament.
    This backdrop has set the stage for armed conflict and  the  likelihood
    of sectarian war".

331.  We  recognise  that  the  future  in  Iraq  remains  subject  to  many
    uncertainties.  We agree with UNHCR that the security situation remains
    unpredictable and that it is too early to gauge  whether  the  GoI  can
    overcome the challenges posed by the full withdrawal of US forces,  the
    ongoing power-struggles between Shi'as  and  Sunnis  and  the  lack  of
    settlement over disputed territories.  We also acknowledge that the two
    experts in this case, Dr George and Dr Fatah, are not alone in  fearing
    that there is  a  real  potential  for  new  conflicts  to  break  out,
    particularly between Arabs and Kurds.  However, we consider that so far
    as Article 15(c) is concerned the most likely development is  that  the
    levels of violence will either continue to reduce or remain  at  around
    the same level as in 2010, 2011 and the first 9  months  of  2012.   As
    stated by UNHCR in both its 2009 and 2012 Guidelines, it is likely that
    "a persistent, low-level conflict" will continue to kill civilians at a
    similar rate  for  years  to  come  ("an  impassable  minimum").   This
    comports with the CSIS  Assessment  in  March  2012,  "The  Outcome  of
    Invasion:  US  and  Iranian  Strategic  Competition  in  Iraq",   which
    (echoing the 2010 report) considers that although there  are  scenarios
    which involve increased violence, [t]he more likely scenario is one  of
    lower levels of continued sectarian and ethnic rivalry struggle without
    going  back to the  civil  war  of  2005-2008".   Whilst  incidents  in
    January-September 2012 demonstrate that insurgents still have the  will
    and capability to launch multi large-scale bombings resulting  in  high
    numbers of civilian deaths, the evidence  continues  to  indicate  that
    their capability to carry out such attacks is diminished.

Internal Relocation

332.  We remind ourselves that in order for there to be a  viable  place  of
    internal relocation decision-makers are required to be  satisfied  that
    it  is  both  safe  (i.e.,  in  the  context  of  Article  15  of   the
    Qualification Directive, that there  is  no  continuing  real  risk  of
    serious harm) and reasonable in all the circumstances: see Article 8 of
    the same Directive. We also remind  ourselves  that  in  its  May  2012
    Eligibility Guidelines UNHCR at p.52 summarised  its  position  in  its
    Introduction (see above [60]) as being that it "considers that internal
    flight options are often not available in Iraq  due  to  serious  risks
    faced by Iraqis throughout the country, including threats to safety and
    security, accessibility problems and lack of livelihood opportunities."

MK and internal relocation within the KRG

333.  In considering the possibility of internal  relocation,  we  have  the
    recent determination in MK.  We must follow that decision unless  there
    is fresh evidence which can challenge in any way its  conclusions.   It
    is to be noted that Drs George and  Fatah  produced  reports  generally
    discounting  internal  relocation  as  a  viable  option   which   were
    summarised in annexes to the MK determination and  that  their  reports
    for this  hearing  cover  much  the  same  ground.  Both  in  its  2009
    Guidelines and its May  2012  Guidelines,  the  UNCHR  has  also  urged
    caution  in  relation  to  the  availability  of  internal  relocation.
    However, we consider that  the  salient  difficulties  said  to  affect
    relocation were considered by the Tribunal in  MK  and  we  would  cite
    first [87] of the determination:


         "87.     We bear in mind Dr Fatah's warning, set out  at  paragraph
             77 above, concerning the difficulty of a broad approach to the
             issue of relocation to/within the GoI governorates.   We  note
             the bureaucratic nature of the registration  processes  which,
             as Mr Hussain points  out  in  paragraph  58  of  his  closing
             submissions, seem increasingly aligned with those in the  KRG.
             The very significant numbers of IDPs (estimated by the IDMC in
             March 2010 at 2.8 million) face the kind  of  difficulties  we
             have set out above, and it may be (IDM May 2009) that IDPs are
             not being registered in all governorates. However,  the  types
             of difficulty we have identified are not such, in our view, as
             either to entail that there is no internal flight  alternative
             in Iraq, or that relocation is, in general, unreasonable.  The
             levels of support that we have identified, from the UNHCR  and
             the Iraqi government in particular, including  the  fact  that
             two-thirds of IDPs appear to have PDS  cards  valid  in  their
             governorate of residence, support us in this view.   Where  an
             IDP is unregistered, and hence is unlikely to have a PDS card,
             and is unable to access family, governmental or  NGO  support,
             it  may  be  that  relocation  would   be   unreasonable,   in
             particular,  of  course,  if  they  faced  a  real   risk   of
             significant harm in their home area and could not therefore be
             expected to  return  there  to  renew  their  PDS  card.   The
             particular circumstances of a returnee may therefore  be  such
             as to make relocation unreasonable."


            We  would  next  remind  ourselves  of  the  Tribunal's  country
    guidance at [88] (reproduced word for word in the  headnote)  which  we
    have already set out above at [245].

335.  In his skeleton produced after seeing  the  determination  in  MK,  Mr
    Fordham sought to challenge the conclusions and to  draw  attention  to
    what  he  submitted  were  cogent  reasons  for  doubting  the  general
    applicability of internal relocation.  He accepted at the hearing  that
    he was not able to challenge the conclusions reached in  MK  unless  he
    could identify cogent fresh evidence or show  that  there  had  been  a
    failure to have regard to existing material.

336.  We consider first Mr Fordham's argument that there is an ambiguity  in
    the guidance in MK as to whether the statement that a  Kurd  would  not
    need a sponsor applied to entry only or also to registration.   If  one
    turns to the section of MK dealing with this issue, it can be seen from
    [54] that the Danish mission in March 2010  was  told  that  any  Iraqi
    national with an Iraqi ID was free to enter the KRG and free to  reside
    there after registration at a local Asayish office.  The point was made
    by both Dr Fatah and Dr George in evidence in  MK  that  there  was  no
    consistent  policy  across  the  KRG  borders  and  there   were   also
    inconsistencies   between   different   governorates   and    different
    checkpoints.  Dr Fatah, as recorded at [53] of MK, said  that  families
    and individuals wishing to live in the KRG were required to  provide  a
    sponsor.  The general tenor of Dr George's evidence seems to have  been
    that, depending on the checkpoint, where a person seeks an  information
    card they may be asked to have a sponsor present or to provide a letter
    from the sponsor, notarised by a court.  We take this from [47] of  MK.
    The Tribunal concluded at [57], as summarised  at  [88],  that  a  Kurd
    wishing to enter the  KRG  would  not  need  a  sponsor  or  guarantor,
    although an Arab might.

337.  If there is an ambiguity, then we  consider  it  lies  in  Dr  Fatah's
    evidence in MK.  On the one hand, he is recorded at [53] as saying that
    Kurds did not need a guarantor and later on in that paragraph as saying
    that families and individuals wishing to live in  the  KRG  were  still
    being required to provide a sponsor.  The Danish mission was clear that
    any Iraqi national with an Iraqi ID was free to enter the  KRG  and  to
    reside there.  In the circumstances, drawing this evidence together  as
    the Tribunal did at [57], we consider that the conclusion that any Kurd
    wishing to enter the KRG would not require a guarantor/sponsor although
    an Arab might was on the one hand clearly open to the Tribunal, and  on
    the other hand may properly be said to be a finding covering both entry
    and residence.

338.  In any event, it is appropriate to go on  and  consider  the  evidence
    that was not before the Tribunal in MK to see if the  position  can  be
    said to be any different from that as concluded in  MK.  The  principal
    reports are: the Joint Finnish-Swiss Fact Finding Mission to Amman  and
    the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) Area, May  10-22,  2011  dated  1
    February 2012 (the Finnish/Swiss report);  the,  Joint  Report  of  the
    Danish Immigration Service/UKBA  Fact  Finding  Mission  to  Erbil  and
    Dahuk, Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI), conducted  11-22  November  2011
    (the Danish/UK report); and the 2012 UNHCR Guidelines.

339.  At [1.02] of the Danish/UKBA report, the director of an  international
    NGO in Erbil is quoted as saying that all Arabs, irrespective of ethnic
    origin or religious orientation, are free to enter the KRG through  the
    external checkpoints by presenting their Iraqi civil ID card, and  said
    that there were thousands of persons of Arab origin living in the  KRG,
    many living with their families, whilst others had come there to  work,
    including individuals.  At [1.08] of the report, the  Director  of  the
    Bureau of Migration and Displacement  (BMD)  of  the  Ministry  of  the
    Interior of Erbil, explained that at present there  were  approximately
    40,000 IDP families from southern and central  Iraq  and  the  disputed
    areas residing in all three of the northern governorates.  The Director
    went on, as recorded at [1.09], to remark that the economic  impact  of
    the influx of IDPs on the  KRG  had  been  significant  and  that  this
    indicated that many IDPs were wealthy.  He referred also  to  the  fact
    that there were middle class  people,  skilled  workers  and  labourers
    looking for unskilled jobs in the KRG.  The Head of Private  Bureau  of
    General Security (Asayish) said that people displaced by violence, i.e.
    IDPs, continued to enter the  KRG  and  mentioned  that,  for  example,
    recently 80 people from central Iraq and Mosul had come to the KRG  for
    protection.  According to figures from the IOM publication  "Review  of
    displacement and return in Iraq" dated February 2011,  as  recorded  at
    [1.13] of the report, in Erbil governorate 29.47% of the IDP population
    was of Arab ethnicity.  In Sulaymaniyah 70.80% of  the  IDP  population
    was of Arab ethnicity but in Dahuk only 3.90%.

340.  As regards security procedures, the head of the Asayish explained,  as
    recorded at [2.04], that the Asayish had  good  levels  of  cooperation
    with Iraqi intelligence and there were two security lists in operation,
    the "black list" which  included  people  who  had  an  arrest  warrant
    outstanding for their detention, and a second list,  the  "stop  list".
    It was said by the officer who had overall  operational  responsibility
    for the Mosul/Erbil checkpoint that around 30  people  per  month  were
    arrested.  This would seem to involve people  who  were  on  the  black
    list, but if there was only a suspicion that someone might be  involved
    in criminal or terrorist activities they would only  be  denied  entry.
    These would be people on the "stop list".  The head of the Asayish  was
    recorded at [2.16] as saying that as regards the documentation required
    to prove a person's identity, this could  include  the  CSID  or  their
    passport, and it might be sufficient to provide only a driving  licence
    or similar document proving a person's identity and Iraqi  citizenship,
    as the system is computerised and a person already on the database will
    be  logged  with  their  photo  and  name  recorded  onto  the  system.
    International organisation A and  Harikar  NGO  (the  UNHCR  Protection
    Assistance Partner in Dahuk) said that the only documentation needed at
    a KRG checkpoint was the  CSID.   At  [2.28]  the  General  Manager  of
    Kurdistan checkpoints in the  Kurdistan  Regional  Security  Protection
    Agency Security General Directorate, KRG Ministry of Interior Erbil, is
    quoted as saying that after a person had given information about  their
    identity to the Asayish they would undergo a second  procedure  at  the
    checkpoint to apply  for  the  appropriate  entry  card  and  once  the
    relevant card had been issued they would be free to  travel  throughout
    the KRG, including  between the three KRG governorates,  without  being
    required to show any  further  form  of  documentation.   There  is  no
    reference there to the requirement of a sponsor.   Nor  was  there  any
    reference  by  PAO  (Public  Aid  Organisation,  the  UNHCR  Protection
    Assistance Centre partner in Erbil) to any requirement for  a  sponsor,
    in their evidence recorded at [2.31] of the report.

341.  At [3.08] the head of the Asayish  is  recorded  as  saying  that  the
    policy which required a person  to  provide  a  reference  at  the  KRG
    external checkpoint was abandoned about two or three years  previously,
    although there might still be some instances  in  which  a  person  was
    asked by the Asayish at the checkpoint to  make  a  telephone  call  to
    someone they knew, to verify their identity.  This state of affairs was
    effectively confirmed  by  the  officer  who  had  overall  operational
    responsibility for the checkpoint, during a  tour  of  the  Mosul/Erbil
    checkpoint.  At [3.10] the director of an international NGO in Erbil is
    recorded as saying that persons of Arab origin do not need a [person to
    provide a] reference to be present  at  the  checkpoint.   He  and  the
    Harikar NGO both noted that there was no requirement for a reference to
    be present at a KRG checkpoint in order for an Iraqi from  outside  the
    KRG to enter.

342.  Following from what he said as recorded at [3.08],  the  head  of  the
    Asayish is recorded at [4.01] as explaining that individuals  not  from
    the KRI (i.e. KRG) might be asked by the Asayish at the  checkpoint  to
    telephone an acquaintance in the KRG to verify  their  identity.   When
    asked if an individual not from the KRG and who knew no one there would
    be able to pass through the KRG external checkpoint, he said that  this
    would depend on the individual and the circumstances in the case but in
    some instances such a person would be viewed  with  suspicion,  however
    such cases were very rare.  It was said that fewer than 30  people  per
    month across all the KRG external checkpoints in all three governorates
    might be denied entry purely on the grounds that they  were  considered
    suspicious for some reason.   As  regards  the  issue  of  differential
    treatment of people from different  ethnic  or  religious  backgrounds,
    international organisation B said, in respect of people without genuine
    identity documents, that a Kurd without personal ID documents might  be
    treated more sympathetically and permitted  entry  because  they  would
    normally know someone in the KRG but that a  person  of  Arabic  origin
    without genuine documents to identify themselves would not be permitted
    entry.  The officer with overall  operational  responsibility  for  the
    Mosul/Erbil checkpoint said that the procedures applied  at  the  entry
    checkpoints did not discriminate against any ethnic group,  and  Arabs,
    Turkmen and Yazidis would be treated no differently from Kurds  seeking
    to enter the KRG.

343.  The same officer is quoted as completely rejecting the statement  from
    UNHCR quoted in the Danish 2011 report, that Arabs, Turkmen  and  Kurds
    from the  disputed  areas  would  face  difficulties/rejection  at  KRG
    checkpoints.  He pointed out that most of the new houses  being  bought
    in the KRG were being purchased by Arabs and not Kurds and  that  Arabs
    from Mosul were moving to the KRG not temporarily for work but also  to
    live.  He also added that the vast majority of Iraqis  passing  through
    the KRG checkpoints were Arabs.  PAO said that people from the disputed
    areas who were of Turkmen or Arab ethnicity would be questioned  for  a
    long time at the KRG external checkpoints before they would be  allowed
    to enter, because the disputed areas were more suspicious of terrorism.
      That  organisation  also   remarked   that   there   existed   ethnic
    discrimination at a limited level, but it was not systematic  and  they
    were aware that the KRG was trying its best to change  this.   He  gave
    the example of some managers of companies in the KRG who were known  to
    them as  experiencing  difficulties  in  attempting  to  bring  skilled
    labourers into the KRG from the GoI who would be required to bring  all
    Iraqi documentation and would  still  be  questioned  thoroughly.   IOM
    Erbil stated that they had never heard of discriminatory policies being
    applied at the KRG checkpoints.  The director of an  international  NGO
    in Erbil, as noted at [4.41], remarked that Iraqis of Arab origin would
    normally be required to undergo greater scrutiny than others,  but  the
    procedure was unproblematic and did not require that a  referee  should
    be present at the checkpoint.

344.  It seems to us from this report  that  there  is  even  less  evidence
    pointing to a requirement for a sponsor for anyone than  was  the  case
    before the Tribunal in MK.  Indeed, on this evidence it would seem that
    in general nobody is required to have a sponsor, certainly not  a  Kurd
    and only in uncommon circumstances an Arab.

345.  We turn to the Finnish/Swiss report.  This confirms the  inconsistency
    in  guidelines  on  entry  practices   between   the   three   northern
    governorates  and  the  absence  of  any  published   instructions   or
    regulations on entry procedures.  There is  reference  at  page  59  to
    several NGOs and the UNHCR having  surveyed  IDPs  at  different  times
    concerning entry procedures to the KRG region at different checkpoints,
    and, for example, it is said that the need for a sponsor/guarantor  has
    essentially ceased at a Dohak governorate  entry  checkpoint  but  that
    even at one checkpoint congruency can lack at  different  times.   This
    emerged from a meeting with the Harikar  NGO.   At  page  60  there  is
    confirmation of the view set out above that  Arabs  are  screened  more
    carefully than  other  passengers  at  the  checkpoints.   It  is  said
    elsewhere on that page that anyone wishing to enter the  KRG  area  who
    does not originate from the region  typically  needs  to  know  someone
    there (a so-called sponsor/guarantor) or have  a  letter  of  reference
    from an employer in the KRG area.  It is said that a sponsor is  needed
    if the person wants to stay in the KRG area for more than ten  days  or
    wants to register and seek residency in the region.  It  is  also  said
    subsequently that according to several sources a  sponsor/guarantor  is
    often not needed nowadays.  Instead, the person wanting entry needs  to
    have a reference from someone in the  KRG  area.   None  of  the  above
    information is sourced,  unlike  the  information  in  the  Danish/UKBA
    report.  The  UNHCR  is  quoted  as  being  of  the  opinion  that  the
    terminology has changed but the sponsor system is basically the same as
    before.  It is also said,  according  to  what  is  described  as  "one
    source" that there is a general policy of not issuing information cards
    to single Arab men and women because  of  fears  of  terrorism  by  the
    authorities.

346.  We have set out at [244] the relevant views of the UNHCR in  its  2012
    Guidelines.

347.  We do not think that this evidence  taken  as  a  whole  advances  the
    position as set out in MK. We prefer the Danish/UKBA report because  it
    is  very  much  more  detailed  and  is  also  sourced.   Much  of  the
    information in the Finnish/Swiss report is not sourced and it  is  very
    much briefer.  We bear in mind, of course, what is said by UNHCR  about
    documentation and the KRG, in particular with regard to the sponsorship
    issue, but that has to be seen in the light of the evidence as recorded
    in the Danish/UKBA report, from Harikar and PAO, both UNHCR  Protection
    Assistance Partners.

348.  Taking the evidence as a whole,  we  consider  that  if  anything,  it
    tends to show  that  no-one  needs  a  sponsor,  rather  than,  as  was
    concluded in MK, that a Kurd will not and an Arab may.   By  needing  a
    sponsor we refer not only to entry but also to residence  in  the  KRG.
    However, since we accept that what  we  identify  is  a  trend  in  the
    evidence rather than a fixed conclusion, we do not propose to go beyond
    the guidance in MK, and on this evidence we are confident that  it  can
    properly be endorsed.

349.  The next point in respect of which Mr Fordham invited  us  to  revisit
    the findings in MK is that summarised at [82(2)(b)]  of  MK  concerning
    the viability of living conditions in the KRG  for  a  person  who  has
    relocated there.  It was concluded that though there were difficulties,
    there were jobs and there was access  to  free  healthcare  facilities,
    education, rented accommodated, and financial and  other  support  from
    UNHCR.

350.  In his  submissions,  Mr  Fordham  argued  that,  in  the  absence  of
    registration of residence, life was precarious in the KRG.  He referred
    to [8.05] and [8.07] of the Danish/UKBA  report.   There  it  was  made
    clear that a person could not reside in the KRG  without  obtaining  an
    information card, and a person who stayed for less than a  month  would
    only have to report to  the  nearest  Asayish  office  and  provide  an
    address where  they  were  residing  in  the  KRG.   The  Finnish/Swiss
    reporters were told that an IDP without registration  was  at  risk  of
    refoulement to central Iraq.

351.  With regard to food rations, Mr Fordham quoted from the Iraq  Thematic
    Country of Origin Information Report of 4  April  2012  at  [7.13]  and
    [7.14] which, itself quoting from IRIN, in a report of 21 February 2011
    entitled "Iraq: Government Vows to Improve Food Aid System"  said  that
    more than half of  Iraq's  29  million  people  depend  on  the  Public
    Distribution System (PDS), according to the Trade Ministry.  Mr Fordham
    quoted from Dr Fatah's report where he said that  anyone  who  did  not
    originate  from  the  KRG  could  not  transfer  their  food   rations.
    Difficulties  in  this  regard  were  noted  in  the  "Report  of   the
    representative  of  the  Secretary  General  on  the  human  rights  of
    internally displaced persons, Walter Klin", dated  16  February  2011.
    Mr Fordham also quoted from [7.25] of the Country of Origin Information
    Report, noting that the Harikar  NGO  was  quoted  in  the  Danish/UKBA
    report as stating that Kurds from the disputed areas would find it very
    difficult to transfer their PDS cards and this was related to political
    factors regarding the future of the disputed  areas  and  whether  they
    would become part of the KRG.  It was said that in  the  future,  Arabs
    from southern and  central  Iraq  or  the  disputed  areas  would  need
    security clearance from the Asayish in order to have  their  PDS  cards
    transferred, and this procedure was lengthy and could take  up  to  two
    months.

352.  The evidence in this regard, therefore, does not go quite  as  far  as
    Dr Fatah suggests.  It would seem  that  an  Arab  such  as  the  third
    appellant would, subject to security clearance, be able to get his  PDS
    card transferred, though it could take up to two months.

353.  None of this evidence takes matters any further than the  position  in
    MK.  The Tribunal there noted, for example, at  [61]  difficulties  for
    Iraqis coming to the KRG to have their PDS card transferred from  their
    place of origin.  It was also noted that  IDPs  from  outside  the  KRG
    could go back to the place where their PDS card was valid in  order  to
    collect food rations every month.  Clearly that would not  be  possible
    for everyone, but the Tribunal went on to note the evidence  concerning
    access to housing and employment, free public health and schooling  and
    the financial support available from UNHCR by way of grants  to  people
    on repatriation and other forms of support from the UNHCR's  Protection
    and Assistance Centres.

Relocation to central and southern Iraq

354.  Mr Fordham also referred to the  issue  of  relocation  to  the  Iraqi
    territory under GoI authority.  He referred to [83] of MK where it  was
    said, among other things, that a third of IDPs interviewed in late 2009
    did not have a PDS card valid in their  governorate  of  residence  and
    only 15% of those with  one  reportedly  received  their  full  monthly
    entitlement.  We do not think the evidence summarised above in  respect
    of relocation to central and southern  Iraq  takes  matters  materially
    further than was the position before the  Tribunal  in  MK.   Like  the
    Tribunal then, we accept that there may be cases where an  unregistered
    IDP with no PDS card and no family, governmental or NGO  support  could
    not reasonably be expected to relocate.  It will always be important to
    have regard to individual circumstances. However, for the generality of
    Iraqis, despite difficulties that may be experienced in respect of such
    matters as access to health care, education and jobs, we consider  that
    relocation within the central and southern  governorates  is  generally
    safe and reasonable.

355.  We turn finally in this context to the issue of documentation.

356.  Again we do not see any reason to depart from the guidance in MK  save
    in one respect, set out below.  There  is  no  fresh  evidence  in  the
    reports of Dr George and Dr Fatah going beyond what they said in  their
    evidence  to  the  Tribunal  in  MK.   In   the   Danish/UKBA   report,
    international organisation B told the delegation  that  the  Bureau  of
    Migration and Displacement was not known to be very active in assisting
    people in need of personal documents.  Public  Aid  Organisation  (PAO)
    (the UNHCR Protection Assistance partner in Erbil) said that they would
    provide support to IDPs who needed to re-obtain missing  documentation,
    dealing with three to five cases of this kind  per  month.   They  said
    that  the  issue  of  documentation  amongst  IDPs  was  not  a  common
    occurrence now compared to previous years.  IDPs in the KRG usually had
    their personal documentation. They also said that due to  the  relative
    stabilisation in the security situation across Iraq, people  were  more
    confident to return back to their place of origin for a short period of
    time to acquire documentation and would even pay  for  people  such  as
    taxi drivers to return on their behalf and through a power of  attorney
    obtain documentation for them.  They said that in the majority of cases
    IDPs would not be at risk of harm if they returned to  their  place  of
    origin temporarily.

357.  In the British Embassy, Baghdad letter of 7 April  2012,  which  stems
    from discussions between a member of staff at the  British  Embassy  in
    Baghdad, the MoDM, Quandil (a Swedish humanitarian aid organisation and
    refugee actions representative in  Iraq),  the  Ministry  of  Interior,
    UNHCR and the International Rescue Committee, it was confirmed  by  the
    MoDM and Quandil that it was rare for  IDPs  not  to  have  and  be  in
    possession of their ID cards.  Quandil said that even if a family  lost
    all of their documents  they  could  obtain  copies  from  the  Central
    Archives.  The letter goes on to say at [15] that  the  Civil  Identity
    Records are retained on microfiche in a central archive  so  that,  for
    example, when the records in the Civil  Status  Office  in  Basra  were
    destroyed, copies were available on microfiche in Baghdad.  It is  said
    that it is most unusual for personal or civil records to go missing.

358.  This evidence, if anything, adds to what was said by the  Tribunal  in
    MK.  At [40] the Tribunal commented that there was nothing to show that
    it was, or perhaps ever had been, the case that a central  register  in
    Baghdad had been kept.  This further evidence  requires  us  to  modify
    that position.  Given the current state of the evidence in this regard,
    we consider that we can add  to  the  guidance  in  MK  by  noting  the
    existence of the Central Archive retaining civil  identity  records  on
    microfiche, providing a further way in  which  a  person  can  identify
    themselves and obtain a copy of their  CSID,  whether  from  abroad  or
    within Iraq.

Conclusions: General


359. We should first make clear our position as  regards  the  substance  of
    the guidance given in HM1. As we made clear, we are to  approach  those
    appeals by considering all the material now available, since we are two
    years on, and reaching a conclusion based on all material.  We have had
    the advantage of hearing the experts and having their views  tested  in
    cross-examination and the benefit of detailed submissions from  counsel
    on both sides.  To an extent we have now had time  and  opportunity  to
    consider whether what was a "pre-election forecast" has  proved  to  be
    appropriate.  The Tribunal in HM1 considered all  the  material  before
    it.  Mr Fordham in the Court of Appeal was in the end only able to show
    a failure to consider 3 reports  and  one  which  had  only  came  into
    existence less than a month before the determination  was  promulgated.
    It follows that essentially all relevant material was  considered,  but
    in the absence of the experts' views and submissions on behalf  of  the
    appellants.  Although our focus in this decision is on the situation in
    Iraq now, we are satisfied that in HM1  the  Tribunal  reached  country
    guidance conclusions which were correct.


              360. So far as concerns the situation now our guidance  is  as
                   follows:

A.
Law
   a) The guidance as to the law relating to Article 15(c)  of  the  Refugee
   Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC given by the Tribunal in HM and Others
   (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC)  ("HM1")  at  [62]-[78]  is
   reaffirmed. Of particular importance  is  the  observation  in  HM1  that
   decision-makers ensure that  following  Elgafaji,  Case  C-465/07  BAILI;
   [2009] EUECJ Case  C-465/07  and  QD  (Iraq)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  620,  in
   situations of armed conflict in  which  civilians  are  affected  by  the
   fighting,  the  approach  to  assessment  of  the  level   of   risk   of
   indiscriminate violence must be an inclusive one,  subject  only  to  the
   need for there to be a sufficient causal nexus between the  violence  and
   the conflict.

   b) Given that country guidance cases may have an impact on a large number
   of asylum cases and appeals, their significance in saving costs in future
   cases,  quite  apart  from  their  general  importance,  should   require
   consideration of the grant of legal aid for representation in the  public
   interest.

   c) Whilst the Upper Tribunal will do all it can to ensure  representation
   in a country guidance case, it cannot be excluded that in highly  unusual
   circumstances such a case would proceed without claimant representation.

   d) Though very considerable weight is almost always  to  be  attached  to
   UNHCR guidelines on risk categories in particular countries,  it  is  not
   accepted that departure from the guidelines should only take place for  a
   cogent and identified reason. Cases are to be decided on the basis of all
   the evidence and arguments presented to the Tribunal.


B. Country guidance

   i. Whilst the focus of the present decision is the current  situation  in
   Iraq, nothing in the further evidence now available  indicates  that  the
   conclusions that the Tribunal in HM1 reached about country conditions  in
   Iraq were wrong.

   ii. As regards the current situation, the  evidence  does  not  establish
   that the degree of indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  current
   armed conflict taking place in the five  central  governorates  in  Iraq,
   namely Baghdad, Diyala, Tameen (Kirkuk), Ninewah,  Salah  Al-Din,  is  at
   such a high level that substantial grounds have been shown for  believing
   that any civilian returned there would solely on account of his  presence
   there face a real risk of being subject to that threat.


   iii. Nor does the evidence establish that there is a real risk of serious
   harm under Article 15(c) for civilians who are Sunni or Shi'a or Kurds or
   have former Ba'ath Party connections: these  characteristics  do  not  in
   themselves amount to "enhanced risk  categories"  under  Article  15(c)'s
   "sliding scale" (see [39] of Elgafaji).

   iv. Further evidence that has become available since the  Tribunal  heard
   MK (documents - relocation) Iraq  CG  [2012]  UKUT  126  (IAC)  does  not
   warrant  any  departure  from  its  conclusions  on  internal  relocation
   alternatives in the KRG or in central or  southern  Iraq  save  that  the
   evidence is now sufficient  to  establish  the  existence  of  a  Central
   Archive maintained by the  Iraqi  authorities  retaining  civil  identity
   records on microfiche, which provides a further way in which a person can
   identify themselves and obtain a copy of their CSID, whether from  abroad
   or within Iraq.

   v. Regarding the issue of whether there would  be  a  risk  of  treatment
   contrary to Article 3 ECHR arising from returns from the  UK  to  Baghdad
   International Airport (BIAP):

   a). If a national of Iraq who has failed  to  establish  that  conditions
   inside Iraq are unsafe is compulsorily returned to Baghdad  International
   Airport (BIAP) on either a current or expired Iraqi passport, there is no
   real risk of detention in the course of BIAP procedures (except  possibly
   in respect of those who are the subject of a  judicial  order  or  arrest
   warrant). Nor is there such a risk if such a person  chooses  to  make  a
   voluntary return with a laissez passer document which can  be  issued  by
   the Iraqi embassy in the UK.


   b). If, however,  such a person is compulsorily returned to BIAP  without
   either a current or  expired  Iraqi  passport,  he  may  be  at  risk  of
   detention in the course of BIAP procedures and it cannot be excluded that
   the detention conditions might give rise to  a  real  risk  of  treatment
   contrary to Article 3 ECHR. Such a risk is however,  purely  academic  in
   the UK context because under the current UK returns policy there will  be
   no compulsory return of persons lacking such documents.



 THE APPELLANTS' CASES

HM and RM

361. The backgrounds of HM and RM are set out at  [47]-[49]  above.  Neither
    has any documentation. In light of our general findings  above,  we  do
    not consider that either  has  made  out  a  claim  for  Article  15(c)
    protection, either on immediate return to Baghdad, in transit to Kirkuk
    or in Kirkuk itself. Neither their age nor sex  nor  Kurdish  ethnicity
    will give rise to a real risk of serious harm under Article 15(c).

362.  As to what would happen to HM and RM at  BIAP,  we  observe  that  the
    Secretary of State has made clear that under her current returns policy
    there will be no enforced returns  of  undocumented  persons.  Enforced
    returns are confined to those who  have  a  current  or  expired  Iraqi
    passport. Currently, therefore, HM and RM do not stand to be  returned.
    In the meantime, of course, it is  open  to  the  appellants,  if  they
    choose,  to make a voluntary return  with  a  laissez  passer  document
    which can be issued by the Iraqi embassy in the UK.  Were  they  to  do
    that, then, again there would be no real risk of detention because  the
    evidence is clear that such persons are not detained on arrival.

363.  Should HM or RM choose to move to the KRG, whether on a  temporary  or
    permanent basis, we  would  anticipate  no  difficulties  beyond  minor
    delays. Indeed, given that both  were  originally  resident  there,  we
    consider there may not even be any minor delays.

364.  We consider that living conditions for them either in the  KRG  or  in
    central or southern Iraq would be safe and adequate for them  and  that
    relocation within any of these areas would not be unreasonable. In this
    regard we bear in mind that they are relatively young  with  no  health
    difficulties.

HF

365.  Mutatis mutandis, many of the above conclusions  are  relevant  to  HF
    also, although as he has an Iraqi ID card and driving licence currently
    held by the Secretary of State, we  consider  that  this  documentation
    would enable him to obtain a CSID and a  laissez  passer  and  to  pass
    through BIAP controls without  difficulty  and  be  reunited  with  his
    family members who include his mother,  two  sisters  and  an  aunt  in
    Baghdad. We see no  "enhanced  risk  factors"  attaching  to  his  Arab
    ethnicity or his Sunni Muslim religious identity that would  place  him
    at risk in  Baghdad  or  elsewhere  in  Iraq.  The  evidence  does  not
    establish any risk to him on account of his deceased father's links  to
    the Ba'ath Party. If he chose to relocate to the KRG or other parts  of
    central or  southern  Iraq,  we  consider  that  would  be  both  safe,
    accessible and not unreasonable.

366.  For the above reasons we conclude:

         That the decision of the immigration judge in the case  of  HM  and
    in the case of RM was wrong  in  law  and  have  been  set  aside.  The
    decision we re-make is to dismiss their appeals;

         That the decision of the immigration judge in the case  of  HF  was
    wrong in law and has been set aside. The  decision  we  re-make  is  to
    dismiss his appeal.


      Signed

      Mr Justice Collins


                                                  APPENDIX

                    DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |23.07.2003     |
|          |(UNHCR), Guidelines on International  |               |
|          |protection: "Internal Flight or       |               |
|          |relocation alternative" within the    |               |
|          |context of Article 1A (2) of the 1951 |               |
|          |Convention and/or 1967 Protocol       |               |
|          |relating to the status of refugees    |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |29.04.2004     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR Annotated Comments on  |               |
|          |the EC Council Directive              |               |
|          |Hansard: Removals and voluntary       |14.07.2005     |
|          |departures, by type, nationals of Iraq|               |
|          |to Iraq, January 2004 to June 2011    |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |10.2005        |
|          |(UNHCR), Country of Origin            |               |
|          |Information, Iraq                     |               |
|          |The New York Times: To stay alive,    |05.09.2006     |
|          |Iraqis Change Their Names             |               |
|          |Institute for Economics and Peace,    |2007           |
|          |Global Peace Index: Methodology,      |               |
|          |Results and Findings 2007             |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |2007           |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Stories of Return |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |01.01.2007     |
|          |(UNHCR), Strategy for the Iraq        |               |
|          |Situation                             |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |09.01.2007     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR issues latest Iraq     |               |
|          |advisory                              |               |
|          |Brookings, Iraq Index: Tracking       |29.01.2007     |
|          |Variables of Reconstruction & Security|               |
|          |in Post-Saddam Iraq                   |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |02.02.2007     |
|          |(UNHCR), Iraq: A humanitarian         |               |
|          |operation that will go on for years   |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |04.2007        |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Civilians without       |               |
|          |Protection: The ever worsening        |               |
|          |humanitarian crisis in Iraq           |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports,        |12.02.2007     |
|          |Operational Guidance Note v3: Iraq    |               |
|          |US Department of State, Iraq Bureau of|06.03.2007     |
|          |Democracy, Human Rights and Labor     |               |
|          |2006, Country Reports on Human Rights |               |
|          |Practices 2006: Iraq                  |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), The Report of the|07.03.2007     |
|          |Secretary General on Iraq pursuant to |               |
|          |paragraph 30 of resolution 1546 (2004)|               |
|          |Human Rights Watch (HRW), Iraq: US    |12.04.2007     |
|          |Data on Civilian Casualties Raises    |               |
|          |Serious Concerns                      |               |
|          |International Federation of Red Cross |18.04.2007     |
|          |and Red Crescent Societies            |               |
|          |(IFRC)Humanitarian Needs of           |               |
|          |Populations Displaced From Iraq       |               |
|          |International Crisis Group (ICG), Iraq|19.04.2007     |
|          |and the Kurds: Resolving the Kirkuk   |               |
|          |Crisis                                |               |
|          |UN Assistance Mission for Iraqi       |25.04.2007     |
|          |(UNAMI), Human Rights Report: 1       |               |
|          |January - 31 March 2007               |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports, Iraq   |30.04.2007     |
|          |COI Report April 2007                 |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Humanitarian     |02.05.2007     |
|          |Briefing on the Crisis in Iraq        |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), The Report of the|05.06.2007     |
|          |Secretary General on Iraq pursuant to |               |
|          |paragraph 30 of resolution 1546 (2004)|               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |05.06.2007     |
|          |(UNHCR), Iraq: Situation continues to |               |
|          |worsen, local governorates overwhelmed|               |
|          |Freedom House Freedom in the World    |26.06.2007     |
|          |2007: Iraq                            |               |
|          |Carnegie Endowment, Iraq Four Years   |07.2007        |
|          |after the U.S.-Led Invasion: Assessing|               |
|          |the Crisis and Searching for a Way    |               |
|          |Forward                               |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch (HRW), Caught in   |02.07.2007     |
|          |the Whirlwind: Torture and Denial of  |               |
|          |Due Process by the Kurdistan Security |               |
|          |Forces                                |               |
|          |US Department of State, International |09.2007        |
|          |Religious Freedom Report 2007: Iraq   |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |01.09.2007     |
|          |(UNHCR), Governorate Assessment Report|               |
|          |Erbil Governorate                     |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |01.09.2007     |
|          |(UNHCR), Governorate Assessment Report|               |
|          |Sulaymaniyah Governorate              |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |01.09.2007     |
|          |(UNHCR), Governorate Assessment Report|               |
|          |Dahuk Governorate                     |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |05.09.2007     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR's Eligibility          |               |
|          |Guidelines for Assessing the          |               |
|          |International Protection Needs of     |               |
|          |Iraqi Asylum-Seekers                  |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), The Report of the|15.10.2007     |
|          |Secretary General on Iraq - Report of |               |
|          |the Secretary General pursuant to     |               |
|          |paragraph 6 of resolution 1770 (2007) |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |11.2007        |
|          |(UNHCR), Iraq: Ability of IDPs to     |               |
|          |Transfer PDS cards by governorate     |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Humanitarian     |13.11.2007     |
|          |Crisis in Iraq: Facts and Figures     |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |23.11.2007     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR says time not right for|               |
|          |large-scale Iraq repatriation         |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |17.12.2007     |
|          |(UNHCR), Addendum to UNHCR's          |               |
|          |Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing  |               |
|          |the International Protection Needs of |               |
|          |Iraqi Asylum-Seekers                  |               |
|          |Institute for Economics and Peace,    |2008           |
|          |Global Peace Index: Methodology,      |               |
|          |Results and Findings 2008             |               |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Civilian deaths|01.01.2008     |
|          |from violence in 2007                 |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports, Iraq   |08.01.2008     |
|          |COI Report January 2008               |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|08.01.2008     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), The Patterns in       |               |
|          |Violence and Casualties in Iraq 2007: |               |
|          |The Need for Strategic Patience       |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |10.01.2008     |
|          |Migration (IOM): Iraq Displacement    |               |
|          |2007 - Year in Review                 |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), The Report of the|14.01.2008     |
|          |Secretary General on Iraq pursuant to |               |
|          |paragraph 6 of resolution 1770 (2007) |               |
|          |Brookings, Iraq Index: Tracking       |28.01.2008     |
|          |Variables of Reconstruction & Security|               |
|          |in Post-Saddam Iraq                   |               |
|          |IRIN:  Iraq: More relief aid needed in|28.01.2008     |
|          |Mosul after blast                     |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch (HRW)World Report  |31.01.2008     |
|          |2008: Iraq                            |               |
|          |The Independent: Sunni vs Shia: The   |05.02.2008     |
|          |real bloody Baghdad                   |               |
|          |BBC News: Assault looms in Iraq's     |07.02.2008     |
|          |'worst place'                         |               |
|          |International Crisis Group (ICG)Civil |07.02.2008     |
|          |War, The Sadrists and the Surge       |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|25.02.2008     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), Violence in Iraq:     |               |
|          |Reaching an 'Irreducible Minimum'     |               |
|          |Iraq Updates: Civilian wounded in     |25.02.2008     |
|          |explosion in Kirkuk                   |               |
|          |Office of the High Commissioner for   |25.02.2008     |
|          |Human Rights (OHCHR), Report of the   |               |
|          |Special Rapporteur on the promotion   |               |
|          |and protection of the right to freedom|               |
|          |of opinion and expression: Summary of |               |
|          |cases transmitted to Governments and  |               |
|          |replies received (Iraq excerpt)       |               |
|          |Iraq Updates: Police chief escapes    |28.02.2008     |
|          |attempt on his life                   |               |
|          |Iraq Updates: Unknown gunmen kidnap   |28.02.2008     |
|          |two workers, trucker in Kirkuk        |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |03.2008        |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Iraq: No Let Up in the  |               |
|          |Humanitarian Crisis                   |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |03.2008        |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Crossing the desert -   |               |
|          |the ICRC in Iraq: analysis of a       |               |
|          |humanitarian operation                |               |
|          |Iraq Updates: Parliament rapporteur   |01.03.2008     |
|          |blames army for Kirkuk attack         |               |
|          |Iraq Updates: Kirkuk attack casualties|01.03.2008     |
|          |up to fourteen                        |               |
|          |US Department of State, Country       |11.03.2008     |
|          |Reports on Human Rights Practices     |               |
|          |2007: Iraq                            |               |
|          |UN Assistance Mission for Iraqi       |15.03.2008     |
|          |(UNAMI), Human Rights Report: 1 July -|               |
|          |31 December 2007                      |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |15.03.2008     |
|          |Migration (IOM): Emergency Needs      |               |
|          |Assessments: Post-February 2006       |               |
|          |displacement in Iraq, bi-weekly report|               |
|          |International Organisation for        |18.03.2008     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Iraq: Five years  |               |
|          |on, more people displaced than ever   |               |
|          |before                                |               |
|          |International Rescue Committee (IRC), |20.03.2008     |
|          |5 Years Later, a hidden crisis        |               |
|          |Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO),|25.03.2008     |
|          |Human Rights Annual Report 2007: Iraq |               |
|          |US Department of State (USSD), US     |04.2008        |
|          |Department of State, Excerpt from     |               |
|          |"Country Reports on Terrorism" 2007   |               |
|          |University of New South Wales, The    |01.05.2008     |
|          |Standard of Proof in Complementary    |               |
|          |Protection Cases: Comparative         |               |
|          |Approaches in North America and Europe|               |
|          |Canadian Immigration and Refugee      |02.05.2008     |
|          |Board, Responses to Information       |               |
|          |Requests                              |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports, Iraq   |15.05.2008     |
|          |COI Report May 2008                   |               |
|          |Amnesty International, Iraq: Amnesty  |28.05.2008     |
|          |International Report 2008             |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |6.2008         |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Iraq displacement |               |
|          |& return 2008 Mid-year review         |               |
|          |Amnesty International, Rhetoric and   |15.06.2008     |
|          |reality: the Iraqi refugee crisis     |               |
|          |Brookings, Ministry of Displacement   |07.2008        |
|          |(MoDM) and Migration, National Policy |               |
|          |on Displacement                       |               |
|          |Freedom House Freedom in the World    |02.07.2008     |
|          |2008: Iraq                            |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), The Report of the|28.07.2008     |
|          |Secretary General on Iraq pursuant to |               |
|          |paragraph 6 of resolution 1770 (2007) |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |08.2008        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Monitoring and|               |
|          |Needs Assessments, Assessments of Iraq|               |
|          |Returns                               |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |08.2008        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Displacement  |               |
|          |Monitoring and Needs Assessments, Tent|               |
|          |Camp Assessment Report                |               |
|          |Brookings, The Looming Crisis:        |05.08.2008     |
|          |Displacement and Security in Iraq     |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports, Iraq   |15.08.2008     |
|          |COI Report August 2008                |               |
|          |US Department of State, International |19.09.2008     |
|          |Religious Freedom Report 2008: Iraq   |               |
|          |European Legal Network on Asylum (ECRE|01.10.2008     |
|          |and ELENA), The Impact of the EU      |               |
|          |Directive on International Protection |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports,        |29.10.2008     |
|          |Operational Guidance Note v4: Iraq    |               |
|          |Council on Foreign Relations, Ansar   |05.11.2008     |
|          |Al-Islam (Iraq, Islamists/Kurdish     |               |
|          |Separatists), Ansar Al-Sunnah         |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |12.2008        |
|          |Migration (IOM): Kirkuk, Ninewa and   |               |
|          |Salah Al-Din Governorate Profiles     |               |
|          |Post-2006 IDP Needs Assessments       |               |
|          |December 2008                         |               |
|          |UN Assistance Mission for Iraqi       |02.12.2008     |
|          |(UNAMI), Human Rights Report: 1       |               |
|          |January - 30 June 2008                |               |
|          |Wikileaks: Abu Ghraib, A New Day      |17.12.2008     |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Post-surge     |28.12.2008     |
|          |violence: its extent and nature       |               |
|          |Institute for Economics and Peace,    |2009           |
|          |Global Peace Index: Methodology,      |               |
|          |Results and Findings 2009             |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |01.2009        |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR Statement on Subsidiary|               |
|          |Protection under the EC Qualification |               |
|          |Directive for People Threatened by    |               |
|          |Indiscriminate Violence               |               |
|          |Integrated Regional News Service      |04.01.2009     |
|          |(IRIN), Iraqis want free food         |               |
|          |programme to continue, finds survey   |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports, Iraq   |12.01.2009     |
|          |COI Report January 2009               |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch (HRW)World Report  |14.01.2009     |
|          |2009: Iraq                            |               |
|          |Brookings, Iraq Index: Tracking       |30.01.2009     |
|          |Variables of Reconstruction & Security|               |
|          |in Post-Saddam Iraq                   |               |
|          |Office of the High Commissioner for   |16.02.2009     |
|          |Human Rights (OHCHR), Report of the   |               |
|          |Special Rapporteur on freedom of      |               |
|          |religion or belief: Summary of cases  |               |
|          |transmitted to governments and replies|               |
|          |received (Iraq excerpt)               |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |22.02.2009     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Emergency     |               |
|          |Needs Assessments, Three Years of     |               |
|          |Post-Samarra displacement in Iraq     |               |
|          |US Department of State, 2008 Human    |25.02.2009     |
|          |Rights Report: Iraq                   |               |
|          |UN Office for the Coordination of     |03.2009        |
|          |Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),          |               |
|          |Humanitarian Update                   |               |
|          |Office of the High Commissioner for   |04.03.2009     |
|          |Human Rights (OHCHR), Report submitted|               |
|          |by the Special Rapporteur on the      |               |
|          |situation of human rights defenders:  |               |
|          |Summary of cases transmitted to       |               |
|          |Governments and replies received (Iraq|               |
|          |excerpt)                              |               |
|          |Amnesty International, Challenging    |11.03.2009     |
|          |Repression: Human Rights Defenders in |               |
|          |the Middle East and North Africa      |               |
|          |Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO),|26.03.2009     |
|          |Annual Report on Human Rights 2008 -  |               |
|          |Iraq                                  |               |
|          |UN Office for the Coordination of     |04.2009        |
|          |Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),          |               |
|          |Humanitarian Update                   |               |
|1         |Amnesty International, Hope and Fear: |14.04.2009     |
|          |Human Rights in the Kurdistan Region  |               |
|          |of Iraq                               |               |
|1         |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |27.04.2009     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines |               |
|          |for Assessing the International       |               |
|          |Protection Needs of Iraqi             |               |
|          |Asylum-Seekers                        |               |
|1         |UN Assistance Mission for Iraqi       |29.04.2009     |
|          |(UNAMI), Human Rights Report 1 July - |               |
|          |31 December 2008                      |               |
|1         |US Department of State, Country       |30.04.2009     |
|          |Reports on Terrorism 2008: Iraq       |               |
|1         |Center for Strategic and International|05.05.2009     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), Iraq: Trends in       |               |
|          |Violence and Civilian Casualties:     |               |
|          |2005-2009                             |               |
|1         |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |05.05.2009     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR revises guidelines for |               |
|          |Iraqi asylum claims                   |               |
|1         |Jane's Sentinel, Country Risk         |22.05.2009     |
|          |Assessment: "Infrastructure Iraq"     |               |
|1         |Office of the High Commissioner for   |27.05.2009     |
|          |Human Rights (OHCHR), Report of the   |               |
|          |Special Rapporteur on the promotion   |               |
|          |and protection of the right to freedom|               |
|          |of opinion and expression: Summary of |               |
|          |cases transmitted to Governments and  |               |
|          |replies received (Iraq excerpt)       |               |
|1         |Amnesty International, Iraq: Human    |28.05.2009     |
|          |Rights in Republic of Iraq: Amnesty   |               |
|          |International Report 2009             |               |
|1         |UNDP, Overview of landmines and       |06.2009        |
|          |explosive remnants of war in Iraq     |               |
|1         |Brookings, Internal Displacement in   |01.06.2009     |
|          |Iraq: The Process of Working Toward   |               |
|          |Durable Solutions                     |               |
|1         |Journal of Humanitarian Assistance,   |22.06.2009     |
|          |Counting excess civilian casualties of|               |
|          |the Iraq War: Science or Politics?    |               |
|1         |Danish Immigration Service, Security  |07.2009        |
|          |and Human Rights Issues in Kurdistan  |               |
|          |Region of Iraq (KRI), and             |               |
|          |South/Central Iraq (S/C Iraq)         |               |
|1         |UK Border Agency COIS Reports, Iraq   |10.07.2009     |
|          |COI Report July 2009                  |               |
|1         |Freedom House Freedom in the World    |16.07.2009     |
|          |2009: Iraq                            |               |
|1         |International Committee of the Red    |08.2009        |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Civilians without       |               |
|          |protection                            |               |
|1         |Inter Agency Information & Analysis   |08.2009        |
|          |Unit (IAU Iraq), The Humanitarian     |               |
|          |Situation in Iraq: Inter-Agency       |               |
|          |Factsheet                             |               |
|1         |International Committee of the Red    |13.08.2009     |
|          |Cross: Iraq: ongoing conflict claims  |               |
|          |hundreds of civilian lives every month|               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Baghdad Blasts |19.08.2009     |
|          |Kill 95                               |               |
|1         |Human Rights Watch (HRW), Iraq: Halt  |23.08.2009     |
|          |All Attacks on Civilians              |               |
|1         |Voice of America New: Southern Iraq   |24.08.2009     |
|          |Blasts Kill 11                        |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Explosions in  |29.08.2009     |
|          |Northern Iraq Claim More Lives        |               |
|1         |UK Border Agency COIS Reports,        |09.2010        |
|          |Casework Instructions - Humanitarian  |               |
|          |Protecton Article 15 (c)              |               |
|1         |Human Rights Watch (HRW), UPR         |01.09.2009     |
|          |Submission                            |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Government Says|01.09.2009     |
|          |August Was Bloodiest Month for Iraqis |               |
|          |in Past Year                          |               |
|          |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):|05.09.2009     |
|          |Iraq: Stormy Times as U.S. Withdraws  |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Bombs across   |07.09.2009     |
|          |Iraq Kill 18                          |               |
|1         |Office of the High Commissioner for   |07.09.2009     |
|          |Human Rights (OHCHR), Joint written   |               |
|          |statement submitted by the Women's    |               |
|          |International Democratic Federation   |               |
|          |(Abuse and Torture in Iraq)           |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Suicide Truck  |10.09.2009     |
|          |Bomb Kills 20 in Northern Iraq        |               |
|1         |International Committee of the Red    |15.09.2009     |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Operational Update -    |               |
|          |Iraq: ICRC Activities in August 2009  |               |
|1         |UK Border Agency COIS Reports, Iraq   |16.09.2009     |
|          |COI Report September 2009             |               |
|1         |UK Border Agency COIS Reports,        |16.09.2009     |
|          |Kurdistan Regional Government Area of |               |
|          |Iraq COI Report September 2009        |               |
|1         |Human Rights Watch (HRW), Iraq: Halt  |23.08.2009     |
|          |All Attacks on Civilians              |               |
|1         |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |10.2009        |
|          |(UNHCR), Protection Monitoring        |               |
|          |Assessments Summary, January - October|               |
|          |2009                                  |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Suicide Bomber |05.10.2009     |
|          |Kills 6 at Iraqi Funeral              |               |
|1         |Inter Agency Information & Analysis   |05.10.2009     |
|          |Unit (IAU Iraq)Fact Sheet: Housing &  |               |
|          |Shelter in Iraq World Habitat Day     |               |
|1         |HJT Research: Iraqi asylum seekers    |16.10.2009     |
|          |deported from the UK are sent back to |               |
|          |Britain                               |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: At Least 15    |16.10.2009     |
|          |Killed at Sunni Mosque in Iraq        |               |
|1         |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |23.10.2009     |
|          |(UNHCR), Involuntary returns to       |               |
|          |Central Iraq contrary to UNHCR        |               |
|          |guidelines                            |               |
|1         |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Two  |25.10.2009     |
|          |Car Bombs Kill At Least 132 in Baghdad|               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Dual Baghdad   |26.10.2009     |
|          |Bombings Kill 155, Wound 500          |               |
|1         |US Department of State, International |26.10.2009     |
|          |Religious Freedom Report 2009: Iraq   |               |
|1         |Amnesty International: Latest killings|26.10.2009     |
|          |of civilians in Baghdad a 'war crime' |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: At Least 8     |01.11.2009     |
|          |Killed in Iraq Bombings               |               |
|1         |International Organisation for        |03.11.2009     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Assessment of     |               |
|          |Return to Iraq                        |               |
|1         |International Organization for        |03.11.2009     |
|          |Migration (IOM): Displaced Iraqis Face|               |
|          |New Set of Challenges upon Return     |               |
|1         |ISN Security Watch: Baghdad divided   |09.11.2009     |
|1         |International Organisation for        |10.11.2009     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Returning to Iraq:|               |
|          |Country Information                   |               |
|1         |Ministry of Transport: Armour Group   |12.11.2009     |
|          |undertake security for Ministry of    |               |
|          |Transport, Baghdad International      |               |
|          |Airport                               |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Gunmen Kill 13 |16.11.2009     |
|          |Villagers near Baghdad                |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Killings in    |16.11.2009     |
|          |Iraq Highlight Continuing Security    |               |
|          |Concerns                              |               |
|1         |Brookings, Resolving Iraqi            |18.11.2009     |
|          |Displacement: Humanitarian and        |               |
|          |Development Perspectives              |               |
|1         |Office of the High Commissioner for   |01.12.2009     |
|          |Human Rights (OHCHR), Universal       |               |
|          |Periodic Review - Iraq: Summary of    |               |
|          |stakeholders' information             |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Car Bombs Kill |08.12.2009     |
|          |Over 100, Wound More than 400 in      |               |
|          |Baghdad                               |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports, Iraq   |10.12.2009     |
|          |COI Report December 2009              |               |
|1         |United Nations High Commissioner for  |11.12.2009     |
|          |Refugees (UNHCR): UNHCR reiterates    |               |
|          |concern about involuntary returns to  |               |
|          |Iraq amid violence                    |               |
|1         |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |11.12.2009     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR reiterates concern     |               |
|          |about involuntary returns to Iraq amid|               |
|          |violence                              |               |
|1         |UN Assistance Mission for Iraqi       |14.12.2009     |
|          |(UNAMI), Human Rights Report 1 January|               |
|          |- 30 June 2009                        |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Bombings in    |15.12.2009     |
|          |Baghdad, Mosul Kill 8; Many Wounded   |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: 20 Killed in   |24.12.2009     |
|          |Central Iraq Bomb Attacks             |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Violence in    |25.12.2009     |
|          |Iraq as Muslims, Christians Mark      |               |
|          |Religious Holidays                    |               |
|1         |Congressional Research Service, Iraq: |29.12.2009     |
|          |Post-Saddam Governance and Security   |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: 23 Dead in Twin|30.12.2009     |
|          |Bombings in Iraq's Anbar Province     |               |
|1         |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Civilian deaths|31.12.2009     |
|          |from violence in 2009                 |               |
|1         |International Committee of the Red    |2010           |
|          |Cross (ICRC), ICRC Annual Report 2010 |               |
|1         |Institute for Economics and Peace,    |2010           |
|          |Global Peace Index: Methodology,      |               |
|          |Results and Findings 2010             |               |
|1         |RAND, An Economic Analysis of the     |2010           |
|          |Financial Records of Al-Qa'ida in Iraq|               |
|1         |Minority Rights Group International,  |2010           |
|          |Report: Still Targeted: Continued     |               |
|          |Persecution of Iraq's Minorities      |               |
|1         |UN Assistance Mission for Iraqi       |2010           |
|          |(UNAMI), Human Rights Report, 1 July -|               |
|          |31 December 2009                      |               |
|1         |Ministry of Planning, National        |2010           |
|          |Development Plan, 2010 - 2014         |               |
|1         |International Organisation for        |2010           |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IDP Programme     |               |
|          |Projects 2006-2010                    |               |
|1         |United Nations (UN), Humanitarian     |2010           |
|          |Action Plan                           |               |
|1         |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Database       |01.01.2010 to  |
|          |                                      |date           |
|1         |National Counter-Terrorism Command,   |01.2010 -      |
|          |Worldwide Incidents Tracking System   |31.12.2011     |
|          |(database source calendar - extracts  |               |
|          |up to Calendar Year 2011)             |               |
|1         |Institute for War and Peace Reporting |05.01.2010     |
|          |(UK): Iraq: Fear Grips Anbar after    |               |
|          |Bombings                              |               |
|1         |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Bomb |07.01.2010     |
|          |Attacks Kill Seven in Iraq            |               |
|1         |Freedom House Freedom in the World    |21.01.2010     |
|          |2010: Iraq                            |               |
|1         |Human Rights Watch (HRW)Country       |20.01.2010     |
|          |Summary                               |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Three Suicide  |25.01.2010     |
|          |Bombers Attack Baghdad Hotels, Killing|               |
|          |36 People                             |               |
|1         |Brookings, Iraq Index: Tracking       |26.01.2010     |
|          |Variables of Reconstruction & Security|               |
|          |in Post-Saddam Iraq                   |               |
|1         |Special Inspector General for Iraq    |30.01.2010     |
|          |Reconstruction (SIGR), Quarterly      |               |
|          |Report and Semiannual Report to the   |               |
|          |United States Congress                |               |
|1         |International Organisation for        |02.2010        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Governate Profile:|               |
|          |Diyala                                |               |
|1         |International Committee of the Red    |02.2010        |
|          |Cross (ICRC), A tough road home:      |               |
|          |Uprooted Iraqis in Jordan, Syria and  |               |
|          |Iraq                                  |               |
|1         |International Organisation for        |02.2010        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Governate Profile:|               |
|          |Kirkuk                                |               |
|1         |International Organisation for        |02.2010        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM  Mission in   |               |
|          |Iraq: Newsletter Volume II 2010       |               |
|1         |United Nations (UN), Report of the    |08.02.2010     |
|          |Secretary-General pursuant to         |               |
|          |paragraph 6 of resolution 1883 (2009) |               |
|1         |Center for Strategic and International|17.02.2010     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), The Uncertain Security|               |
|          |Situation in Iraq: trends in violence,|               |
|          |casualties and Iraqi perceptions      |               |
|1         |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |22.02.2010     |
|          |Sixteen Killed In Spate of Attacks    |               |
|          |Across Iraq                           |               |
|1         |Internal Displacement Monitoring      |25.02.2010     |
|          |Centre (IDMC), Returnees and IDPS face|               |
|          |difficulties in registration and      |               |
|          |obtaining documentation required (2005|               |
|          |- 2009)                               |               |
|1         |International Crisis Group (ICG)Iraq's|25.02.2010     |
|          |Uncertain Future: Elections and Beyond|               |
|1         |Congressional Research Service Iraq   |25.02.2010     |
|          |Casualties: US Military Forces and    |               |
|          |Iraqi Civilians, Police and Security  |               |
|          |Forces                                |               |
|1         |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |03.2010        |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR Iraq Operation Monthly |               |
|          |Statistical update on return - March  |               |
|          |2010                                  |               |
|1         |UNHCR, Iraq Fact Sheet                |03.2010        |
|1         |US Department of Defence, Measuring   |03.2010        |
|          |Stability and Security in Iraq: March |               |
|          |2010 Report to Congress               |               |
|1         |Voice of America News: Early Voting in|04.03.2010     |
|          |Iraq Marred by Suicide Attacks        |               |
|1         |Internal Displacement Monitoring      |04.03.2010     |
|          |Centre (IDMC) Iraq: Little new        |               |
|          |displacement but around 2.8 million   |               |
|          |Iraqis remain internally displaced: A |               |
|          |profile of the internal displacement  |               |
|          |situation                             |               |
|1         |Compass Direct (USA): Violence        |05.03.2010     |
|          |Escalates in Mosul, Iraq ahead of     |               |
|          |Elections                             |               |
|2         |Center for Strategic and International|10.03.2010     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), Iraq: Meeting the     |               |
|          |Challenges of 2010                    |               |
|2         |US Department of State, 2009 Human    |11.03.2010     |
|          |Rights Report: Iraq                   |               |
|2         |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Car  |15.03.2010     |
|          |Bomb Kills Seven in Fallujah          |               |
|2         |Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO),|17.03.2010     |
|          |Human Rights Annual Report 2009 -     |               |
|          |Countries of Concern: Iraq            |               |
|2         |Danish Immigration Service, Honour    |23.03.2010     |
|          |Crimes against Men in Kurdistan Region|               |
|          |of Iraq (KRI) and the Availability of |               |
|          |Protection                            |               |
|2         |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Iraq War Logs: |23.10.2010     |
|          |What the numbers reveal               |               |
|2         |Voice of America News: Violence Rocks |26.03.2010     |
|          |Iraq Ahead of Vote Results            |               |
|2         |Voice of America News: At Least Six   |28.03.2010     |
|          |Killed in Iraq Bombings               |               |
|2         |Voice of America News: Car Bombs Kill |29.03.2010     |
|          |5 in Iraqi Holy City                  |               |
|2         |International Organisation for        |04.2010        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM UK's          |               |
|          |Reintegration Assistance to returnees |               |
|          |under VARRP's New Approach (2007 -    |               |
|          |2009)                                 |               |
|2         |Norwegian Directorate of Immigration, |04.2010        |
|          |The Making of UNHCR's guidance and its|               |
|          |implementation in the national        |               |
|          |jurisdiction of the United Kingdom,   |               |
|          |Norway and Sweden                     |               |
|2         |Economist Intelligence Unit Country   |01.04.2010     |
|          |Report, Iraq                          |               |
|2         |Voice of America News: Iraqi          |03.04.2010     |
|          |Insurgents Kill 24 People with Ties to|               |
|          |Pro-US Militia                        |               |
|2         |Voice of America News: Three Massive  |04.04.2010     |
|          |Bombs Rock Baghdad, at Least 41 Killed|               |
|2         |Brookings, April 2010 Index Update: A |05.04.2010     |
|          |look into the Afghanistan, Pakistan   |               |
|          |and Iraq Index Projects               |               |
|2         |Voice of America News: Bombs Kill 35  |06.04.2010     |
|          |People in Shi'ite Neighborhoods of    |               |
|          |Baghdad                               |               |
|2         |Amnesty International: Killings of    |07.04.2010     |
|          |civilians in Iraq constitute 'war     |               |
|          |crimes'                               |               |
|2         |Voice of America News: Bombings in    |10.04.2010     |
|          |Iraq Kill 6                           |               |
|2         |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |12.04.2010     |
|          |(UNHCR), Diyala Initiative -          |               |
|          |Facilitating returns and creating     |               |
|          |conditions for sustainable            |               |
|          |reintegration                         |               |
|2         |International Organisation for        |13.04.2010     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Emergency     |               |
|          |Needs Assessments, Four Years of      |               |
|          |Post-Samarra displacement in Iraq     |               |
|2         |Voice of America News: Baghdad        |14.04.2010     |
|          |Violence Kills Sunni Cleric, Two      |               |
|          |Others                                |               |
|2         |Danish Immigration Service Entry      |15.04.2010     |
|          |Procedures and Residence in Kurdistan |               |
|          |Region of Iraq (KRI) for Iraqi        |               |
|          |Nationals                             |               |
|2         |Amnesty International: Iraq urged to  |19.04.2010     |
|          |investigate secret prison allegations |               |
|2         |Center for Strategic and International|19.04.2010     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), Q & A Iraq after the  |               |
|          |death of Al-Qaeda in Iraq's Leadership|               |
|2         |International Organisation for        |20.04.2010     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Emergency     |               |
|          |Needs Assessments Displacement from   |               |
|          |Mosul, Ninewa                         |               |
|2         |Human Rights Watch: Iraq: Detainees   |27.04.2010     |
|          |Describe Torture in Secret Jail       |               |
|2         |Amnesty International, Iraq: Civilians|27.04.2010     |
|          |under fire                            |               |
|2         |Voice of America News: Human Rights   |28.04.2010     |
|          |Watch: Torture 'Routine' at Secret    |               |
|          |Iraqi Detention Facility              |               |
|2         |Institute for War and Peace Reporting |29.04.2010     |
|          |(UK): Sadr City Shaken by Bombings    |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |29.04.2010     |
|          |Reports: Eight Killed In Baghdad Car  |               |
|          |Bomb                                  |               |
|          |Special Inspector General for Iraq    |30.04.2010     |
|          |Reconstruction (SIGR), Quarterly      |               |
|          |Report to the United States Congress  |               |
|          |International Rescue Committee (IRC), |05.2010        |
|          |10,000 Refugees from Iraq - A report  |               |
|          |on Joint Resettlement in the European |               |
|          |Union                                 |               |
|          |Kurdistan Regional Government, Fact   |01.05.2010     |
|          |Sheet: Travel to the Kurdistan Region |               |
|          |in Iraq                               |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Attack on Iraqi|02.05.2010     |
|          |Students Kills One, Wounds 80         |               |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Exaggerated    |05.05.2010     |
|          |claims, substandard research, and a   |               |
|          |disservice to truth                   |               |
|          |US Department of State, Iraq Status   |05.05.2010     |
|          |Report                                |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |10.05.2010     |
|          |Scores Killed, Wounded in Attacks in  |               |
|          |Iraq                                  |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Attacks in Iraq|10.05.2010     |
|          |Kill More Than 100                    |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Attacks in     |11.05.2010     |
|          |Iraqi Capital Kill at Least Five      |               |
|          |Police Officers                       |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Development      |11.05.2010     |
|          |Assistance Framework for Iraq 2011 -  |               |
|          |2014                                  |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Attacks Kills  |13.05.2010     |
|          |Ten in Baghdad                        |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Bombings near  |14.05.2010     |
|          |Iraqi Stadium kill at least ten       |               |
|          |Danfoss, First Quarterly Report       |17.05.2010     |
|          |Jan-March 2010                        |               |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Documented     |20.05.2010     |
|          |civilian deaths from violence         |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Car bomb kills |21.05.2010     |
|          |23 in Iraq                            |               |
|          |Brookings, Iraq Index: Tracking       |25.05.2010     |
|          |Variables of Reconstruction and       |               |
|          |Security in Post-Saddam Iraq          |               |
|          |Office of the High Commissioner for   |26.05.2010     |
|          |Human Rights (OHCHR), Report of the   |               |
|          |Special Rapporteur on the promotion   |               |
|          |and protection of the right to freedom|               |
|          |of opinion and expression: Summary of |               |
|          |cases transmitted to Governments and  |               |
|          |replies received (Iraq excerpt)       |               |
|          |Amnesty International, Iraq: Amnesty  |27.05.2010     |
|          |International Report 2010             |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|06.2010        |
|          |Studies (CSIS), Iraq and the United   |               |
|          |States: Creating a Strategic          |               |
|          |Partnership                           |               |
|          |Washington Institute for Near East    |06.2010        |
|          |Policy, Policy Notes: The Iraqi       |               |
|          |Security Forces: Local Context and    |               |
|          |U.S. Assistance                       |               |
|          |US Department of Defence, Measuring   |06.2010        |
|          |Stability and Security in Iraq: June  |               |
|          |2010 Report to Congress               |               |
|          |Voice of America News: at Least Five  |06.06.2010     |
|          |Killed in Iraq Explosions             |               |
|          |Amnesty International: European states|06.06.2010     |
|          |must stop the imminent forcible return|               |
|          |of Iraqis                             |               |
|          |Voice of America News: At least Seven |07.06.2010     |
|          |Killed in Iraq Attacks                |               |
|          |Foreign & Commonwealth Office: Iraq - |07.06.2010     |
|          |Internal Travel                       |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |08.06.2010     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR cautions against       |               |
|          |European deportations to Iraq         |               |
|          |Amnesty International: UK: Removals to|08.06.2010     |
|          |Iraq put lives in danger              |               |
|          |UNHCR: UNHCR cautions against European|08.06.2010     |
|          |deportations to Iraq                  |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |13.06.2010     |
|          |Baghdad Bank Attack Kills 12          |               |
|          |Amnesty International: Stop forcible  |17.06.2010     |
|          |returns from Europe to Iraq           |               |
|          |Voice of America News: At Least 20    |18.06.2010     |
|          |Killed in Iraq Attacks                |               |
|          |Guardian: Iraqi asylum seekers claim  |18.06.2010     |
|          |they were beaten on flight to Baghdad |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Twin Suicide   |20.06.2010     |
|          |Blasts Kill More Than Two Dozen in    |               |
|          |Baghdad                               |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Bomb Attack    |21.06.2010     |
|          |Kills 8 in Northern Iraq              |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Nine Killed in |24.06.2010     |
|          |Iraq Attacks                          |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |28.06.2010     |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Iraq: helping detainees |               |
|          |and their families                    |               |
|          |UN Office for the Coordination of     |07.2010        |
|          |Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Iraqi    |               |
|          |Kurdish Border Displacement Situation |               |
|          |Update Note                           |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |01.07.2010     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Iraq Facts and    |               |
|          |Figures                               |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Suicide Bomber |07.07.2010     |
|          |Kills At Least 30 Shi'ite Pilgrims in |               |
|          |Baghdad                               |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Suicide Bombers|18.07.2010     |
|          |Kill at Least 46 in Iraq              |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Iraqi Mosque   |21.07.2010     |
|          |Bombing Kills 15                      |               |
|          |HJT Research: News media reports on   |22.07.2010     |
|          |the fate of failed Iraqi asylum       |               |
|          |seekers deported from the UK          |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |28.07.2010     |
|          |(UNHCR), Note on the Continued        |               |
|          |Applicability of the April 2009 UNHCR |               |
|          |Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing  |               |
|          |the International Protection Needs of |               |
|          |Iraqi Asylum-Seekers                  |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |28.07.2010     |
|          |(UNHCR), Annex to the Note on the     |               |
|          |Continued Applicability of the April  |               |
|          |2009 UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for |               |
|          |Assessing the International Protection|               |
|          |Needs of Iraqi Asylum-Seekers: Reports|               |
|          |of Attacks and Security Incidents in  |               |
|          |Iraq since April 2009                 |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Report of the    |29.07.2010     |
|          |Secretary-General pursuant to         |               |
|          |paragraph 6 of resolution 1883 (2009) |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |08.2010        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Review of         |               |
|          |Displacement and Return in Iraq       |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Iraq's July    |01.08.2010     |
|          |Death Toll Highest In Two Years       |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Iraq Bombings  |03.08.2010     |
|          |Kill At Least 12 in Southern City of  |               |
|          |Kut                                   |               |
|          |US Department of State, Country       |05.08.2010     |
|          |Reports on Terrorism 2009: Iraq       |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Roadside Bombs,|15.08.2010     |
|          |Shootings Kill Ten in Iraq; Gunmen    |               |
|          |Kill 5 in Baghdad Checkpoint Shooting |               |
|          |Spree                                 |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Explosions     |25.08.2010     |
|          |Wreak Havoc in Major Iraqi Cities     |               |
|          |Ajazeera: Pulling out of Iraq, 'US    |30.08.2010     |
|          |combat troops are leaving the country,|               |
|          |but can the Iraqi army ensure         |               |
|          |security?'                            |               |
|          |United Nations High Commissioner for  |03.09.2010     |
|          |Refugees (UNHCR): UNHCR concerned at  |               |
|          |ongoing deportations of Iraqis from   |               |
|          |Europe                                |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |03.09.2010     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR concerned at ongoing   |               |
|          |deportations of Iraqis from Europe    |               |
|          |Jane's Sentinel, Security Assessment: |05.09.2010     |
|          |The Gulf States: Security and Foreign |               |
|          |Forces"                               |               |
|          |BBC News: Fresh claims of Iraqi       |09.09.2010     |
|          |deportation "beatings"                |               |
|          |Guardian: Deported Iraqi asylum       |09.09.2010     |
|          |seekers say they were beaten and      |               |
|          |forced off plane                      |               |
|          |Coalitions to Stop Deportations to    |09.09.2010     |
|          |Iraq (UK): Iraqi refugees assaulted on|               |
|          |mass deportation flight to Baghdad    |               |
|          |Danish Immigration Service Security   |10.09.2010     |
|          |and Human Rights in South/Central Iraq|               |
|          |Amnesty International: Thousands of   |13.09.2010     |
|          |Iraqi detainees at risk of torture    |               |
|          |after US handover                     |               |
|          |Amnesty International, New order, same|13.09.2010     |
|          |abuses: Unlawful detentions and       |               |
|          |torture in Iraq                       |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |13.09.2010     |
|          |Rights Group Says Torture, Abuses     |               |
|          |Routine in Iraqi Prisons              |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Car Bombs Kill |19.09.2010     |
|          |at Least 29 People in Iraq            |               |
|          |IRIN: Refugees: UNHCR concerned over  |29.09.2010     |
|          |Iraqi deportations                    |               |
|          |International Reconstruction: Fund    |30.09.2010     |
|          |Facility for Iraq                     |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports,        |01.10.2010     |
|          |Operational Guidance Note, Iraq v.6   |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |10.2010        |
|          |(UNHCR),Monthly Highlights, October   |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service, The   |01.10.2010     |
|          |Kurds in Post-Saddam Iraq             |               |
|          |UNAMI: UN expert calling for action on|03.10.2010     |
|          |behalf of internally displaced persons|               |
|          |in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Erbil|               |
|          |- 03 October 2010                     |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service Iraq   |07.10.2010     |
|          |Casualties: US Military Forces and    |               |
|          |Iraqi Civilians, Police and Security  |               |
|          |Forces                                |               |
|          |Canadian Immigration and Refugee      |29.10.2011     |
|          |Board, Travel Report: Iraq            |               |
|          |The Guardian: Iraq war logs reveal    |22.10.2010     |
|          |15,000 previously unlisted civilian   |               |
|          |deaths                                |               |
|          |The Guardian: Wikileaks Iraq, data    |23.10.2010     |
|          |journalism maps every death           |               |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Iraq War Logs: |23.10.2011     |
|          |The truth is in the detail            |               |
|          |International Crisis Group (ICG),     |26.10.2010     |
|          |Loose Ends: Iraq's Security Forces    |               |
|          |between US Drawdown and Withdraw      |               |
|          |New York Times: A New Attitude in Sadr|29.10.2010     |
|          |City (Slides)                         |               |
|          |New York Times: Baghdad's Shiite Heart|29.10.2010     |
|          |Beats as War Ebbs                     |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |11.2010        |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Operational Update Nov -|               |
|          |Dec 2010, Iraq: unexploded munitions  |               |
|          |put civilians at risk                 |               |
|          |Amnesty International, Denmark, Human |11.2010        |
|          |rights violations and concerns in the |               |
|          |context of counter-terrorism,         |               |
|          |immigration-detention, forcible return|               |
|          |of rejected asylum seekers and        |               |
|          |violence against women                |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |01.11.2010     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Governate Profiles|               |
|          |International Organisation for        |01.11.2010     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Iraq displacement |               |
|          |reports, Special focus - Disputed     |               |
|          |Internal Boundaries                   |               |
|          |Guardian: European court demands halt |05.11.2010     |
|          |to forcible return of Iraqi asylum    |               |
|          |seekers                               |               |
|          |Guardian: Two asylum seekers deported |10.11.2010     |
|          |to Baghdad and allegedly tortured were|               |
|          |not Iraqi                             |               |
|          |Amnesty International Public          |10.11.2010     |
|          |Statement: European states must stop  |               |
|          |forced returns to Iraq                |               |
|          |Council of Europe: Member states must |16.11.2010     |
|          |respect ECHR decision on forced       |               |
|          |expulsions of Iraqis                  |               |
|          |US Department of State, International |17.11.2010     |
|          |Religious Freedom Report 2010: Iraq   |               |
|          |Guardian: Iranian wrongly deported to |21.11.2010     |
|          |Baghdad claims he was tortured        |               |
|          |Amnesty International: UK asylum      |23.11.2010     |
|          |removals to Iraq: Amnesty Response    |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Report of the    |26.11.2010     |
|          |Secretary-General pursuant to         |               |
|          |paragraph 6 of resolution 1936 (2010) |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |30.11.2010     |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Operational Update      |               |
|          |September - October 2010, Iraq:       |               |
|          |Civilians still enduring undue        |               |
|          |hardship                              |               |
|          |The Iraq Partners Forum, Iraq Briefing|12.2010        |
|          |Book                                  |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |12.2010        |
|          |(UNHCR), Iraq Fact Sheet, December    |               |
|          |2010                                  |               |
|          |US Department of State, Iraq Status   |01.12.2010     |
|          |Report                                |               |
|          |Swedish Immigration Service,          |09.12.2010     |
|          |Delrapport fn utredningsresa till    |               |
|          |Irak - oktober/november 2010 (utsatta |               |
|          |grupper -kristna), Migrationsverket   |               |
|          |2010-12-09, Lifos 24184               |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |15.12.2010     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Emergency     |               |
|          |Needs Assessment, Displacement of     |               |
|          |Christians to the North of Iraq       |               |
|          |UNHCR: UNHCR Dismayed at forced       |17.12.2010     |
|          |repatriation of Iraqis: reports       |               |
|          |increase in flight of Iraqi Christians|               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |17.12.2010     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR reports increase in    |               |
|          |flight of Iraqi Christians; reiterates|               |
|          |advice on protection needs            |               |
|          |IRIN: Christian IDPs find refuge in   |23.12.2010     |
|          |Kurdish north                         |               |
|          |IRIN: Middle East: Iraqi refugees -   |28.12.2010     |
|          |interpreting the statistics           |               |
|          |US Government Accountability Office,  |12.2010        |
|          |Accountability Office, Displaced      |               |
|          |Iraqis: Integrated International      |               |
|          |Strategy Needed to Reintegrate Iraq's |               |
|          |Internally Displaced and Returning    |               |
|          |Refugees                              |               |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Iraqi deaths   |30.12.2010     |
|          |from violence in 2010                 |               |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Documented     |30.12.2010     |
|          |civilian deaths from violence         |               |
|          |Chr Michelson Institute (CRI), Between|2011           |
|          |Two Societies: Review of the          |               |
|          |Information, Return and Reintegration |               |
|          |of Iraqi Nationals to Iraq (IRRINI)   |               |
|          |programme                             |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |2011           |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Iraq          |               |
|          |Newsletter - Volume I 2011 -          |               |
|          |Oct/Nov/Dec 2010                      |               |
|          |RAND, From Insurgency to Stability,   |2011           |
|          |Vol II: Insights from selected case   |               |
|          |studies                               |               |
|          |Social Watch, Social Progress and     |2011           |
|          |Environmental Damage, the Basic       |               |
|          |Capabilities index and CO2 emissions  |               |
|          |Institute for Economics and Peace,    |2011           |
|          |Global Peace Index: Methodology,      |               |
|          |Results and Findings 2011             |               |
|          |RAND, The 2008 Battle for Sadr City   |2011           |
|          |UN Assistance Mission for Iraqi       |01.2011        |
|          |(UNAMI), 2010 Report on Human Rights  |               |
|          |in Iraq                               |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |01-03/2011     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Iraq          |               |
|          |Newsletter, Vol II, 2011              |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |01-03/2011     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Iraq          |               |
|          |Newsletter, Vol II, 2011              |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |18.01.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR concerned at planned   |               |
|          |forced return from Sweden to Iraq     |               |
|          |UNHCR: UNHCR seeks common sense       |19.01.2011     |
|          |European approach towards those       |               |
|          |fleeing violence                      |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |19.01.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR seeks common sense     |               |
|          |European approach towards those       |               |
|          |fleeing violence                      |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch (HRW)Word Report   |24.01.2011     |
|          |2011: Iraq                            |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe: Iraq Drafts Plan to|26.01.2011     |
|          |Help IDPs, Refugees                   |               |
|          |Special Inspector General for Iraq    |30.01.2011     |
|          |Reconstruction (SIGR), Quarterly      |               |
|          |Report and Semiannual Report to the   |               |
|          |United States Congress                |               |
|          |Brookings, Iraq Index: Tracking       |31.01.2011     |
|          |Variables of Reconstruction & Security|               |
|          |in Post-Saddam Iraq                   |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |02.2011        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), Review of         |               |
|          |Displacement and Return in Iraq       |               |
|          |Amnesty International. Broken Bodies, |02.2011        |
|          |Tortured Minds: Abuse and Neglect of  |               |
|          |Detainees in Iraq                     |               |
|          |Inter Agency Information & Analysis   |02.2011        |
|          |Unit (IAU Iraq),  Governorate Profiles|               |
|          |2011                                  |               |
|          |International Institute for Strategic |02.2011        |
|          |Studies, Armed Conflict Database      |               |
|          |Guardian: G4S security firm was warned|08.02.2011     |
|          |of lethal risk to refused asylum      |               |
|          |seekers                               |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting |08.02.2012     |
|          |(IWPR): City of Contrasts             |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|09.02.2011     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), Iraq: Patterns of     |               |
|          |Violence, Casualty Trends and Emerging|               |
|          |Security Threats                      |               |
|          |Jane's Sentinel, Security Assessment: |12.02.2012     |
|          |"The Gulf States: Security"           |               |
|          |PLoS Medicine, 2011; 8 (2): e1000415, |15.02.2011     |
|          |Violent Deaths of Iraqi Civilians,    |               |
|          |2003-2008: Analysis by Perpetrator,   |               |
|          |Weapon, Time, and Location            |               |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), New Study:     |16.02.2011     |
|          |Analysis by Perpetrator, weapon, time |               |
|          |and location (2003-2008)              |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Report of the    |16.02.2011     |
|          |Representative of the Secretary       |               |
|          |General on the human rights of        |               |
|          |internally displaced persons, Walter  |               |
|          |Kalin, Visit to Iraq                  |               |
|          |Refugees International, Iraq's        |16.02.2011     |
|          |displaced: a stable region requires   |               |
|          |stable assistance                     |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|20.02.2011     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), A Threat Transformed, |               |
|          |Al Qaeda and Associated Movements in  |               |
|          |2011                                  |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch: Iraq: Vulnerable  |21.02.2011     |
|          |Citizens at Risk                      |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch (HRW), Iraq:       |21.02.2011     |
|          |Vulnerable Citizens at Risk           |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch (HRW), At a        |22.02.2011     |
|          |Crossroads: Human Rights in Iraq Eight|               |
|          |Years after the US-Led Invasion       |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |03.2011        |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Iraq: Facts and Figures,|               |
|          |January - December 2010               |               |
|          |International Rescue Committee (IRC), |03.2011        |
|          |Annual Report 2010 Iraq Country       |               |
|          |Programme                             |               |
|          |Jane's Sentinel, Security Assessment: |21.03.2011     |
|          |The Gulf States: Non-State Armed      |               |
|          |Groups                                |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports, Iraq   |25.03.2011     |
|          |Country of Origin Information (COI)   |               |
|          |Report March 2011                     |               |
|          |International Crisis Group (ICG), Iraq|28.03.2011     |
|          |and the Kurds: Confronting Withdrawal |               |
|          |Fears                                 |               |
|          |Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO),|31.03.2011     |
|          |Human Rights and Democracy: the 2010  |               |
|          |Foreign and Commonwealth Office Report|               |
|          |(extract)                             |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Second report of |31.03.2011     |
|          |the Secretary-General pursuant to     |               |
|          |paragraph 6 of resolution 1936 (2010) |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |04-06/2011     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Iraq          |               |
|          |Newsletter, Vol III 2011              |               |
|          |Inter Agency Information & Analysis   |04.2011        |
|          |Unit (IAU Iraq), Landmines and        |               |
|          |Unexploded Ordinance Factsheet        |               |
|          |National Counter-Terrorism Command,   |04.2011        |
|          |Iraq's Civil Society in Perspective   |               |
|          |UK Department for International       |04.2011        |
|          |Development (DFID), Iraq Operational  |               |
|          |Plan                                  |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |05.04.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR), Comments MOMD Comprehensive  |               |
|          |Plan to address Displacement in Iraq, |               |
|          |Meeting of UN and International       |               |
|          |Organisations with GoI                |               |
|          |US Department of State, 2010 Country  |08.04.2011     |
|          |Reports on Human Rights Practices:    |               |
|          |Iraq                                  |               |
|          |Amnesty International, Days of rage:  |12.04.2011     |
|          |Protests and Repression in Iraq -     |               |
|          |Testimonies/Case Studies              |               |
|          |Iraq Business News: AKE Security,     |19.04.2011     |
|          |Sticky Bombs on the Rise              |               |
|          |National Counter-Terrorism Center,    |30.04.2011     |
|          |2010 Report on Terrorism              |               |
|          |Special Inspector General for Iraq    |30.04.2011     |
|          |Reconstruction (SIGR), Quarterly      |               |
|          |Report to the United States Congress  |               |
|          |Oxfam, Protection of civilians in     |05.2011        |
|          |2010: Facts, figures, and the UN      |               |
|          |Security Council's response           |               |
|          |Amnesty International, Denmark: Human |05.2011        |
|          |Rights violations and concerns in the |               |
|          |context of counter-terrorism,         |               |
|          |immigration-detention, forcible return|               |
|          |of rejected asylum seekers and        |               |
|          |violence against women                |               |
|          |InterSOS, Providing Fair Protection   |05.2011        |
|          |Processes and Documentation for       |               |
|          |Internally Displaced and Host         |               |
|          |Communities: The Experience of the    |               |
|          |Protection and Assistance Centers     |               |
|          |(PACs) in Southern Iraq               |               |
|          |US Commission on Religious Freedom    |05.2011        |
|          |(ISCIRF), Annual Report 2011          |               |
|          |InterSOS, Addressing the legal needs  |05.2011        |
|          |of the displaced in Southern Iraq     |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |05.2011        |
|          |(UNHCR), Iran, Return Guide for the   |               |
|          |Voluntary Repatriation of Iraqis      |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting |06.05.2011     |
|          |(IWPR): Iraqis' Mixed Emotions Over   |               |
|          |Bin Laden's Death                     |               |
|          |Freedom House Freedom in the World    |12.05.2011     |
|          |2011: Iraq                            |               |
|          |Amnesty International, Amnesty        |13.05.2011     |
|          |International Annual Report 2011 -    |               |
|          |Iraq                                  |               |
|          |International Federation of Red Cross |17.05.2011     |
|          |and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC),    |               |
|          |Annual Report Iraq 2010               |               |
|          |IRIN: Iraq, Preparing for a possible  |18.05.2011     |
|          |returnee influx                       |               |
|          |InterSOS,  Stories from the Protection|25.01.2011     |
|          |and Assistance Centers of Iraq        |               |
|          |US Department of State, Strengthening |19.05.2011     |
|          |Iraq: Fact Sheet                      |               |
|          |iCasualties List of US fatalities as  |28.05.2011     |
|          |of May 28 2010                        |               |
|          |Danish Immigration Service Iranian    |06.2011        |
|          |Kurdish Refugees in the Kurdistan     |               |
|          |Region of Iraq (KRI)                  |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |06.2011        |
|          |(UNHCR), Global Report 2010: Iraq     |               |
|          |Inter Agency Information & Analysis   |06.2011        |
|          |Unit (IAU Iraq), Urban Baghdad: Impact|               |
|          |of conflict on daily life             |               |
|          |Internal Displacement Monitoring      |06.2011        |
|          |Centre (IDMC), Iraq: IDPs and their   |               |
|          |prospects for durable solutions       |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |06-09/2011     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Iraq          |               |
|          |Newsletter, Vol IV 2011               |               |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: ISSUE:       |01.06.2011     |
|          |Foreign contractors/risk to western   |               |
|          |collaborators in Baghdad and Iraq     |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |02.06.2011     |
|          |Multiple bombings in Ramadi leave at  |               |
|          |least five dead                       |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: At   |03.06.2011     |
|          |least 17 killed in blast at mosque in |               |
|          |Iraq's Tikrit                         |               |
|          |Middle East Institute, Displacement   |06.06.2011     |
|          |and National Institutions: Reflections|               |
|          |on the Iraqi experience               |               |
|          |Office of the High Commissioner for   |07.06.2011     |
|          |Human Rights (OHCHR), UN official     |               |
|          |urges stronger action to protect Iraqi|               |
|          |civilians                             |               |
|          |Middle East Institute, Iraqi Refugee  |09.06.2011     |
|          |and IDPs: From Humanitarian           |               |
|          |Intervention to Durable Solutions     |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Six  |11.06.2011     |
|          |killed in bombings in Iraq's Mosul    |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Car  |21.06.2011     |
|          |bombs kill more than 20 in central    |               |
|          |Iraq                                  |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |21.06.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR), Iraq Fact Sheet, May 2011    |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |23.06.2011     |
|          |Baghdad Market Blasts Kill at Least 21|               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Iraq |26.06.2011     |
|          |Suicide Attack Kills At Least Two     |               |
|          |Foreign and Commonwealth Office       |30.06.2011     |
|          |(FCO)Quarterly Update on Iraq, 30     |               |
|          |December 2011, 30 September 2011, 30  |               |
|          |June 2011, 31 March 2011              |               |
|          |National Geographic: Baghdad After the|07.2011        |
|          |Storm                                 |               |
|          |Minority Rights Group International,  |07.2011        |
|          |State of the World's Minorities and   |               |
|          |Indigenous People 2011, Events of 2010|               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |07.2011        |
|          |(UNHCR), Safe at Last? Law and        |               |
|          |Practice in Selected EU Member States |               |
|          |with respect to asylum-seekers fleeing|               |
|          |indiscriminate violence               |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: U.S. |05.07.2011     |
|          |general warns insurgent attacks       |               |
|          |threaten Iraq                         |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Third report of  |07.07.2011     |
|          |the Secretary-General pursuant to     |               |
|          |paragraph 6 of resolution 1936 (2010) |               |
|          |Iraq Business News: AKE Security,     |08.07.2011     |
|          |Safety in Kurdistan                   |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting |13.07.2011     |
|          |(IWPR): New Role for Najaf            |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service, Iraq: |15.07.2011     |
|          |Politics, Governance and Human Rights |               |
|          |IRIN: Iraq: Youth unemployment driving|20.07.2011     |
|          |emigration                            |               |
|          |United States Agency for International|26.07.2011     |
|          |Development (USAID), Iraq, Complex    |               |
|          |Emergency                             |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |27.07.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR): UNHCR assists hundreds of    |               |
|          |displaced Iraqis at border with Iran  |               |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: ISSUE:       |27.07.2011     |
|          |Freedom of Movement and Requirements  |               |
|          |to Transfer Personal Documentation in |               |
|          |Order to Relocate in Iraq             |               |
|          |Ministry of Transport: The opening of |28.07.2011     |
|          |Mosul International Airport           |               |
|          |Special Inspector General for Iraq    |30.07.2011     |
|          |Reconstruction (SIGR), Quarterly      |               |
|          |Report and Semiannual Report to the   |               |
|          |United States Congress                |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |08.2011        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Country Fact  |               |
|          |Sheet, Iraq                           |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |08.2011        |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR Iraq Refugee Returnee  |               |
|          |Monitoring: 2011 Mid Year Report and  |               |
|          |UNHCR, Iraq Fact Sheet, June - July   |               |
|          |2011                                  |               |
|          |Internal Displacement Monitoring      |08.2011        |
|          |Centre (IDMC), Unlocking protracted   |               |
|          |displacement: An Iraqi case study     |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Car  |02.08.2011     |
|          |bomb attack targets church in northern|               |
|          |Iraq, injures 14                      |               |
|          |Press Release: UNAMI and UN Office of |08.08.2011     |
|          |the High Commissioner for Human Rights|               |
|          |: 2010 Report on Human Rights in Iraq:|               |
|          |Human rights situation in Iraq remains|               |
|          |fragile                               |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service, Iraq: |09.08.2011     |
|          |Politics, Governance and Human Rights |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |10-12/2011     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Iraq          |               |
|          |Newsletter, Vol I, 2012               |               |
|          |USATODAY.COM: Iraq army delays pullout|08.10.2011     |
|          |from cities over security             |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |15.08.2011     |
|          |Dozens killed in Iraq bombings        |               |
|          |UN News Service: UN officials condemn |15.08.2011     |
|          |wave of deadly bombings across Iraq   |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service, Iraq  |15.08.2011     |
|          |Map Sources                           |               |
|          |UN News Service: Deploring deadly     |18.08.2011     |
|          |blasts in Iraq, Security Council urges|               |
|          |punishment of perpetrators            |               |
|          |US Department of State, Country       |18.08.2011     |
|          |Reports on Terrorism 2010: Iraq       |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |23.08.2011     |
|          |Turkish Army Says Up To 100 Kurdish   |               |
|          |Rebels Killed in Northern Iraq        |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: At   |28.08.2011     |
|          |least 28 dead in Baghdad mosque attack|               |
|          |Congressional Research Service, Iraq: |29.08.2011     |
|          |Politics, Governance and Human Rights |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports, Iraq   |30.08.2011     |
|          |Country of Origin Information (COI)   |               |
|          |Report August 2011                    |               |
|          |IWPR: Hard Times for Iraqis Fleeing   |31.08.2011     |
|          |Unrest Elsewhere                      |               |
|          |IWPR: US Troops Face New Threat from  |31.08.2011     |
|          |Iraqi Shia Militia                    |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|09.2011        |
|          |Studies (CSIS), Confronting an        |               |
|          |Uncertain Threat: The Future of Al    |               |
|          |Qaeda and Associated Movements        |               |
|          |The Lancet Journal, Casualties in     |01.09.2011     |
|          |civilians and coalition soldiers from |               |
|          |suicide bombings in Iraq, 2003 - 2010:|               |
|          |a descriptive study                   |               |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Casualties of  |03.09.2011     |
|          |suicide bombings in Iraq, 2003-2010   |               |
|          |US Department of State, July-December,|13.09.2011     |
|          |2010 International Religious Freedom  |               |
|          |Report: Iraq                          |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |13.09.2011     |
|          |Gunmen kill 22 Shi'ite pilgrims in    |               |
|          |Iraq                                  |               |
|          |Iraq Business News, AKE Security: A   |13.09.2011     |
|          |Return of Illegal Checkpoints         |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Bomb |14.09.2011     |
|          |attacks against Iraq security forces  |               |
|          |Kill 17                               |               |
|          |Internal Displacement Monitoring      |23.09.2011     |
|          |Centre (IDMC), Iraq: Response still   |               |
|          |centred on return despite increasing  |               |
|          |IDP demands for local integration     |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |25.09.2011     |
|          |Multiple explosions reported in Iraqi |               |
|          |shrine city of Karbala                |               |
|          |International Crisis Group (ICG),     |26.09.2011     |
|          |Failing Oversight: Iraq's Unchecked   |               |
|          |Government                            |               |
|          |International Crisis Group (ICG),     |28.09.2009     |
|          |Iraq's New Battlefront: The Struggle  |               |
|          |over Ninewa                           |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service Iraq:  |30.09.2011     |
|          |Politics, Governance and Human Rights |               |
|          |National Counter-Terrorism Command,   |10.2011        |
|          |Political, Humanitarian, and Military |               |
|          |Frameworks in the Iraqi Disputed      |               |
|          |Territories on the Eve of US          |               |
|          |withdrawal                            |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Iraqi|03.10.2011     |
|          |security forces end hostage crisis,   |               |
|          |casualties reported                   |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |03.10.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR), Refugees Return to Baghdad,  |               |
|          |September 2010 - August 2011          |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |03.10.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR), IDPs Return to Baghdad,      |               |
|          |September 2010 - August 2011          |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |03.10.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR), Total Return to Iraq         |               |
|          |September 2010 - August 2011          |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |03.10.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR), Total IDPs return to Iraq,   |               |
|          |September 2010 - August 2011          |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Report of the    |28.11.2011     |
|          |Secretary-General pursuant to         |               |
|          |paragraph 6 of resolution 2001 (2011) |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Series of      |12.10.2011     |
|          |Baghdad Bombings Kill at Least 25     |               |
|          |Iraq Business News, Iraq controls own |12.10.2011     |
|          |airspace for first time since 2003    |               |
|          |IWPR: Iraqi Kurds offer Christians a  |12.10.2011     |
|          |Sanctuary                             |               |
|          |Iraq Business News, US Helps build    |13.10.2011     |
|          |safe and efficient rail system        |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |18.10.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR), Asylum Levels and Trends in  |               |
|          |Industrialized Countries: Statistical |               |
|          |overview of asylum applications lodged|               |
|          |in Europe and selected non-European   |               |
|          |countries                             |               |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: Entry        |19/10/2011     |
|          |Procedures for UK Returnees           |               |
|          |Voice of America News: US Withdrawal  |21.10.2011     |
|          |Raises Questions of a Vacuum in Iraq  |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|24.10.2011     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), Iraq and US Strategy  |               |
|          |in the Gulf                           |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Iraq Car Bombs |26.10.2011     |
|          |Kill at Least 5                       |               |
|          |Brookings, Index of State Weakness in |27.10.2011     |
|          |the Developing World                  |               |
|          |The Guardian: Double bomb attack      |28.10.2011     |
|          |strikes Iraqi capital                 |               |
|          |Special Inspector General for Iraq    |30.10.2011     |
|          |Reconstruction (SIGR), Quarterly      |               |
|          |Report to the United States Congress  |               |
|          |Brookings, From Responsibility to     |11.2011        |
|          |Response: Assessing National          |               |
|          |approaches to internal displacement   |               |
|          |UNHCR: Response to inquiry regarding  |03.11.2011     |
|          |returnees/deportees: documentation,   |               |
|          |assistance and conditions at Baghdad  |               |
|          |Airport                               |               |
|          |Iraq Business News, AKE Security:     |05.11.2011     |
|          |Mapping Violence in Iraq              |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: At   |06.11.2011     |
|          |Least 12 Killed As Blasts Rock Baghdad|               |
|          |The Guardian: Triple Blast hits       |06.11.2011     |
|          |Baghdad Market                        |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Bomb Blasts in |06.11.2011     |
|          |Central Baghdad Leave Eight Dead      |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |08.11.2011     |
|          |Cross:Iraq: ICRC delivering more aid  |               |
|          |where it is needed most               |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service, Iraq: |10.11.2011     |
|          |Politics, Governance and Human Rights |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service Iraq:  |10.11.2011     |
|          |Politics, Governance and Human Rights |               |
|          |European Commission Humanitarian, Aid |11.11.2011     |
|          |& Civil Protection Humanitarian       |               |
|          |Implementation Plan (HIP): Iraq Crisis|               |
|          |UK Home Office, Proscribed terrorist  |11.11.2011     |
|          |groups                                |               |
|          |Christian Science Monitor: As US exits|21.11.2011     |
|          |Iraq, a top general's warning         |               |
|          |Mawtani.com, International companies  |21.11.2011     |
|          |invest in six Iraqi shopping centres  |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports,        |22.11.2011     |
|          |Bulletin - Collation of IGC Member    |               |
|          |States' Responses to Returns to Iraq  |               |
|          |UKBA: Iraq bulletin - Collation of IGC|22.11.2011     |
|          |Member States' Responses on Returns to|               |
|          |Iraq dated 22 November 2011           |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Three Bombings |24.11.2011     |
|          |Kill 19, Injure 65 in Southern Iraq   |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Baghdad        |26.11.2011     |
|          |Bombings Kill 15                      |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Iraqi Violence |28.11.2011     |
|          |Kills 22                              |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|28.11.2011     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), The Outcome of        |               |
|          |Invasion: US and Iranian Strategic    |               |
|          |Competition in Iraq                   |               |
|          |Minority Rights Group International,  |28.11.2011     |
|          |Iraq's Minorities: Participation in   |               |
|          |Public Life                           |               |
|          |Brookings, Iraq Index: Tracking       |30.11.2011     |
|          |Variables of Reconstruction and       |               |
|          |Security in Post-Saddam Iraq          |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |30.11.2011     |
|          |(UNHCR), Iraq Operation, Statistical  |               |
|          |Report on UNHCR Registered Iraqis and |               |
|          |Non-Iraqis                            |               |
|          |Iraq Knowledge Network, Essential     |12.2011        |
|          |Services Fact Sheet                   |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports,        |12.2011        |
|          |Operational Guidance Note: Iraq       |               |
|          |Iraq Knowledge Network, Labour force  |12.2011        |
|          |fact sheet                            |               |
|          |Voice of America News: New, Deadly    |01.12.2011     |
|          |Attacks Rattle Iraqi Province         |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Iraq Bombings  |05.12.2011     |
|          |Kill 28 Shi'ite Pilgrims              |               |
|          |Integrated Regional Information       |05.12.2011     |
|          |Network News (IRIN): Iraq: Overall    |               |
|          |violence down - but attacks on        |               |
|          |minorities continue                   |               |
|          |United Nations: "Withdrawal of United |06.12.2011     |
|          |States forces in Iraq at year's end   |               |
|          |will give Iraqis chance to prove      |               |
|          |themselves, but entails many          |               |
|          |challenges", UN envoy tells Security  |               |
|          |Council                               |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service, Iraq: |06.12.2011     |
|          |Politics, Governance and Human Rights |               |
|          |UK House of Commons, The Terrorism Act|07.12.2011     |
|          |2000: Proscribed Organisations        |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting |07.12.2011     |
|          |(IWPR): Sunni Separatist Fears as US  |               |
|          |Troops Leave Iraq                     |               |
|          |McClatchy Newspapers: Huge numbers of |11.12.2011     |
|          |Iraqis still adrift within the country|               |
|          |New York Times: Junkyard Gives up     |14.12.2011     |
|          |Secret Accounts of Massacre in Iraq   |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |14.12.2011     |
|          |Cross (ICRC) Iraq: People living in   |               |
|          |rural areas remain among the most     |               |
|          |affected                              |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|15.12.2011     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), Iraq: Putting US      |               |
|          |Withdrawal in Perspective             |               |
|          |National Public Radio (NPR): There's  |17.12.2011     |
|          |No Going Home For Iraqi Squatters     |               |
|          |New York Times: Iraq After the US     |18.12.2011     |
|          |military withdrawal                   |               |
|          |NPR, "The IED: The $30 bombs that cost|18.12.2011     |
|          |the US billions"                      |               |
|          |National Public Radio (NPR): Former   |18.12.2011     |
|          |Envoy to Iraq says situation still    |               |
|          |'very fragile'                        |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Crumbling      |19.12.2011     |
|          |Infrastructure Slows Iraqi Growth     |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch (HRW)Iran/Turkey:  |20.12.2011     |
|          |Recent Attacks on Civilians in Iraqi  |               |
|          |Kurdistan                             |               |
|          |The Guardian: Sunni leaders warn of   |20.12.2011     |
|          |sectarian chaos in Iraq               |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch: Iran/Turkey:      |20.12.2011     |
|          |Recent Attacks on Civilians in Iraqi  |               |
|          |Kurdistan At Least a Dozen Dead;      |               |
|          |Thousands Displaced Since July        |               |
|          |Foreign Policy News: The Damage Done  |21.12.2011     |
|          |Reuters Alertnet FACTBOX - Security   |21.12.2011     |
|          |developments in Iraq                  |               |
|          |The Guardian: Baghdad car bomb attack |22.12.2011     |
|          |rips through Iraq's already failing   |               |
|          |hopes                                 |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |22.12.2011     |
|          |Scores Killed In Wave Of Bombings In  |               |
|          |Baghdad                               |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch: Iraq: Deadly      |22.12.2011     |
|          |Bombings an Assault on Human Rights   |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting |22.12.2011     |
|          |(IWPR): Conflict Fears as Iraqi Power |               |
|          |Balance crumbles                      |               |
|          |BBC News: Dozens killed in            |22.12.2011     |
|          |co-ordinated Baghdad attacks          |               |
|          |Foreign and Commonwealth Office       |23.12.2011     |
|          |(FCO)Travel Advice, Iraq              |               |
|          |US Department of State, Travel Advice,|23.12.2011     |
|          |Iraq                                  |               |
|          |Brookings, Iraq on the Brink          |24.12.2011     |
|          |Brookings, Understanding the Iraq     |24.12.2011     |
|          |Crisis                                |               |
|          |Newsweek Magazine, "Iraq: Baghdad     |26.12.2011     |
|          |without America"                      |               |
|          |BBC News: Iraq interior ministry hit  |26.12.2011     |
|          |by suicide bomber                     |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: FACTBOX - Security  |26.12.2011     |
|          |developments in Iraq                  |               |
|          |Reuters: Suicide bomber kills seven   |27.12.2011     |
|          |outside Iraq ministry                 |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service Iraq:  |27.12.2011     |
|          |Politics, Governance and Human Rights |               |
|          |The Guardian: Al-Qaeda Claims         |27.12.2011     |
|          |Responsibility for Baghdad Bombings   |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|27.12.2011     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), The Broader Crisis in |               |
|          |Iraq                                  |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |27.12.2011     |
|          |Al-Qaida claims responsibility for    |               |
|          |Baghdad blasts                        |               |
|          |Agence France-Presse: Iraq, Suicide   |27.12.2011     |
|          |car bomb outside Baghdad hospital     |               |
|          |kills 31                              |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: FACTBOX - Security  |28.12.2011     |
|          |developments in Iraq                  |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Analysts:      |29.12.2011     |
|          |Al-Qaida in Iraq Aims to Stir         |               |
|          |Sectarian Strife                      |               |
|          |Integrated Regional Information       |30.12.2011     |
|          |Networks News (IRIN): Analysis:       |               |
|          |Worrying signs for Iraq's stability as|               |
|          |USA pulls out                         |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |2012           |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Iraq          |               |
|          |Newsletter, Vol I, 2012               |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |2012           |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Mission in    |               |
|          |Iraq, 2003 - 2011                     |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |01.2012        |
|          |(UNHCR), Monthly Statistical Update on|               |
|          |Return                                |               |
|          |Danish Refugee Council, Local         |01.2012        |
|          |Humanitarian Accountability Framework |               |
|          |(HAF) Iraq 2012                       |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: FACTBOX - Security  |01.01.2012     |
|          |developments in Iraq                  |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch (HRW), Iraq:       |01.01.2012     |
|          |Country Summary                       |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |02.01.2012     |
|          |'Iraqi Civilian Deaths Increase In    |               |
|          |2011'                                 |               |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Iraqi deaths   |02.01.2012     |
|          |from violence 2003-2011               |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: FACTBOX - Security  |03.01.2012     |
|          |developments in Iraq                  |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: FACTBOX - Security  |04.01.2012     |
|          |developments in Iraq                  |               |
|          |Amnesty International: Iraq: Amnesty  |05.01.2012     |
|          |International condemns latest killings|               |
|          |of civilians                          |               |
|          |The Guardian: Iraq suicide attack     |05.01.2012     |
|          |kills 30                              |               |
|          |The Guardian: Iraq's shias targeted in|05.01.2012     |
|          |deadly bomb blasts                    |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Scores Dead as |05.01.2012     |
|          |Bombings Shake Iraq During Political  |               |
|          |Crisis                                |               |
|          |Amnesty International: Iraq: Amnesty  |05.01.2012     |
|          |International condemns latest killings|               |
|          |of civilians                          |               |
|          |Reuters: Roadside bomb kills five in  |05.01.2012     |
|          |southern Iraq: police                 |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |05.01.2012     |
|          |Sectarian Violence Worsens in Iraq    |               |
|          |Amid Political Crisis                 |               |
|          |IRIN, New government plans to tackle  |05.01.2011     |
|          |population displacements              |               |
|          |Agence France Presse: Rockets his     |06.01.2012     |
|          |Green Zone as Iraq marks Army Day     |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: FACTBOX Security    |08.01.2012     |
|          |Developments in Iraq                  |               |
|          |USCIRF:  USCIRF Condemns Attacks on   |09.01.2012     |
|          |Shi'ite Pilgrims in Iraq              |               |
|          |Amnesty International: Year of        |09.01.2012     |
|          |rebellion: The state of human rights  |               |
|          |in the Middle East and North Africa   |               |
|          |(Iraq excerpt)                        |               |
|          |US Commission on International        |09.01.2012     |
|          |Religious Freedom: USCIRF Condemns    |               |
|          |Attacks on Shi'a Pilgrims in Iraq     |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Baghdad Bombs  |09.01.2012     |
|          |Target Shi'ite Pilgrims, 16 Killed    |               |
|          |Agence France Presse: Attacks in Iraq,|09.01.2012     |
|          |wound 15 Afghan pilgrims              |               |
|          |US Commission on International        |09.01.2012     |
|          |Religious Freedom: USCIRF Condemns    |               |
|          |Attacks on Shi'a Pilgrims in Iraq     |               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |09.01.2012     |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Persons detained by the |               |
|          |US in relation to armed conflict and  |               |
|          |the fight against terrorism - the role|               |
|          |of the ICRC                           |               |
|          |BBC News: Iraq Profile                |10.01.2012     |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: Security            |11.01.2012     |
|          |developments in Iraq                  |               |
|          |Iraq Business News: New Railway opened|12.01.2012     |
|          |between Karbala and Musayyib          |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: Security            |12.01.2012     |
|          |developments in Iraq                  |               |
|          |Foreign Policy: My Mesopotamian       |13.01.2012     |
|          |Getaway                               |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |14.01.2012     |
|          |Suicide Bomber Kills At Least 50      |               |
|          |Shi'ite Pilgrims'                     |               |
|          |Reuters: Timeline: Deadliest attacks  |14.01.2012     |
|          |in Iraq last year                     |               |
|          |Reuters: Attack on Iraqi Pilgrims     |14.01.2012     |
|          |kills 50, scores hurt                 |               |
|          |The Guardian: Seven Iraqi police      |15.01.2012     |
|          |officers killed after gunmen storm    |               |
|          |government compound                   |               |
|          |Reuters: Ten dead in militant attack  |15.01.2012     |
|          |in Iraq's Ramadi                      |               |
|          |Christian Science Monitor: Shiite and |15.01.2012     |
|          |Sunni: What are the differences       |               |
|          |Reuters: Car Bombs Kill At Least 9 in |16.01.2012     |
|          |Iraq's Mosul                          |               |
|          |The Guardian: Iraq: What next for a   |16.01.2012     |
|          |corrupt and divided country           |               |
|          |UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office    |16.01.2012     |
|          |(FCO): Human Rights in Countries of   |               |
|          |Concern: Quarterly Update on Iraq,    |               |
|          |October to December 2011              |               |
|          |Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO):|16.01.2012     |
|          |Human Rights in Countries of Concern: |               |
|          |Quarterly Update on Iraq, October to  |               |
|          |December 2011                         |               |
|          |COI Service: Iraqi Civil ID Cards and |16.01.2012     |
|          |residency, enclosing: Note of meeting |               |
|          |with Hassanain Hadi Fadhil, Second    |               |
|          |Secretary , Embassy of the Republic of|               |
|          |Iraq, London                          |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting |17.01.2012     |
|          |(IWPR): Alarm as Shia Paramilitaries  |               |
|          |Enter Politics                        |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Allawi: Iraq   |18.01.2012     |
|          |Heading Toward Sectarian War          |               |
|          |National Public Radio: After 20 Years,|19.01.2012     |
|          |An Iraqi Returns to a Changed Land    |               |
|          |Integrated Regional Information       |19.01.2012     |
|          |Networks News (IRIN): Iraq: People    |               |
|          |consider fleeing as violence increases|               |
|          |Amnesty International, Year of        |19.01.2012     |
|          |rebellion: The state of human rights  |               |
|          |in the Middle East and North Africa   |               |
|          |(Iraq excerpt)                        |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting |21.01.2012     |
|          |(IWPR): Shia Casualties Rise after    |               |
|          |American Withdrawal                   |               |
|          |Reuters: Iraq risks slipping into     |22.01.2012     |
|          |authoritarianism - rights group       |               |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: ISSUE:       |22.01.2012     |
|          |Renewal or Reissuance of a Civil      |               |
|          |Status ID card and Provisions to      |               |
|          |Change Place Of Residence in Iraq     |               |
|          |Erbil International Airport: News and |22.01.2012     |
|          |Notices, Press Notice 2011 results EIA|               |
|          |exceeds its targets as it records +37%|               |
|          |growth in passenger numbers           |               |
|          |Reuters: Car bombs kill 14, wound 75  |24.01.2012     |
|          |in Iraq capital                       |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: At   |24.01.2012     |
|          |Least 14 Killed, Scores Hurt In       |               |
|          |Baghdad Bombings                      |               |
|          |Thomson Reuters Alertnet: Iraqis      |24.01.2012     |
|          |condemn US Haditha sentence as insult |               |
|          |Agence France Presse: Bombs in and    |24.01.2012     |
|          |around Baghdad kill 12                |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |25.01.2012     |
|          |Militia Leader Reported Killed In     |               |
|          |Baghdad                               |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |26.01.2012     |
|          |Attack On Iraqi Policemen's Home Kills|               |
|          |10 On Violent Day                     |               |
|          |The Telegraph: Iraq sectarian war     |27.01.2012     |
|          |flares as 32 killed in suicide attack |               |
|          |on funeral procession                 |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Car Bomb Kills |27.01.2012     |
|          |31 in Shiite Neighbourhood of Baghdad |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:      |27.01.2012     |
|          |Violence Soars As Political Crisis    |               |
|          |Paralyzes Iraq                        |               |
|          |BBC News Middle East: Car Bomb attack |27.01.2012     |
|          |near funeral in Baghdad kills 32      |               |
|          |people                                |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: TIMELINE - Deadliest|27.01.2012     |
|          |attacks in Iraq last year             |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet; Iraq Factbox -      |27.02.2012     |
|          |Security Developments in Iraq         |               |
|          |Iraq Business News, AKE: Security     |28.01.2012     |
|          |Statistics from 2011                  |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet; Iraq Factbox -      |28.01.2012     |
|          |Security Developments in Iraq         |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |28.01.2012     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM provides      |               |
|          |emergency assistance to families      |               |
|          |affected by bombing in Baghdad        |               |
|          |Special Inspector General for Iraq    |30.01.2012     |
|          |Reconstruction (SIGR), Quarterly      |               |
|          |Report and Semiannual Report to the   |               |
|          |United States Congress                |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |31.01.2012     |
|          |Migration (IOM UK), IOM Emergency     |               |
|          |Needs Assessments - Update,           |               |
|          |Displacement of Christians to the     |               |
|          |North of Iraq                         |               |
|          |Brookings, Iraq Index: Tracking       |02.2012        |
|          |Variables of Reconstruction & Security|               |
|          |in Iraq                               |               |
|          |Carnegie Endowment, The State of Iraq |02.2012        |
|          |BBC News Middle East: Iraq executes 17|01.02.2012     |
|          |people days after UN rebuke           |               |
|          |Swiss Confederation, Department of    |01.02.2012     |
|          |Justice and Police, Report on Joint   |               |
|          |Finnish-Swiss Fact Finding Mission to |               |
|          |Amman and the Kurdish Regional        |               |
|          |Government (KRG) Area, May 10 -22 2011|               |
|          |LIFOS, Joint Swiss-Finnish FFM to     |01.02.2012     |
|          |Amman and the Kurdish Regional        |               |
|          |Government, May 2011                  |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: Iraq civilian deaths|01.02.2012     |
|          |rise in January-govt figures          |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet; Iraq Factbox -      |01.02.2012     |
|          |Security Developments in Iraq         |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet; Iraq Factbox -      |05.02.2012     |
|          |Security Developments in Iraq         |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|06.02.2012     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), Iraq and the Challenge|               |
|          |of Continuing Violence                |               |
|          |Musings on Iraq, January 2012:        |06.02.2012     |
|          |Security Statistics Undermine case    |               |
|          |that Iraq is heading towards New Civil|               |
|          |War                                   |               |
|          |Reuters Alertnet: Iraq Factbox -      |07.02.2012     |
|          |Security Developments in Iraq         |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch: 'Iraq: 65         |08.02.2012     |
|          |Executions in First 40 Days of 2012'  |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting |09.02.2012     |
|          |(IWPR): Western Province Sides with   |               |
|          |Syrian Uprising                       |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch (HRW), Iraq: 65    |09.02.2012     |
|          |Executions in First 40 Days of 2012   |               |
|          |Iraq Business News: Iraq to clamp down|10.02.2012     |
|          |on security contractor                |               |
|          |BBC News Middle East: Turkey 'bombs   |12.02.2012     |
|          |hideouts of Kurdish rebels PKK'       |               |
|          |Washington Institute for Near East    |16.02.2012     |
|          |Policy: A Violent New Year in Iraq    |               |
|          |Reuters: Iraq inquiry blames Sunni VP |16.02.2012     |
|          |death squads for attacks              |               |
|          |Reuters: Suicide attack on Baghdad    |19.02.2012     |
|          |police academy kills 19               |               |
|          |BBC News Middle East: Iraq gun and    |19.02.2012     |
|          |bomb attacks hit Baghdad and Baquba   |               |
|          |IRIN, Iraq: Government vows to improve|21.02.2012     |
|          |food aid system                       |               |
|          |Christian Science Monitor: As Al Qaeda|21.02.2012     |
|          |moves fight to Syria, violence in Iraq|               |
|          |drops sharply                         |               |
|          |Brookings, From National              |21.02.2012     |
|          |Responsibility to Response - Part i:  |               |
|          |General Conclusions on IDP Protection |               |
|          |Iraq Business News, AKE: Weekly       |22.02.2012     |
|          |Security Update                       |               |
|          |Brookings, From National              |22.02.2012     |
|          |Responsibility to Response - Part ii: |               |
|          |IDPs Housing, Land and Property Rights|               |
|          |Aljazeera: Dozens dead in wave of Iraq|23.02.2012     |
|          |attacks                               |               |
|          |Reuters: Timeline: Deadliest attacks  |23.02.2012     |
|          |in Iraq in last year                  |               |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting:|23.02.2012     |
|          |Iraq stunned by Bombing Wave          |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service Iraq:  |23.02.2012     |
|          |Politics, Governance and Human Rights |               |
|          |New York Times: Iraq                  |24.02.2012     |
|          |Reuters: Iraq attacks kill 60, raise  |24.02.2012     |
|          |sectarian fears                       |               |
|          |Reuters: Iraqi al Qaeda claims        |24.02.2012     |
|          |country-wide attacks                  |               |
|          |Iraq Business News: Turkish Airlines  |28.02.2012     |
|          |increases to 4 flights/week to Basra  |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Human Rights     |28.02.2012     |
|          |Council: Joint written statement:     |               |
|          |Children of Iraq and Armed Conflicts  |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Human Rights     |28.02.2012     |
|          |Council: Joint written statement:     |               |
|          |Detention and Rule of Law in Iraq     |               |
|          |United Nations (UN), Human Rights     |28.02.2012     |
|          |Council: Joint written statement:     |               |
|          |Iraqi children healt situation        |               |
|          |Thomson Reuters Alertnet: Iraq Sunni  |29.02.2012     |
|          |insurgents keep fighting after U.S.   |               |
|          |pullout                               |               |
|          |BBC News Middle East: Iraq car bomb   |29.02.2012     |
|          |leaves three dead in Baghdad          |               |
|          |Danish Immigration Service, Joint     |03.2012        |
|          |Report of the Danish Immigration      |               |
|          |Service/UKBA Fact Finding Mission to  |               |
|          |Erbil and Dahuk, Kurdistan Region of  |               |
|          |Iraq (KRI), Conducted 11-22 November  |               |
|          |2011                                  |               |
|          |Human Rights Watch: Iraq: Intimidation|01.03.2012     |
|          |at Anniversary Protests               |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Iraqi|02.03.2012     |
|          |Civilian Deaths Increase in 2011      |               |
|          |Iraq Business News, AKE: Attacking the|05.03.2012     |
|          |police                                |               |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: Entry        |               |
|          |Procedures for UK Returnees           |05.03.2012     |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: ISSUE: Mixed |05.03.2012     |
|          |Sunni/Shia Marriages                  |               |
|          |Aljazeera: Iraqi forces targeted in   |05.03.2012     |
|          |deadly attacks                        |               |
|          |The Guardian: Al-Qaida kill 25 Iraqi  |05.03.2012     |
|          |police officers                       |               |
|          |Reuters: Gunmen kill 27 in raids on   |05.03.2012     |
|          |west Iraq                             |               |
|          |BBC News Middle East: Iraq attacks in |05.03.2012     |
|          |Haditha Kill 27 Policemen             |               |
|          |iCasualties Iraqi Coalition           |06.03.2012     |
|          |Casualties: Contractors - a partial   |               |
|          |list                                  |               |
|          |Center for Strategic and International|08.03.2012     |
|          |Studies (CSIS), The Outcome of        |               |
|          |Invasion: US and Iranian Strategic    |               |
|          |Competition in Iraq                   |               |
|          |ASSIST News Service (USA), Iraqi      |12.03.2012     |
|          |Teenagers Stoned to Death for Western |               |
|          |Dress and 'emo' Haircuts              |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: More |12.03.2012     |
|          |Than A Dozen Killed In Iraqi Robbery, |               |
|          |Other Attacks                         |               |
|          |Iraqi LGBT (UK): Militias massacre    |15.03.2012     |
|          |sexual minorities and Emo's in Iraq   |               |
|          |Inter Press Service News Agency: Those|16.03.2012     |
|          |Bodies in Baghdad Are of Gay Men      |               |
|          |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: At   |20.03.2012     |
|          |Least 45 Killed In Series Of Blasts   |               |
|          |Across Iraq                           |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Explosions     |20.03.2012     |
|          |Across Iraq Kill Dozens               |               |
|          |46 killed in attacks in 8 Iraq cities |20.03.2012     |
|          |ahead of Arab summit                  |               |
|          |US House of Representatives Committee |21.03.2012     |
|          |on Foreign Affairs, Halting the       |               |
|          |Descent: U.S. Policy toward the       |               |
|          |Deteriorating Situation in Iraq       |               |
|          |(Testimony of Kimberly Kagan,         |               |
|          |Institute for the Study of Way)       |               |
|          |Barnabas Aid (UK): Bombed Iraqi church|27.03.2012     |
|          |reopens but anti-Christian attacks    |               |
|          |continue                              |               |
|          |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):|27.03.2012     |
|          |Exit Americans, Enter Sectarian Strife|               |
|          |International Committee of the Red    |29.03.2012     |
|          |Cross (ICRC), Iraq: Facts and Figures,|               |
|          |January - December 2011               |               |
|          |Reporters Sans Frontieres (Reporters  |03.04.2012     |
|          |Without Borders): Car bomb kills TV   |               |
|          |presenter in Tikrit                   |               |
|          |Associated Press: Iraq's              |04.04.2012     |
|          |reconciliation conference postponed   |               |
|          |UK Border Agency COIS Reports,        |04.04.2012     |
|          |Thematic Country of Origin Information|               |
|          |(COI) Report, COI Service, Treatment  |               |
|          |of Persons Returning to Iraq,         |               |
|          |including failed asylum seekers; the  |               |
|          |situation of internally displaced     |               |
|          |persons and procedures to re-obtain   |               |
|          |documentation to access services and  |               |
|          |facilitate internal movement          |               |
|          |Arabic Network for Human Rights       |05.04.2012     |
|          |Information (ANHRI): Iraq: Iraqi      |               |
|          |journalist killed by an explosive     |               |
|          |device in Tikrit                      |               |
|          |Iraq Business News: Weekly Security   |06.04.2012     |
|          |Updates                               |               |
|          |Iraq Body Count (IBC), Documented     |07.04.2012     |
|          |civilian deaths from violence         |               |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: ISSUE:       |07.04.2012     |
|          |Re-documentation Procedures           |               |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: ISSUE:       |07.04.2012     |
|          |Indiscriminate Violence in Iraq       |               |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: ISSUE:       |08.04.2012     |
|          |Monitoring of Returnees to Baghdad    |               |
|          |International Airport (BIAP)          |               |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: ISSUE:       |08.04.2012     |
|          |Returns Procedure for UK failed asylum|               |
|          |seekers                               |               |
|          |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):|13.04.2012     |
|          |Those Laboratory Mice Were Children   |               |
|          |ALERTNET - ADD - Iraq's sunni         |13.04.2012     |
|          |insurgnts keep fightin tafter US pull |               |
|          |out                                   |               |
|          |News Times: Roadside bomb kills 2     |14.04.2012     |
|          |policemen in Iraq                     |               |
|          |USA Today: Officials: 5 killed in Iraq|15.04.2012     |
|          |attacks                               |               |
|          |Associated Press: Iraq: Gunmen kill 4 |16.04.2012     |
|          |Shiite farmers near Baghdad           |               |
|          |Newsday: Iraq: Gunmen kill 4 Shiite   |16.04.2012     |
|          |farmers near Baghdad                  |               |
|          |International Federation of Red Cross |18.04.2012     |
|          |and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC),    |               |
|          |Humanitarian Needs of Iraq's          |               |
|          |Population                            |               |
|          |iCasualties ICasualties, Iraqi        |18.04.2012     |
|          |Coalition Casualties: Fatalities by   |               |
|          |year                                  |               |
|          |BBC News: Deadly blasts hit Baghdad,  |19.04.2012     |
|          |Kirkuk and other Iraq cities          |               |
|          |UN Assistance Mission for Iraqi       |19.04.2012     |
|          |(UNAMI), Top UN Envoy in Iraq Condemns|               |
|          |wave of bomb attacks across the       |               |
|          |country                               |               |
|          |Congressional Research Service, Iraq: |19.04.2012     |
|          |Politics, Governance and Human Rights |               |
|          |Voice of America: Bombings Kill 24 in |19.04.2012     |
|          |Baghded, Northern Iraq                |               |
|          |International Crisis Group (ICG), Iraq|19.04.2012     |
|          |and the Kurds: The High-Stakes        |               |
|          |Hydrocarbons Gambit                   |               |
|          |Canadian Immigration and Refugee      |20.04.2012     |
|          |Board, Travel Report: Iraq            |               |
|          |British Embassy Baghdad: ISSUE: Mixed |20.04.2012     |
|          |Sunni/Shia marriages                  |               |
|          |Foreign and Commonwealth Office       |22.04.2012     |
|          |(FCO)Travel Advice, Iraq              |               |
|          |iCasualties ICasualties, Iraqi        |22.04.2012     |
|          |Coalition Casualties: Fatalities by   |               |
|          |province                              |               |
|          |Kurdistan Regional Government,        |27.04.2012     |
|          |Department of Foreign Relations       |               |
|          |'Residence'                           |               |
|          |Guardian, Iraqi Parliament refuses to |02.07.2012     |
|          |accept nationals deported from Europe |               |
|          |Brookings, National and Regional Laws |Undated        |
|          |and Policies on Internal Displacement,|               |
|          |Iraq                                  |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |Undated        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK)About IOM UK        |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |Undated        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK)What we do,         |               |
|          |Sustainable livelihoods               |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |Undated        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK)What we do,         |               |
|          |Monitoring and Assessment             |               |
|          |International Organisation for        |Undated        |
|          |Migration (IOM UK)The Story of Zahra'a|               |
|          |Minorities Councils, About Us and     |Undated        |
|          |Internal Bylaw                        |               |
|          |Minorities Councils, NGO Home page,   |Undated        |
|          |Map showing areas of Iraq's minorities|               |
|          |Office of the High Commissioner for   |Undated        |
|          |Human Rights (OHCHR), Report of the   |               |
|          |Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial   |               |
|          |summary or arbitrary executions       |               |
|          |Summary of cases transmitted to       |               |
|          |Governments and replies received (Iraq|               |
|          |excerpt)                              |               |
|          |Prism 1. No 2., An interview with     |Undated        |
|          |Raymond T. Odierno                    |               |
|          |Quandil, Web Page                     |Undated        |
|          |Refugee Action, Choices, Assisted     |Undated        |
|          |Voluntary Return Programme            |               |
|          |Refugee Action, Choices, Further      |Undated        |
|          |Information English                   |               |
|          |Refugee Action, Stories of Return to  |Undated (Circa |
|          |Iraqi Kurdistan                       |2011)          |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |Undated (circa |
|          |(UNHCR), UNHCR returnee assistance in |2010)          |
|          |country of asylum by regional UNHCR   |               |
|          |offices                               |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |Undated (circa |
|          |(UNHCR), Significant Achievements in  |2010)          |
|          |2009                                  |               |
|          |UN High Commissioner for Refugees     |Undated        |
|          |(UNHCR), Iraq: 2010 UNHCR country     |               |
|          |operations profile                    |               |
|          |Iraq Civil Aviation  Authority, Iraqi |Undated        |
|          |Airports                              |               |
|          |Voice of America News: Bombings Rock  |Undated        |
|          |Baquba Ahead of Iraq Elections        |               |
|          |Hansard: Asylum Claims on 16 June     |               |
|          |2003: News Release: Asylum Numbers    |               |
|          |Down, New Drive on Removals - Home    |               |
|          |Secretary on 24 February 2004         |               |
|          |A UKBA investigation into the         |               |
|          |circumstances surrounding the Guardian|               |
|          |newspaper publishing a story that     |               |
|          |Iraqi national alleged being assaulted|               |
|          |and abused after a failed removal on  |               |
|          |15 October 2009                       |               |
|          |A UKBA investigation into the         |               |
|          |circumstances surrounding the Guardian|               |
|          |Newspaper publishing a story that     |               |
|          |Iraqi nationals alleged being         |               |
|          |assaulted and abused after a failed   |               |
|          |removal on 15 October 2009            |               |
|          |A UKBA investigation into the         |               |
|          |circumstances surrounding Operation   |               |
|          |Rangat 2 on 16 June 2010              |               |
|          |UKBA investigation into the Iraqi     |               |
|          |Charter Operation on 06 September 2010|               |
|          |A UKBA investigation into the         |               |
|          |circumstances surrounding an          |               |
|          |allegation from Ms Kxxx Oxxx the      |               |
|          |girlfriend of Mr Axx Axx Txxx via Ms  |               |
|          |Axxx Oxxx from Gloucestershire Action |               |
|          |for Refugees and Asylum Seekers       |               |
|          |(GARAS) that Mr Txxxx was assaulted by|               |
|          |G4S Escorts on 06 September 2010 on   |               |
|          |arrival at Baghdad International      |               |
|          |Airport                               |               |



                                      GLOSSARY


AAH - Asaib Ahl al-Haq

AQI - Al-Qaeda in Iraq

AVRIM - Assisted Voluntary Return Irregular Migrants Programme

AVRFC - Assisted Voluntary Returns for Families and Children

BIAP - Baghdad International Airport

BMD - Bureau of Migration and Displacement

CIA - Central Intelligence Agency

COIS - Country of Origin Information
Service

CSID - Civil Status ID

CSIS - Center for Strategic and International Studies

CSOs - Civil Society Organisations

EDPs - externally displaced persons

EGIs -UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines

FCO - Foreign and Commonwealth Office

GoI - Government of Iraq

GPI - Global Peace Index

HRW - Human Rights Watch

IAU - UN Agency Information Unit

IBC - Iraq Body Count

ICRC - International Committee of the Red Cross

IEDs - improvised explosive device

IDMC - Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre

IMF - International Monetary Fund

IDPs - Internally displaced persons

IED - improvised explosive device

IIP - Iraqi Islamic Party

IGC - Intergovernmental Consultations on Migration, Asylum and Refugees

INC - Iraqi Nationality Certificate

IOM - International Organisation for Migration

IRIN - Integrated Regional Information Networks

ISF -Iraqi security forces

JSCRA - Jane's Sentinel Country Risk Assessment

KDP - Kurdistan Democratic Party

KH - Kata'ib Hizbullah

KRG - Kurdish Regional Government

KRI - Kurdistan region of Iraq

LGBTI - Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex

MDO - Migration Delivery Officer

MoDM - Ministry of Displacement and Migration

MNF-I - The Multi-National Force - Iraq

NCCI - NGO Coordination Committee for Iraq

NGO - Non government organisation

OCHA - Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

OGN - Operational guidance notes

OHCHR - Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights

PAC - UNHCR Protection Assistance Centres

PAO - Public Aid Organisation

PARCs - rotection Assistance Reintegration Centers

PDS - Public Distribution System card (food ration card)

PSU - UKBA's Professional Standards Unit

PUK - Patriotic Union of
Kurdistan

RICC - UNHCR Return Integration & Community Centres

RMJ - Refugee and Migrant Justice

SIGIR - Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction

SoI - The Sons of Iraq

UNAMI - United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq

USDD - US State Department

UNSC - UN Security Council

VARRP - Voluntary Assisted Return and Integration Programme

VBIED - multiple vehicle-borne improvised explosive device















-----------------------
[1] From 21 December 2013 this directive is replaced by Directive
2011/95/EU of 13 December 2011; but by recital 50 the UK and Ireland are
not taking part in its adoption. In any event, Article 15(c) is unaffected
by these changes.

