
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle Building, Glasgow              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 May 2015                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            STEVEN RICHARD FORMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:     Mr  J  Komorowski  (Advocate),  instructed  by  the  Advocate
             General
Respondent:   Mr Devlin (Advocate), instructed by Latta and Co Solicitors




     i) The public interest in firm immigration control is not  diluted  by
        the consideration that a person pursuing a claim  under  Article  8
        ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the state or is self-
        sufficient  or  is  likely  to   remain   so   indefinitely.    The
        significance of these factors is that where they  are  not  present
        the public interest is fortified.


    ii) The list of considerations contained in section  117B  and  section
        117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002
        Act") is not exhaustive.  A court or tribunal is entitled  to  take
        into account additional  considerations,  provided  that  they  are
        relevant in the  sense  that  they  properly  bear  on  the  public
        interest question.


   iii) In cases where the provisions of sections 117B-117C of the 2002 Act
        arise, the decision of the Tribunal must demonstrate that they have
        been given full effect.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 25 September 2014, refusing the  application  of  the  Respondent
    (the original Appellant), a citizen of the  United  States  of  America
    aged 69 years, for a variation of his leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   The  Respondent  appealed  successfully  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (the  "FtT").   The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals  with
    permission to this Tribunal.

THE IMPUGNED DECISION

 2. On 26 July 2012, the Secretary of State granted the Respondent leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1  (Highly  Skilled)  Post-Study
    Migrant for a period of two years, to expire on 26  July  2014.  On  22
    July 2014 the Respondent applied  for  a  variation  of  his  leave  to
    remain. He based his application on his right to  respect  for  private
    life under Article 8 ECHR. The ensuing decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State has two elements.  First, the application  was  considered  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, yielding the conclusion that
    the Respondent did  not  satisfy  any  of  the  requirements  enshrined
    therein.  One interposes here the observation that this gives  rise  to
    no controversy between the parties.  The second element of the impugned
    decision is expressed in these terms:

         "Decision on Exceptional Circumstances


         It has also been considered  whether  your  application  raises  or
         contains any exceptional circumstances which, consistent  with  the
         right to respect for private and family life contained in Article 8
         [ECHR], might warrant consideration by the Secretary of State of  a
         grant of  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It has been decided that it
         does not."

         Therein lies the genesis of this appeal.

 3. In order to comprehend the context, it is essential to outline some  of
    the features of the Respondent's application to the Secretary of State.
     Dr  Forman  is  a  professional  musician  whose  specialism  lies  in
    percussion. This is the career which  he  has  pursued  in  the  United
    States,  where  he  worked  mainly  as  a  recording  musician  in  the
    entertainment business.  He has worked with some of the  biggest  names
    in the world of musical entertainment.  As  his  career  progressed  he
    began to focus on composition, education and teaching.  His  activities
    include research in musical  therapy,  specifically  in  the  realm  of
    Parkinson's Disease.  He has developed a particular affinity  with  the
    musical  culture  of  Scotland,   illustrated   inter   alia   in   his
    compositions, certain performances and his  doctoral  studies  in  this
    country. He secured his doctorate  in  2012.  This  was  the  immediate
    impetus for the two years post-study work visa granted to him  in  July
    2014.  He has spent the last seven years of his life in Scotland.   His
    most recent employer here has been the Royal Conservatoire of  Scotland
    ("RSC").

 4. The nature, quality  and  quantity  of  the  support  for  Dr  Forman's
    application to the Secretary of State can only  attract  a  mixture  of
    admiration  and  envy.   His  application  was  supported  by   written
    testimonials from a total of  63  friends,  professional  and  academic
    colleagues, studies and supporters.  Dr  Forman  is  clearly  a  rather
    special person.

DECISION OF THE FtT

 5. Turning one's attention to the decision of  the  FtT,  another  of  the
    stand out features of this appeal emerges.  This decision is  obviously
    the product of careful reflection and  consideration  on  the  part  of
    Designated Judge MacDonald.  It is,  moreover,  carefully  and  clearly
    structured.  Furthermore, it was produced with commendable expedition.

 6. If this were a merits appeal, there could only be one outcome,  bearing
    in mind the various considerations and observations rehearsed in [3]  -
    [5] above: Dr Forman would be a resounding winner.  However, we have  a
    significantly different duty and task, namely that of deciding  whether
    the decision of the FtT is undermined by  material  error  of  law.  We
    shall revisit certain aspects of the decision presently.

THE ISSUES

 7. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  following  basis.   It  was
    considered arguable that the Judge had erred in his approach to Article
    8 ECHR by attaching no weight to the Respondent's  failure  to  satisfy
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Continuing, the  permission
    Judge observed that the FtT may have approached  the  appeal  from  the
    perspective that the Appellant is an asset to United  Kingdom  society,
    rather than that of whether removal would be a disproportionate  breach
    of his right to respect for private life.

 8. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Komorowski  helpfully  reduced
    his argument to the following five core submissions:

        i) The FtT failed to have regard to the full terms  of  and  policy
           underlying  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (the
           "Rules").


       ii) The FtT failed to recognise the inherently weak  nature  of  the
           majority of private life claims.

      iii) The  FtT  failed  to  consider  the  precarious  nature  of  the
           Respondent's private life.

       iv) The FtT wrongly weighed  the  consideration  of  wider  societal
           benefit as part of the Respondent's private life.

        v) The FtT wrongly discounted the weight to be given to immigration
           control by reference to the Respondent's self-sufficiency.


    In support of  these  submissions,  Mr  Komorowski  drew  attention  to
    certain passages in the  determination  of  the  FtT,  highlighting  in
    particular what he suggested was an  incorrect  focus  on  the  Tier  2
    regime of the  Rules,  rather  than  paragraph  276ADE,  an  incomplete
    consideration of the latter and the inadequate consideration of section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Devlin  emphasised  in  particular  the
    importance of considering the determination as a  whole  and,  in  this
    context, he placed some  emphasis  on  that  section  of  the  decision
    wherein  the  Judge  rehearses,  in  summary,  the  parties'  competing
    submissions.  Adopting this approach, he contended that,  in  substance
    and in the round, the Judge had avoided falling into error.  In support
    of his submissions he invoked SS (Congo) and Others v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 387,  at [44] and [48] especially.  He contended that the Judge had
    observed the strictures contained in the judgment  of  Richards  LJ  at
    [48]:

         "What does matter, however - whether one is dealing with a  section
         of the  Rules  which  constitutes  a  'complete  code'  (as  in  MF
         (Nigeria)) or with a section of the Rules which is not a  'complete
         code' (as in Nagre and the present appeals) - is to  identify,  for
         the purposes of the application of Article 8, the degree of  weight
         to  be  attached  to  the  expression  of  public  policy  in   the
         substantive part of the Rules in the particular context in question
         (which will not always be the same ....),  as  well  as  the  other
         factors relevant  to  the  Article  8  balancing  exercise  in  the
         particular case (which,  again,  may  well  vary  from  context  to
         context and from case to case)."

    Mr Devlin also reminded us of one of several  memorable  statements  by
    Lord Bingham of Cornhill,  in  this  instance  his  formulation  in  EB
    (Kosovo) v SSHD [2009] 1 AC 1159:


         "The search for a hard-edged or bright-line rule to be  applied  to
         the  generality  of  cases  is  incompatible  with  the   difficult
         evaluative exercise which Article 8 requires."

    Giving effect to this principle, the Court of Appeal  in  PE  (Peru)  v
    SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 274 rejected the argument that, in any given case,
    there can only be one correct answer  to  the  question  of  whether  a
    person's deportation will constitute  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the rights protected by Article 8. In the  same  case,  Hooper  LJ
    (delivering the judgment of the Court)  preferred  the  view  that  the
    determination  of  such  questions  involves  matters   of   evaluative
    judgment: see [11].


10. The decision of the Court of Session (Inner House) in MS v SSHD  [2013]
    CSIH 52 is a reminder of what has become firmly rooted doctrine, namely
    that in the generality of cases the discrete code in the  Rules  formed
    by paragraph 276ADE - 276DE will cater  for  Article  8  claims.   Lord
    Drummond Young continued, at [30]:

         "The purpose of those provisions is to set out  the  factors  which
         normally apply  to  the  assessment  of  Article  8  rights  in  an
         immigration  context;  consequently  both  the   terms   of   those
         provisions and the underlying policy that  can  be  discerned  from
         those terms are of importance.  They must, of  course,  be  weighed
         against  the  other  special  considerations  that  apply  in   the
         particular case."

    One construes the final part of this passage as a  reference  to  cases
    (by definition the minority) in which Article 8 claims should  properly
    be considered outwith the ambit of the regime contained in the Rules.

11. It is also appropriate to focus on how the Article 8 jurisprudence  has
    evolved during recent years.  In Patel and Others v  SSHD  [2013]  UKSC
    72, Lord Carnwath stated, at [57]:

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right."

    We note the analysis of Upper Tribunal Judge Lane in Nasim  and  Others
    (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC), at [12], that this passage has  an
    import beyond the narrow confines of  a  student's  ability  to  pursue
    education in the United Kingdom under the umbrella  of  Article  8  "in
    seeking to refocus attention upon the core purposes of Article 8".  The
    question of what Article 8 protects has  become  one  of  the  dominant
    themes of the more recent jurisprudence.  In Nasim, the Upper  Tribunal
    revisited Lord Carnwath's formulation in [20], invoking it  in  support
    of the proposition that Article 8 is of -


         ".....  limited utility to an individual where one has moved  along
         the continuum, from that Article's core area of  operation  towards
         what might be described as its fuzzy penumbra."

    The Tribunal emphasised the distinction between  the  family  life  and
    private life dimensions of Article 8, concluding that the  ambition  of
    the qualified students in the appeals, namely to undertake a period  of
    post-study work in the United Kingdom -


         "...  lies at the outer reaches of cases requiring  an  affirmative
         answer to the second of the five Razgar questions and that, even if
         such an  affirmative  answer  needs  to  be  given,  the  issue  of
         proportionality is to be  resolved  decisively  in  favour  of  the
         Respondent, by reference to her functions as the  guardian  of  the
         system of immigration controls, entrusted to her by Parliament."

         We would observe that this passage repays careful reading.

CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

12. We begin by considering the first and  second  of  the  submissions  on
    behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  summarised  in  [8]  above.   The
    rationale of the exercise which the FtT conducted was  based  upon  the
    premise that  the  Respondent  did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. This was expressly noted by the Judge in
    his summary of the parties' submissions, which  included  (unavoidably)
    an  explicit  acknowledgement  to  this  effect  by  the   Respondent's
    representative: see  [40]  and  [57].   Further,  in  [61],  the  Judge
    observed (in terms) that the  Respondent's  inability  to  satisfy  the
    Rules was one of substantial dimensions.  It cannot  be  said,  in  our
    judgment, that the Rules were overlooked by  the  Judge.   Furthermore,
    for our part, we have some reservations about the practical effect  and
    meaning of the Court of Session's exhortation in MS that  the  Tribunal
    must have regard to paragraph 276ADE and the underlying policy thereof.
     This exhortation makes perfect sense in cases where there  is  a  live
    dispute about the claimant's ability to satisfy the requirements  under
    scrutiny.  However, in cases, such as the present, where  the  starting
    point is that the claimant does not satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, with the result that the sole question is whether his Article  8
    claim can be successfully established  outwith  the  framework  of  the
    Rules, we consider that the latter form a backdrop, but little more, in
    the context of  an  exercise  which  differs  sharply  from  that  just
    mentioned.  Thus we find no merit in the  first  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's submissions.

13. We can dispose swiftly of  the  second  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submissions.  At the commencement of his analysis the Judge  recognised
    that -

         "....  It is only in very rare cases that an appellant can  succeed
         under Article 8 outside the Rules."

    At the conclusion of his analysis he employed much the same terminology
    viz "... one of those rare cases which demands that the proportionality
    exercise falls on the Appellant's side of the scales ...."


    We find no misdirection on the part  of  the  Judge  in  this  discrete
    respect.

14. The fourth of the Secretary of State's submissions  was  that  the  FtT
    erred in law by weighing the consideration of wider societal benefit as
    part of the Appellant's private life. We  consider  that  there  is  no
    merit in this submission.  In our judgment, the  relevant  passages  in
    the determination considered as a  whole  make  clear  that  the  Judge
    viewed societal benefit as one of the factors  in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise favourable to the Respondent.  In our view there  is
    no warrant for construing these passages in the manner  for  which  the
    Secretary of State contends.  Formulating  this  consideration  in  the
    abstract, we consider it unexceptional that positive  contributions  to
    society are normally in furtherance of a  clearly  identifiable  public
    interest that can properly be balanced  against  the  competing  public
    interest underpinning the Secretary of State's decision which, in  this
    case, is the public interest in the  maintenance  of  firm  immigration
    control.

15. At this juncture we consider the fifth, and last, of the submissions on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.  In doing so, we  consider  that  the
    correct formulation of the principle which this submission  engages  is
    thus:  the public interest in firm  immigration control is not  diluted
    by the consideration that the Article 8 claimant has at no time been  a
    financial burden on the state, is self  sufficient  and  is  likely  to
    remain so indefinitely.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  related  principle
    which we  would  formulate  in  these  terms:  in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise, the public interest in maintaining firm immigration
    control qualifies for greater weight, or is enhanced and fortified,  in
    circumstances where the Article 8 claimant is and/or is likely to be  a
    financial burden on the state.  These principles now find expression in
    the Immigration Act 2014, to  which  we  shall  refer  presently.   The
    application  of  these  principles  to  the  present  case  places  the
    spotlight on the following passage in the decision of the FtT at [60]:

         "It is clear that the Appellant's application for leave  to  remain
         under the Rules failed on the financial requirement.  However  this
         case is different from most in that the evidence has demonstrated -
         and it was not disputed - that the Appellant has his own  financial
         means and therefore is not  dependent  financially  on  the  salary
         which the RCS are able and willing to pay him.  That fact seems  to
         me to separate the Appellant from many other  Appellants  who  fail
         under the financial requirements of the Rules."

    We agree with Mr  Komorowski  that  within  this  passage  there  is  a
    conflation of two distinct issues, namely the  Appellant's  ability  to
    satisfy the requirements of the Rules and the legal significance in  an
    Article 8 context of his self sufficiency.   The  inescapable  fact  is
    that the Respondent was unable to satisfy the financial requirements of
    the Rules.  This inability stemmed from the salary he was receiving. We
    consider that  the  Judge,  effectively,  diluted  and  mitigated  this
    failure and, in substance, concluded that the public interest in  place
    was weakened in consequence.  This,  for  the  reasons  which  we  have
    explained above, is erroneous in law.  The exercise of considering [60]
    - [65] of the determination as a whole impels to  the  conclusion  that
    the materiality of this error is inescapable.

Section 117, Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

16. The new Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (the "2002 Act") came into operation on 25 July 2014.   Its  provisions
    are engaged by the third of the Secretary of State's submissions.

17. We consider the correct analysis of sections 117A and  117B  to  be  as
    follows:

        i) These provisions apply in every case where a court  or  tribunal
           is required to determine  whether  a  decision  made  under  the
           Immigration Acts  breaches  a  person's  right  to  respect  for
           private and family life under Article 8 ECHR and, as  a  result,
           would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.
           Where  a  Court  or  Tribunal  is  not  required  to  make  this
           determination, these provisions do not apply.

       ii) The so-called "public interest question"  is  "the  question  of
           whether an interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for
           private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).", which
           appears to embrace the entirety of the proportionality exercise.

      iii) In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
           tribunal must  have  regard  to  the  considerations  listed  in
           section 117B in all cases: per section 117A(1) and (2).

       iv) In considering the public interest question in cases  concerning
           the deportation of foreign criminals, the court or tribunal must
           have  regard  to  the  section  117B  considerations   and   the
           considerations listed in section 117C.

        v) The list of considerations in sections  117B  and  177C  is  not
           exhaustive: this is clear from the  words  in  parenthesis  "(in
           particular)".

       vi) The court or tribunal concerned has  no  choice:  it  must  have
           regard to the listed considerations.

     To this we would add the following.  While the court  or  tribunal  is
    clearly entitled to take into account considerations other  than  those
    listed in section 117B (and,  where  appropriate,  section  117C),  any
    additional factors considered must be relevant, in the sense that  they
    properly bear on the "public  interest  question".   In  this  discrete
    respect, some assistance is provided by reflecting on  the  public  law
    obligation to take into account all material considerations  which,  by
    definition, prohibits the intrusion of immaterial factors.   We are not
    required to decide in the present case whether  there  is  any  tension
    between section 117A (2), which obliges the court or tribunal concerned
    to have regard to the list of considerations  listed  in  section  117B
    and, where appropriate, section 117C)  and  the  contrasting  terms  of
    section 117B (5) and (6) which are framed  as  an  instruction  to  the
    court or tribunal to attribute little weight to the two  considerations
    specified.

18. We apply the above analysis to the determination  of  the  FtT  in  the
    following way.  The Judge, as mandated by the legislature, was  obliged
    to have regard to all of the elements of section 117B.  While the Judge
    did not adopt a sequential and structured  approach  this  is  not,  of
    course, fatal per se. Indeed, this tribunal has held  in  appeals  that
    the provisions of sections 117B - 117C were applied in substance - and,
    hence, without error of law - by the FtT.  The critical  issue  in  the
    present case turns on section 117B(5), which provides:

         "Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious."

    In its determination, the FtT noted  -  in  [43]  -  the  Secretary  of
    State's submission based on this provision. However,  in  the  critical
    passages in its  decision,  one  finds  no  reference  to  any  of  the
    provisions of the 2002 Act, with the exception of  the  somewhat  bland
    and brief sentence, in [64]:


         "Clearly I must take account of section  117B  inserted  into  the
    2002 Act."

    The Judge was not simply required by Parliament to take account of this
    statutory provision: rather, he was obliged to have regard  to  all  of
    the considerations listed therein.  This  required  identification  and
    analysis (however brief) of each of  the  provisions  concerned.   This
    exercise was not carried out and, in our judgment, it is  not  possible
    to infer that it was conducted.  This constitutes an error of law.


19. Furthermore, the exercise of considering the determination as  a  whole
    gives rise to the conclusion, in our view, that  the  Judge  attributed
    substantial weight to the Respondent's private life.   This  assessment
    is prompted by the detailed rehearsal of the evidence in [3] - [35] and
    the strong emphasis on various facets of the Respondent's private  life
    in [61] and  [62].   It  was  incumbent  on  the  Judge  to  explicitly
    acknowledge that the entirety of the Respondent's private life  in  the
    United Kingdom was established during a  period  when  his  immigration
    status was precarious and, having done so,  to  conduct  the  balancing
    exercise accordingly.  Neither this acknowledgement nor  this  exercise
    is contained in the decision.  This, in  our  judgment,  constitutes  a
    clear error of law.  The materiality of this error  of  law  is  beyond
    plausible dispute: if the Judge had done so, he would have been obliged
    to find unequivocally that the Respondent's private life in the  United
    Kingdom could not be accorded more than slight weight.


20. The rigid, prescriptive nature of sections 117A - 117C of the 2002  Act
    invites reflection on the  topic  of  judgment  design  and  structure.
    Where the decisions of tribunals  list,  explicitly  and  sequentially,
    each of the obligatory statutory  considerations,  accompanied  by  the
    Tribunal's evaluation and application thereof, there should be no scope
    for debate.  Adherence to this discipline will have the  supreme  merit
    of reducing the possibility of error of law. This is illustrated in  MK
    (section 55 - Tribunal options) [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), at [41] -  [43].
    Furthermore, tribunals are well used to having to craft their decisions
    in accordance with the dictates of discipline  and  structure,  in  the
    light of decisions such as Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, at [17].   The
    same exhortation is made in relation  to  the  Tribunal's  exercise  of
    evaluating and applying  the  related  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules: see MK, at [45] - [49].  Fundamentally,  the  decision  must  be
    crafted in such a way as to demonstrate that the statutory requirements
    have been given full effect.

DECISION

21. On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated above, we decide:

        i) There are material errors of law in  the  determination  of  the
           FtT.

       ii) We set aside the determination in consequence.

      iii) The Practice Directions of the Upper Tribunal indicate that  the
           remaking of the decision of the FtT should be undertaken  within
           this forum.

       iv)  The  parties'  representatives  shall,  within  14  days,  make
           submissions in writing in relation to the following matters:

              a) what we have said in (iii) above; and


              b) in the event of the decision being remade  in  this  forum,
                 the necessity for a further hearing  and  the  question  of
                 whether there will be any application for the adduction  of
                 further evidence under Rule 15(2A).












                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                           Date: 29 May 2015
