

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Adamally and Jaferi (section 47 removal decisions: Tribunal Procedures)
[2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 October 2012                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    MUNIRA QURAISH SAJAD HUSSAIN ADAMALLY
                            SHAIQEEN AHMED JAFERI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik instructed by Malik Law Chambers for Mrs
Adamally
      Mr A Jafar instructed by Lee Valley Solicitors for Mr Jaferi


When a removal decision purportedly under s 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
and Nationality Act 2006 is  made  concurrently  with  a  decision  refusing
further leave:

     i) the s 47 decision is unlawful, but
    ii) the decision refusing leave is a separate decision, that
   iii) requires determination;
    iv) s 85(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  brings
        the two decisions into one appeal, but
     v) s 86 of that Act allows and requires the determination  to  reflect
        differences in outcome.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. What should a Tribunal Judge do when faced with a single piece of paper
    on which is both a decision refusing a person further leave  to  remain
    and a decision that the person should be removed?  That question  forms
    the latest part in a long-running jurisprudential saga.  We shall begin
    by setting out the relevant legislation, and summarising the  story  so
    far.

Legislation

 2. The relevant provisions are as follows.

    In the Immigration Act 1971:

       "3C Continuation of leave pending variation decision
       (1) This section applies if -
          (a) a person who has limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of State for  variation
             of the leave,
          (b) the  application  for  variation  is  made  before  the  leave
          expires, and
          (c) the leave expires without the application for variation having
          been decided.


       (2)  The leave is extended by virtue  of  this  section  during  any
       period when -
          (a) the application for variation is neither decided nor withdrawn
          (b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Asylum  and
             Immigration Act 2002 could be brought, while the  appellant  is
             in the United Kingdom against the decision on  the  application
             for variation (ignoring any possibility of  an  appeal  out  of
             time with permission), or
          (c) an appeal under that section against  that  decision,  brought
             while the appellant  is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  is  pending
             (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act).


       (3) Leave extended by virtue of this  section  shall  lapse  if  the
          applicant leaves the United Kingdom.
       (4) A person may not make an application for variation of his  leave
          to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  while  that  leave  is
          extended by virtue of this section.
       (5) But subsection  (4)  does  not  prevent  the  variation  of  the
          application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).
       (6) The Secretary of State may make regulations determining when  an
          application is decided for the purposes of this section;  and  the
          regulations -
          (a)  may make provision by reference to receipt of a notice,
          (b) may provide for a notice to be treated as having been received
             in specified   circumstances,
          (c)  may  make  different  provision  for  different  purposes  or
          circumstances,
          (d)  shall be made by statutory instrument, and
          (e) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution  of
             either House of  Parliament. "

          Section 3D contains, in the case of a person whose leave has  been
    revoked, provisions parallel to those of section 3C(2)(b) and (c),  (3)
    and (4).

 3. The regulations made under s 3C(6) are the Immigration (Continuation of
    Leave) (Notices) Regulations 2006 (SI 2170/2006).  For present purposes
    they need to be read with the Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003
    (SI 658/2003).  They have the effect that, for the purposes of s 3C, an
    application is decided  only  when  written  notice  of  the  decision,
    including notice of any appeal rights, is given to  the  person  making
    the application.


 4. In the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006:

        "47. Removal: persons with statutorily extended leave


        (1) Where a person's leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
           is extended by section 3C(2)(b) or 3D(2)(a) of  the  Immigration
           Act 1971 (c.77) (extension pending  appeal),  the  Secretary  of
           State may decide that the person  is  to  be  removed  from  the
           United Kingdom, in accordance with directions to be given by  an
           immigration officer if and when the leave ends.
        (2) Directions under this section may impose any requirements of  a
           kind prescribed for the purpose of section 10 of the Immigration
           and Asylum Act 1999 (c.33) (removal  of  persons  unlawfully  in
           United Kingdom).
               ...."

 5. We do not need to set out s 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.
    It permits directions to be given for the removal of persons unlawfully
    in the  United  Kingdom.   The  only  relevant  provision  for  present
    purposes is that directions can be given for the removal  of  a  person
    who remains beyond the time limited by his leave.

 6. In the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

        "82. Right of appeal: general
        (1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a person he
           may appeal to the Tribunal.
        (2) In this Part 'immigration decision' means -
        ...
           (d) refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain  in  the
              United Kingdom if the result  of  the  refusal  is  that  the
              person has no leave to enter or remain
           ...
           (g) a decision that a person is to be removed  from  the  United
              Kingdom by way of directions  under  section  10(1)(a),  (b),
              (ba) or (c) of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  (c.33)
              (removal of person unlawfully in United Kingdom),

           (ha) a decision that a person is to be removed from  the  United
           Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under  section   47   of   the
           Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  (removal:  persons
           with statutorily extended leave)
        ...
        85. Matters to be considered
        (1) An appeal under section  82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
           treated by the Tribunal  as  including  an  appeal  against  any
           decision in respect of which the appellant has a right of appeal
           under section 82(1).
        (2) If an appellant under section 82(1)  makes  a  statement  under
           section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any  matter  raised  in
           the statement which constitutes a ground of  appeal  of  a  kind
           listed in section 84(1) against the decision appealed against.
        ...
        86. Determination of appeal
        (1) This section applies on an appeal under section  82(1),  83  or
        83A.
        (2) The Tribunal must determine -
           (a) any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether or  not  by
              virtue of section 85(1)), and
           (b) any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.
        (3) The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks  that
        -
           (a) a decision against which the appeal is brought or is treated
              as  being  brought  was  not  in  accordance  with  the   law
              (including immigration rules), or
           (b) a discretion exercised in making a  decision  against  which
              the appeal is brought or is treated as being  brought  should
              have been exercised differently.
        (4) For the purposes of subsection (3) a  decision  that  a  person
           should be removed from the  United  Kingdom  under  a  provision
           shall not be regarded as unlawful if it could have been lawfully
           made by reference to removal under another provision.
        (5) In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, the Tribunal  shall
        dismiss the appeal.
        (6)  Refusal  to  depart  from  or  to  authorise  departure   from
           immigration rules is not the exercise of a  discretion  for  the
           purposes of subsection (3)(b).


 7. The effect of these provisions for present purposes is as  follows.   A
    person who has current leave and applies for a variation  (that  is  to
    say, extension) of it, has a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    under s 82(2)(d) if the application is refused.[1]  His existing  leave
    is extended by s 3C of  the  1971  Act  until  his  appeal  is  finally
    determined; or, if he does not appeal, his leave is extended to the end
    of the period in which he could, without needing an extension of  time,
    have served a notice of  appeal.   After  the  end  of  the  period  of
    extension granted by s 3C, unless an appeal was successful,  the  leave
    expires, and the person becomes an overstayer,  whose  removal  can  be
    directed under provisions of s 10(1)(a) of the 1999 Act.  That decision
    also carries a right of appeal, under s 82(2)(g).  Following the coming
    into force of s 47 of the 2006 Act, however,  the  Secretary  of  State
    does not have to wait until the person becomes an  overstayer,  because
    that section permits a removal decision to be made during the  currency
    of leave.  Such a decision also carries a right  of  appeal  under    s
    82(2)(ha).  The existence of separate rights  of  appeal  confirms,  if
    confirmation were needed, that the decisions  are  separate  decisions.
    Sections 85 and 86  regulate  the  Tribunal's  process  in  determining
    appeals.

The story so far

 8. In a number of cases, the courts have considered whether, when making a
    decision that a person's leave is not to be extended, the Secretary  of
    State should also make any relevant decision relating to  the  person's
    removal.  Before the coming into force of s  47,  the  answer  to  that
    question would appear to be obvious.  As the  only  relevant  power  to
    make a removal decision was that in s 10(1)(a), the power could not  be
    exercised during the continuance of leave under s 3C of the  1971  Act,
    because until  the  expiry  of  that  leave,  the  person  was  not  an
    overstayer.  Thus it  would  appear  impossible  to  make  the  removal
    decision at the same time as refusing further leave, because the effect
    of s 3C is that the person is not an overstayer until the expiry  of  a
    period of time which extends beyond the date of  the  decision  on  the
    variation application.

 9. For reasons which have never been entirely clear, it  was  conceded  by
    Counsel for the Secretary of  State  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  TE
    (Eritrea) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 174, not only that  the  Secretary  of
    State could make a s 10 decision in tandem with a decision refusing  an
    in-time  application  for  a  variation  of  leave,  but  that  in  the
    circumstances of that case he should have  done  so.   That  concession
    appears to have been approved by the court.  How the Secretary of State
    could be obliged to make a decision that he could not in law make (that
    is to say, to direct the removal as an overstayer of a person  who  had
    existing leave) has never been explained, as this Tribunal remarked  in
    Kishver [2011] UKUT 00410  (IAC).   There  is  a  further  problem.   A
    decision to remove an overstayer does not carry an in-country right  of
    appeal unless at the time it is made the subject of it  "has  made"  an
    asylum or human rights claim (see ss 82(2)(g), 92(2) and (4)).  In  the
    usual case the application for further leave relies on the rules;  only
    if it is unsuccessful would human rights be invoked.  If  by  the  time
    the subject had notice of either decision, both had  been  made,  there
    would  be  in-country  and  out-of-country  appeals  against  the   two
    decisions.  Nevertheless, the concession, and the  consequent  decision
    of the Court of Appeal led to a number  of  other  decisions,  some  of
    which, like TE (Eritrea) itself, must now be regarded  as  of  doubtful
    authority.

10. The reason for the latter proposition is the decision of the  Court  of
    Appeal (Lord Neuberger MR, Hallet LJ and Stanley Burnton LJ)  in  Patel
    and others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 741.  By the time of that decision, s
    47 was in force and the Court held that the word "may" in s  47(1)  was
    genuinely permissive and did not impose any obligation on the Secretary
    of State.  In these circumstances, we regard it as settled at the level
    of this Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal that  decisions,  even  of
    the Court of Appeal, to the contrary effect,  including  Mirza  v  SSHD
    [2011] EWCA Civ 159, and Sapkota v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1320 should not
    be followed.  In his judgment, the Master of  the  Rolls  explains  the
    Court of Appeal's jurisdiction to resolve an irreconcilable conflict in
    earlier decisions, here exercised by following Lamichhane v SSHD [2012]
    EWCA Civ 260 in preference to Mirza.  Stanley Burnton LJ, agreeing with
    the Master of the Rolls, summarised the reasons as follows:

        "74.  I have emphasised the impossibility of imposing a duty on the
             Secretary of State to issue removal directions because, in  the
             absence of such a duty, it is difficult to see the  utility  of
             making the decision to refuse leave  to  remain  (for  example)
             dependent on the decision  whether  or  not  to  issue  removal
             directions. So far as an overstayer is concerned, it  makes  no
             difference to his legal position  if  the  Secretary  of  State
             decides not to issue removal directions, or to  defer  deciding
             whether  to  issue  removal  directions.  It  is  only  if  the
             Secretary of State is under a duty to and  does  issue  removal
             directions that an immigration decision is made giving rise  to
             a right of appeal. It seems to me that although in paragraph 46
             of Mirza Sedley LJ referred to "an unjustified  deferral  of  a
             decision on  removal",  he  must  have  meant  "an  unjustified
             deferral of a decision to remove" and thus was interpreting the
             legislation as imposing a duty, owed to overstayers,  to  issue
             directions for their removal.
          1. Quite apart from these considerations, I wish to  underline  my
             agreement with paragraphs 50 and 51  of  the  judgment  of  the
             Master of the Rolls. As I indicated  above,  to  hold  that  an
             otherwise lawful decision, for  example  to  refuse  to  extend
             leave to remain, becomes  unlawful  because  the  Secretary  of
             State fails to make a decision to remove within a short  period
             thereafter would be to  create  a  principle  of  retrospective
             unlawfulness or invalidity that  was,  until  the  decision  in
             Mirza, unknown to the law. Parliament could, of course, provide
             that the decision on leave would only be lawful if  a  decision
             on removal were made within a defined time thereafter,  but  it
             has not done so. Aikens LJ in Sapkota  was  conscious  of  this
             difficulty with the decision in Mirza, which is  evidently  why
             he adopted, in paragraph 101 of his judgment,  the  formulation
             that the Secretary of State must contemplate that  the  removal
             decision will be taken promptly after the  decision  on  leave.
             But, as the Master of the Rolls points out,  this  creates  its
             own legal and practical difficulties. The  contemplation  of  a
             decision maker as to when  or  even  whether  he  will  make  a
             separate decision under  a  separate  statutory  provision  has
             never been a ground  for  judicial  review.  Moreover,  putting
             aside cases where a decision maker has made a decision  for  an
             improper purpose, how is the person affected by the decision to
             know or to ascertain what was the contemplation of the decision
             maker? What if the decision maker changes his mind, or  forgets
             to do what he contemplated earlier? What if  when  refusing  to
             extend leave to remain he did not contemplate making a decision
             on removal, but in fact does make that decision shortly  after?
             What if the decision to remove is not made "promptly" (whatever
             that means) after the decision to refuse to extend  leave,  but
             is made at a later date? None of these questions is susceptible
             of an acceptable answer. "
    Hallet LJ agreed with both judgements.

11. We accordingly must proceed on  the  basis  that  a  decision  refusing
    further leave may stand on its own: it  is  not  rendered  unlawful  by
    being unaccompanied by a removal decision.  Nor, of course,  can  there
    be any suggestion that if there is a removal  decision,  the  decisions
    that have been made are  somehow  combined  into  one  decision.   They
    remain separate decisions, made under separate statutory powers to make
    decisions, and carrying separate rights of appeal under s 82(2).

12. Section 47 is the subject of a decision of this Tribunal  in  Ahmadi  v
    SSHD [2012] UKUT 147.  Although before us Mr Melvin indicated that  the
    Secretary of State did not agree with that decision,  and  although  we
    understand that she has sought permission to appeal against it, we  can
    see no reason for not following it.  On the contrary, it appears to  us
    to have been clearly correct.  The effect of  it  is  that  a  decision
    under s 47 is not lawful if it is in the same document as, or otherwise
    accompanied by, the decision refusing further leave.   The  reason  for
    that lies in the  statutory  provisions,  which  are  perfectly  clear.
    Section 3C extends the relevant leave by three  steps,  set  out  in  s
    3C(2).  They are (a) up to the decision; (b) the time  when  an  appeal
    could be brought; (c) the time when any appeal is pending.  The section
    itself provides for  the  interpretation  of  when  an  application  is
    "decided" to be dealt with by regulations, and the regulations make  it
    clear that the making of the decision involves the giving of the notice
    required by the notices  regulations.   Until  that  notice  is  given,
    period (a) is still running; and time during which  an  appeal  may  be
    brought has not begun.  Section 47 permits a decision to be  made  only
    during period (b).  If the decision is on the same piece  of  paper  as
    the decision refusing leave, it has been made too early: period (a)  is
    still running and period (b) has not yet begun.

13. We are not aware of any possible escape from this conclusion.   It  has
    been suggested that  the  effect  of  the  statute  is  to  produce  an
    absurdity, but that cannot be right,  It is not impossible for a  s  47
    decision to be made within the period specified  within  s  47  itself.
    Any more elaborate reinterpretation of the period  specified  in  s  47
    would have to take into account the interaction  between  s  47  as  it
    applies  to  variation  decisions  and  as  it  applies  to  revocation
    decisions, in respect of which there is, in s 3D of the  1971  Act,  no
    equivalent of period (a).

14. For the foregoing reasons this Tribunal will follow  Ahmadi,  and  will
    take the view that a s 47 decision  is  unlawful  if  combined  with  a
    decision to refuse further leave.  Thus, it appears  that,  in  a  case
    where the refusal to extend leave and the decision purportedly under  s
    47 are served together, the latter is unlawful but the  former  is  not
    rendered unlawful by having to stand alone if the latter  drops.   Both
    decisions are appealable, and the question is what is to happen if they
    are appealed.


The appeals

15. Mrs Adamally is a national of  Sri  Lanka.   She  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 29 October 2008 with entry clearance as a  dependent  spouse
    of a Tier 4 Student, valid from 28 October 2008 to 28 October 2011.  On
    19 October 2011 she applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.
    She was refused, and at the same time as the refusal the  Secretary  of
    State purported to make a decision  under  s  47  that  she  should  be
    removed.

16. She appealed, and her appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Buckwell.  Following Ahmadi, he decided that the removal  decision  was
    unlawful.  He thereupon purported to determine the whole appeal  before
    him by "remitting" to the Secretary of State to rectify  the  defective
    notice.  He made no enquiry into, or decision on,  the  merits  of  the
    refusal to vary leave.

17. Mr Jaferi is a national of Pakistan.  He entered the United Kingdom  on
    22 November 2002 as a student.  There were further extensions, and  his
    final leave was as a work permit holder, until 27 March  2011.   On  16
    March 2011 he applied for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of
    his work permit employment.  His application was refused,  and  at  the
    same time the Secretary of State purported to decide that he should  be
    removed by way of directions under s 47.

18. He appealed.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  too  followed
    Ahmadi and decided that the decision under s 47 could not  stand.   She
    made no enquiry into the merits of the decision  refusing  leave,  but,
    like Judge Buckwell, "remitted" the decision to the Secretary of  State
    to rectify what she described as a defective notice.

19. The Secretary of State appealed against both  decisions,  on  identical
    grounds as follows:

        "An appeal was brought to the FTT against simultaneous decisions to
        vary leave such that the appellant had no leave (82  (2)  (e)  2002
        Act) and to remove by way of directions under  section  47  of  the
        2006 Act (82 (2) (ha)). The First-tier Tribunal Judge had regard to
        the reported decision of Ahmadi (s47. decision: validity:  Sapkota)
        and without any further consideration of the merits held  that  the
        appeal fell to be allowed and returned to the  Secretary  of  State
        for further consideration.


           This approach ignores the following:


         . That the appeal  was  to  be  treated  as  brought  against  two
           separate decisions served simultaneously (85 (1) 2002 Act);
         . That,  following  Patel  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  741,  the  variation
           decision was not affected by the absence  of  a  lawful  removal
           decision including the presence of an unlawful one (which, it is
           reiterated, is disputed in any event);
         . That it was incumbent upon the Tribunal  to  decide  any  matter
           raised as a ground of appeal;
         . That it is contrary to the outcome in Ahmadi, wherein the  Upper
           Tribunal dismissed the appeal despite finding that  the  section
           47 decision could not lawfully be  made  simultaneously  with  a
           refusal to vary;


        Accordingly, it  is  respectfully  submitted  that  the  FTT  ought
        (irrespective of the  question  of  whether  Ahmadi  was  correctly
        decided) to have ruled on the substantive merits of the grounds and
        to have treated the two immigration decisions separately.


        The Secretary of State, therefore, seeks a full decision in respect
        of the grounds raised against the variation  decision  including  a
        ruling that it was not contaminated  by  any  unlawfulness  in  the
        removal decision such as to render it not in  accordance  with  the
        law".


Discussion

20. Permission was granted, and we heard both appeals  together.   Although
    at the beginning of the hearing Mr Jafar thought that the  position  he
    would be taking on behalf of Mr  Jaferi  would  be  identical  to  that
    adopted by Mr Malik on behalf of Mrs Adamally, it transpired that there
    were some differences.

21. Mr Malik drew our attention in particular to ss 85 and 86 of  the  2002
    Act, which we have set  out  above.   Section  85(1)  applies  only  in
    circumstances in which an appellant before the Tribunal is the  subject
    of another immigration decision against which he has  (not,  we  think,
    "had") a right of appeal.  Thus, if at the time he gives his notice  of
    appeal against an immigration decision, there  is  another  immigration
    decision affecting him, which carries a right of appeal, and  the  time
    for appealing which has not yet expired, the Tribunal has to treat  the
    appeal against the first decision as including an  appeal  against  the
    second decision.  Presumably the same applies if the person becomes the
    subject of the second appealable decision while the appeal relating  to
    the first decision is pending before the Tribunal.  In any event, there
    appears to be no doubt that the result of the process of combination is
    that there is still a single appeal before the Tribunal,  but  that  it
    "includes" an appeal against the decision which the appellant  has  not
    specifically appealed.  What the grounds of appeal against  the  second
    decision are supposed to be, we do not exactly know: but that will  not
    necessarily prevent the Tribunal from doing justice  in  an  individual
    case.

22. Having established, uncontroversially in our judgment,  that  in  these
    circumstances there is a single appeal before the  Tribunal,  Mr  Malik
    went on to argue that the statute required that  appeal  to  be  either
    allowed or dismissed as a whole.  He pointed out that sub-s (3) of s 86
    precedes sub-s (5), and argued that the effect was that  if  there  was
    any ground for allowing the appeal, it fell  to  be  allowed:  only  if
    there were no grounds for allowing the appeal should it  be  dismissed.
    There was only one appeal,  and  it  could  not  be  both  allowed  and
    dismissed: in cases such as the present, because the appeal against the
    s 47 decision fell to be  allowed,  the  appeal  as  a  whole  must  be
    allowed.  The immigration judge  need  not  concern  himself  with  the
    merits of the  decision  refusing  leave:  it  was  necessary  for  the
    Secretary of State to start the whole process again, and make anew  and
    serve whatever decisions  were  appropriate.   In  the  mean  time,  of
    course, the applicant would  continue  to  benefit  from  s  3C  leave,
    because the effect of the judge's decision would be that there  had  as
    yet  been  no  lawful  decision  on  the  appellant's  application  for
    variation  of  leave.   Mr  Jafar   associated   himself   with   those
    submissions.

23. We do not accept them.  In these circumstances,  there  is  indeed  one
    appeal before the Tribunal, but the wording of s 86(3) and (5) makes it
    in our view clear that it is open to the Tribunal to allow an appeal in
    part and to dismiss it in part.  Indeed that may well happen when there
    is only one decision under consideration, but  different  grounds   are
    relied upon, all of which have to be considered   in   accordance  with
       s 86(2).  In cases such as  the  present,  we  see  nothing  in  the
    wording of s 86 which prevents a judge from disposing of the appeal  by
    deciding that in so far as the appeal before him is against a  decision
    made purportedly under s 47 it is allowed, but in so far as the  appeal
    relates to a decision refusing variation of leave, it is dismissed.

24. Reading the section in that way  has  a  number  of  other  advantages.
    First, it is in accordance with the ratio of Patel.  That is because if
    Mr Malik's construction were to be adopted, the judge would be required
    to declare as retrospectively invalid the  decision  refusing  to  vary
    leave, which itself was not invalid at  the  time  that  it  was  made.
    Secondly, adopting Mr  Malik's  construction  would  produce  different
    results according to whether the appellant put  in  notices  of  appeal
    against both decisions, or only one.  If he put in  notices  of  appeal
    against both decisions, he would of course succeed in challenging the s
    47 decision, but he might lose his appeal against the refusal to  vary:
    but if he put in only one notice he would be bound to  win  his  appeal
    against both decisions, with the consequent advantage to him  in  terms
    of s 3C.  That cannot have been intended.  Thirdly, the  interpretation
    we have adopted allows the phrase "in so far as" its full meaning.   Mr
    Malik's proposed interpretation would treat that phrase  as  synonymous
    with "if".   "If" was indeed the word used in the predecessors of s 86,
    that is to say in s 19 of the Immigration Act 1971 and in  para  21  of
    schedule 4 to the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The change  to  the
    present wording must have been deliberate, and would appear clearly  to
    have the effect we have  indicated.   Fourthly,  given  that  following
    Patel, the refusal to vary leave can stand by itself, there  simply  is
    no good reason why, when an appeal against  that  decision  is  clearly
    before the Tribunal, the Tribunal should not determine it.  Indeed,  if
    grounds of appeal have been  advanced,  the  Tribunal  is  required  to
    determine them. (As pointed out in paragraph 21 above, there will be no
    grounds if the refusal to vary leave is the decision  included  in  the
    appeal by virtue of s 85(1).)

25. At the end  of  the  day,  the  result  should  be  that  the  Tribunal
    determines in substance the appeal brought against the lawful decision,
    and declares the other decision unlawful.  The Secretary of State ought
    not to have made the s 47  decision,  but,  with  the  benefit  of  the
    Tribunal's decision on the merits of the refusal to  vary,  can  decide
    whether the person should be subject to  a  removal  decision.   As  to
    that, it appears to us that the Tribunal should not express  any  view.
    To dispose of the appeal in such a way as to suggest to  the  Secretary
    of State that a new removal decision  ought  to  be  made  is,  in  our
    judgement, quite wrong.  For that reason if no other, use of  the  word
    "remit" is not appropriate.

Disposal

26. We return now to the disposal of the present appeals.  Both the  First-
    tier Tribunal judges erred in law by failing to appreciate the need  to
    determine the appeal in so far as it related to each  of  the  included
    decisions.  So far as concerns Mr  Jaferi's  appeal,  the  position  is
    clear.  Judge Wellesley-Cole commenced the determination of the  appeal
    but has not yet completed it.   She  has  correctly  decided  that  the
    decision under s 47 is one which is not in accordance with the law, but
    her decision on the merits of the refusal to vary Mr Jaferi's leave  is
    still awaited.  We set aside her decision.  We remit the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal with the following directions.  The appeal is to be
    heard by Judge Wellesley-Cole.  She is to allow the appeal in so far as
    it relates to the decision under s 47.  She is to determine the grounds
    of appeal raised in relation to the refusal to vary Mr Jaferi's  leave,
    and decide whether the appeal falls to be allowed or  dismissed  in  so
    far as it relates to that decision.

27. Mrs Adamally's case is less clear, because Mr Malik told us  firmly  at
    the hearing before us that before Judge Buckwell she had relied only on
    the ground that the s 47 decision was not in accordance  with  the  law
    and that, accordingly, the  appeal  had  to  be  allowed.   No  grounds
    relating to the merits of the decision to refuse  to  vary  leave  were
    advanced.  When it became clear that we  were  unlikely  to  adopt  his
    principal argument, Mr Malik told us  that  the  appellant  would  have
    relied on other grounds if Judge Buckwell had  not  said  that  he  was
    going to "remit" the matter  to  the  Secretary  of  State.   In  these
    circumstances, we have examined the file.  There is no doubt  that  the
    substantive grounds are very thin indeed.  Instead of setting  out  any
    argument why the appellant's private life ought to enable her to remain
    in the United Kingdom despite the provisions of the Immigration  Rules,
    a total of nineteen paragraphs of "grounds of appeal"  and  "additional
    grounds" say almost nothing that could not be  said  in  every  similar
    case and, at the one point where they descend  to  particulars,  merely
    set out basic  facts  which  it  is  said  should  have  "alerted"  the
    Secretary of State to the engagement of article 8.  These clearly  take
    the matter no further at all: the  decision  letter  is  almost  wholly
    devoted  to  the  consideration  of   article   8.    The   appellant's
    representatives did send a bundle to the Tribunal before  the  hearing,
    including witness statements of the appellant and her brother,  but  at
    the hearing itself the appellant did not attend, and her solicitor told
    the  Tribunal  that  he  had  "accidently  forgotten"  to   bring   the
    appellant's bundle.  He it was who asserted that the appeal had  to  be
    allowed outright and that the Tribunal was  not  permitted  to  inquire
    into the merits of the decision to refuse leave.

28. Clearly the course of  events  reflects  no  credit  at  all  upon  the
    appellant's solicitors, Malik Law  Chambers.   We  are,  however,  just
    persuaded that in this  case  too  the  judge  should  have  a  further
    opportunity to  consider  whether  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  or
    dismissed in so far as it relates  to  the  decision  refusing  further
    leave.  We accordingly remit Mrs  Adamally's  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with the following directions.  The appeal is to be  heard  by
    Judge Buckwell.  He is to allow the appeal in so far as it  relates  to
    the decision under s 47.  He is to  determine  the  grounds  of  appeal
    raised in relation to the refusal of vary Mrs Adamally's leave, and  to
    decide whether the appeal falls to be allowed or dismissed in so far as
    it relates to that decision.

29. Both judges made fee awards.   We set  aside  both  those  awards,  the
    judges will need to determine whether any  fee  award  is  appropriate,
    when they have concluded their work on each of these appeals.





                                                                  Signed



                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 1 November 2012


-----------------------
[1] "...if the result of the refusal is that the person has no leave to
enter or remain" (S 82(2)(d)).

