

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


       Kishver and others ("limited leave": meaning) Pakistan [2011] UKUT
00410(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination delivered      |
|                                              |orally                       |
|On 29 July 2011                               |at hearing.  Sent out on     |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern




                                   Between

                               SULTANA KISHVER
                                   F KASZI
                                FAISAL BASHIR
                                 HASHIR KAZI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

"Limited leave" under s. 10(i)(a) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999
includes leave under s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appellant Sultana Kishver  ("the  appellant")  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  She came to the  United  Kingdom  with  her  husband  on  12
    September 2004.  They had leave to enter as visitors.   Her  leave  was
    due to expire on 1  March  2005.    In  January  2005  applications  or
    purported applications for leave to remain were made by  the  appellant
    and her husband.  Her  husband's  application  was  refused  under  the
    rules.  The appellant submitted a further application on 11 March  2005
    having received no response to her  application  of  24  January.   The
    appellant's application was refused but that refusal  has  subsequently
    been withdrawn.  The substantive refusal  on  which  these  proceedings
    have been based was dated 19 March 2009; it refuses further  leave  and
    indicates that there is no  right  of  appeal  against  that  decision.
    Undaunted, the appellant put in a notice of appeal.  That was  received
    by the Tribunal on 2 April 2009 and on 12 June 2009 Immigration Judge R
    A Britton heard the appellant's purported appeal.  He dismissed it in a
    determination sent out on 6 June 2009.

 2. An application for a reconsideration order was on  application  granted
    on 27 July 2009 and the matter came before the Tribunal as  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal but  as  presently  constituted  by  the  then
    Deputy President and Senior Immigration Judge  Southern  on  8  October
    2009.  This is the second subsequent hearing.  The difficulty raised by
    this appeal falls under two heads. The first question  is  whether  the
    appellant had or has ever had a right  of  appeal  to  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal or any Tribunal.  The second question arises  from
    the Secretary of State's treatment of her application.

 3. So far as the first question is concerned, it is clear from the history
    as we have set it out that the matter was dealt with by the AIT as  one
    in which there was a right of appeal.  Before us today, although it  is
    fair to say that the documents had been sent in earlier and  apparently
    not put before us, Ms Isherwood raises the question whether  there  was
    ever a valid right of appeal.  She bases her argument on the fact,  and
    it is a fact, that in the application of 24 January 2005 the  appellant
    used the wrong form.  There was a form prescribed for  the  application
    which she made and it is accepted on her behalf by Mr  Malik  that  the
    appellant used the wrong form.  At the time the regime  for  in-country
    applications for leave to remain  was  in  the  Immigration  (Leave  to
    Remain) (Prescribed  Forms  and  Procedures)  Regulations  2003;  those
    regulations prescribed forms for a number of  purposes,  including  the
    purpose for which the appellant sought leave.

 4. Regulations 11 and 12  of  those  regulations  are  headed  "Prescribed
    Procedures".  In reg 11 "the following procedures are hereby prescribed
    in relation to an application for which a form is prescribed in any  of
    regulations 3-9 above" (Regulations 3-9 above are the regulations which
    prescribe the forms).

        " (a) The form shall be signed and dated by the applicant...
          (b) The application should be accompanied by such  documents  and
        photographs as specified in the form.
          (c) The application shall be, [I summarise] sent."

         Regulation 12 is, so far as material, as follows:


        "12 (1) A failure  to  comply  with  any  of  the  requirements  of
             Regulation  11(a)  or  (b)  above  to  any  extent  will   only
             invalidate an application if:


          a) the applicant does not provide, when making the application, an
             explanation for  the  failure  which  the  Secretary  of  State
             considers to be satisfactory,
          b) the Secretary of State notifies the applicant,  or  the  person
             who  appears  to  the  Secretary  of  state  to  represent  the
             applicant, of the failure within 21 days of the date  on  which
             the application is made, and
          c) the applicant does not comply with the  requirements  within  a
             reasonable time and in  any  event  within  21  days  of  being
             notified by the Secretary of State of the failure"


 5. Those Regulations make it clear that it was open to  the  Secretary  of
    State to treat an invalid application as one which was  valid,  because
    invalidity would only arise if the  Secretary  of  State  notified  the
    failure.  Ms Isherwood's submission was that reg. 12 applies only  when
    the prescribed form has been used.  We do not accept  that  submission.
    In our judgement, reg. 11  relates  to  all  matters  relating  to  the
    application.  The  words  are  "the  following  procedures  are  hereby
    prescribed  in  relation  to  an  application  for  which  a  form   is
    prescribed" and the first requirement is that the form, that is to  say
    the prescribed form, shall be signed and so on.  It appears to us  that
    reg. 12 clearly covers failures to use the correct form  and  that  the
    non-use of  the  correct  form  could  therefore  properly,  under  the
    Regulations, be condoned by the Secretary of State  in  an  appropriate
    case.

 6. The position in this appeal is that although the notice of decision  of
    March  2009  made  clear  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  that   the
    application of January 2005 was not a valid application, the  Secretary
    of State's position has been at a number of stages during  this  appeal
    that there was a valid appeal.  That could only  be  the  case  if  the
    application of  24  January  2005  was  a  valid  application,  because
    otherwise the appellant's leave would have expired by the time she made
    her only valid application and she would have had no  right  of  appeal
    against his refusal.

 7. Ms Isherwood's submissions today were made on the basis that she sought
    to withdraw a concession  which  she  acknowledged  had  been  made  in
    litigation, to the effect that there was a right of appeal.  However we
    do not think that that is an appropriate way of putting the application
    which she made.  Rights of appeal arise or do not arise by statute.  In
    the present circumstances, although the right of appeal exists only  if
    there was a valid application in January 2005, it was for the Secretary
    of State to decide, if appropriate, that the application made  on  that
    date was a valid application.   If it  was  a  valid  application  then
    there was a right of appeal in respect of his refusal.  If it was  not,
    there was not.   It was not open to the Secretary of State to "concede"
    the right of appeal.  What the Secretary of State has done  at  various
    stages in this litigation is  to  treat  the  application  as  a  valid
    application.  That  was  itself  a  valid  executive  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State or an officer of hers  and  we  think  it  would  be
    entirely inappropriate for that decision now to be reversed.

 8. We therefore decide that it is not open to the Secretary  of  State  to
    withdraw the decision, effectively made long ago, that the  application
    of 21 January 2005 was a valid application.

 9. What follows from that is that as it was made during existing leave, it
    extended that leave by virtue of s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971, and
    the second application, on 11 March 2005 was a  variation  of  it.   It
    remained undecided in effect until 19  March  2009  when  a  notice  of
    decision was sent out.  As we have indicated, that notice  of  decision
    said that there was no right of appeal, but in so far as  the  decision
    of 19 March 2009 was a response to the application of 24  January  2005
    as varied, there was indeed a right of appeal.  It  follows  from  that
    that the notice of decision was not a valid notice of decision  because
    it did not comply with the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003.   Mr
    Malik however, emphasises that he seeks to proceed with the appeal;  he
    waives the requirement of notice of rights of appeal, as he is entitled
    to do.

10. The conclusion is that there is and was  a  valid  appeal  against  the
    decision of 19 March 2009 and that appeal is, following  the  abolition
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, now before this Tribunal.

11. The second question relates, as we have indicated, to the way in  which
    the application was in the end decided by the Secretary of State.   The
    appellant's application was an application for further leave.  She  had
    had leave as a visitor and now sought to remain on another basis.   The
    notice of decision indicated that as leave was being refused she should
    make arrangements to depart from the United Kingdom and that if she did
    not do so she might be removed.  It is also of course accepted however,
    that her removal would require a further decision.  The  appellant  has
    sought to demonstrate that in those circumstances it was wrong for  the
    Secretary of State to decide only to  refuse  her  further  leave:  the
    Secretary of State should also have considered whether she ought to  be
    removed  and  should  have  made  a  removal  decision,  or   something
    equivalent to a removal decision at  the  same  time  as  refusing  her
    leave.

12. That submission, made in this case and in a number of other cases,  has
    caused a considerable amount of difficulty.  In  TE  (Eritrea)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 174, the same argument was raised and in the course  of
    submissions, Counsel for the Secretary of State conceded  that  in  the
    circumstances of that case,  the  Secretary  of  State  would  consider
    whether to make a decision to remove the claimant under  s10,  applying
    the considerations set out in para 395C of the Statement of Changes  in
    Immigration Rules HC 395.  That concession, on its face raised a number
    of further difficulties and there has been subsequent litigation in the
    Court of Appeal, most recently Mirza v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 159; [2011]
    Imm AR 484 and Daley-Murdock v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 161; [2011] Imm  AR
    500.

13. The result of those two decisions taken in tandem is  broadly  speaking
    as follows: A person who is refused leave to remain at a time when that
    person has  no  outstanding  leave  is  not  entitled  to  require  the
    Secretary of State to make any other immigration decision in  order  to
    ease that person's immigration status.  The argument in  that  case  is
    that the person was already committing an offence by overstaying at the
    time the application for further leave was made; and therefore there is
    no additional disadvantage by requiring the person to leave  forthwith:
    there is no risk of committing a new immigration  offence  by  staying.
    If, on the other hand, a person makes an  application  during  existing
    leave, the effect of Mirza is that the Secretary of State  should  make
    in tandem the removal decision.

14. As we have indicated in the course of argument this morning and  as  we
    think Mr Malik at any rate is prepared to acknowledge,  there  is  some
    difficulty in showing how the removal decision could be made under  the
    provisions of s. 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   That  is
    because s. 10, which is the authority for any  removal  decision  which
    would have been made in this case applies if  a  person  has  outstayed
    their leave.  The wording of s. 10 (1)(a) is as follows:-

        "A person who is not a British citizen  may  be  removed  from  the
        United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  directions   given   by   an
        Immigration Officer if

        a) having only a limited leave to enter  or  remain,  he  does  not
           observe a condition attached to the leave or remains beyond  the
           time limited by the leave;"

15. The problem is that in this case, as in Mirza's case, the operation  of
    s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971, which extends existing leave  during
    the currency of any appeal, means that the person is not a  person  who
    has remained beyond the time limited by the leave.  At the time of  any
    appeal he is still not an overstayer.  Precisely how the  Secretary  of
    State is lawfully to make a decision under s. 10 deciding to  remove  a
    person who is not subject to removal has not yet been explained, so far
    as we understand it, by the Court of Appeal or  by  anybody  else.   Mr
    Malik submits that the meaning of "limited leave"  in  s.  10(1)(a)  is
    restricted to the original leave granted and not to leave under s.  3C,
    but that is a very difficult submission to  accept  for  at  least  two
    reasons.

16. The first is that s. 3  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  sets  out  the
    dichotomy of leave being either limited  or  indefinite,  and  provides
    that only limited leave may have conditions.  It follows that  whatever
    the condition, if leave  is  not  indefinite,  it  is  limited  and  so
    "limited leave" in s. 10 means leave which is subject to any conditions
    at all.  It therefore does not follow that because s. 3C leave  may  be
    of an indeterminate period, it is not limited leave.

17. Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, the restriction on removal of a
    person under the 2002 Act is restricted under ss 77 and 78 of that  Act
    to cases where either there is a claim for  asylum  pending  or   where
    there is an appeal pending.  If Mr Malik is right that "limited  leave"
    in s. 10 applies only to the original grant of leave  and  not  to  its
    extension by s. 3C, it would follow that a person  who,  in  time,  has
    made a valid application for further  leave,  would  be  liable  to  be
    removed, as soon as his original leave ran out.  That  liability  would
    continue thereafter for the whole period of the  Secretary  of  State's
    determination of his application and the following days during which if
    he had been refused, he had a right of appeal.  Only when a  notice  of
    appeal was actually lodged would the protection from removal  under  s.
    78 apply.  That simply cannot be right. Sections 77  and  78,  and  the
    reformulation of s. 3C  were  a  replacement  of  the  old  Immigration
    (Variation of Leave) Order 1976  which  was  specifically  intended  to
    prevent the removal of a person who had made in time an application for
    further leave.  It is clear that those provisions  taken  together  are
    intended to prevent precisely the situation which  would  arise  if  Mr
    Malik's submission about the meaning of s. 10 of the 1999 Act  were  to
    be accepted.

18. In those circumstances, we are unwilling to go as far as Mr Malik would
    ask us to and require the Secretary of State to make a  decision  under
    s. 10 in the present case.  It does  not  appear  to  us  that  in  the
    present case the Secretary of State can lawfully make a decision  under
    s. 10.  The appellant has leave and is not subject to removal under  s.
    10.

19. A change in the law has been introduced by s. 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 which came into force on 1 April  2008.
    That section  provides  power  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make
    decisions of the sort suggested whilst s. 3C leave  is  running.    The
    section is now in force, although it was not in force at the time  when
    the decision under appeal in the present case was made.  It is not  for
    us to indicate at this stage what effect that change in the  law  ought
    to have on this appeal.  Nor are we prepared to  direct,  as  Mr  Malik
    suggests that we should direct, that the appellant  be  granted  leave.
    What we do do is make a decision equivalent to that which we  are  told
    was the outcome of the litigation in  Mirza.[1]  That  is  to  say,  we
    decide that the Immigration Judge erred in law by failing  to  conclude
    that, in the circumstances of the case, the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State on the 19 March 2009 was not in accordance with the  law,  for
    failure  to  consider  also  the  question  of  removal.   We  make  no
    direction.

20. Mr Malik also asked us to consider a  point  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.   The  argument  under  Article  8
    before the Immigration Judge was that  the  appellant's  removal  would
    breach Article 8.  Bearing in mind that no removal  decision  had  been
    issued, that ground was, we think, unlikely to succeed.  In view of the
    decision we have made, that is to say that no lawful decision has  been
    made at all, it cannot possibly succeed.  No other issue in relation to
    human rights has been raised in the course of the  reconsideration  and
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and, as we indicated in the course of the
    argument, in an appeal which has been on foot for so long it would  not
    be appropriate to look, at this late stage, at  an  entirely  different
    issue which can be of only marginal relevance, bearing in mind that the
    Secretary of State now will have to remake all  relevant  decisions  in
    this case.

21. For the reasons we have given, this appeal is allowed.

                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     -----------------------
[1] We have since been reminded that this was a decision that ultimately
turned on judicial review rather than on appeal.

