

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 00413 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Promulgated on               |
|On 22 August 2016                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                     F A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Warren, instructed by Switalskis Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.

 1. The question of whether a person is at art 15(c) risk in Libya should,
    until further Country Guidance, be determined on the basis of the
    individual evidence in the case.


 2. This decision replaces AT and Others Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC) in
    respect of assessment of the art 15(c) risk.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Libya.  She  and  other  family  members
    have made a number of journeys between Libya and  the  United  Kingdom.
    She last entered the United Kingdom on 11 July 2014  with  her  husband
    and their young child.  Another child  has  since  been  born.   On  28
    January 2015 the appellant claimed asylum, naming her husband and their
    child as making claims dependant on hers.  On 28 July  2015  her  claim
    was refused.  She appealed; her appeal was heard by  Judge  Turnock  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and dismissed in a decision sent out on 20 June
    2016.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.


 2. At the hearing we canvassed with the parties the  preliminary  view  we
    had reached after reading the papers.  The decision  we  make  is  made
    with the consent of the parties, including consent at a senior level in
    the Home Office following a consultation Ms Pettersen was able to  make
    by telephone.

 3. The appellant's claim as originally made was  a  complex  one.   As  an
    asylum claim it was based on a claim of a fear of  persecution  on  the
    grounds of race and political opinion actual  and  imputed.   She  also
    claimed humanitarian protection on  the  basis  of  art  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC.  Judge Turnock heard oral  evidence
    from the appellant, her husband and another witness.

 4. Judge Turnock accepted that the appellant and her husband are from Bani
    Waleed and are part  of  the  Warfella  tribe.   He  found  that  those
    characteristics did not expose them to any risk of  ill-treatment.   He
    rejected the appellant's claim that her apartment had  been  raided  or
    that her husband was on a 'wanted' list.  He therefore  concluded  that
    there was nothing in the history of the appellant or  her  family  that
    would expose any of them  to  a  risk  of  persecution  or  other  ill-
    treatment directed at them.  He then turned to the possibility of their
    being at risk of  indiscriminate  violence.   He  had  before  him  the
    decision of this Tribunal in AT and others Libya  CG  [2014]  UKUT  318
    (IAC), which amongst other guidance  concludes  that  a  Libyan's  mere
    presence in Libya would not expose him to risk of threatening his  life
    or person (para (2) of the headnote).  It was drawn  to  his  attention
    that although the decision was not issued until some months later,  the
    hearing in that case was in November 2013, and that developments  since
    the latter date now needed to be taken into account.  He noted a wealth
    of evidence but declined to depart from the guidance of  AT.   Thus  he
    dismissed the appeal.

 5. The grounds of appeal against his decision do not challenge the Judge's
    assessment of credibility or his conclusions about the history  of  the
    appellant and her family or the risk of their being  persecuted.  Those
    findings are therefore to be regarded as final for the purposes of this
    appeal. The grounds argue that the Judge gave too little weight to  the
    evidence tending to show that the  existing  country  guidance  was  no
    longer reliable in relation to the risk of art 15(c) harm, and that  he
    failed to evaluate the risk to the appellant at the point of return.

 6. The question of the weight to be attributed to each item of evidence is
    classically a question for the trial judge, and in an appeal on a point
    of law it would be quite wrong to allow  any  view  we  might  have  to
    undermine the decision of the judge.  The problem here, however, is not
    precisely that of the weight he gave to the items of evidence in a fact-
    finding process, but the approach he took to  considering  whether  the
    evidence before him was sufficient to require him to depart,  in  whole
    or in part, from the Tribunal's published guidance.  He was essentially
    being asked  to  say  that  the  present  appeal  would  not  be  being
    determined on the basis of 'the same or similar evidence' as was before
    the Tribunal in AT (the phrase in  inverted  commas  is  that  in  this
    Chamber's Guidance Note No 2 of 2011)  and  that  he  should  therefore
    reach an appropriate conclusion on  the  new  evidence  insofar  as  it
    appeared to displace any conclusions reached in the Country Guidance.

 7. The intention behind the Country Guidance System  is  that  frequently-
    arising issues should be capable of being determined  once  only.   The
    designation of a published judgment as Country Guidance  therefore  has
    the effect of removing the issues in question from the  normal  process
    of determination by evidence in an adversarial process.  Consistency is
    assured, and time and  resources  are  saved.   Unless  and  until  the
    guidance is set aside, the decision stands as the  Tribunal's  approach
    to that issue.

 8. Of course there may always be supplementary evidence, either confirming
    or undermining the conclusion reached in the Country Guidance decision;
    and there will often be  subsequent  evidence  that  either  in  itself
    should not be treated as requiring the issue  to  be  determined  again
    (because it is similar to evidence considered in the  Country  Guidance
    decision) or that is met by other subsequent evidence to  the  opposite
    effect, rebalancing the issue as it were.  But there  is  no  intention
    that the guidance should be followed when the situation in the  country
    concerned has changed substantially  since  the  guidance  was  issued.
    Consistency is a virtue in a judicial system, but it does not  displace
    the duty to determine cases correctly when the  passage  of  time,  and
    events since the evidence considered in the Guidance  case,  give  real
    reason to say that the guidance either should not be followed or should
    be applied with caution.  Whether that is the case must be  a  decision
    for  a  judge  in  an  individual  case,  and  may  require  individual
    assessment.  No doubt in many circumstances the judge's  view  will  be
    that he has been shown no reason to depart from the guidance;  and  the
    question whether any new  evidence  really  is  or  was  sufficient  to
    displace the guidance has to be treated for the purposes of  an  appeal
    as an issue of law  in  the  same  way  that  the  question  whether  a
    precedent of law was properly differentiated is an issue of  law.   But
    there is no good reason for imposing any other filter or  legal  hurdle
    before considering the evidence proffered.

 9. In the present case the judge appears to have recognised that there had
    been many changes in the situation in Libya since  November  2013.   He
    sets out the material to that effect before him in three pages of small
    print.  But he then says that the appellant has not produced  a  direct
    comparison with the material before the Tribunal in AT or  an  analysis
    of the differences from that material.

10. The judge's assertion may be right; and we readily endorse the  process
    of his reasoning, which was evidently that without  such  a  comparison
    and analysis he would not readily be persuaded that  the  new  material
    was different from the old.  But that does not mean that the production
    of a table of comparisons or analyses is a precondition to  considering
    the evidence on its merits.  If he needed help in determining what  the
    real differences (if any) were, both parties were represented  and  the
    judge could have asked for help or required the  appellant  to  produce
    such a table: a very short time-limit might well have been  appropriate
    given  that  the  submissions  made  on  the  appellant's  behalf  were
    precisely those that would be merely  reduced  to  writing  in  such  a
    tabulation.  But in the circumstances of this case deciding  to  follow
    the existing guidance in the face of a  mass  of  new  material  simply
    because there was no comparison or analysis  was  in  our  judgment  an
    error of law. It had the effect that the judge's decision was not -  or
    more precisely cannot be shown to have been - based on all the relevant
    evidence before him.  We shall set his decision aside for that reason.

11. In fact, as it seems to us, there have been numerous changes  in  Libya
    since November 2013, and that they are sufficient to render  unreliable
    the guidance on art 15(c) given in AT.  Amongst those changes  are  the
    cessation of direct flights from the United Kingdom, the ebb  and  flow
    of fighting in Libya, the rise of Daesh,  and  the  issue  of  numerous
    reports and advice, not least by the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office.
    It may be that some of this evidence, the last in particular, would not
    by itself throw any real doubt on the accuracy of  the  assessments  in
    AT, but the evidence taken as a whole leads us to say that the Tribunal
    needs to undertake a new analysis of the  art  15(c)  risk,  in  a  new
    decision that can be considered for marking as  Country  Guidance.   In
    the mean time it is better that  there  be  guidance  in  the  form  of
    instructions to determine each case on its own evidence than that there
    be out-of-date guidance liable to lead to  incorrect  conclusions.   In
    our judgment AT should not stand as an authority on the art 15(c)  risk
    in Libya.  Instead, that risk should be determined  on  a  case-by-case
    basis, on the evidence in each individual case,  until  general  up-to-
    date guidance is again published.  It may be that  the  Tribunal  ought
    also to review the rest of the guidance given in AT:  but that is not a
    matter that falls for decision in this appeal.

12. We therefore set aside the decision of  Judge  Turnock  and  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The only extant ground of appeal is
    that the appellant's return to Libya, in the way and by  the  route  in
    which it is envisaged it would take place, would expose her to  a  risk
    from which art 15(c) protects her.  That issue needs to  be  determined
    on the evidence, by a judge other than Judge Turnock.



                                                           C. M. G. Ockelton




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 31 August 2016
