
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

     Mohammed (Family Court proceedings-outcome) [2014] UKUT 00419 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 July 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                             CHALACHEW MOHAMMED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Sesay, Solicitor, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Whilst it may be that in the Family Court jurisdiction prior to  the  coming
into force on 22 April 2014 of the Children and Families Act 2014 there  was
always the possibility of a parent making a fresh  application  relating  to
contact, there is nothing in the  guidance  given  in  RS  (Immigration  and
Family Court) India [2012] UKUT 00218  (IAC)  (which  was  approved  by  the
Court of Appeal in Mohan v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2012] EWCA Civ 1363) that supports the notion that the mere possibility  of
such an application being made (or pursued) is a relevant criterion  in  the
case of an immigration appeal when deciding whether to adjourn an appeal  or
to direct a grant of discretionary leave in order for  such  proceedings  to
be pursued. The guidance is concerned with  whether  there  is  a  realistic
prospect of the Family Court making a decision that  will  have  a  material
impact  on  the  relationship  between  a  child  and  the   parent   facing
immigration measures such as deportation.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national  of  Ethiopia.  He  appeals  with  permission
against a decision of a First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  panel  (Judge  Hembrough
sitting with Dr Barros) sent on 29 May 2014 dismissing his appeal against  a
decision made by the respondent to make an order to deport him as a  foreign
criminal  pursuant  to  s.32(5)of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.    In   this
determination we have anonymised details of the appellant's partner and  his
child, but see no reason to do in respect of the appellant.

2. The appellant came to the UK in April 2005 and claimed asylum in May  the
same year. His claim was rejected and his appeal against the  rejection  was
dismissed by an Immigration Judge in November 2005.   He  then  remained  in
the UK unlawfully. On 30  November  2008  he  made  further  representations
based on human rights grounds. By that time he had begun to commit a  series
of criminal offences,  totalling  22,  between  July  2008  and  June  2011,
including several convictions for violence and one for the supply  of  drugs
including Class A.  On 17 April 2012 he had been  sentenced  to  30  months'
imprisonment after he  pleaded  guilty  to  an  offence  of  burglary  of  a
dwelling house.  On 30 April 2012  he  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
deportation and then on  6  December  2012  of  the  decision  ordering  his
deportation.

3. In its determination the FtT recorded that the  appellant  had  requested
an adjournment. The appellant  referred  to  the  history  of  Family  Court
proceedings relating to his daughter K and the  fact  that  the  last  order
made by that  court  (the  Belfast  Family  Proceedings  Court)  was  on  11
December 2013 when it ordered that the appellant be given  indirect  contact
with  K.   The  appellant  said  he  wished  to  obtain  further  up-to-date
information  about  K's  situation.   The  panel  concluded  that   it   had
sufficient information about K's situation to proceed.

4. At paras 51-58 the panel found:


    "51.  We accept  the  evidence  that  despite  the  difficulty  of  his
         relationship with Ms  S  and  his  intermittent  incarceration  the
         appellant has endeavoured to build a relationship with K.  We  have
         noted that he first initiated contact proceedings against Ms  S  in
         2010 and that his subsequent intervention in the  care  proceedings
         resulted in an order that he be allowed indirect contact.


    52.      However the evidence is that K is the subject of a  Full  Care
         Order and for so long as it remains extant parental  responsibility
         is vested in Belfast Health and Social Care Trust (the Trust).  The
         appellant has never lived with K as part of a family  unit  and  in
         his evidence he accepted that it was unlikely that he would  so  in
         the future.  The more so as it has been deemed to be  in  her  best
         interests that she should live with her  sister  J  with  whom  the
         appellant has no relationship  whatsoever.   The  appellant's  long
         term aspiration was that he should be given direct contact  with  K
         when he had sorted his life out and proved himself.


    53.      That the appellant only has indirect contact with K we find to
         indicate that both the Trust and the Family Court do  not  consider
         that the absence  of  direct  contact  to  be  prejudicial  to  her
         welfare.  We also note that as recently as July 2013 K's care  plan
         was adoption. This would indicate that the Trust, which is  charged
         with her welfare, is of the view that her best interests  would  be
         served by terminating her parental relationship with the  appellant
         altogether.


    54.      Since he was sent to prison in April 2012  the  appellant  has
         been a peripheral figure in K's life and the  reality  we  find  is
         that he is  likely  to  remain  so.   We  are  satisfied  that  his
         deportation to Ethiopia  will  not  prevent  him  from  maintaining
         indirect contact with K via the use of modern  communication  media
         such as Skype and Facebook should the trust and  the  Family  Court
         deem it appropriate.  As we have already  noted,  it  would  appear
         that he maintains contact with friends in Ethiopia in like manner.


    55.      Although we  accept  that  the  appellant's  deportation  will
         effectively put paid to the  prospect  of  direct  contact  in  the
         future, on the evidence before us we have not been satisfied to the
         required standard that this would be prejudicial to K's welfare  or
         development in the short, medium or long term.


    56.     Ultimately  we  have  to  balance  the  interference   in   the
         appellant's relationship with his child against the public interest
         in his removal. Although we did not have  the  benefit  of  a  pre-
         sentence or OASys Report the judge's sentencing remarks record that
         the appellant was assessed as having a high likelihood  of  further
         offending and has failed to understand the impact of his  behaviour
         on others.  Given that he has several convictions for violence  and
         the supply of drugs including Class A, we conduct that the risk  to
         the public as being at least medium.


    57.  We also note that even whilst pursuing contact proceedings through
         the courts in 2010 he continued  to  commit  a  range  of  offences
         including violence and the possession of drugs.  Indeed  given  the
         range of offences of which he was convicted we find his explanation
         of his offending behaviour that he was forced to sell goods on  the
         street and did not appreciate that some of them were stolen  to  be
         indicative of a  failure  to  come  to  terms  with  his  offending
         behaviour.  It would seem that he is still some  way  from  sorting
         his life out and proving himself.


    58.      Looking at all the evidence before us in the round and  giving
         appropriate weight to the will of Parliament that foreign criminals
         should be deported and noting that the  sentence  imposed  for  the
         index offence was 2.5 times the threshold for expulsion we have not
         been satisfied that the deportation of this appellant  would  place
         the United Kingdom in breach of its  obligations  under  Article  8
         ECHR or section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
         2009."



5. Earlier, at para 12 the panel had noted that:

    "... on the appeal file there was an  email  dated  8  July  2013  from
    Lawrence O'Kane who is a social worker involved in the care proceedings
    which stated that K was the subject of a Full Care Order and  that  her
    care plan was adoption.  In response to our enquiry as to  whether  she
    was going to be the subject  of  an  adoption  order  Ms  Gunomai  [who
    represented the appellant] said she had no information."

6. The grounds of appeal were  essentially  three-fold.  The  first  alleged
procedural unfairness.  It is stated that an adjournment  was  requested  at
the hearing on the basis that the appellant's representatives  had  not  had
sight of this email from Mr O'Kane and that this was something  about  which
they needed time to obtain further instructions.  Given that the  panel  did
not have the care plan before then, it was said that it was  impossible  for
it to make a fair  or  rational  decision  about  the  appellant's  plan  in
respect of his daughter:

    "T[he] representatives were not afforded the adjournment to be able  to
    take full instructions  and  obtain  full  documents  from  the  family
    solicitor.   The   representatives   that   handled   the   appellant's
    immigration  [case]  previously  were  in  Belfast  and   the   present
    representatives were not sent the respondent's bundle of papers  handed
    to them in court.  The panel were aware of this as well."

7. At the end of the hearing we said we would check the file to  locate  the
email from the social worker and send it to the parties  for  any  comments.
We return to this matter below.

8. Second, it was submitted that  the  panel  erred  in  not  analysing  the
appellant's evidence in relation to his contact application  and  Article  8
and in failing to explain sufficiently why it had concluded  that  the  best
interests of the appellant's daughter lay in her remaining with her  sister.
 "The panel had not explained sufficiently why her father  [with]  whom  she
has contact should not be in  her  life".   Following  RS  (Immigration  and
Family Court) India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC), the panel should  have  allowed
the Article 8 appeal and directed a grant  of  Discretionary  Leave  pending
the resolution of the  appellant's  contact  matter.    Contact  proceedings
were  initiated  to  promote  the  child's  welfare;  her  mother  had   not
challenged that contact; it was envisaged that ultimately  the  court  would
grant full contact with his daughter if he was allowed to remain in the  UK.
 It was envisaged that this contact matter would take seven to eight  months
to resolve.  The appellant wanted full custody of his child.

9. Finally it was contended  that  the  panel  erred  in  finding  that  the
appellant's crime was a particularly serious  one  and  that  the  appellant
constituted a danger to the UK community. The panel was said to have  failed
to give due weight to the documents and certificates from prison  confirming
that the appellant had shown good  behaviour  in  custody  and  had  wrongly
concluded that he posed a medium risk without having  the  evidence  of  any
report before them.

10. Taking the last ground first, we find it wholly devoid of  merit.   Even
focusing  solely  on  the  latest  offence  for  which  the  appellant   was
convicted, that was an  index  offence  culminating  in  a  sentence  of  30
months' imprisonment. The FtT did not have the benefit of  an  OASys  Report
but did have the relatively recent  sentencing  remarks  of  the  judge  who
recorded that the appellant had been assessed as having  a  high  likelihood
of further offending and had failed to  understand  the  importance  of  his
behaviour on others. As stated by Laws LJ in SS (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
550 at para 55, the 2007 Act attributes great weight to the  deportation  of
foreign criminals.

11. In addition, the panel noted that whilst  pursuing  contact  proceedings
through the courts, the  appellant  had  continued  to  commit  a  range  of
offences including for  violence  and  possession  of  drugs,  and  his  own
explanation for why he had committed these offences betrayed  a  failure  to
come to terms with his offending behaviour.  Whilst it would  have  resulted
in a more compete determination had the  panel  specifically  addressed  the
prison documents and certificates, there is no reason to consider it  failed
to have regard to them and even if it was thought it overlooked  them,  they
were not capable of demonstrating  that  the  decision  reached  -  that  he
continued to pose at least a medium risk of the public -  was  erroneous  in
law.  Given the appellant's history of  persistent  offending  and  lack  of
evidence that he had  come  to  terms  with  his  offending  behaviour,  the
panel's conclusions were entirely within the range of reasonable  responses.
We would also observe, insofar  as  the  Article  8  balancing  exercise  is
concerned, that on the public interest side of  the  scales  there  was  not
only his serious and persistent history of criminal offending but  also  his
history of immigration wrongdoing - he had been  in  the  UK  illegally  the
entire time.  Both counted against him in the proportionality assessment.

12. Reverting to the first ground, we are unable to establish from the  file
whether the panel made a copy of the email from Mr O'Kane available  to  the
parties, but it is clear that it did make the contents known to the  parties
and made  reference  to  them  in  the  questioning  of  the  appellant  and
submissions.  Whilst no adjournment was given to enable  the  appellant  and
his representatives to consider the email, there is nothing to suggest  that
it took the appellant or his  representatives  by  surprise  and  indeed  it
simply recorded what must have been known to  him.   Although  he  expressed
concern that a change in the solicitors dealing with  his  immigration  case
meant he lacked all documents relevant to his immigration case , he did  not
suggest that he  had  changed  the  solicitors   dealing  with  his  contact
proceedings and, from his own evidence, he  was  aware  of  every  stage  of
those proceedings.  Further, on 14 October 2013 he had already  obtained  an
adjournment of his immigration appeal so that Family Court  documents  could
be produced (which they were) and there  had  been  subsequent  adjournments
for various reasons in January, February and April 2014.

13.The  appellant  complains  that  the  panel  did  not   have   sufficient
information before it to form a proper conclusion about  the  state  of  the
Family Court proceedings, but the burden of proof rested  on  the  appellant
and the documents that he himself had produced showed that the Family  Court
had (i) ordered that the child K and her half-sibling remain in the care  of
the local at authority until they were 18 (that was the order  made  by  the
Family Court on 9 August 2012);  (ii)  subsequently  refused  to  grant  the
appellant direct  contact;  and  (iii)  confined  itself  to  an  order  for
indirect contact  which  was  limited  to  continued  indirect  contact  via
letters, presents etc but in addition 4 videolinks, two being  introductory;
thereafter 2 videolinks per year. There was nothing to show that  the  order
for indirect contact was qualified  by  any  suggestion  that  it  might  be
changed to direct contact.  In short, the documentary  evidence  before  the
FtT established that the Family Court has reached a  concluded  view  as  to
the best interests of the  child  which  identified  them  as  entailing  no
direct contact with the appellant. Whilst the appellant sought  in  evidence
to claim that the Family Court left open that  the  appellant  could  become
more directly involved in K's life, he had  simply  failed  to  substantiate
that claim.  That claim was at best an explanation of  his  own  aspiration.
Moreover,  the  further  documents  enclosed  with  the  response   by   the
appellant's representatives to the Tribunal's request for  comments  on  the
O'Kane email included a transcript of the Belfast Family  Proceedings  Court
hearing which  took  place  on  29  August  2013.  This  confirms  that  the
understanding of the FtT was correct. Faced with an application  for  direct
contact, the Family Court ruled that contact should  "not  now  progress  to
direct contact" and "realistically...the  time  for  attempting  a  possible
long-term rehabilitation with [K's] father, even if he is  allowed  to  stay
in the United Kingdom..., is  long  since  past.  "  We  consider  that  the
guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed and  others  (decisions
affecting children; onward appeals) Iran [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) is  extremely
pertinent in this case.  In  this  case  the  President,  Mr  Justice  Blake
observed in the headnote that:

    "Although in some cases this may require a judge to explore whether the
    duty requires further information to be obtained or inquiry to be made,
    the judge primarily acts on  the  evidence  in  the  case.  Where  that
    evidence gives no hint of a suggestion that the welfare of the child is
    threatened by the immigration decision in question, or that the child's
    best interests are undermined  thereby,  there  is  no  basis  for  any
    further judicial exploration or reasoned decision on the matter."

14. This brings us to the second ground of  appeal  concerning  the  panel's
treatment of the best interest of the child. Given the documentary  evidence
regarding the Family Court proceedings, the position before  the  FtT  panel
was that it had been established by that court that the best interests of  K
lay with remaining in care, away  from  both  her  mother  (who  had  mental
health problems) and her father.  From  the  evidence  it  was  sufficiently
clear why the Family Court had come to the conclusion it had.  As  explained
by the FtT  panel,  although  the  appellant  had  endeavoured  to  build  a
relationship with K and had first  initiated  contact  proceedings  in  2010
(resulting in an order that he be  allowed  direct  contact  for  a  limited
period), (i) he had never lived as a  family  unit  with  K;  (ii)  his  own
history of offending meant that for  much  of  her  young  life  he  was  in
prison; (iii) the appellant had himself  accepted  that  (although  he  held
hopes to the contrary) that it was unlikely that he would be  able  to  live
with K as a family unit in the future because  of  the  view  taken  by  the
Family Court that K should be kept together with her half-sibling.  We  draw
particular attention to what the FtT said at paras 53 to 55: see above  para
4.

15. We consider what the panel said  in  these  paragraphs  to  be  a  well-
reasoned assessment, leaving the reader in no doubt why K's  best  interests
did not lie with being in any closer relationship with the  appellant  other
than by way of  indirect  contact.   Given  that  finding  it  was  entirely
proportionate for the FtT panel to  consider  that  his  removal  would  not
prevent him from maintaining from abroad an indirect contact  of  a  similar
kind that he had been granted in the UK.

16. In response to our direction made shortly after  the  hearing  that  the
parties furnish any submissions they wished in response  to  our  forwarding
them the email from Mr O'Kane, the appellant's  representatives  state  that
they had received an email  from  the  appellant's  family  solicitors  from
which it was now clear that the adoption plan alluded to  by  Mr  O'Kane  in
his email of July 2013 had not been  proceeded  with,  the  decision  having
been  made  to  arrange  long-term  fostering  instead.   We   lack   fuller
information about this, in particular we are not  told  whether  the  Family
Court has endorsed the long-term  fostering  arrangement.  But  it  was  not
suggested that there was any  issue  of  Family  Court  non-endorsement  and
there is no reason to consider that there had been any unlawful exercise  by
the Belfast Health and Social Care Trust of its legal duty to have  care  of
the child until she is 18, in respect of how to arrange that  care.  Nothing
has been forthcoming to suggest that there was  anything  that  had  altered
the clear conclusion reached by the Family Court that the appellant was  not
to have a direct role in K's life.  We find, as did the  Upper  Tribunal  in
the follow-up to RS -  RS  (Immigration/  family  court  liaisons:  outcome)
[2013] UKUT 82 (IAC) - that where a decision  is  made  approving  long-term
foster care, such an arrangement clearly envisages permanent  separation  of
the child from its parents.

17. Mr Sesay for the appellant has argued that the  panel  failed  to  apply
the principles set out in RS which indicate that when an  appellant  who  is
resisting deportation  has  pending  Family  Court  proceedings  the  proper
course was to grant discretionary leave to remain in order  for  the  Family
Court to resolve the issue of the best interests of the child.

18. It is as well at this point to quote from the relevant parts  of  RS  as
set out by the Court of Appeal in Mohan v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1363 at paras 18-19:
      "18.The material parts of  that  guidance  are  to  be  found  in  the
   following extracts:
      "43. In our judgment, when a judge sitting in  an  immigration  appeal
      has to consider whether a person with a  criminal  record  or  adverse
      immigration history should be  removed  or  deported  when  there  are
      family proceedings contemplated  by  the  judge  should  consider  the
      following questions:
      (i) Is the outcome of the contemplated family proceedings likely to be
      material to the immigration decision?
      (ii) Are there compelling  public  interest  reasons  to  exclude  the
      claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective of the  outcome  of  the
      family proceedings or the best interests of the child?
      (iii) In the case of contact proceedings initiated by an appellant  in
      an immigration appeal, is there any reason to believe that the  family
      proceedings have been instituted to delay or frustrate removal and not
      to promote the child's welfare?
      (iv) In assessing the above questions, the judge will normally want to
      consider: the degree  of  the  claimant's  previous  interest  in  and
      contact with the child, the timing of the contact proceedings and  the
      commitment with which they have been progressed, when  a  decision  is
      likely to be reached, what materials (if any) are already available or
      can be made available  to  identify  pointers  to  where  the  child's
      welfare lies?"
   19.The Tribunal then went on  to  identify  issues  which  would  require
   resolution in the light of the  answers  to  those  questions,  including
   whether a claimant has an Article 8 right to remain until the  conclusion
   of the family proceedings and, if so, whether  he  should  be  granted  a
   limited discretionary leave to remain or, alternatively,  whether  it  is
   more appropriate for a short adjournment of the immigration  case  to  be
   granted  "to  enable  the  core  decision  to  be  made  in  the   family
   proceedings" (paragraph 44)..."
19. At para 20 The Court started that it "should endorse that approach".

20. Contrary to what is asserted on behalf  of  the  appellant,  we  see  no
conflict between the principles set out in RT and  Mohad  and  the  approach
taken by the FtT panel in this appeal.  For one thing, the panel  was  aware
that the appellant had already been granted  an  adjournment  to  ensure  he
could produce  evidence  regarding  the  Family  Court  proceedings  and  in
response he had done so. For another thing, the appellant  did  not  need  a
further adjournment so he could pursue Family Court proceedings  because  he
had already pursued them with the result that the  "core  decision"  in  the
Family Court proceedings had already been  taken,  with  the  outcome  being
that he had been unsuccessful in obtaining direct contact. The Family  Court
had made clear that the care  of  K  was  to  remain  vested  in  the  local
authority, not in either the appellant's or the child's mother. This  was  a
case, therefore, in which the substance of  the  judgment  from  the  Family
Court with all the tools  at  its  disposal  had  been  made  known  to  the
immigration court which had acted accordingly.

21. There is a further aspect to this, relating to  point  (ii)  of  the  RS
guidance cited above. It is suggested  by  the  appellant's  representatives
that the Family Court left open taking a  different  view  regarding  direct
contact dependent on the outcome  of  the  appellant's  immigration  appeal.
But, as already noted, that is  plainly  contradicted  by  what  the  Family
Court said in August 2013: see above para 13. Not only in this judgment  did
the Family Court find that it did not consider the appellant's  was  a  case
in which the immigration court  should  await  developments  in  any  Family
Court proceedings, but it went so far as to say that even if  the  appellant
succeeded in being allowed to stay in the UK, the  time  for  rehabilitation
of K's relationship with the appellant was "long past".

22. Given the  suggestion  made  by  the  appellant's  solicitors  in  their
response to the Tribunal's request for any  observations  about  the  O'Kane
email, namely that the FtT should have borne in  mind  that  it  was  always
open to the appellant to make another application for direct contact, it  is
as well that we add the following observation. Whilst it may be that in  the
Family Court jurisdiction in Northern Ireland[1] and in the  pre-April  2014
jurisdiction in England and Wales there  is  always  the  possibility  of  a
parent making a fresh application, there is nothing in  the  guidance  given
in RT or in Mohad, or  in  the  previous  case  law  which  these  decisions
clarify,  that supports the notion that the  mere  possibility  of  such  an
application  being  made  (or  pursued)  is  a  relevant  criterion  for  an
immigration judge or panel when deciding whether to adjourn  an  immigration
appeal or to direct a grant of discretionary leave in order for  proceedings
to be pursued. The guidance is concerned with whether there is  a  realistic
prospect of the Family Court making a decision that  will  have  a  material
impact  on  the  relationship  between  a  child  and  the   parent   facing
immigration measures such as deportation.

23. We would accept that the  workings  of  the  Family  Court  jurisdiction
hitherto have made  it  difficult  in  some  cases  to  identify  any  "core
decision". As stated by Sir Andrew McFarlane, in the Hershman Levy  Memorial
Lecture 2014:

    "Too often cases have limped on with the judge making an  order  as  to
    the arrangements for the child and then being encouraged  to  list  the
    case for "review" in 6 months' time to see how it  is  going  with  the
    expectation that the parties will, once again, trot back to court  with
    a list of complaints about each other and the hope that the judge will,
    on this next occasion, produce a different  result  that  favours  more
    closely the outcome that they each seek. "

24. We take note, however, that Sir Andrew  McFarlane  considers  that  with
the coming into force in England on  22  April  2014  of  the  Children  and
Families Act 2014, such procedures will be a thing  of  the  past.  The  new
provisions provide in England for  a  "final"  hearing.   His  lecture  also
alerts us to the fact that the  new  Act  does  away  with  "residence"  and
"contact" orders. In  their  place  is  the  more  neutrally  worded  "child
arrangement order". The new Act has as a central element a "Parenting  Plan"
which is designed to help separated parents (and their  families)  work  out
the best possible arrangements for the child.  Any parent who now  makes  an
application for a court order with  respect  to  their  child  will  not  be
allowed to  proceed  with  the  application  unless  they  have  attended  a
Mediation Information and Assessment Meeting (MIAM).

25. For the avoidance of doubt, we have  applied  the  statutory  provisions
relating to Article 8 set out in  s.117A-D  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014,
which have effect from 28  July  2014.   They  make  no  difference  to  our
overall assessment in this case that the  appellant  cannot  succeed  either
under the pre- or post- 28 July 2014 legal regime.

26. For the above reasons we conclude that FtT did not err in  law  and  its
decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal should stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey


                           -----------------------
[1]See The Adoption (NI) Order 1987  [SI  1987  No  2203,  NI  22]  and  The
Children (NI) Order 1995 [SI No 775, NI 2]; on the former see P  &  Ors,  Re
(Northern Ireland) [2008] UKHL 38.


