

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of  Hamasour)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (supplementary decision letter - effect) IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00414
(IAC)


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |                             |
|On 26th June 2015                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF

                              CAMERAN HAMASOUR

                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Ms N Braganza, for the applicant, instructed by Latitude Law Solicitors
Mr V Mandalia, for the respondent, instructed by GLD


The decision in Nash v Chelsea College of Art and  Design  [2001]  EWHC  538
(Admin) may provide a useful tool on the issue of  whether  a  supplementary
decision  letter  amounts  to  a  fresh  decision,  or  whether  it   merely
supplements the decision already made, and in  relation  to  matters  to  be
considered in terms of the effect of such a supplementary decision letter.


                                  JUDGMENT

   1. The applicant applied for leave to remain on the basis of his  private
      life,  claiming  that  refusal  of  leave   would   bring   about   an
      impermissible infringement of rights protected by  Article  8  of  the
      ECHR. His application was refused. Permission to  apply  for  judicial
      review was granted by the President of the  Upper  Tribunal  (IAC)  on
      18th March 2015 in the following terms:


             The headline criticisms of the impugned letter of decision  in
             this matter are that it discloses no proper  consideration  of
             the substantial quantities of information and  representations
             put forward, it contains no proportionality exercise, it makes
             no assessment of the Applicant's private life and it does  not
             engage with  the  evidence  provided,  in  particular  in  the
             Applicant's witness statements, asserting that  he  no  longer
             has any contact  with  his  country  of  origin,  Iraq.  I  am
             satisfied that there is an arguable case for judicial review.


        Immigration and procedural background


   2. The applicant arrived clandestinely in the UK aged 17 on 25th May 1999
      and claimed asylum. His application was refused on 28th June 2001. His
      appeal, against removal on asylum grounds was lodged on 13th July 2001
      and dismissed on 26th May 2006. He became appeal rights  exhausted  on
      4th June 2006. He did not leave the UK. Pending  the  hearing  of  his
      appeal against removal he had also sought asylum in the name of  Jasim
      Hussain   which   was   treated   as   and   refused   as   a    fresh
      application/further representations on 9th February 2004. There was no
      challenge to that decision.


   3.  The  applicant  requested  an  appointment  to  attend  the   Further
      Submissions Unit in order to present written submissions regarding his
      asylum/human rights claim. Following an appointment on 9th March  2010
      the respondent considered the applicant's case under the remit of  the
      Legacy Casework Programme and, for reasons set out in a  letter  dated
      6th July 2012 "deemed that the original decision made  on  [his]  case
      should remain extant" and he was notified "he has no basis of stay  in
      the UK and should make arrangements to leave the country  as  soon  as
      possible". Despite that, he did not leave the UK.


   4. By letter dated 6th March 2014  the  applicant  sought  permission  to
      remain in the UK on private life  grounds  and  that  application  was
      refused with no right of  appeal  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
      decision letter dated 29th April  2014  ("Decision  1").  It  is  that
      decision which is the subject matter of these proceedings.


   5. Permission to judicially review that decision was granted in the terms
      referred to above.


   6. On 14th April 2014 the respondent sought an extension of time to  file
      detailed grounds of defence and said that she was in  the  process  of
      preparing  a  supplementary  decision  letter.  Correspondence  ensued
      during the course of which the applicant asserted that the  fact  that
      the respondent saw  the  need  to  supplement  her  original  decision
      indicated that she accepted that the decision dated  29th  April  2014
      was flawed and therefore suggested that  the  instant  proceedings  be
      compromised by way of a consent order, with an order as to  costs  and
      the respondent agreeing to issue a fresh  decision.   This  offer  was
      rejected by the respondent and a supplementary letter was  served  and
      filed dated 18th May 2015 ("Decision 2").


   7. Detailed grounds of defence  were  served;  the  applicant  served  an
      amended statement of grounds and I received  skeleton  arguments  from
      both parties.


   8. The application for leave to remain on the basis of private  life  set
      out  the  applicant's  immigration  history,  that  he   was   granted
      permission to work and refers to the establishment of his business and
      length of residence accumulated. He relied upon  paragraph  276ADE  of
      the  Immigration  Rules,  asserting  that  he  had  no  retained  ties
      including social, cultural or family ties with Iraq;  had  no  contact
      with any family in  Iraq  and  that  his  continued  presence  was  of
      positive benefit to the UK. He said that for these reasons  he  should
      be granted leave to remain. For the same reasons, the  applicant  also
      relied upon Article 8 ECHR particularly in the light of his length  of
      residence in the UK. It was accepted  in  this  application  that  the
      decision of 6th July 2012 was not susceptible to judicial  review.  It
      was submitted that given the subsequent judgment in Hakemi and  others
      v SSHD [2012] EWHC 1967 (Admin) he should have been given leave  under
      Legacy. This submission was, realistically, no longer pursued in these
      proceedings.   Accompanying   the    application    was    substantial
      documentation including correspondence and accounts  relating  to  the
      applicant's  successful  business,  a  letter  from  his  local   city
      councillor dated May 2011, evidence of studies completed successfully,
      witness statements and a petition as well as evidence of his community
      activities.


        Decision 1


   9. Decision 1 set out the reasons for refusing the  application  in  what
      might be described as 'standard terms'.  The  salient  parts  of  that
      decision are as follows:

             Having spent 17 years in your home country and in the  absence
             of any evidence to the contrary, it is not  accepted  that  in
             the period of time that you have been in the UK you have  lost
             ties to your home country and therefore the Secretary of State
             is not satisfied that you can meet the  requirements  of  Rule
             276ADE(1)(vi).
             ....
             It  has  also   been   considered   whether   the   particular
             circumstances  set  out   in   your   application   constitute
             exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right  to
             respect for private and family life contained in Article 8  of
             the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  might   warrant
             consideration by the Secretary of State of a grant of leave to
             remain in the United Kingdom outside the requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules. It has  been  decided  that  they  do  not,
             because you claim to be in fear of your life  if  returned  to
             Iraq due to your  involvement  with  the  PKK  prior  to  your
             departure and that you no longer follow the Islamic faith,  it
             would not be unreasonable  to  expect  you  to  return  to  an
             alternative location within Iraq. Your application  for  leave
             to remain in the United Kingdom is therefore refused.


             If you are in fear of your life or you are in  fear  of  being
             persecuted if you were to  return  to  Iraq  then  this  would
             constitute an asylum application.....


  10. The grounds seeking permission to judicially review Decision 1  relied
      upon the evidence submitted to  establish  lack  of  ties  namely  the
      applicant's lack of contact  with  his  family  as  evidenced  by  the
      consistency of his statements since his arrival in the UK in terms  of
      the Immigration Rules and drew attention to Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new
      Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC). In  terms  of  Article  8  the
      applicant relied upon his integration into the UK  by  virtue  of  his
      length of residence; the establishment of his business,  loss  of  his
      Islamic faith and adoption of the social mores  of  the  UK  including
      drinking alcohol occasionally; his friendship  network  and  community
      ties. It was submitted that  these  factors  taken  together  provided
      strong support for  his  contention  that  these  matters,  considered
      cumulatively, amount  to  exceptional  circumstances  such  that  they
      should have been specifically considered by the respondent in reaching
      her decision whether to exercise discretion. The applicant relied upon
      the line of authority following Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  and  Bossadi
      (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 42 (IAC).


  11. The respondent sought to defend the claim on the grounds, inter  alia,
      that paragraph 267ADE of the Immigration  Rules  reflects  the  public
      interest considerations set out in s117B Nationality, Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002. She submitted that  the  material  submitted  by  the
      applicant failed to disclose any basis upon which the respondent could
      have reached a decision to  the  effect  that  the  refusal  would  be
      unjustifiably harsh.


  12.  The  respondent  made  the  entirely  legitimate  point    that   the
      consideration by the decision maker required not only an assessment of
      ties as an objective and subjective consideration but also of  whether
      such ties as there were that were dormant could be revived.  She  also
      observed that the consideration  of  whether  there  were  exceptional
      circumstances was highly fact sensitive and, where  an  applicant  was
      unable to meet the requirements of the Rules,  it  was  only  in  rare
      circumstances that the respondent was likely  to  consider  exercising
      her discretion. That is another way of saying that there  need  to  be
      compelling  circumstances  to  demand  that  discretion  be  exercised
      outside the rules in order to secure an outcome compliant with Article
      8 of the ECHR.


  13. The respondent relied upon what she asserted  was  a  failure  of  the
      applicant to adduce any evidence to establish that he had no ties  and
      that he had produced no evidence to support his claim that there  were
      exceptional  circumstances  such  as  to  consider  the  exercise   of
      discretion.


  14. The respondent in her decision did not address the evidence  that  was
      produced, even  to  the  limited  extent  of  explaining  why  it  was
      considered to fall short of what was required to demand  the  exercise
      of discretion in the applicant's favour. The only  reference  to  what
      the applicant had submitted was to his assertion that he feared return
      because of previous PKK involvement. Whilst it is correct that if  the
      applicant wished to pursue that element of his claim it should  be  by
      way  of  a  claim  for  international  protection,  the  lack  of  any
      acknowledgement by the respondent of the  other  matters  put  forward
      does not indicate that the respondent had engaged at  all  with  these
      matters  when  considering   whether   there   were   any   particular
      circumstances  that  constituted   exceptional   circumstances.   This
      consideration is not apparent  from  the  earlier  paragraphs  of  the
      letter which refer to a lack of evidence of loss of ties  -  which  in
      itself is impossible to reconcile with the fact that the applicant had
      offered evidence, in the  form  of  witness  statements  and  his  own
      assertion of fact, which was, if accepted, evidence of  his  extensive
      ties in the UK. Nor did the respondent apparently have any  regard  to
      the applicant's age when he left Iraq and or time spent in the UK.


  15. It is not apparent that in Decision  1  the  respondent  had,  in  her
      consideration of matters that may fall outwith the  Immigration  Rules
      in deciding whether to exercise her discretion, considered  adequately
      or at all much of the material that was before her. If  that  was  the
      full extent of the review to be conducted in these proceedings I would
      grant the application for Judicial Review and quash  the  decision  of
      29th April 2014.


  16. The matter does not, however, stop at this point  because,  subsequent
      to the grant of permission, the respondent issued a further decision -
      Decision 2. It is significant to appreciate that the applicant had not
      submitted any further or additional evidence between the date of grant
      of permission and the making of Decision  2.  The  respondent  accepts
      that Decision 2 was produced in response to and after consideration of
      the grant of permission by the President of the Upper Tribunal (IAC).


        Decision 2


  17. I must therefore consider the status of Decision 2.  There  are  three
      possibilities:


             (1) Decision 2 is to be read as a continuum of Decision 1  (as
             contended by the respondent) as supplementing it and so curing
             the defects I have found  to  be  disclosed  by  it.  It  thus
             operates to render lawful Decision 1 where, absent Decision  2
             it would not be;


             (2) Decision 2 cannot be read together with Decision 1  so  as
             to cure the defects disclosed by it.   Decision 2 is  relevant
             only to the issue of relief, given the discretionary nature of
             judicial review proceedings;

             (3) Decision 2 is a  'stand alone' decision, not  relevant  to
             these proceedings, even to the extent of being relevant to the
             relief to be given but one that may generate  its  own,  quite
             separate, route of challenge.




  18. The question of whether a supplementary  letter  amounts  to  a  fresh
      decision has been the subject of judicial  consideration.  In  Nash  v
      Chelsea College of Art and Design [2001] EWHC Admin 538 Stanley Burton
      J held


             34.  In my judgment, the following  propositions  appear  from
             the above authorities:
             (i)  Where there is a statutory duty to give reasons  as  part
             of the notification of the decision, so that (as Laws J put it
             in Northamptonshire County Council ex p D)  "the  adequacy  of
             the reasons is itself made a condition of the legality of  the
             decision", only in exceptional circumstances if  at  all  will
             the Court accept subsequent evidence of the reasons.
             (ii)  In  other  cases,  the  Court  will  be  cautious  about
             accepting late reasons.  The relevant  considerations  include
             the following, which to a significant degree overlap:
             (a)  Whether the new reasons are consistent with the  original
             reasons.
             (b)  Whether it is clear that the new reasons are  indeed  the
             original reasons of the whole committee.
             (c)  Whether there is a real risk that the later reasons  have
             been composed subsequently in order to support the  tribunal's
             decision, or are a retrospective justification of the original
             decision.  This consideration is really an aspect of (b).
             (d)  The delay before the later reasons were put forward.
             (e)  The circumstances in which the  later  reasons  were  put
             forward.   In  particular,  reasons  put  forward  after   the
             commencement  of  proceedings  must  be   treated   especially
             carefully.    Conversely,   reasons   put    forward    during
             correspondence in which the parties are seeking  to  elucidate
             the decision should be approached more tolerantly.
             35.  To these I add two further considerations.  The first  is
             based on general principles of administrative law.  The degree
             of scrutiny  and  caution  to  be  applied  by  the  Court  to
             subsequent reasons should depend on the subject matter of  the
             administrative decision in question.   Where  important  human
             rights are concerned, as in asylum cases, anxious scrutiny  is
             required; where the subject  matter  is  less  important,  the
             Court may be less demanding, and readier to accept  subsequent
             reasons.
             36.   Secondly,  the   Court   should   bear   in   mind   the
             qualifications and experience of the persons involved.  It  is
             one  thing  to  require  comprehensiveness  and  clarity  from
             lawyers  and  those  who  regularly  sit   on   administrative
             tribunals;  it  is  another  to  require  those  qualities  of
             occasional non-lawyer tribunal chairmen and members


  19.  Although McGowan J did not, in R(K) v SSHD [2015] EWHC  542  (Admin),
      specifically refer to Nash, she held in [28]:


             The SSHD supplemented D1 almost a year later by a new decision
             on  review  in  D2.  There  can  be  nothing   irrational   or
             unreasonable in such a course. The Claimant submits that it is
             "wrong in principle". If that submission was right then  there
             would be no place  for  any  supplementary  decisions  in  the
             process. So long as there is an exchange  of  new  and  often,
             unfolding information, there must be a place for supplementary
             decisions. The power, or duty, to reconsider cannot be  denied
             because it is said that there is "an inevitable  bias  towards
             upholding a decision which is impugned, because doing  so  may
             thereby win the litigation".  It cannot  be  argued  that  all
             supplementary decisions are flawed because the decision  maker
             will inevitably have a bias towards justifying their  original
             decision.


  20. Although it appears at first blush that there is  a  conflict  in  the
      approach taken in these two decisions, on close examination  there  is
      not. In K there is reference to 'new and  unfolding'  information  and
      that there must be a place  for  supplementary  decisions.  McGowan  J
      makes the point that  it  cannot  be  argued  that  all  supplementary
      decisions are flawed; that the power or duty to reconsider  cannot  be
      denied.


  21. The considerations set out in Nash provide a useful tool to analyse  a
      letter produced subsequent to the grant of  permission  or  indeed  on
      issue of proceedings and prior to the making of a decision whether  to
      grant or refuse permission to judicially review the original decision.


  22. In the instant case there was no  further  material  produced  to  the
      respondent for consideration. There was no reference in the GCID  case
      note  (disclosed  during  the  course   of   these   proceedings)   of
      consideration immediately prior to Decision 1 of matters submitted  by
      the applicant other than to state:


            PRIVATE LIFE 276ADE
            ...Having spent 17 years in Iraq  and  in  the  absence  of  any
            supporting evidence, it is not accepted that the  applicant  has
            lost ties to their home country during this time.
            ...
            DECISION ON EXCEPTIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES
            The applicant claims to be in fear of his life  if  returned  to
            Iraq because he was involved with the PKK prior to his departure
            and no longer follows  the  Islamic  faith.  The  applicant  was
            refused asylum in 1999 and I see no  reason  why  he  could  not
            return to an alternative location within Iraq and settle.

  23. The next reference to consideration of  the  application  in  the  un-
      redacted GCID notes on 6th June 2014 to the Pre-action protocol letter
      merely states:


             No points raised that would warrant recon. Reps mention legacy
             claim, but seems like this is a separate matter. Clmt does not
             meet RD policy.

  24. Following the grant of permission in the instant proceedings, the GCID
      notes record the following on 8th April 2015:


             Please draft a supplementary  letter  addressing  the  Private
             Life claim and the Claimant's ties with Iraq in  more  detail.
             The Claimant previously sought reliance on his  private  life,
             his lack of ties with Iraq (having spent 15 years  in  the  UK
             and not knowing the whereabouts of his family), and  his  fear
             of returning to Iraq (having previously been involved with the
             PKK and now become an atheist during his time in the UK).


  25. Decision 2 stated:


             This letter is supplemental, and should be read in conjunction
             with the original decision  of  19  April  2014.  This  letter
             provides further clarification of  the  reasons  for  refusing
             your client's application for leave to remain in the UK.
             ...
             It is this application and the decision  made  upon  it,  that
             gives rise to the present claim for judicial review  and  this
             supplemental decision letter.


             In reaching a decision regarded as  being  had  (sic)  to  the
             matters set out in the covering letter to the application from
             your firm, dated  06  March  2014.  In  reaching  a  decision,
             particular consideration was given to the matters set  out  in
             the two witness statements made  by  your  client  dated  29th
             October 2013 and 15 May 2009. Regard is also been headed (sic)
             to the extensive documentation  provided  about  the  business
             that your  client  established  in  the  United  Kingdom,  his
             academic achievements and  the  representations  made  on  his
             behalf, particularly in the form of a  petition  signed  by  a
             number of people, some of whom identify the basis  upon  which
             you are known to them.
             ....

            Decision 2 went on to consider under the heading  Private  Life,
            whether the applicant met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
            of the Immigration Rules and considered inter alia his length of
            residence in the UK, family  in  Iraq,  current  age,  business,
            quality  of  life  in  Iraq  compared   to   the   UK,   general
            considerations of immigration control and immigration history.


  26. It appears to me plain, considering the GCID notes in conjunction with
      the documents submitted by the applicant in his application  in  March
      2014, Decision 1 and Decision 2 that it was not until Decision 2  that
      the respondent gave proper  consideration  to  the  application  made.
      There  was  substantial  information  and  material  provided  by  the
      applicant which was deserving of consideration to at least the  extent
      that the applicant was aware that it had been taken into  account  and
      of the reasons for its rejection as a basis for the grant of leave  to
      remain. That consideration did not take place  until  Decision  2  was
      drafted.


  27. Considering this in the context of the propositions set out  in  Nash,
      it is not clear that the reasons in Decision 2 are indeed the original
      reasons and I am  satisfied  that,  correctly  understood,  the  later
      reasons in  Decision  2  are  a  retrospective  justification  of  the
      original decision.


  28. Accordingly I am satisfied that Decision  2  is  not  a  continuum  of
      Decision 1 and the  two  letters  cannot  be  read  as  one  decision.
      Decision 2 constitutes an assessment of matters that  needed  to  have
      been considered as part of the original decision but were not.


        What is the effect of Decision 2?


  29. The applicant submitted that Decision 2 was  itself  unlawful  because
      there had been no regard to or engagement  with  or  analysis  of  the
      evidence and particular matters supporting that  evidence.  I  do  not
      agree. There is no requirement upon the  respondent  to  identify  and
      address  each  and  every  matter  the  applicant  relied  upon.   The
      respondent considered  and  reached  conclusions  on  the  significant
      matters raised in representations and those conclusions  were  plainly
      open to  her.  The  submissions  by  Ms  Braganza  were  substantially
      submissions as to the merits of the representations  and  are  matters
      that are open to the applicant to raise in a statutory appeal - as  to
      which see below.


  30. In any event, Decision 2 is a separate decision.  For  the  reasons  I
      give below the applicant appears to  have  an  alternative  remedy  to
      challenge Decision 2 namely a statutory appeal albeit he would have to
      waive  his  entitlement  to  service  of  proper  notice   under   the
      Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 as he is entitled to do  -  see
      Khan, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department (right of appeal - alternative remedy)  (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT
      353 (IAC) (15 June 2015).


  31. The next issue to be addressed is whether and to what extent  Decision
      2 affects the final outcome of  these  proceedings.  Although  I  have
      found that Decision 1 was unlawful, relief is of course discretionary.
      In the light of my findings in [27] and [28] this  is  clearly  not  a
      case where the applicant is entitled to the relief sought (although it
      can be said that the production of Decision 2 has in  practical  terms
      given  the  applicant  the  substance  of  relief  sought  namely   an
      immigration decision which has permitted him a right of appeal).


        Is there a statutory appeal?


  32. I heard submissions from both parties with  regard  to  the  operative
      date of decision. Mr Mandalia submitted that the operative date of the
      decision was 29th April 2014 and that the  supplementary  decision  of
      18th May 2015 had not changed the decision. Ms Braganza submitted that
      the consideration of the application was completed  in  May  2015  and
      that until that had occurred the decision was not  complete  and  thus
      the operative date was 18th May 2015; absent the decision of 18th  May
      2015 the applicant was not aware of the reasons  for  the  refusal  of
      leave to remain and a decision cannot be complete unless and until the
      applicant is made aware of the reasons.


  33. As already referred to above I am satisfied that  Decision  2  is  not
      part of a continuing decision arising initially with Decision  1.  The
      operative date is therefore 18th May 2015 ie the date of  Decision  2.
      In any event, even if Decision 1 and Decision 2 were one decision, the
      operative date would  be  18th  May  2015  -  it  cannot  possibly  be
      successfully said that a decision which is incomplete and  has  to  be
      supplemented by a later decision carries with it the original date  of
      the partial decision.


  34. Decision 2 did not have on it notice of  appeal  rights  and  did  not
      identify itself as an appealable decision. As noted earlier that error
      can be  waived  by  the  applicant  if  he  chooses  to  exercise  the
      alternative remedy of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


        Conclusion


  35. For all of these reasons the claim must fail.


        Costs


         I have carefully balanced the competing interests of the parties as
        to costs and taken account of the unlawfulness of  Decision  1  and
        the effect of Decision  2.  Subject  to  written  submissions  from
        either or both parties to be received by me within 7  days  of  the
        handing down of this judgment I propose to make no order for costs.







Signed                                       Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
