

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MSU (S.104(4b) notices) Bangladesh [2019] UKUT 00412 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decisions & Reasons sent out  |
|                                              |on                            |
|On 23 October 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     MSU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, instructed by Duncan Lewis.

    1. Where s.104(4A) applies to an appeal, neither the First-tier Tribunal
       nor the Upper Tribunal has any jurisdiction unless and until a notice
       is given in accordance with s.104(4B).

    2. If such a notice is given,  it  has  the  effect  of  retrospectively
       causing the appeal to have been pending  throughout,  and  validating
       any act by either Tribunal that was done without jurisdiction for the
       reason in (1) above.

    3. As the matter stands at present,  there  are  no  'relevant  practice
       directions' governing the s.104(4B) notice in either Tribunal.

    4. The Upper Tribunal has power to extend time for a  s.104(4B)  notice.
       Despite the provisions of Upper Tribunal rule 17A(4),  such  a  power
       can be derived from s.25 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act
       2007.

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


INTRODUCTION


 1. We have to decide various matter  in  relation  to  "upgrade"  appeals,
    including the scope for extending time for a person to pursue  such  an
    appeal, and the effect of the notice that has to be given.


 2. It sometimes happens that a person who makes  a  claim  on  refugee  or
    humanitarian grounds  is  refused  on  those  grounds  but,  either  in
    response to the original claim, or as a result of an  appeal  decision,
    or for some other reason, is granted leave  to  remain  on  some  other
    ground.  Similarly, a person whose protection status is revoked may  be
    granted leave  on  some  other  basis.   The  person  affected  may  be
    satisfied with the grant of leave.  If so, all is well.  But it may  be
    that the person affected wants to maintain  the  claim  to  the  higher
    status of a refugee or a person entitled to humanitarian protection: to
    'upgrade', in other words.


 3. If the grant of leave precedes  the  commencement  of  any  appeal,  no
    particular problem arises.  That is because despite the grant of  leave
    there has nevertheless been a  refusal  of  a  protection  claim  or  a
    decision to revoke protection status, and the familiar provisions of  s
    82(1)(a) and (c), 84(1)(a) and (b) and 84(3) give precisely  the  right
    of appeal required.  If, however, the grant of leave to remain is  made
    after the commencement of an appeal, the matter is more difficult.  The
    current provisions  are  a  development  of  those  introduced  by  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as originally enacted.  We
    deal with those in force from 20  October  2014,  with  savings,  as  a
    result of the notoriously complex provisions of the Commencement Orders
    for the Immigration Act 2014,  with  which,  fortunately,  we  are  not
    concerned.


THE LAW


 4. Section 104 of  the  2002  Act  now  reads  as  follows;  there  is  no
    subsection (3) or (4); and there is no paragraph (4B)(a).


            "104. Pending appeal


               1) An appeal under section 82(1) is pending during the period
                  -


                    a) beginning when it is instituted, and


                    b) ending when it is finally determined,  withdrawn  or
                       abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).


               2) An appeal under section 82(1) is  not  finally  determined
                  for the purpose of subsection (1)(b) while -


                    a)  an  application  for  permission  to  appeal  under
                       section 11  or  13  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
                       Enforcement Act 2007 could be made  or  is  awaiting
                       determination,


                    b) permission to appeal under either of those  sections
                       has  been  granted  and  the  appeal   is   awaiting
                       determination, or

                    c) an appeal has been remitted under section 12  or  14
                       of that Act and is awaiting determination.
             (4A) An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a  person  while
                  he is in the United Kingdom shall be treated as  abandoned
                  if the appellant is granted leave to enter  or  remain  in
                  the United Kingdom (subject to subsection (4B)).
             (4B)   Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so  far
                  as it is brought on a ground specified in section 84(1)(a)
                  or (b) or 84(3) (asylum or humanitarian protection)  where
                  the appellant -
                    a) gives notice, in accordance with Tribunal  Procedure
                       Rules, that he wishes to pursue the appeal in so far
                       as it is brought on that ground."

 5. There were similar provisions in paragraph  2  of  Schedule  2  to  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (SI  2006/1003).
    Those  provisions  are  in  effect  reversed  by  reg  36(11)  of   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  (SI  2016/1052)
    and, except in quotations, we shall not need to refer further to them.


 6. The phrase "Tribunal Procedure Rules" is not defined in the  2002  Act,
    but the Rules made by virtue of s  22  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 are to be called "Tribunal Procedure  Rules".   It
    is to those Rules, therefore, that  s  104(4B)(b)  refers.   There  are
    separate Rules for the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) and for the Upper Tribunal: the latter are nominally the  same
    for all chambers of the Upper Tribunal except the  Lands  Chamber,  but
    contain  numerous  provisions  specific  to  individual   chambers   or
    different kinds of proceedings.


 7. In the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 (SI 2014/2604), rule 16, so far as relevant, is  as
    follows.


           "Appeal treated as abandoned or finally determined

           16.- (1)    A party must notify the Tribunal if they  are  aware
    that -
       a) the appellant has left the United Kingdom;

                    b) the appellant has been granted  leave  to  enter  or
                       remain in the United Kingdom;


       c)  a deportation order has been made against the appellant; or

                    d)  a document listed in paragraph 4(2) of  Schedule  2
                       to the 2006  Regulations  has  been  issued  to  the
                       appellant.
              (2)    Where an appeal is treated as  abandoned  pursuant  to
                  section 104(4A) of the  2002  Act  or  paragraph  4(2)  of
                  Schedule 2 to 2006 Regulations, the Tribunal must send the
                  parties a notice informing them that the appeal  is  being
                  treated as abandoned or finally determined,  as  the  case
                  may be.
              (3)    Where an appeal would otherwise fall to be  treated  as
                  abandoned pursuant to section 104(4A) of the 2002 Act, but
                  the appellant wishes to pursue their appeal, the appellant
                  must provide a notice, which must comply with any relevant
                  practice direction, to the Tribunal and each  other  party
                  so that it is received within 28 days of the date on which
                  the appellant was sent notice of the  grant  of  leave  to
                  enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  or  was  sent  the
                  document listed in paragraph 4(2) of  Schedule  2  to  the
                  2006 Regulations, as the case may be."

 8. This should be read with rules 4  and  6.   Rule  4,  "Case  Management
    Powers" gives general powers and, by rule 4(3):

              "'In particular, ... the Tribunal may -
                  a)   extend or shorten the time for complying with any
                     rule, practice

                       direction or direction;
                   ... .'

     Finally, rule 6 is as follows:


    "Failure to comply with rules etc.

          6.- (1)   An irregularity resulting from a failure to comply  with
                any requirement in these Rules, a practice  direction  or  a
                direction does not of itself render void the proceedings  or
                any step taken in the proceedings.
             (2) If a party has failed to  comply  with  a  requirement  in
                these Rules,  a  practice  direction  or  a  direction,  the
                Tribunal may take such action as it  considers  just,  which
                may include -
               a) waiving the requirement;

               b) requiring the failure to be remedied; or

               c) exercising its power under paragraph (3).
             (3)  The Tribunal may refer to the Upper Tribunal, and ask the
                Upper Tribunal  to  exercise  its  power  under  section  25
                (supplementary powers of Upper Tribunal) of the 2007 Act  in
                relation to, any failure  by  a  person  to  comply  with  a
                requirement imposed by the Tribunal -
                a) to  attend  at  any  place  for  the  purpose  of  giving
                   evidence;

                b) otherwise to make themselves available to give evidence;


                c) to swear  an  oath  in  connection  with  the  giving  of
                   evidence;


                d) to give evidence as a witness;


                e) to produce a document; or


                f) to facilitate the inspection of a document or  any  other
                   thing (including


                           any premises)."


 9. In rule 5 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
    2008/2698) there  are  for  present  purposes  exactly  the  same  case
    management powers, and rule 5(3)(a) is word for word the same  as  rule
    4(3)(a) of the First-tier Tribunal Rules.  Rule 7 has similar functions
    to those of First-tier Tribunal rule 6, but is a little different:


         "Failure to comply with rules etc.

          7.- (1)  An irregularity resulting from a failure to  comply  with
              any requirement in these Rules, a  practice  direction  or  a
              direction does not of itself render void the  proceedings  or
              any step taken in the proceedings.
            (2) If a party has failed to comply with a requirement in these
              Rules, a practice direction or a direction, the Tribunal  may
              take such action as it considers just, which may include -
                a) waiving the requirement;

                b) requiring the failure to be remedied;


                c) exercising its power under rule 8 (striking out a party's
                   case); or


              d) ..."


    Rules 7(3) and (4) prescribe the procedure if a matter is  referred  to
    the Upper Tribunal under First-tier tribunal rule 6(3).


10. The specific rules envisaged by s 104(4B) are in  Upper  Tribunal  rule
    17A:

             "Appeal treated as abandoned or finally determined in an
             asylum case or an immigration case


             17A.(1) A party to an asylum case or an immigration case
             before the Upper Tribunal must notify the Upper Tribunal if
             they are aware that-


                  (a) the appellant has left the United Kingdom;
                  (b) the appellant has been granted leave to enter or
                  remain in the United
                        Kingdom;
                  (c) a deportation order has been made against the
                  appellant; or
                   (d) a document listed in paragraph 4(2) of Schedule 2 to
                   the Immigration
                        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 has been
                   issued to the
                         appellant.
             (2) Where an  appeal  is  treated  as  abandoned  pursuant  to
                section 104(4) or (4A) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
                Asylum Act 2002 or paragraph  4(2)  of  Schedule  2  to  the
                Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, or as
                finally  determined  pursuant  to  section  104(5)  of   the
                Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  Upper
                Tribunal must send the parties a notice informing them  that
                the  appeal  is  being  treated  as  abandoned  or   finally
                determined.
             (3) Where an appeal would otherwise  fall  to  be  treated  as
                abandoned pursuant to section 104(4A)  of  the  Nationality,
                Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, but the appellant wishes to
                pursue their appeal, the appellant must send  or  deliver  a
                notice,  which  must  comply  with  any  relevant   practice
                directions, to the Upper Tribunal and the respondent so that
                it is received within thirty days of the date on  which  the
                notice of the grant of leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
                United Kingdom was sent to the appellant.
             (4) Where a notice of grant of leave to  enter  or  remain  is
             sent electronically or
                   delivered personally, the time limit in paragraph (3) is
             twenty-eight days.
             (5) Notwithstanding rule 5(3)(a) (case management powers)  and
             rule 7(2) (failure
                   to comply with rules etc.), the Upper Tribunal must  not
             extend the time limits
                   in paragraph (3) and (4)."

11. Section 25 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 is  headed
    "Supplementary Powers of Upper Tribunal" and reads as follows.


           "25.  Supplementary powers of the Upper Tribunal

               1) In relation to the matters mentioned  in  subsection  (2),
                  the Upper Tribunal -
                    a) has, in England and Wales or  in  Northern  Ireland,
                       the same powers rights, privileges and authority  as
                       the High Court, and

                    b) has, in Scotland, the same powers rights, privileges
                       and authority as the Court of Session.


               2) The matters are -


                    a) the attendance and examination of witnesses,


                    b) the production and inspection of documents, and


                    c) all other matters incidental to the Upper Tribunal's
                       functions.


               3) Subsection (1) shall not be taken -


                    a) to limit any power to make Tribunal Procedure Rules;


                    b) to be limited  by  anything  in  Tribunal  Procedure
                       Rules, other than an express limitation.


               4) A power, right  privilege  or  authority  conferred  in  a
                  territory by subsection (1) is available for  purposes  of
                  proceedings in the Upper Tribunal that take place  outside
                  that territory (as well as for purposes of proceedings  in
                  the tribunal that take place within that territory)."


12. Pausing there, the basic structure appears to be clear.  An  appeal  is
    abandoned by the grant of  leave,  and  the  parties  are  concurrently
    obliged to tell the Tribunal if there has been a grant  of  leave.   If
    the appellant wants to maintain the appeal on protection grounds, there
    is a requirement of notice.  The notice has to be given to the relevant
    Tribunal within a time limited by the  relevant  rules,  and  different
    periods apply to the two Tribunals.  In  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    time limit can apparently be  extended  under  the  Tribunal's  general
    powers, but in the Upper Tribunal the Rules prohibit the use  of  those
    powers to extend time.  It follows that if the Upper  Tribunal  is  the
    relevant Tribunal, there is no power to extend time unless  that  power
    can be found elsewhere, perhaps in s 25 of the 2007 Act.  In any event,
    the notice given by  the  appellant  "must  comply  with  any  relevant
    practice directions".




PRACTICE DIRECTIONS AND OTHER MATERIAL

13. It is at  this  point  that  matters  become  very  difficult.   As  Mr
    Bandegani's research has shown, the documents  available  to  a  person
    wishing to comply with the requirements of the Act and  the  Rules  are
    sadly deficient.  There is  no  doubt  about  what  is  the  "relevant"
    practice direction, at least so far as the Upper Tribunal is concerned,
    because  it  is  defined.   Direction  5  of  the  Practice  Direction:
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Upper Tribunal is as follows.

         "5 Pursuing appeal after grant of leave
         5.1 This Practice Direction applies where:
           a) an appeal would otherwise fall to  be  treated  as  abandoned
              pursuant to section 104(4A)  of  the  2002  Act  because  the
              appellant is granted leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom;
              but
           b) the appellant wishes, in pursuance  of  sections  104(4B)  or
              (4C), to pursue the appeal,  insofar  as  it  is  brought  on
              asylum grounds or on grounds of unlawful discrimination.
         5.2 Where this  Practice  Direction  applies,  the  appellant  must
         comply with the following  requirements  (which  are  the  relevant
         practice directions for the purposes of UT rule 17A(3)).
         5.3 Where section 104(4B) of the 2002 Act (asylum grounds) applies,
         the notice required by UT rule 17A(3) to be sent  or  delivered  to
         the Upper Tribunal must state:
           a) the appellant's full name and date of birth;

           b) the Tribunal's reference number;


           c) the Home Office reference number, if applicable;


           d) the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  reference  number,  if
              applicable;


           e) the date on which the appellant was granted leave to enter or
              remain in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  period  exceeding  12
              months, and

           f) that the appellant wishes to pursue the appeal in so  far  as
              it is brought on the ground specified in section 84(1)(g)  of
              the 2002 Act which relates to the Refugee Convention.
            5.4 Where section 104(4C) of the 2002 Act (grounds  of  unlawful
            discrimination) applies, the notice required by UT  rule  17A(3)
            to be sent or delivered to the Upper Tribunal must state:
              a) the appellant's full name and date of birth;

              b) the Tribunal's reference number;


              c) the Home Office reference number, if applicable;


              d) the Foreign and Commonwealth Office reference  number,  if
                 applicable;


              e) the date on which the appellant was granted leave to enter
                 or remain in the United Kingdom; and

              f) that the appellant wishes to pursue the appeal in  so  far
                 as it is  brought  on  the  ground  specified  in  section
                 84(1)(b) of the 2002 Act which relates to section  19B  of
                 the Race Relations  Act  1976  (discrimination  by  public
                 authorities).
              5.5 Where an appellant has sent or delivered a  notice  under
              UT rule 17A(3), the Upper Tribunal will notify the  appellant
              of the date on which it received the notice.
              5.6 The Upper Tribunal will send a copy of the notice  issued
              under paragraph 5.5 to the respondent.
              5.7 In this Practice Direction:

              'appellant' means the party who was the appellant before  the
              First-tier Tribunal; and 'respondent' means the party who was
              the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal."


14. Problems appear immediately.  The Direction has  not  been  amended  to
    match the appeal provisions changed by the Immigration  Act  2014.   In
    particular, the references to s 104(4C),  the  unlawful  discrimination
    ground in 5.1(b)  and  the  whole  of  5.4,  are  no  longer  apposite.
    Further, the Refugee Convention ground of appeal is now in s  84(1)(a),
    not s 84(1)(g), which means that it is in fact impossible now to comply
    with the provisions of  the  Direction.   There  is  no  provision  for
    maintaining an appeal on the other permitted grounds (those  now  in  s
    84(1)(b) and 84(3)).  And, on a matter of  detail,  for  the  'upgrade'
    provisions to apply, it is not now necessary for the leave  granted  to
    be "for a period exceeding 12 months" (5.3(f)).  We were also  shown  a
    copy of a form available on the Tribunal's website, which  is  in  line
    with the Practice Direction and  has  the  same  defects,  as  well  as
    another one: it appears to  apply  only  when  "you  have  applied  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal", although the event raising
    the possibility  of  a  notice  by  the  appellant  might  arise  after
    permission has been granted or possibly even after the Upper Tribunal's
    decision if the appeal is still pending  (see  s  104(2)),  and  it  is
    possible to envisage cases where it might arise where  the  application
    for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  or  was  by  the
    Secretary of State, not the individual.


15. Direction 5 is within Part 3 of the Practice Direction,  which  applies
    only to the Upper Tribunal.  Part 2 contains  the  exiguous  provisions
    applying to the First-tier Tribunal, with  no  mention  of  s  104(4A).
    This is because from 2006  the  provisions  about  a  notice  that  the
    appellant wished to pursue the appeal were in rule 18(1A)-(1G)  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  (SI  2005/230),
    as amended by SI 2006/2788.  Those Rules were made  applicable  to  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the  First-tier  Tribunal  when  that
    Chamber was created in 2010.  But they were revoked by rule 45  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal's 2014 Rules on 20 October, the same day  that  the
    present appeals regime took effect.  It follows that  there  has  never
    been any "relevant practice direction" within the meaning of  its  rule
    16(3) in the First-tier Tribunal.  This contrasts with the position  in
    the Upper Tribunal, where, because of Direction  5.2,  the  out-of-date
    requirements are still in  the  Practice  Direction  but  here  too  it
    appears that they cannot be regarded as 'relevant'.


16. Mr Bandegani took us also to the  Notice  of  Decision  issued  by  the
    Secretary of State in the present case in June 2019  and  no  doubt  in
    standard  form.   It  is  headed  "Your  asylum   decision.   Important
    information and advice for claimants. Grant of limited leave".  It  has
    two pages.  The second half of the  second  page  is  devoted  to  this
    "information and advice":


         "Pending Appeals


         If you have an appeal pending at the time you are  granted  limited
         leave it will be treated as abandoned.  If your  ground  of  appeal
         was that the decision was unlawful by virtue of section 19B of  the
         Race Relations Act 1976 you  may  give  notice  that  you  wish  to
         continue your appeal.  If your  ground  of  appeal  is  brought  in
         relation to the  Refugee  Convention  and  you  have  been  granted
         limited leave for a period exceeding 12 months you  may  also  give
         notice that you wish to continue your appeal.   You  may  not  give
         notice that you wish to continue your appeal on any  other  ground,
         and you must have raised these grounds in your original appeal.  To
         prevent such an appeal becoming abandoned you must give  notice  to
         the Asylum & Immigration Tribunal (AIT) or  the  appropriate  court
         that you wish to continue your appeal.  If  you  wish  to  continue
         your appeal you must give notice  within  28  days  of  receipt  of
         notice of  your  grant  of  limited  leave.   The  appeal  will  be
         abandoned after 28 days unless you send to the relevant  court  the
         notice of intention to pursue the appeal.  If you notify the  court
         within 28 days that you  wish  to  continue  with  an  appeal,  any
         pending appeal hearing will be re-listed.

         To give notice that  you  wish  to  continue  an  appeal  in  these
         circumstances your notice must be in a form which complies with the
         relevant procedure rules.  If your appeal is currently pending with
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (AIT), or is being reconsidered
         by the higher courts, you may complete  a  form  for  this  purpose
         which is available on the AIT website:
         http://www.ait.gov.uk/forms_and_guidance/forms_and_guidance.htm."

17. This is worse even than the unamended Practice Direction.  It  has  all
    the latter's defects in its references to the old  law.   It  compounds
    them by specifically and wrongly stating that "you may not give  notice
    that you wish to continue your appeal on any other ground", whereas two
    other grounds are available, and one of those  specified  is  not.   It
    requires notice within 28 days of receipt of the grant of leave,  which
    is wrong: in the First-tier Tribunal the  notice  has  to  be  received
    within 28 days of the date the grant of leave was sent and in the Upper
    Tribunal it has to be received within 30 days of the date the grant  of
    leave  was  sent  (unless  it  was   delivered   personally   or   sent
    electronically, in which case the  period  is  again  28  days).   That
    difference between the rules for the two Tribunals draws  attention  to
    the most blatant error in this "Information and Advice": it  says  that
    notice must be given to the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal,  a  body
    that has not existed since 2010, and refers to a website which has also
    presumably not existed for the best part of ten years.


18. Because the decision communicated, the grant of leave, is not one  that
    itself carries a right  of  appeal,  the  contents  of  the  Notice  of
    Decision are not covered by the Immigration (Notices) Regulations  2003
    SI 2003/658 (which, we think, would render the  notice  ineffective  if
    the rights of appeal were stated so misleadingly).  It is, however, not
    easy to excuse "Information and Advice" that is so badly  out  of  date
    and which specifically denies a  number  of  rights  that  are  in  law
    available to the person to whom the Notice is addressed and  mis-states
    the law applicable to those whose existence it concedes.


THE FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY


19. Having set out the law as expressed in the various  sources  available,
    we turn to the facts of the present case.


20. MSU (to whom, despite the doubts about whether he has a pending appeal,
    we shall refer as "the appellant") is a  national  of  Bangladesh.   He
    came to the United Kingdom as a student in  2006.   His  wife  and  two
    children joined him as his dependents in 2008.   A  further  child  was
    born in the United Kingdom in 2011.   The  last  child  has  never  had
    leave, but on application the appellant's leave was extended,  and  the
    rest of the family's in line, the last grant  of  leave  being  due  to
    expire on 30 December 2012.  That leave was,  however,  curtailed  with
    effect from 4 June 2012, because the college at which the appellant was
    registered had its licence revoked.  The  family  have  therefore  been
    overstayers since 4 June 2012.  Notices of removal were  served  on  24
    September 2013 but were never implemented.


21. On 28 February 2014 the whole family applied for leave to remain on the
    basis of article 8 of the ECHR.   The  application  was  refused.   The
    family appealed, and the appeal was  dismissed.   Their  appeal  rights
    were exhausted on 8 May 2015.  The appellant asked for his human rights
    application to be reconsidered on  3  August  2015:  that  request  was
    refused on 18 September 2015.  On 9 October 2015  the  appellant's  two
    eldest children submitted human rights applications, which were refused
    with no right of appeal on 8  September  2016.   They  sought  Judicial
    Review.  One of the claims was not  admitted;  the  other  was  refused
    permission on the papers and the application was  not  renewed.   Costs
    orders totalling just  over  �1,000  were  made  against  them.   Those
    proceedings were complete by the summer of 2017.   On 28 July 2017  the
    respondent's Family Returns Team discussed voluntary  return  with  the
    appellant.


22. On 23 August 2017 the appellant claimed asylum.  The claim was  refused
    on 6 March 2018.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  on
    refugee, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.  The hearing
    was before Judge Raynor on 9 April 2019.    He  refused  the  claim  on
    protection grounds but allowed it on human rights grounds, finding that
    the appellant's removal would be a disproportionate  interference  with
    the article 8 rights of himself and his family.


23. Then followed the events that raise the questions we  set  out  at  the
    beginning of this decision.   Judge Raynor's decision was sent out on 7
    June 2019.  On 20 June the appellant, his wife and all  three  children
    were granted leave to remain for 30 months, apparently as a  result  of
    the decision.  It is not clear when or by whom notice of that  decision
    was given to the Tribunal.  On 21 June the  appellant  applied  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal, making no mention of  the
    grant but simply saying, in grounds signed by Mr Bandegani, that he did
    not challenge the allowing of his appeal on human  rights  grounds  but
    only the dismissal of his appeal on protection grounds.  Permission  to
    appeal was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  17  July.   The
    application for permission was renewed to the Upper Tribunal, in  time,
    on 31 July.  Again, there was no mention of the grant, the matter being
    dealt with in terms identical to those below, and again  signed  by  Mr
    Bandegani.  On 1 August the appellant gave notice of his  intention  to
    continue the appeal on protection grounds following the grant of leave.
     It is clear, and is accepted, that  that  was  out  of  time;  it  was
    accompanied by a request for time to be extended.


24. The application for permission was decided by Judge Grubb.  He  pointed
    out that there is an issue about which procedure rules apply  in  these
    circumstances, that question being of importance in the  light  of  the
    prohibition on the extension of time contained in the Upper  Tribunal's
    Rules.  He granted permission in order for the question of whether time
    could be extended and if so whether  it  should  be;  if,  following  a
    decision extending time the appeal was before the  Upper  Tribunal,  he
    considered the substantive grounds arguable.


25. Judge Grubb wrote that "it is arguable that  [the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Rules] were the applicable Rules because, at the time the appellant was
    granted leave, the appeal was pending in the First-tier Tribunal",  but
    that "it may be argued that the UT Procedure Rules  have  in  some  way
    "taken over" once permission to appeal was refused in  the  FtT".    He
    thought that the issue was 'a difficult one'.  With the last  sentiment
    we agree.


DISCUSSION


A.   THE EFFECT OF THE NOTICE


26. The statute makes it clear that the appeal is abandoned on the grant of
    leave, unless a notice is given.  It implies, but does not specifically
    provide, that if notice is given, the appeal again  becomes  a  pending
    appeal, that is to say it ceases to be an abandoned appeal.   It  makes
    no provision, expressly or by implication, in relation to the  position
    between the grant of leave and the giving of the notice.


27. Clearly, there are two possibilities if a notice is given.  One is that
    it has retrospective effect on the abandonment,  which  is  now  to  be
    deemed never to have happened.  The  other  is  that  it  reverses  the
    abandonment, so that the appeal remains  an  appeal  which  was  for  a
    period abandoned,  but  then  again  became  pending.   Each  of  these
    possibilities has an attraction in terms of  its  consequences  in  the
    context of the appeals provisions as a whole.


28. If the effect of the notice is retrospective, the consequence  is  that
    in a case where notice is given the appeal was  (it  turns  out)  never
    abandoned.  It is not therefore necessary to consider the  consequences
    of the period of time  between  the  grant  of  leave  and  the  notice
    separately from any other period of time during which the appellant had
    been in the United Kingdom.  It might have the effect that  any  action
    taken in that period by or in respect of the Tribunal (at either level)
    was retrospectively validated.  On the other hand, it would  mean  that
    the appeal could not be regarded as actually having been  abandoned  by
    the grant of leave.  The grant would merely have  presumptively  caused
    abandonment, and there would be a period of  "limbo"  during  which  it
    would not be possible to say whether the appeal should  be  treated  as
    abandoned  or  not.   A  major  difficulty  is  that  because  of   the
    possibility of extending time for the notice (certainly in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal) one could never say for certain that the abandonment had
    definitively taken place.  A person might (for  example)  be  satisfied
    with a  grant  of  leave  in  a  category  that  appeared  to  lead  to
    settlement.  At the expiry of that leave, extension might be refused  -
    because there had been a change in policy or the law, or  a  change  in
    the person's circumstances, or for any other reason.  The Secretary  of
    State gives notice of an intention to remove.  The person then makes an
    application for an extension of time for the  notice  to  continue  the
    appeal, with an explanation that the notice was not necessary until the
    refusal  of  the  extension  of  leave.   If  time  was  extended,  the
    consequence would be that the protection appeal had  been  pending  for
    the whole intervening period.


29. If the effect of the notice is not retrospective,  there  would  remain
    for ever a period during which  the  appeal  fell  to  be  regarded  as
    abandoned (although later recovered).   There could be  no  possibility
    that  any  act  done  during  that  period  could  be   retrospectively
    validated: it would need to be renewed.  This has a  particular  impact
    on the giving of notice to appeal: there is a mismatch between the time
    for appealing and  the  time  for  giving  a  notice  of  intention  to
    continue, which is much longer.  Although  this  interpretation  avoids
    the difficulty  of  the  alternative,  it  would  mean  that  it  would
    regularly be necessary to extend time for the appeal that was validated
    by the notice of intention  to  continue.   There  might  be  difficult
    questions of interaction  between  different  time  limits,  given  the
    variety of orders in which relevant events might happen.


30. We consider that the only real  reason  for  not  adopting  the  former
    interpretation is that relating to the possibility of an appeal's being
    permanently in limbo.  Looking at s 104 as a whole, we  think  that  in
    fact that possibility is not envisaged by the legislator.


31. Section 104(1)  and  (2),  it  will  be  seen,  suffer  from  the  same
    difficulty, because given the possibility of an extension of  time  for
    appealing, the normal position would be that an appeal could  never  be
    said to  be  finally  determined.   The  predecessor  provisions  of  s
    104(2)(a), in s  104(2)  as  amended  by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004, specifically dealt with this by
    incorporating the phrase "other than an application out  of  time  with
    permission" in the specification of the periods of time during which an
    appeal remained pending following its determination.  Although  nothing
    in  the  present  legislation  has  that  express  provision,  it  must
    nevertheless be implied.  Otherwise no ordinary appeal could safely  be
    regarded as having ceased to be pending, and no unsuccessful  appellant
    could be  removed  (see  s  78).   Once  it  is  appreciated  that  the
    application of subsections (1) and (2) require the possibility  of  the
    extension of time to be ignored, there seems no reason not to apply the
    same device to subsections (4A) and (4B).  The difficult consequence to
    which we referred in paragraph [28]  above  vanishes,  and  the  neater
    solution there set out becomes viable.  We prefer it and adopt it.


32. That interpretation has, as we said, the consequence that an  act  that
    was  legally  impossible  at  the  time  it   was   done   may   become
    retrospectively valid by the giving of the notice.


B.  CAN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL EXTEND TIME?


33. We have set out Upper Tribunal rule 17A(4) above.  It appears to impose
    an absolute prohibition, underlined by the indication that the  use  of
    case management powers or the power to condone an irregularity does not
    provide an escape from the prohibition.


34. Section 25 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  is  also,
    so for as relevant, set out above.  It gives the Upper Tribunal all the
    powers of the  High  Court  in  "all  ...  matters  incidental  to  the
    Tribunal's functions".  There can be no doubt that the extension of the
    time limit for giving a notice of the sort under discussion is  such  a
    "matter", nor that the High  Court  has  power  to  extend  time.   The
    question then is whether the wording of the Rules  excludes  the  s  25
    power.   Section 25(3) provides that the power "shall not be  taken  to
    be limited by anything  in  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  other  than  an
    express limitation".  It follows  that  unless  there  is  an  "express
    limitation" of the power to extend time conferred by s  25,  the  power
    may be exercised.


35. The wording of rule 17A(4) is a clear limitation of any power conferred
    by the Upper Tribunal Rules themselves but it does  not  appear  to  us
    that it can be an "express limitation" because it does not refer to (or
    express any limitation of)  the  s  25  power.   It  follows  that  the
    apparent prohibition  in  rule  17A(4)  is  wholly  ineffective.   This
    conclusion, surprising as it is, is reinforced by the approach to s  25
    taken in the Court of Appeal in R (Singh) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  1014.
    There, Leggatt LJ, with whom the other members  of  the  Court  agreed,
    said this:

         "[18]  I  see  no  reason  to  give  section   25   a   restrictive
         interpretation. I agree  with  the  following  observations  of  Mr
         Martin Rodger QC, Deputy President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Lands
         Chamber) in William Hill Organization Ltd v  Crossrail  Ltd  [2016]
         UKUT 275 (LC), para 59:


             "Parliament was obviously aware of  the  powers  of  the  High
             Court, both those which are inherent, and  those  specifically
             conferred by statute. Section 25 therefore seems to me  to  be
             intended to be read literally and applied  generally,  and  to
             invest the Upper Tribunal with the powers of the High Court in
             relation to all  matters  incidental  to  its  functions;  the
             critical limitation in section 25(2)(c)  is  supplied  by  the
             reference to the functions  of  the  Tribunal,  and  does  not
             depend on the source of the power or the terms in which it has
             been conferred on the High Court. Parliament  could  obviously
             make explicit an intention that the Upper Tribunal was not  to
             possess a particular power, but where it has not done so,  and
             where no express  limitation  has  been  imposed  by  tribunal
             procedure rules as contemplated by section 25(3)(b), the Upper
             Tribunal must be taken to have the same  powers  as  the  High
             Court in relation to all matters incidental to its functions."

36. Leggatt LJ also rejected a submission that the  s  25  power  had  been
    excluded by a specific power in the rules covering  the  "whole  field"
    under consideration, partly because the limitation found in  the  Rules
    "in particular, ... does not impose any limitation on the  exercise  of
    powers conferred by section 25".  In these circumstances it seems to us
    that we may say for the same  reasons  that  the  s  25  power  is  not
    excluded.  We remind ourselves, however, that insofar as there might be
    any difference, it is to be exercised as it would be exercised  in  the
    High Court, not as the exercise of  a  power  conferred  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules.


C. WHICH TRIBUNAL?


37. When abandonment under s 104(4A)  takes  place  it  will  sometimes  be
    perfectly clear which  Tribunal  has  the  task  of  dealing  with  the
    validity of a notice of intention to continue, including  any  question
    of the extension of time.  For example, if the  grant  of  leave  takes
    place before the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  on  the  appeal,  the
    Upper Tribunal cannot be involved and any such issues must be  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  On the other hand, if the grant of  leave  occurs
    at a time when the appellant's  appeal  is  clearly  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, following a decision on the appeal  and  either  a  grant  of
    permission or a refusal renewed to the Upper Tribunal, the matter  must
    be for the Upper Tribunal: the First-tier  Tribunal  is  functus.    As
    Judge Grubb pointed out, however, in the present case the matter is not
    so clear.  Given that there was an application for permission  made  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, which was refused, and that there was then  an
    application for permission made to the Upper Tribunal before the notice
    of intention to continue the appeal was given, it appears superficially
    that questions relating to the notice ought to  be  considered  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.


38. That, however, in our judgment cannot be right. The grant of leave  had
    the effect (provisionally, it may be said) of causing the appeal to  be
    treated as abandoned; and unless and until a valid  notice  was  given,
    any  act  by  either  Tribunal  (other   than   acts   connected   with
    acknowledging the  abandonment)  was  made  without  jurisdiction.   In
    particular, an application  for  permission  to  appeal  could  not  be
    received or determined.  It follows from that at the time  it  received
    and determined the application for permission in the present  case  the
    First-tier Tribunal  was  acting  without  jurisdiction,  because  both
    events followed the grant of leave.  The Upper Tribunal  has  not  been
    involved.   (The  correctness  of  this  analysis  can  be  tested   by
    considering the position if no application for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal had been  made:  although  the  First-tier  tribunal
    appeared  to  have  become  functus  by  incompetently  determining  an
    incompetent application, the Upper Tribunal could not be  concerned  at
    all.   The  answer  cannot  be  different  if  a  further   incompetent
    application is made to the Upper Tribunal.)


39. On the facts of this case it can only be for the First-tier Tribunal to
    determine the validity of the notice,  including  deciding  whether  to
    extend the time for it to be  given.   Once  there  has  been  a  valid
    notice, however, for the reasons set out at paragraphs [28]-[32] above,
    it has the effect of retrospectively continuing the appeal as a pending
    appeal, so that events that took place during the period  when  it  was
    provisionally abandoned acquire validity.   If the First-tier  Tribunal
    does not extend time, the appeal stands as abandoned on 20  June  2019,
    and  the  Tribunal  has  only  to  send  out   the   requisite   notice
    acknowledging that.  If time is  extended,  that  will  retrospectively
    validate (i) the application for permission to appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal;  (ii)  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  refusing   that
    application; (iii) the application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal; (iv) Judge Grubb's decision  granting  permission,  and
    (v) the substantive appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the First-tier
    Tribunal's dismissal of the refugee grounds of appeal, which will be an
    appeal pending before the Upper Tribunal.


D.  SHOULD TIME BE EXTENDED?


40. For the reasons given  above,  we  sit  as  judges  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to consider whether time should be  extended.   We  apply  the
    usual criteria, as set out in the decisions of the Court of  Appeal  in
    Mitchell v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2013] EWCA Civ 1537, Denton v T H
    White Ltd [2014] EWCA Civ 906 and Hysaj v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1633.


41. 1.  The extent of the default.  The grant of leave was made on 20  June
    2019.  The period of 28 days limited by First-tier Tribunal rule  16(3)
    expired on 18 July.  The notice appears to  have  been  received  on  2
    August, 15 days later.  The default is  clearly  not  trivial,  and  an
    extension to over 150% of the time allowed under  the  rules  would  be
    required.


42. 2.  The reason for  the  default.   Before  us,  Mr  Bandegani  clearly
    indicated that the fault was entirely attributable to  his  instructing
    Solicitors, Duncan Lewis and Co.  No further  explanation  was  offered
    and we do not therefore know whether it was the result of ignorance  of
    the law,  ignorance  of  fact,  or  something  else.   The  surrounding
    circumstances point clearly to the second (whether or  not  accompanied
    by either  or  both  of  the  others).   Mr  Bandegani,  presumably  on
    instructions, drafted grounds of appeal to both Tribunals in turn,  and
    those grounds were submitted by Duncan Lewis attached  to  applications
    they made on the appellant's behalf.  At no stage was it  mentioned  or
    indeed apparently appreciated  that  the  appellant  had  been  granted
    leave.  It looks as though the solicitors were not as closely in  touch
    with the appellant's circumstances as they might be expected to be when
    apparently acting on his instructions.  We can make no further  comment
    on  this.   In  particular  we  cannot  associate  ourselves  with  the
    submission that the delay was not the fault of the appellant.  There is
    no evidence substantiating that.


43. 3.  All the circumstances of the case.  The appellant has leave and  so
    is not threatened with removal, but the grant is the starting-point  in
    a case of this sort and cannot be a matter to be  taken  into  account.
    The grounds of appeal have been considered and although  not  obviously
    strong have merited a (provisional) grant of permission to appeal.  The
    materials that were publicly available  relating  to  the  process  for
    giving the notice were, as we have shown  above,  seriously  defective:
    but it is not said that either the appellant  or  his  solicitors  were
    misled by them.  The information given in the material accompanying the
    grant of leave was also seriously defective, but again it is  not  said
    that the appellant was misled.


44. 4.  Decision.  We have had the advantage of full consideration  of  the
    issues of jurisdiction by Mr Bandegani and Mr  Kotas.   Mr  Bandegani's
    position on behalf of Duncan Lewis and Co  was  a  frank  admission  of
    failure.  Although the default  was  considerable  it  was  in  context
    perhaps not enormous, and there is a clear judicial decision  that  the
    grounds are arguable.  In what has  essentially  been  a  test  case  a
    decision not to extend time might be  seen  as  condoning  the  various
    failures to give  accurate  information  on  the  notice  process.   In
    particular we cannot ignore the fact that  the  individual  information
    given by the Secretary of State was misleading, even if there is in the
    present case no evidence that  anyone  was  misled.   Any  decision  in
    circumstances such as this has to be made on its own facts and none can
    create a precedent.  We consider by quite a  narrow  margin,  that  the
    justice of this case requires time to be  extended;  and  we  therefore
    extend time for the notice for such period as will  enable  the  notice
    received on 2 August 2019 to be regarded as in time.


CONCLUSION


45. That decision by the First-tier Tribunal now has the effects set out in
    paragraph [39] above.  Sitting as judges of the Upper Tribunal we  give
    the following directions.  The appeal will be listed to  be  heard,  by
    any constitution of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  accordance  with  Judge
    Grubb's grant of permission, that is to say on the basis of grounds 2-5
    of the grounds supporting the application for permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings







                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 12 December 2019


