

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Sheidu (Further submissions; appealable decision) [2016] UKUT 000412 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|On 2 March 2016                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             AMUDA YUSUF SHEIDU

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Radford, instructed by Wilson Solicitors.


If the SSHD makes a decision that is one of those specified in s  82(1),  it
carries a right of appeal even  if  the  intention  was  not  to  treat  the
submissions as a fresh claim.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. When is a decision not to treat submissions as a fresh  claim  not  (or
    not merely) a decision not to treat submissions as a fresh claim?   The
    question is one of many difficult issues arising from the amendment  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by the Immigration Act
    2014, the implementation of those amendments, and the context in  which
    they occur.

 2. By s. 82(1)(a), as amended by the 2014 Act, and as in force essentially
    for all purposes from 6 April 2015, there is a right  of  appeal  where
    the Secretary of State has "decided to refuse" a "protection claim"  or
    a "human rights  claim".   Sub-section  (2)  provides  the  definitions
    relevant to the first:

          "(2) For the purposes of this Part -
        a) a "protection claim" is a claim made  by  a  person  ("P")  that
           removal of P from the United Kingdom -
           i) would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
              Refugee Convention, or
          ii) would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in relation  to
              persons eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection;
        b) P's protection claim is refused if the Secretary of State  makes
           one or more of the following decisions -
           i) that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would  not  breach
              the  United   Kingdom's   obligations   under   the   Refugee
              Convention;
          ii) that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would  not  breach
              the United  Kingdom's  obligations  in  relation  to  persons
              eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection;
        c) a person has "protection status" if the person has been  granted
           leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as a  refugee  or
           as a person eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection;
        d) "humanitarian protection" is to be construed in accordance  with
           the immigration rules;
        e) "refugee" has the same meaning as in the Refugee Convention."

    The definition of "human rights claim" is in s. 113(1):


          "'human rights claim' means a  claim  made  by  a  person  to  the
          Secretary of State ... that to remove the person from  or  require
          him to leave the United Kingdom  would  be  unlawful...  as  being
          incompatible with his Convention rights."

 3. Alongside those provisions,  although  without  specific  reference  in
    either direction, are paragraphs 353-353A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    which, together with paragraph 353B, are found between  paragraphs  361
    and A362 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395  (as
    amended).

     "Procedure and rights of appeal

          Fresh claims


          353. When a human rights or protection claim has been  refused  or
          withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under paragraph  333C  of  these
          Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is no longer  pending,
          the decision maker will consider any further submissions  and,  if
          rejected, will then determine  whether  they  amount  to  a  fresh
          claim.  The submissions will amount to a fresh claim if  they  are
          significantly different from the material that has previously been
          considered.  The submissions will only be significantly  different
          if the content:
              (i)   had not already been considered; and
              (ii) taken together with the previously considered  material,
                 created a realistic prospect  of  success,  notwithstanding
                 its rejection.
          This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas.


          353A. Consideration of further submissions shall be subject to the
          procedures set out in these Rules.   An  applicant  who  has  made
          further submissions shall not be removed before the  Secretary  of
          State has  considered  the  submissions  under  paragraph  353  or
          otherwise."


 4. In the appeals regime from 1993 until the amendments introduced by  the
    2014 Act, there was no specific right of appeal against the refusal  of
    an asylum or human rights claim.  The right of appeal was  against  the
    consequent decision, for example to refuse the individual leave, or  to
    remove him.  In a line of cases beginning with R v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department, Ex p Onibiyo [1996] QB 768, it was established
    that there was no statutory right of appeal against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision, under paragraph 353  and  its  predecessors,  not  to
    treat submissions as a "fresh claim", and  therefore  to  make  no  new
    appealable immigration decision.  Following the  amendments  introduced
    by the 2014 Act, a number of decisions,  including  R  (Waqar)  v  SSHD
    [2015] UKUT 00169 (permission to appeal to Court of Appeal  refused  by
    Beatson LJ on 17 November 2015), R (Robinson) v SSHD [2016] UKUT 00133,
    R (MG) v First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  [2016]
    UKUT 00283 and R (Amin Sharif Hussein) v First-tier Tribunal  and  SSHD
    [2016] UKUT 00409 (IAC) have considered whether there is still a  clear
    dichotomy between a decision carrying a right of appeal and a  decision
    merely not to treat submissions as a "fresh claim".

 5. On the one hand, it appears clear that the  procedure  under  paragraph
    353 was intended to continue, despite the change to the appeals regime.
     If it were otherwise, the removal of  any  successful  claimant  could
    readily be hindered by a succession  of  repeat  claims:  even  if  the
    resulting decisions were certified, the administrative tasks imposed by
    a statutory invitation to resist removal in this way would no doubt  be
    insuperable.  On the other hand,  as  is,  we  think,  clear  from  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in R (BA (Nigeria)) v  SSHD  and  another
    [2009] UKSC 7, if the Secretary of State makes a decision which  is  an
    appealable decision, paragraph 353 has no further  part  to  play.   In
    that case, the claimant was subject to a deportation order; his further
    submissions therefore necessarily amounted to a request for  revocation
    of the deportation order, the  refusal  of  which,  however  expressed,
    carried a right  of  appeal  under  the  (then)  appeals  regime.   The
    decision was primarily concerned with where the right of  appeal  could
    be exercised.  BA (Nigeria) was examined by the Court of  Appeal  in  R
    (ZA (Nigeria)) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 926,  where  Lord  Neuberger  MR,
    having examined the competing  arguments  before  him,  reasserted  the
    proposition, derived from ZT  (Kosovo)  v  SSHD  [2009]  UKHL  6,  that
    paragraph 353 has no part to play where there has  been  an  appealable
    immigration decision.

 6. In this context, this Tribunal has, in  the  cases  to  which  we  have
    referred above, had to determine whether the Onibiyo  regime  continues
    to apply in any meaningful sense when,  after  an  unsuccessful  asylum
    claim, an individual again submits to the Secretary of State  that  his
    removal would breach the Refugee Convention.   In  Waqar  the  Tribunal
    concluded that, in the  present  context,  further  submissions  by  an
    unsuccessful applicant would only be a "claim" within the meaning of s.
    82(2)(a) if they were a "fresh claim" within the meaning  of  paragraph
    353.  As we have said, permission to appeal was refused in Waqar: Waqar
    was followed in Robinson.  In MG Counsel  for  the  applicant  accepted
    that for the purposes of that application the right of appeal should be
    read as meaning  "a  person  may  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  where  the
    Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection claim (that is  a
    fresh claim within the meaning of paragraph 353) made by  P".   In  MG,
    the Tribunal rejected the  argument  that  it  is  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to decide whether there has been  a  "fresh  claim".   Hussein
    follows all those decisions, in particular deciding that the  Secretary
    of State's power under paragraph 353 to determine  whether  an  adverse
    response to further submissions carries a right of appeal survives  the
    2014 amendments.  That decision examines  the  authorities  in  detail,
    with extensive citation from them, and will for most purposes provide a
    more than adequate survey of them.

 7. Despite the unanimity thus far, there is  clearly  room  for  a  modest
    measure of doubt.  There is as yet no  authoritative  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal on these provisions.   Is  it  really  right  to  treat
    "claim" in s. 82(2)(a) as meaning "fresh claim within  the  meaning  of
    paragraph 353"?  As has been pointed out  on  a  number  of  occasions,
    paragraph 353 does not  specify  what  is  to  be  the  result  of  the
    consideration of the new submissions.  If they are "rejected", the next
    question is whether they amount to a "fresh claim".  May it be that  in
    line with ZT (Kosovo) and ZA (Nigeria), if the Secretary of State  does
    actually refuse the submissions, the decision falls within  s.  82?  If
    that is so, the  existing  "fresh  claim"  regime  could  survive,  for
    reasons found in the wording of the paragraph itself.  As the  Tribunal
    points out in Hussein, the word "rejected", which is the crucial one in
    paragraph 353, is not part of the vocabulary of the statute.  It may be
    that, if the  Secretary  of  State  communicated  a  rejection  of  the
    submissions, rather than a refusal of the  claim,  there  would  be  no
    appealable decision, but on the other hand the decision to  reject  and
    the consequential decision that there was not a "fresh claim" could  be
    judicially reviewed, as previously.

 8. Although these issues and the question whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    has the task of "classifying" a claim, were the subject of  submissions
    before us, we have concluded that they do not arise for decision on the
    facts of this case, to which we now belatedly  turn.   The  appellant's
    nationality is not clear: he claims to be Sudanese but is  regarded  by
    the Secretary of State as Nigerian.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    from Nigeria in 2004 and presented a counterfeit Nigerian passport.  He
    made an asylum application which was refused; an appeal  was  dismissed
    and his appeal rights became exhausted on 13 May 2005.  He has  made  a
    number of subsequent applications.  All have been rejected or  refused.
    In 2011 he was sentenced to twenty-seven months imprisonment on each of
    five counts concurrent for offences of fraud and money laundering.   He
    was then subject to a deportation decision: he appealed; the appeal was
    dismissed and his appeal rights were exhausted  on  22  November  2012.
    Following the criminal conviction, there is a confiscation order which,
    on appeal, was reduced to �125,000 and  remains  outstanding.   Further
    submissions were made on 16 May 2013.  They were to the effect that the
    appellant fears persecution in Sudan, which he says is his  country  of
    nationality, and that his removal from the United Kingdom would  be  in
    breach of his rights under the Refugee Convention and articles 2, 3 and
    8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  because  of  the  ill-
    treatment  that  he  would  suffer  on  removal  to  his   country   of
    nationality.  The article 8 claim  is  supported  also  by  submissions
    about his private and family life.

 9. The submissions are, as the Secretary of State indicates  in  paragraph
    2k, "considered" in a letter dated 1 June 2015.  The letter is headed:

                            "UK BORDERS ACT 2007
                    CONSIDERATION OF FURTHER SUBMISSIONS
        DECISION TO REFUSE A PROTECTION CLAIM AND HUMAN RIGHTS CLAIM"

10. After introductory paragraphs, above paragraph 4  there  is  a  heading
    "Consideration of protection  claim".   Paragraphs  4  to  17  deal  in
    substance with the appellant's assertion that he is a Sudanese national
    with a well-founded fear of persecution in Sudan.  The conclusion notes
    the previous adverse determinations of Tribunal  Judges  and  concludes
    that there is no reason to take a  different  view.   The  letter  then
    passes to issues arising under article 8 and  the  related  immigration
    rules.  Paragraphs  18  to  57  deal  in  substance  with  the  various
    arguments raised by the appellant.  There is then a heading "Article  8
    conclusion" following which is this:

          "58. Therefore, having considered all available information  about
              Mr Sheidu's circumstances including the best interests of his
              daughter, it is considered that  his  deportation  would  not
              breach the United Kingdom's obligations under ECHR Article  8
              because the public interest in deporting Mr Sheidu  outweighs
              his rights to private and family life".

11. Another short section deals with "other  ECHR  claims",  concluding  as
    follows:

          "60. Careful consideration has been given to whether  Mr  Sheidu's
              deportation would breach any  other  Articles  of  the  ECHR.
              However, on the basis of information currently available, and
              for the reasons explained above, it is not accepted that  his
              deportation would breach the ECHR."

12. Paragraphs 61 to 65 consider and reject the application for  revocation
    of the deportation order.

13. Above paragraph 66 is a  heading  "Paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration
    Rules".   Paragraphs  66  to  77  work  through  paragraph  353.    The
    conclusions are as follows:


          "76. Consideration has been given of Mr Sheidu's submissions  that
              have not previously been considered, but that taken  together
              with the previously considered  material,  do  not  create  a
              realistic prospect of success before an Immigration Judge  in
              paragraphs 4 to 58 above.
             77. As Mr  Sheidu's  submissions  do  not  create  a  realistic
              prospect of success before an Immigration Judge, they do  not
              amount to a fresh claim."

14. The conclusions are essentially repeated in paragraphs 78 to 81, and at
    paragraph 82 the writer of the letter says that "there is no  right  of
    appeal against this decision".

15. Undaunted, the appellant put in a notice of appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In written submissions made  preparatory  to  a  hearing  to
    consider the question of jurisdiction, the appellant pointed  out  that
    the submissions had been regarded as a "human rights  claim",  and  had
    been so described in a consent order of 21 May 2015 quashing a previous
    decision on them.  There therefore had been a human rights claim within
    the meaning of s. 82(2)(a) (as amended): further, Waqar  was  wrong  in
    applying the paragraph 353 notion of a "fresh claim" to the  definition
    of "claim" in s. 82(2)(a).   Judge Russell  decided,  following  Waqar,
    that there was no appealable decision, and a notice to that effect  was
    sent  out.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  this
    Tribunal.  We heard submissions on 2 March 2016 and  allowed  time  for
    further submissions to be made in writing following that  hearing.   We
    then became aware that the Tribunal constituted with  Dove  J  and  UTJ
    Peter Lane were to consider similar issues in Hussein.  As is  apparent
    from what is written above, we have considered the decision in Hussein.
      It does not affect the view we had already  reached  on  the  matters
    before us in this appeal, so we have not invited the  parties  to  make
    any further submissions based on it.

16. The terms of the decision letter in the present case  show,  we  think,
    why we expressed the sentiments we did in paragraph  7  above.   It  is
    true that the part of the decision beginning at paragraph  66  purports
    to deal with the submissions made on the basis  that  they  are  not  a
    "fresh claim".  But it appears to us that the previous 65 paragraphs do
    something rather different.  The heading of the letter, which  we  have
    set out, indicates that it contains a decision to refuse  a  protection
    claim and a human rights claim; so far  as  the  latter  is  concerned,
    paragraph 58 appears to be, in terms, the refusal  of  a  human  rights
    claim.  As it seems to  us,  this  is  ZT  (Kosovo)  and  ZA  (Nigeria)
    territory: there has been an appealable decision, and  once  there  has
    been an appealable decision, paragraph 353 has no part to play.

17. Mr Deller's submissions are, effectively, under two heads.   The  first
    is that it is not for the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine  whether
    submissions amount to a "fresh claim" within the meaning  of  paragraph
    353.  We entirely agree.  Nevertheless, the  First-tier  Tribunal  does
    have to determine whether the decision before it  is  one  which  falls
    within the definition in s. 82 of the 2002 Act as amended.  Mr Deller's
    second submission  is  that,  because  of  the  way  paragraph  353  is
    considered in the decision letter, and following  Waqar,  the  decision
    was that the submissions did not amount to  a  "fresh  claim",  and  so
    their rejection carried no  right  of  appeal.   If  those  terms  were
    applicable to the decision letter, that submission would  certainly  be
    consistent with Waqar;  but  it  does  not  appear  to  us  that  those
    submissions are open to the Secretary of State in view of the terms  of
    the decision letter.  Whatever may have been the terms of the  decision
    letters in the other cases, it appears to us that this decision  letter
    starts with a human rights claim, substantively refuses it, and does so
    using wording in the heading and in the  refusal  itself  which  is  so
    clearly that envisaged by s. 82 that the subsequent consideration under
    paragraph 353 cannot have the effect of removing the  right  of  appeal
    engendered by the decision.

18. For these reasons we allow the appellant's appeal against the  decision
    that the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction.  The appellant has an
    outstanding appeal, which will need to be determined in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.












                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 16 August 2016




