

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application  of  Oyekan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00410(IAC)

                    on an application for JUDICIAL REVIEW

|At                                            |Decision signed:   16.11.2014|
|on    14.11.2014                              |                             |

                                   Before

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

                                   Between

            The Queen on the application of  Janet Foyeke OYEKAN
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and



                                                                  Respondent
Solicitor advocate for the applicant:   Mr CT Emezie
Counsel for the respondent:             Mr Z Malik

                                  JUDGMENT

1.     This is an application for judicial review of  the  decision  of  the
    respondent on 29  September  2013,  for  administrative  removal  of  a
    citizen of Nigeria, born 23 January 1988. That decision did  not  carry
    any in-country right of appeal; but before it was made,  she  had  been
    through the statutory appeal process against a  previous  decision,  to
    refuse her an EEA residence card on the basis  of  her  marriage  to  a
    Swedish citizen. This ceremony had taken place by proxy in Nigeria.


 2. By the time the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Anthony  Metzer)  dismissed
    the appeal, the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC) (16 January 2014) was not yet  available;  but  it
    now represents the law  as  declared  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    question of validity of proxy marriages under EEA law. It  was  further
    explained, so far as explanation may  have  been  necessary,  in  TA  &
    others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 316 (18 June 2014).

 3. Nevertheless on 1 July 2014 Mr  Emezie  persuaded  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (Judge Gleeson) to grant permission to apply for judicial review of the
    decision under challenge on the basis of evidence subsequent to  Kareem
    from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office  about  the  legal  status  of
    proxy marriages in Nigeria. It is by no means clear that he cited TA  &
    others to her, as he should have done; but I need to say more about the
    basis for the decision in Kareem itself.

 4. The position on formal validity  of  proxy  (and  other)  marriages  at
    common  law,  as  set  out  in  previous  decisions  of  the  appellate
    authorities, was that  the  question  was  governed  by  the  lex  loci
    celebrationis, in this case Nigeria, where it was never  in  any  doubt
    that they were capable of recognition under the statutory  arrangements
    for reception of customary law. However, Kareem made it clear that,  on
    an appeal against refusal of a card, following a  proxy  marriage  (see
    judicial head-note at g)

       It should be assumed that, without independent and reliable  evidence
       about the recognition of the marriage  under  the  laws  of  the  EEA
       country and/or  the  country  where  the  marriage  took  place,  the
       Tribunal is likely to be unable to find that sufficient evidence  has
       been provided to discharge the burden of proof.

 5. That was perhaps more clearly re-stated in the judicial head-note to TA
    & others:

       Following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages -  EU  law)  [2014]
       UKUT 24, the determination of whether there is a marital relationship
       for the purposes of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  must
       always be examined in accordance with the laws of  the  Member  State
       from which the Union citizen obtains nationality.

 6. The 'burden of proof' in Kareem  of  course  referred  to  the  general
    burden on an appellant to show the validity of a marriage:  so  far  as
    that was a question  of  foreign  law,  whether  Nigerian  or  Swedish,
    evidence was required. Nevertheless Mr Emezie persuaded the judge,  not
    only to grant permission, but to make the  following  'case  management
    directions':

     . Within 14 days from the date this decision  was  sent  to  her  (see
       below), the Respondent must lodge and provide to the  Applicant  and
       the Upper Tribunal detailed grounds for continuing to  contest  this
       application and any written evidence upon which she will rely at the
       hearing, including in particular evidence of Swedish law as to proxy
       marriages between Swedish and Nigerian citizens.
     . If no such grounds or evidence are received, the respondent will  be
       taken to have accepted that the decision to remove the applicant  to
       Nigeria on the basis of the First-tier Tribunal determination of May
       2013 was unlawful.
     . If the respondent lodges any grounds or evidence  for  continuing  to
       contest this application, then within 21 days of her  being  provided
       with such grounds or evidence for continuing to contest the  judicial
       review application, the applicant must lodge  and  serve  any  reply,
       and any application to lodge further evidence, in particular  on  the
       Swedish law point identified above.  In  default  of  such  Reply  or
       application, the applicant will not be permitted  to  adduce  further
       grounds or evidence at the hearing of this  application  without  the
       leave of the Upper Tribunal.

 7. These directions  were  later  varied  by  consent  order,  giving  the
    Secretary of State more time to comply with  them;  but  instead  on  3
    September the Treasury Solicitors e-mailed the applicant's, with a copy
    of a further consent order, by which the  judicial  review  proceedings
    would be withdrawn. The basis for this offer was a further decision  to
    refuse a residence card, giving an in-country right of appeal, made  on
    28 August. This would have  enabled  the  applicant  to  challenge  the
    decision before the First-tier Tribunal once more, but this  time  with
    full knowledge of the evidential requirements set out in Kareem and  TA
    & others.

 8. On 2 September the applicant's solicitors wrote back  to  the  Treasury
    Solicitors, essentially taking up  their  position  on  the  directions
    given by Judge Gleeson, as Mr Emezie did at the hearing which  followed
    before me. Mr Emezie's arguments were these:

     a) the directions  had  effectively  reversed  the  burden  of  proof,
        turning it from the applicant (where in my view Kareem  had clearly
        left it), to the Secretary of State;

     b) if the  Secretary  of  State  had  had  any  complaint  about  that
        position, then she could have applied to set  aside  the  grant  of
        permission;

     c) in any case, she had chosen to agree to the consent order, by which
        she was bound; and

     d) she had not considered the full merits of the application under the
        Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  [the  EEA
        Regulations].

 9. While there may be a certain superficial  logic  about  each  of  these
    arguments, in my view the position on the case  as  a  whole  is  quite
    clear. Judge Gleeson could not, and clearly did not intend  to  reverse
    the view of the law taken by the three-judge vice-presidential panel in
    Kareem, and followed ever since by the Tribunal as a whole (except  for
    those first-tier judges who seem to have misunderstood it, and  had  to
    be set right in TA & others) . What this applicant, and anyone else  in
    his situation was entitled to, was a fair decision according to law  on
    his application.

10. This the applicant was offered in the decision of 28  August,  and  the
    correspondence which followed. While the course which  the  application
    had taken so far certainly entitled him and his  solicitors  to  a  few
    days for reflection, the barest familiarity with the law as declared by
    the Tribunal should have led  them  to  accept  the  offer  made  on  3
    September, and withdrawn it. The decision provided a clear  alternative
    remedy, by which the application could be reconsidered on appeal  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal judge with the full facts and law before them:  any
    argument on costs at that stage could have been put before the Tribunal
    to resolve, if necessary; and so the application is dismissed.


11. I dealt with the current argument  on  costs  by  e-mail  between  both
    sides: as the decision on it risks swamping the main one, it  is  given
    separately. So far as permission to appeal is  concerned,  the  grounds
    put forward repeated those made in argument, and I see nothing in them.

Application
Costs as ordered
Permission to appeal refused
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)


