

                           [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MSM (journalists; political opinion; risk) Somalia [2015] UKUT 00413 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 March and 28 April 2015                 |                             |
|Further submissions: 04 June 2015             |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


                                   Between


                                     MSM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:                 Mr S Chelvan and Ms V Hutton (both  of  Counsel),
             instructed                   by  Duncan   Lewis   and   Company
             Solicitors

Respondent:                Ms DJ Rhee (of Counsel), instructed by the
             Treasury Solicitor

UNCHR (intervening):   Ms M Demetriou QC, acting pro bono, instructed by
             Baker and                   McKenzie LLP



[1]  The enforced return of the Appellant, a  journalist,  from  the  United
    Kingdom to his country of origin, Somalia, would expose him to  a  real
    risk of persecution on  the  ground  of  actual  or  imputed  political
    opinion and/or a breach of his rights under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

[2]  It is probable  that,  in  the  event  of  returning  to  Somalia,  the
    Appellant will seek and find employment in the media sector.

[3]  The Appellant is not to be denied refugee status on the ground that  it
    would be open to him to seek to engage in employment other than in  the
    media sector.

[4]  Documents such as Home Office Country Information Guidance and  Country
    of  Information  publications  and  kindred  reports  should   not   be
    forensically construed by the kind of exercise more  appropriate  to  a
    contract, deed or other legal instrument.  Reports  of  this  kind  are
    written by laymen, in laymen's language, to be read and  understood  by
    laymen.  Thus courts and tribunals should beware an  overly  formal  or
    legalistic approach in construing them.  Furthermore, reports  of  this
    type should be evaluated and construed in their full context,

[5]  In cases where the Secretary of State seeks to withdraw  a  concession,
    or admission, the Tribunal should adopt a broad approach,  taking  into
    account in particular its inquisitorial jurisdiction,  the  public  law
    overlay, the  imperative  of  considering  all  relevant  evidence  and
    fairness to the litigant.



ANONYMITY

We maintain the anonymity  order  made  previously  under  Rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal
or a Court orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.
This  prohibition  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties  and   their
representatives.


                               DECISION [No 2]

Introduction

 1. This decision determines two main  questions.  The  first  is  whether,
    given the prevailing conditions in Mogadishu, Somalia, the Appellant, a
    journalist, is at risk of persecution and/or breach of Articles 2 and 3
    ECHR in the form of attacks inflicting serious injury or death  in  the
    event of his enforced return there.   The  second  is  the  interesting
    question of law of whether the Appellant can be denied  refugee  status
    in the United Kingdom on the ground that it is reasonable to expect him
    upon return to engage in employment other than his chosen occupation of
    journalism.  These questions are determined  in  a  context  where  the
    Upper Tribunal has recently promulgated updated guidance on  conditions
    prevailing in Mogadishu:  see MOJ and  others  (Returns  to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG  [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)


 2. The contours of this appeal emerge from the following passages  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"):

         "It is conceded by the Respondent that in general  journalists  may
         be at risk in Mogadishu.  It is an established principle of refugee
         law that protection is to be refused if it is shown that the person
         seeking asylum can reasonably be expected to take measures to avoid
         the threat of persecution upon his return to his country of origin.
          This principle finds expression, for example, in  the  requirement
         for an applicant to demonstrate that it would not be reasonable, or
         that it would be unduly harsh, to expect him to relocate to an area
         where he would not face the real risk of persecution .....


         It is common ground that this Appellant is a qualified teacher  and
         that he practised as such prior to training as  a  journalist.   It
         would not, in my view, be unreasonable to expect him to change  his
         profession and to return to teaching, in order to avoid any risk he
         may face merely on account of  being  a  journalist  practising  in
         Mogadishu ...


         I am further satisfied that even if the Appellant could  show  that
         the only reason that would compel him to change profession would be
         a fear of persecution he would not  be  entitled  to  international
         protection under the Refugee Convention .....


         The Appellant's change of profession by returning to teaching would
         not involve a violation of or a denial of a right enshrined in  the
         Convention.  The right to practice ones profession does  not  enjoy
         protected status under the Convention ......


         In the circumstances I find that to the extent that this  Appellant
         would be at risk merely on account of his continuing to practice as
         a journalist in Mogadishu, it would be reasonable to expect him  to
         revert to teaching as a means of earning  and  income  and,  hence,
         avoid any risk that would befall him as a journalist at  the  hands
         of the Al-Shabaab."

         [Emphasis added.]

    Al-Shabaab  ("AS")  is  a   radical   Islamist   group,   a   terrorist
    organisation.

The Proceedings To Date

 3. The Appellant, who benefits from the  protection  of  anonymity,  is  a
    national of Somalia, aged 29 years. This appeal has its  origins  in  a
    decision made on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (the "Secretary of State"), dated 02 January  2014,  whereby
    the Appellant's application  for  asylum  was  refused.  The  Appellant
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")  which,  by   its
    determination promulgated on 18 March 2014, affirmed  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State.  The ensuing grounds of appeal raised the three
    issues of the asserted risk to the Appellant as a member  of  a  group,
    namely journalists in Somalia; the Appellant's likely conduct on return
    to Somalia and, in particular, whether he would, or  would  be  obliged
    to, transfer to a different  profession;  and  the  historical  factual
    issue of whether the Appellant had been specifically  targeted  by  AS.
    Permission to appeal was duly granted.

 4. The error of law hearing before the Upper Tribunal was held on  29  May
    2014.  Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson held that the decision  of  the  FtT
    was vitiated by error of  law  (see  Appendix  1).  The  Judge,  having
    recorded  a  limited   concession   by   the   Secretary   of   State's
    representative, ruled, in substance, that  the  FtT  had  not  properly
    directed itself in law in relation to the matters raised in  the  first
    two grounds of appeal: see especially [13] - [14] of the decision.   We
    draw particular attention to the following passages:

         "[17]    What is  missing  from  the  determination  is  a  finding
             whether the Appellant would continue as a journalist ...


              There will need to be further evidence on this aspect ....


         [18] If it is found that the Appellant will resume  his  occupation
             as a journalist on return, the issue will be whether it  would
             be reasonable to expect him to change his career and to resume
             his earlier [teaching occupation] or another occupation."

    These passages  shape  the  essential  framework  of  the  exercise  of
    remaking the decision of the FtT which now falls to this Tribunal.


    Preserved Findings

 5. Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson expressly preserved a series of findings of
    fact contained in the determination of the FtT, namely:

       i) The Appellant worked as a journalist for Radio "X" in Somalia.


      ii) He did not at any stage come to the adverse attention of  AS:  his
          evidence to the contrary was a total fabrication.

     iii) He did not receive any threats on his mobile phone from AS.

      iv) None of his colleagues at the radio station was targeted or harmed
          before the Appellant left Mogadishu.

       v) The Appellant's wife had not relocated to a place of safety.

      vi) The Appellant's sister was aware of his intention to travel to the
          United Kingdom, confounding his claim to the contrary.

     vii) Little weight could be attributed to the documentary  evidence  on
          which the Appellant relied in support of his assertion that AS had
          threatened him.

    viii) Increased income was his initial motivation in training to  become
          a journalist.

    The preservation of these findings  obviously  has  a  bearing  on  the
    remaking exercise.

Further Finding

 6. By reason of the manner in which the appeal hearing unfolded, it became
    necessary for the Tribunal to adjourn for the purpose  of  providing  a
    preliminary ruling relating to the admission  of  fresh  evidence  (see
    Appendix 2).  When  making  this  ruling  we  found  it  convenient  to
    promulgate our findings in relation to the  Appellant's  likely  future
    employment in the event of returning to Mogadishu.  At  this  juncture,
    we draw attention to the following passage in the Tribunal's  error  of
    law determination:

         "What is missing from the determination [of the FtT] is  a  finding
         whether the Appellant would continue as  a  journalist  and  it  is
         unclear that the Judge concluded the Appellant  would  practice  as
         such on return.  There will need to be  further  evidence  on  this
         aspect ...............


         If it is found that the Appellant will resume his occupation  as  a
         journalist on return,  the  issue  will  be  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect him to change his career  and  to  resume  his
         earlier or another occupation."


    See Appendix 1, [17] - [18].  Sequentially, the next  decision  of  the
    Tribunal followed an uncompleted remaking hearing.  This  contains  our
    finding on the issue of future employment.

    We refer particularly to [24] - [27] of Appendix 2 and, in  particular,
    our conclusion at [27]:

         "In summary, therefore, we find as a matter of probability that the
         Appellant will, if returned, continue to pursue his interest  in  a
         career in broadcasting and  media  related  activity.   This  would
         include a creative role  in  terms  of  research  and  writing  for
         broadcasts.  To this extent there will be a  journalistic  element.
         We consider further that he is likely to secure employment in  this
         field."

    The hearing of the appeal was duly completed, on a later date,  against
    this backdrop.


The Evidence Considered


 7. What follows is a digest of the relevant documentary evidence, which we
    have considered in full, with some analysis and commentary.  We confine
    ourselves to highlighting its salient features.  We would add that as a
    result of our initial finding - see [6] above - the focus at this stage
    is mainly on the so-called "country evidence" relating to the  risk  to
    journalists practising their profession in Mogadishu and beyond.


 8. We begin with certain aspects of the Appellant's  evidence  which  were
    not challenged.  He is aged 29 years and a national of Somalia.   Prior
    to his arrival in the United Kingdom, in October 2013, he worked  as  a
    teacher and, latterly, as a journalist.  In the latter capacity he  was
    employed by a radio entity  presenting  news  reports  and  sports  and
    childrens' programmes.  He claims  to  have  been  informed  by  fellow
    journalists that in Somalia -

         "....  they have to live in hiding and they have to  keep  changing
         their  mobile  numbers  in  order  to  stay  safe  and  take   many
         precautions in order to stay alive."

    Adverting to the reported murder of a journalist by AS in June 2014, he
    avers:


         "I was very angry about what had happened and if I was  in  Somalia
         right now I would have broadcast this  news  myself  on  the  local
         radio. From my point of view I would  have  wanted  to  inform  the
         people of the truth behind these innocent people being  killed  ...
         the journalist who was killed on 21 June 2014 was a friend of  mine
         .....


         His death has motivated me even more to continue pursuing  my  life
         as a journalist as I want to highlight the brutalities inflicted on
         innocent  people."

    Continuing, the Appellant makes the case  that  journalists  are  under
    threat not only from the terrorist organisation AS but the  "Government
    authorities" also.  In support of this, he instances one specific  case
    of a radio entity being closed by the security forces for a  matter  of
    some days, associated with the detention  of  the  director  and  other
    journalists, evidently short lived. While the  Appellant  follows  this
    with  claims  about  other  comparable  incidents,   he   provides   no
    particulars.  He formulates his case based on risk  of  return  in  the
    following general terms:


         "....  If I am returned to Somalia I would face  ill  treatment  by
         the Government in Mogadishu and other Government  controlled  areas
         and [AS] in their areas ....


         I cannot  relocate  to  any  other  part  of  Somalia  and  live  a
         relatively normal life without  being  ill  treated,  for  being  a
         journalist."

 9. In its Country of Origin ("COI") report on Somalia of August 2013,  the
    Home Office noted the continuing threat posed by AS.  In this  context,
    we refer to the recent review of the evidence by the Upper Tribunal  in
    MOJ and Others.  The COI report  quotes  from  a  US  State  Department
    ("USSD") 2012 report containing the following passage:

         "Journalists were subjected to  violence,  harassment,  arrest  and
         detention in all regions.  The National Union of Somali journalists
         (NUSOJ) reported 18 journalists were killed across the  country  in
         2012 and 14 were wounded in Mogadishu.  According to the Somaliland
         Journalists Association (SOLJA),  more  than  79  journalists  were
         arrested in Somaliland during the year."

     In the same year the NUSOJ reported:

         "Media freedom, a cornerstone for democracy  and  good  governance,
         has constantly been curtailed to unacceptable degrees .....


         Killing of journalists in Somalia is a common and normal  practice.
         Mogadishu continues to record the highest levels of attacks against
         journalists and news media organisations in the country."

    In this context we refer also to a  BBC  report  of  July  2012  and  a
    Freedom House report of September 2012.  The latter  notes  that  Radio
    Mogadishu has the support of  the  transitional  Government.   The  COI
    report further notes the killing of a journalist  in  Mogadishu  on  18
    January 2013.  It also draws on the report of the Danish Norwegian fact
    finding mission (May 2013):


         "[AS] has taken responsibility for the killings of only journalists
         from the state run Radio Mogadishu.  Who is behind the rest of  the
         killings of journalists is not clear ....


         It was added that most journalists will not report negatively about
         [AS]".

10.  There  is  a  more  recent  Home  Office  Report,  entitled   "Country
    Information  and  Guidance"  ("CIG"),  dated   December   2014.    This
    incorporates certain  passages  from  an  equally  up  to  date  report
    produced  by  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner   for   Refugees
    ("UNHCR").  Under the rubric "Potential Risk Profiles" UNHCR identifies
    a total of twelve categories.  One of these is defined in the following
    terms:

         "Individuals in certain professions such as journalists ....."

     This is prefaced by these words:

         "UNHCR considers that persons with any of the profiles below, or  a
         combination thereof, may be in need of international protection  in
         the sense of the [Refugee Convention] ......"

    Notably, the Home Office CIG report adopts  this  without  question  or
    qualification.  Advice to decision makers is couched in  the  following
    terms:


         "With regard to persons  who  come  within  these  heightened  risk
         categories, decision makers must make a  careful  assessment  of  a
         person's overall circumstances."

     Risk to journalists was not one of the issues  considered  in  MOJ  and
Others.

11. An overview of the subject of risk to journalists can be undertaken  by
    reference to other pieces  of  evidence  provided.   These  include  in
    particular the reports of the Somalia journalist organisations noted in
    the COI 2013 report and the USSD report quoted therein.   The  evidence
    records that between 1992 and the  end  of  2014  56  journalists  were
    killed in Somalia.  The majority of the killings were in Mogadishu.  It
    is of some note that the journalist murdered in  January  2013  (supra)
    was working for a particular privately owned radio  organisation  which
    has evidently been the focus of a disproportionate number  of  attacks.
    It is described  as  the  "most  vulnerable  outlet  to  assassinations
    targeting Somalia journalists".  There are various strands of  evidence
    relating to  the  killings  of  individual  journalists.   We  find  it
    difficult to distil  from  these  any  clear  and  consistent  pattern.
    Considering the evidence as a  whole,  most  of  these  killings  would
    appear to have been planned and targeted  attacks.   According  to  the
    NUSOJ report, in 2014 there were five murders of  "media  workers"  and
    attacks  injuring  seven  "journalists:  these  figures  apply  to  the
    entirety of the country.

12. The NUSOJ report makes a distinction between areas  controlled  by  the
    federal government and those under the control of AS.  The  ability  of
    journalists to work more freely in the former  areas  is  acknowledged.
    This would include Mogadishu. However,  there  is  criticism  of  state
    agencies:

         "....  The  authorities  restrict  their  ability  to  work  freely
         through the police and judiciary system, including  the  harassment
         of media that criticise them.  [AS]  has been able to threaten  and
         eliminate journalists in government controlled neighbourhoods."

    The report claims that "crimes" against journalists have been committed
    with impunity.  It makes the further claim that in 2014, 47 journalists
    were arrested,  five  media  buildings  were  attacked  and  repressive
    legislation was enacted. While NUSOJ, unsurprisingly,  is  critical  of
    this conduct on the part of state agencies, there is no suggestion that
    journalists have been attacked, ill-treated or  murdered  by  any  such
    agency.


13. At this juncture we consider the discrete issue  of  how  the  risk  to
    journalists in Somalia has evolved in recent years.  The year 2012  was
    described in the Home Office CIG Report (2013) as "the  deadliest  year
    on record for the country's journalists".  The  "Committee  to  Protect
    Journalists",  which  is  based  in  Somalia,  has  prepared  a   table
    documenting that 12 journalists were killed in  Somalia  in  2012.   Of
    these, seven of the killings took place in  Mogadishu;   three  of  the
    victims worked for a particular media network perceived to be  anti-AS;
    one worked for the  pro-government  Radio  Mogadishu;  one  worked  for
    Somalia National TV; and the others worked for other media outlets.  In
    the year 2013, four journalists were killed: three of the killings were
    perpetrated  in  Mogadishu;  one  of  the  victims   worked   for   the
    aforementioned anti-AS media organisation; and another worked for Radio
    Mogadishu.  In the year 2014, there were four  deaths.   One  of  these
    occurred in Mogadishu and the  other  three  elsewhere.   Notably,  the
    annual report of NUSOJ describes these victims as "media  workers":  we
    shall revisit  the  significance  of  this  terminology.  There  is  no
    evidence of any deaths in 2015 to date.


    The Secretary of State's Decision

14. At this juncture it is appropriate to consider the impugned decision of
    the Secretary  of  State.   The  following  passages  are  particularly
    significant:

         "[46]    The above information indicates that journalists and those
             who work in the media are generally at risk in  Somalia,  with
             those working for state-owned media companies at the  greatest
             risk. It is noted that  [Radio  X]  is  an  independent  radio
             station however and is not linked in any  way  to  the  Somali
             Government ....


         [47] It is also noted that you worked as a reporter for  [Radio  X]
             from May 2011 until September 2013 ....


              Before this you worked as a teacher for three years,  teaching
             mathematics and Somali language .....


         [48] It is therefore concluded that although working as a  reporter
             may place you at risk in Somalia, it is not a necessary  risk,
             as you have transferable skills as a teacher which would allow
             you to live and work peacefully in your  home  country.   When
             this was put to you in interview the only reason you cited for
             not pursuing a career as a teacher was that the salary is less
             than that of a reporter."

    The "above information"  is  an  excerpt  from  the  2013  Home  Office
    publication  entitled  "Country  Information  and  Guidance:   Somalia"
    ("CIG").  Drawing on  identified  sources,  this  report  contains  the
    following salient passages:


         "Despite the  violence,  dozens  of  radio  stations  aligned  with
         particular factions continued to  broadcast  in  Mogadishu  and  in
         other parts of  the  country.  The  TFG  [Transitional  Government]
         continued to support Radio Mogadishu ......


         This includes journalists from  popular  stations  ....   who  have
         found it challenging to operate under [AS] ......


         Journalists were subjected  to  violence,  harassment,  arrest  and
         detention in all regions.  The National Union of Somali Journalists
         reported 18 journalists were killed across the country in 2012  and
         14 were wounded in Mogadishu ...  This was the  deadliest  year  on
         record for the country's journalists .....


         Concerning the big number of assassinated journalists,  it  is  not
         justified to say that [AS] is targeting  this  group  specifically,
         according to the international NGO(B) Mogadishu.   [AS]  has  taken
         responsibility for the killings of only journalists from the  state
         run Radio Mogadishu.  Who is behind the rest  of  the  killings  of
         journalists is not clear. In this connection it should be mentioned
         that Shabelle Media has had a conflict for a  long  time  with  the
         Government.  It was added that most  journalists  will  not  report
         negatively about [AS]."

         [Emphasis added.]

     In its determination, the FtT stated, at [15]:

         "It is conceded by the Respondent that in general  journalists  may
         be at risk in Mogadishu."

    We consider it clear that  the  Judge  was  not  here  referring  to  a
    concession made by the Respondent's representative at the hearing.   He
    was, rather, adverting to those parts of the decision letter reproduced
    above.

15. The framework for the Tribunal's determination of  the  first  question
    identified in [1] above is conveniently delineated   in  the  following
    passage in the Appellant's skeleton argument:

         "The Appellant invites the Upper Tribunal  to  find  that,  on  the
         basis of the .......  documents and evidence, it is  overwhelmingly
         clear that journalists (and those who work in  the  media)  are  at
         risk in Somalia, whether from state or non-state actors."

    On behalf of the Appellant, it is further submitted that his claim  has
    been "conceded" by the Secretary of State in the decision letter.

16. The submission of Ms Rhee on behalf of the Secretary of State,  in  our
    opinion, accurately encapsulates the key question to  be  addressed  by
    the Tribunal in determining the first issue.  Ms  Rhee  submitted  that
    the evidence does not support a finding that a  person  employed  as  a
    researcher, writer or presenter in the broadcasting sector without more
    and with no history of working as an  investigative  journalist  for  a
    state run media organisation is likely  to  have  imputed  to  him  any
    political opinion exposing him  to  the  risk  of  a  targeted  attack.
    Furthermore, we concur with Ms Rhee that one of the essential exercises
    for the Tribunal must is to consider and determine  whether,  from  the
    perspective of risk, a distinction is to be  made  between  journalists
    working for a pro-government media organisation and those who  do  not.
    We further consider that we must examine, and decide, the  question  of
    whether only certain types of workers in the media sector are at  risk.
    In addition, we must consider whether any distinction  is  to  be  made
    between Mogadishu and the rest of Somalia. These issues require of  the
    Tribunal a careful analysis of all the evidence bearing on the question
    of risk, simultaneously giving effect to the lower  standard  of  proof
    which applies in asylum cases.

The Risk Issue

17. Having found that the Appellant is likely  to  engage  in  journalistic
    activities, for the purpose of  earning  a  living,  in  the  event  of
    returning to Mogadishu - see [6] above - we pose the question  required
    by Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention: does he have a well founded
    fear of  being  persecuted  in  Mogadishu  for  reasons  of   political
    opinion? We make clear at this juncture that the Appellant's  case  has
    been advanced exclusively on the ground of political opinion: no  other
    ground or status protected by the Refugee Convention is  in  play.  The
    onus rests on the Appellant and  he  must  establish  a  real  risk,  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, of persecution to a standard  somewhat
    lower than the balance of probabilities.

18. The Refugee Convention reason invoked  by  the  Appellant  is  that  of
    political opinion. His case is that the pursuit of his chosen career in
    journalism will involve the expression of political opinions and is  it
    at least partly driven by political conviction  related  to  conditions
    prevailing  in  Somalia.   Having  considered  with  care  his  several
    accounts and having had the advantage of assessing  his  demeanour,  we
    accept this and find accordingly.

19. Next we take into account the undisputed  evidence  relating  to  media
    broadcasting  in  Somalia.   It  is  clear   that   there   are   media
    organisations which are, or are perceived to be, pro-AS, anti-AS,  pro-
    government and anti-government.  It seems to  us  uncontroversial  that
    journalists involved in the activities  of  researching,  interviewing,
    reporting and presenting engage in the expression of views and opinions
    which  are,  or  are  perceived  to  be,  of  one  or  more  of   these
    orientations.  We are satisfied that these are plainly  opinions  of  a
    political genre.  This analysis probably applies to all  parts  of  the
    globe.  We find further that the  Appellant  has  established,  to  the
    requisite degree that he will foreseeably engage in journalism of  this
    kind following his return to Mogadishu. He will not refrain from  doing
    so, whether voluntarily or involuntarily.  In addition,  we  find  that
    pro-government or anti-AS opinions,  both  of  which  are  probably  in
    substance indistinguishable, are attributed to all those who  work  for
    media organisations, irrespective of their specific role or activities.
     Such opinions are inherently political in nature.   We  consider  that
    this broad assessment applies to all media organisations in  all  areas
    of Somalia.  Accordingly, the Appellant's case overcomes the  threshold
    of falling within the ambit of the Refugee Convention.

20. We turn now to the question of real risk of persecution.  This requires
    of the Tribunal an evaluative assessment of all the evidence,  together
    with a predictive evaluative judgment in relation to future events. The
    Tribunal must also give effect to the specific  finding  noted  in  [6]
    above. We  observe  that  if  the  Appellant's  case  is  accepted,  no
    journalist  who will foreseeably engage in the expression of  political
    opinion, or to whom  such  opinion  may  be  imputed,  in  his  or  her
    occupation could be safely removed to Mogadishu or, logically,  to  any
    part of the country.  The main question is: what further  findings  and
    conclusions are impelled by the evidence?

21. We conclude that the evidence supports the following findings, some  of
    which are specific and others general in nature:


        a) Radio Mogadishu is perceived by AS to be  pro-government,  state
           run.


        b) Journalists working for Radio Mogadishu  are  at  real  risk  of
           being  targeted  by  AS  and  killed  or  seriously  injured  in
           consequence.


        c) AS is the only identified group, or faction,  which  engages  in
           such attacks and killings.


        d) AS has perpetrated some, but not all, of the  reported  killings
           of journalists and other workers in the media sector.


        e) The perpetrators of the killings of other  journalists  are  not
           known.


        f)  Those  who  work  for  media  organisations  other  than  Radio
           Mogadishu which publish anti-AS material or have an imputed anti-
           AS stance or inclination are also at risk of being  targeted  by
           AS and killed or seriously injured in consequence.


        g) All of the attacks upon and  murders  of  both  journalists  and
           "media workers" (the language  employed  in  one  of  the  NUSOJ
           reports) documented in the  reports  digested  above  have  been
           motivated by the occupation of the victims.  The  expression  of
           political opinions is an intrinsic feature of the daily  lot  of
           most of those who work in the media sector. Furthermore, we find
           that the  aggressors  impute  political  opinions  to  all  such
           workers in any event. We consider that there is a  direct  nexus
           between the espousal and/or expression  of  political  opinions,
           actual or imputed, by the victims and  their  death  or  injury.
           There is no other identifiable motive or  ground  and  none  was
           suggested on behalf of the Secretary of State.


        h) We find no sustainable basis for making any distinction  between
           journalists and "media workers" (and we were not invited  to  do
           so). We define this term as all those  who  work  in  the  media
           sector. Thus  the  members  of  the  endangered  group  are  not
           strictly confined to journalists in the conventional sense. Thus
           the analysis in [20] above extends to this wider group.


        i) We find that there is nothing selective about the attacks on the
           members of the endangered group.   In  particular,  we  find  no
           sustainable basis for confining those at  risk  to  persons  who
           work  for  media  organisations  perceived  to  be  either  pro-
           government or anti  -  AS  (insofar  there  is  any  distinction
           between the two). In this sense, the  attacks  which  have  been
           perpetrated  and   which,   predictably,   will   continue   are
           indiscriminate. We reject the Secretary of State's  argument  to
           the contrary.


        j)    Thus the risk is generated by membership  of  the  endangered
           group without more.


        k)    We find no basis  for  any  sustainable  distinction  between
           Mogadishu and other areas of Somalia.


    We have made these findings on the basis of all the evidence presented.
     While the evidence was undisputed per se, it  has  required  analysis,
    interpretation and evaluation.  The Tribunal has performed  this  task.
    While we  have  noted  some  differences  and  inconsistencies  in  the
    reports, we consider these to be minor and inconsequential. The reports
    are, broadly, united and consistent in their exposition of the  factual
    issues associated with our findings tabulated above.


    The Concession Issue


22. One discrete strand of the Appellant's case is that  the  Secretary  of
    State's letter concedes that he will be at risk of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason,  qua  journalist,  in  the  event  of  returning  to
    Mogadishu: see the relevant excerpts  reproduced  in  [14]  above.   We
    consider it trite that the construction of the relevant passages  is  a
    question of law for the Tribunal and, further, they must be  considered
    in their full context.  This includes in particular the underlying  and
    surrounding evidence. The letter is expressly and  inextricably  linked
    with the evidence to which it refers, which we have  outlined  in  [13]
    above.

23. We consider that documents such as the CIG, the COI and kindred reports
    should not be forensically construed  by  the  kind  of  exercise  more
    appropriate a contract, deed or other  legal  instrument.   Reports  of
    this kind are written by laymen, in layman's language, to be  read  and
    understood by laymen.  Thus courts and tribunals must beware an  overly
    formal or legalistic approach in construing them.  Furthermore, reports
    of this type must be evaluated and construed  in  their  full  context,
    which - as in this case - includes previous and  related  reports  upon
    which the text in question draws.  Thus,  in  construing  the  relevant
    passages of this particular report, we  must   consider  also  the  COI
    report  published  more  or  less  simultaneously,  the   USSD   report
    reproduced in part in the COI report and the other information  sources
    identified in [9] - [13] above.  These are all strands of the same web.
     We also take into account that reports of this kind, dealing  as  they
    do with matters of life and death and rights under  Articles  2  and  3
    ECHR, are  generally  prepared  with  care  and  couched  in  carefully
    selected terms.  Approached in this way, we construe the  Secretary  of
    State's decision letter as acknowledging that journalists as a group in
    Somalia are, at  present,  at  risk  of  persecution  and/or  treatment
    infringing Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

24. As we noted in our first judgment in  this  appeal,  the  Secretary  of
    State is desirous of withdrawing  this  concession:  see  the  reported
    version, [2015] UKUT 00228 (IAC).  Given our findings in [20]  and  our
    analysis in [22], this issue  has  been  rendered  moot.   However,  we
    consider it appropriate to express our  view  that  the  task  for  the
    Tribunal is not necessarily the narrow one of  ruling  on  whether  the
    concession can legitimately be withdrawn.  This is in  truth  something
    of a peripheral battle, merely distracting attention from  the  central
    task of the  Tribunal,  which  is  to  consider  the  evidence  in  its
    totality,  including  evidence  postdating  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision and to make its independent assessment  of  risk  accordingly.
    This we have done in  the  exercise  yielding  the  findings  rehearsed
    above.   To  this  we  would  add  that  the  Tribunal   exercises   an
    inquisitorial jurisdiction, with a significant public law  overlay,  to
    be contrasted with the lis inter-partes  approach  which  characterises
    private  law  litigation.   The  topic  of   withdrawal   of   supposed
    concessions, or admissions, seems to belong more readily to the  latter
    sphere.  It may be that previous judicial examination of  this  subject
    has rather neglected these  considerations.   We  would  add  that  the
    imperative of considering all relevant evidence  and  fairness  to  the
    litigant will always  be  obligatory  considerations  when  this  issue
    arises.

    Risk From State Actors


25. At this juncture we turn to consider the discrete question of the  risk
    that the Appellant will be persecuted by state actors for a  Convention
    reason. While we acknowledge that this formed part of  the  Appellant's
    case, we consider that it was canvassed somewhat faintly  and  we  find
    the explanation for this diffidence in the supporting evidence invoked.




26. We note in particular the criticisms in the NUSOJ publications of state
    interference  in  the  broadcasting  sector  in  2014.  This  evidence,
    however, suffers from certain intrinsic limitations.  At its height, it
    suggests  the  detention  by  state  agencies  of  a  small  number  of
    journalists for unspecified reasons and for short periods, followed  by
    release; one completed  prosecution  and  conviction,  followed  by  an
    almost immediate presidential pardon of the two journalists  concerned;
    a rather vague  objection  to  the  enactment  of  a  new  law  in  one
    particular province or  region;  a  handful  of  cases  of  outstanding
    charges against journalists; and the revocation  of  four  broadcasting
    licences in the entire country, followed by the restoration thereof  in
    at least one case.


27. Based on this evidence, the Appellant makes the further  case  that  if
    returned to Mogadishu, he will be exposed to a real risk of persecution
    by state agents based on his political opinion.  We reject this  claim.
    In our estimation, the supporting evidence falls measurably short, both
    quantitatively and qualitatively, of discharging the Appellant's burden
    in this respect.  The evidence is sparse, unilateral,  probably  driven
    by a particular viewpoint and lightly particularised.  At  its  zenith,
    it merely establishes some isolated instances of state  action  against
    some journalists and media entities which has  invited  criticism  from
    the journalistic profession. We consider that it does  not  partake  of
    the quality or depth necessary to warrant a finding of  persecution  of
    journalists by state actors..

The Risk Issue: Conclusion

28. On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated above, we  conclude  that
    the Appellant has discharged the burden of  establishing  that  in  the
    event of returning to Mogadishu, Somalia, there is a real risk that  by
    virtue of his predicted employment in  the  media  sector  he  will  be
    persecuted for the  Refugee  Convention  reason  of  political  opinion
    and/or that a breach of his rights under Articles 2  and  3  ECHR  will
    occur.

Political Opinion and the Modification of Conduct Issue

29. The Appellant's case (in our words) was that if the Secretary of  State
    were to refuse his asylum application on the basis  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect him, upon returning to Mogadishu, to avoid risk by
    not engaging  in  his  chosen  career  of  journalism,  this  would  be
    unlawful.  This issue is triggered by the assessment in  the  Secretary
    of State's decision that it would not be "necessary" for the  Appellant
    to expose himself to risk in light of his  "transferable  skills  as  a
    teacher".  This assessment was duly endorsed by the FtT.  The  question
    is whether it is sustainable in law

30. On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted by Mr Chelvan  (in  terms)
    that  involuntary  modification   of   conduct   is   an   inadmissible
    consideration and (we would add) in effect a misdirection in law.  This
    argument preys in aid, mainly, the decision of the Supreme Court in  HJ
    (Iran) v SSHD [2011] 1 AC 596 and the decision of the  Australian  High
    Court in Minister for Immigration and Border Migration v  SZSCA  [2013]
    FCAFC 155.  Reliance was also placed on C-71/11 and C-99/11 Germany v Y
    and Z [2013] 1 CMLR 5.  Article 10 of the Qualification  Directive  was
    also invoked.  The Appellant's case on  this  issue  was  supported  by
    UNHCR, intervening.  The core submission of Ms Demetriou QC was that it
    is unlawful to deny an asylum applicant refugee  status  on  the  basis
    that they could be expected  to  conceal,  or  exercise  discretion  or
    restraint in relation to, one of the core protections provided  by  the
    Refugee Convention namely race, religion, nationality, membership of  a
    particular social  group  or  political  opinion,  in  order  to  avoid
    persecution.  It was argued that asylum cannot be refused  on  a  basis
    which expects or requires the applicant to disavow a right, or  status,
    protected  by  the  Convention.   This  argument  recognises  that  the
    practice of a particular profession is not protected by the Convention.
     However, it is emphasised that political opinion is a protected ground
    and, further, that the Appellant's chosen profession of  journalism  is
    indissociable from his actual  or  imputed  political  opinion.   As  a
    result,  to  expect  or  require  him  to  relinquish  his   profession
    contravenes the  Convention  as  it  directly  undermines  one  of  the
    protections which it affords.

31. On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Ms  Rhee  accepted  that  asylum
    applicants cannot be required to relinquish their religion,  racial  or
    sexual  identity  or  their  political  opinions  in  order  to   avoid
    persecution in their country  of  origin.  It  was  acknowledged  that,
    following the decision of the Supreme Court in  HJ  (Iran),  to  expect
    discretion of asylum seekers whose conduct was driven by a Convention -
    protected reason would be to deny them their fundamental  right  to  be
    who they are.  Notwithstanding, Ms  Rhee  submitted  that  the  correct
    interpretation of HJ (Iran) is that a compulsion to alter one's conduct
    in order to avoid persecution does not per se  amount  to  persecution.
    Rather, drawing on the opinion of Lord Dyson at [110] - [118],  it  was
    argued that in order to do so it  must  involve  the  forfeiture  of  a
    fundamental human right.  This  submission,  we  observe,  conveniently
    highlights the main interface between the parties, having regard to the
    wider principle which the Appellant and UNCHR  seek  to  draw  from  HJ
    (Iran).

32. The Qualification Directive.  We take as  our  starting  point  Council
    Directive 2004/83/EC, the  soi-disant  Qualification  Directive.   This
    prescribes the minimum standards for the qualification  and  status  of
    third country nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as  persons
    otherwise in  need  of  international  protection,  together  with  the
    content of the protection granted.  The Directive gives  expression  to
    the EU's common policy on asylum, including the Common European  Asylum
    System.   It seeks  to  achieve  the  approximation  of  rules  on  the
    recognition  of  refugees  and  the  content  of  refugee  status.   It
    recognises that  the  Refugee  Convention  and  Protocol  provide  "the
    cornerstone of the international legal regime  for  the  protection  of
    refugees".  By prescribing minimum standards  for  the  definition  and
    content of refugee status, it seeks to "guide"  Member  States  in  the
    application of the Convention.

33. For present  purposes,  Articles  9  and  10  are  the  most  important
    provisions. Before turning to consider them, we  would  highlight  that
    the definition of "refugee" in the Directive mirrors that contained  in
    the Refugee Convention.  The Directive, in contrast to the  Convention,
    defines the concept of an act of persecution, in Article 9(1):

         "Acts of persecution within the meaning of Article 1A of the Geneva
         Convention must:


          a) Be sufficiently serious by their nature  or  repetition  as  to
             constitute  a  severe  violation  of  basic  human  rights,  in
             particular the rights from  which  derogation  cannot  be  made
             under Article 15(2) of the [ECHR], or


          b) Be an accumulation of various measures, including violations of
             human rights which is  sufficiently  severe  as  to  affect  an
             individual in a similar manner as mentioned in (a)."


    In Article 9(2) there is a non-exhaustive list of acts which  may  fall
    within the aforementioned definition.  Article 9(3) provides that there
    must be a connection between the reasons for persecution  (see  Article
    10) and the acts of persecution.  Article  10  stipulates  that  Member
    States shall take specified factors into  account  when  assessing  the
    reasons for prosecution. As regards political opinion, Article 10(1)(e)
    provides:

         "The concept of political opinion shall in particular  include  the
         holding of an opinion, thought or belief on a matter related to the
         potential actors of persecution mentioned in Article 6 and to their
         policies or methods, whether or not that opinion, thought or belief
         has been acted upon by the applicant."

    These words embrace the twin concepts of actual and  imputed  political
    opinion.  Both are protected.


34. This last mentioned protection is a reflection of the long  established
    norm  that  freedom  of  expression  is  a  core  value  of  democratic
    societies,  recognised  in  a  series  of  international   instruments.
    Furthermore, we consider that it is clear that the  Refugee  Convention
    ground of political opinion is of the same pedigree.  Bearing  in  mind
    the  context  of  the  present  appeal,  it  is  also  appropriate   to
    acknowledge that the question of whether an opinion has the  adjectival
    quality of political must take into account the  conditions  prevailing
    in the individual's country of origin.   In  Somalia,  journalists  and
    kindred workers in the media industry  have  become  embroiled  in  the
    continuing conflict.  They have been sucked into it by reason of  their
    occupations.  Their occupation is the stimulus for  the  imputation  to
    them of political opinions.  As appears from  our  findings  above,  we
    consider that each is tarred with the same brush.  Furthermore, in  the
    words of the Canadian Supreme Court in Canada (Attorney General) v Ward
    [1993] 2 R.C.S. 689, at [746]:
          "The persecution stems from the desire to  put  down  any  dissent
          viewed as a threat to the persecutors... a claimant may be seen as
          a threat by a group unrelated, and perhaps even  opposed,  to  the
          government because of his or her political viewpoint, perceived or
          real."


35. SSHD v Ahmed [1999] EWCA Civ 3003.  In this case the Immigration Appeal
    Tribunal ruled that a Pakistani Ahmadi did not qualify for  protection,
    reasoning that it would not be unreasonable for him, upon returning  to
    Pakistan, to make some allowances for the  situation  there,  including
    the sensitivities of others and to exercise a measure of discretion  in
    his conduct and in the profession of his faith. The Special Adjudicator
    had found that he would be vocal in  the  proclamation  of  his  Ahmadi
    beliefs  and  would  follow  the  command  of  his  spiritual   leaders
    irrespective of his place of residence in  Pakistan.   On  appeal,  the
    Court of Appeal placed emphasis on the central, single question, namely
    -

         ".....  Is there a serious risk that on return the applicant  would
         be persecuted for a Convention reason?"


     The Court supplied the following answer:

         "If there is, then he  is  entitled  to  asylum.   It  matters  not
         whether the risk arises  from  his  own  conduct  in  the  country,
         however unreasonable.  It does  not  even  matter  whether  he  has
         cynically sought to enhance his prospects of asylum by creating the
         very risk on which he then relies. ......"

         [Emphasis added.]


    Thus the focus must be on the future conduct of the  person  concerned.
    In all cases, this requires a finding or, perhaps more  accurately,  an
    evaluative predictive judgment which, we consider, is to be  undertaken
    according to the civil standard of the balance of probabilities.


36. HJ (Iran).  In determining the forced modification of conduct issue  we
    consider the key domestic decision to be that in HJ (Iran).  This  case
    involved two homosexual men  who  would  suffer  persecution  in  their
    respective countries of origin if they  lived  openly  as  homosexuals.
    The essential question  was  whether  they  could  lawfully  be  denied
    refugee status on the ground of an expectation that they could  conceal
    their homosexuality by  discretion  and  self-restraint.   The  Supreme
    Court allowed their appeals.  Lord Hope noted that  the  characteristic
    in play was an immutable one, unlike a person's religion  or  political
    opinion: see [11].  It is of particular note that Lord Hope cited  with
    approval the passage in Ahmed quoted above.


         "...  The critical question [is]: if  returned,  would  the  asylum
         seeker in fact act in the way in which he says he would  and  would
         thereby  suffer  persecution?    If   he   would,   then,   however
         unreasonable he  might  be  thought  for  refusing  to  accept  the
         necessary restraint on his liberties, in my judgment  he  would  be
         entitled to asylum."

     Lord Hope distilled from this passage two propositions, [18]:

         "The first is that attention must be focused on what the  applicant
         will actually do if he is returned to his country  of  nationality.
         The second is that the fact that he  could  take  action  to  avoid
         persecution does not disentitle him from asylum if in fact he  will
         not act in such a way as to avoid it.  That is so even if  to  fail
         or to refuse to avoid it would be unreasonable."

    It is appropriate to highlight at this juncture the key  finding  which
    we have made:  the Appellant will, as a matter of probability, work  in
    the media sector upon return to Mogadishu.  In his case,  the  relevant
    "avoiding action" on which the spotlight is placed is that of  engaging
    in an alternative occupation.  We have found that  the  Appellant  will
    not take this avoiding  action.   Lord  Rodger,  concurring  with  this
    approach, elaborated by identifying its rationale, at [76]:

         "No one would proceed on the basis that a  straight  man  or  woman
         could find it reasonably tolerable to conceal  his  or  her  sexual
         identity indefinitely to avoid suffering  persecution.   Nor  would
         anyone proceed on the basis that a  man  or  woman  could  find  it
         reasonably tolerable to conceal his or  her  race  indefinitely  to
         avoid suffering persecution.  Such an assumption about gay men  and
         lesbian women is equally unacceptable.  Most significantly,  it  is
         unacceptable as being inconsistent with the underlying  purpose  of
         the Convention since it involves the applicant  denying  or  hiding
         precisely the innate characteristic which forms the  basis  of  his
         claim of persecution ...."


         [Emphasis added.]

    The rationale of the Refugee Convention also emerges in  the  following
    passage, in [82]:

         "To reject his application on the ground that he  could  avoid  the
         persecution by living discreetly would be to defeat the very  right
         which the Convention exists to protect - his right to  live  freely
         and openly as a gay man without fear of persecution."

     In short, the protected right must prevail.


37.  Lord Dyson formulated the guiding principle in the following  way,  at
    [109]:

         "It is well established that in asylum cases it  is  necessary  for
         the decision maker to determine what the asylum seeker will  do  on
         return .....


         Thus, the asylum seeker who could avoid persecution on his  return,
         but who (however unreasonably) would not do so is  in  principle  a
         refugee within the meaning of the Convention."

         [Our emphasis.]

    Notably, in formulating this principle, Lord Dyson (in common with Lord
    Hope) referred to Ahmad.  Continuing, Lord Dyson stated in [110]:

         "If the price that a person must pay in order to avoid  persecution
         is that he must conceal his race, religion, nationality, membership
         of a social group or political opinion, then he is  being  required
         to surrender the very protection that the Convention is intended to
         secure for him."

     Turning to the context of the appeal, he continued:

         "The Convention would be failing in its purpose if it were to  mean
         that a gay man does not have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because he would conceal the fact that he is a gay man in order  to
         avoid persecution on return to his home country."


    Next, Lord Dyson  noted  the  purposive  approach  to  the  meaning  of
    "refugee" adopted by the Australian High Court in SC395/2002 v Minister
    for Immigration and Multi-Cultural Affairs [2003] 216 CLR 473, at [41]:


         "The object of the signatories to the Convention was to protect the
         holding of such beliefs, opinions, membership and origins by giving
         the persons concerned refuge in the signatory countries when  their
         country of nationality would not protect them. It  would  undermine
         the object of the Convention if the  signatory  countries  required
         them to modify their beliefs or opinions or  to  hide  their  race,
         nationality or membership of particular social groups before  those
         countries would give them protection under the Convention."

     Significantly, Lord Dyson continued:

         "Like Lord Rodger, I would follow this approach."


    We are prompted to repeat our  observation  above:  protection  of  the
    right in question must prevail.  To this we  would  add  that  this  is
    achieved by the grant of refugee status.  The effect of such  grant  is
    to enable the person concerned to exercise  the  right  freely  in  the
    country of refuge.


38. Before extending our consideration of the opinion  of  Lord  Dyson,  we
    pause.  In our estimation, it is clear  that  Lords  Hope,  Rodger  and
    Dyson were ad idem.  We detect no distinction in the dominant principle
    espoused by each.  We interpose this analysis because  the  submissions
    of Ms Rhee on behalf of the Secretary of State rather sidestep the core
    of their Lordships' opinions as we have exposed this above. Notably, as
    regards the decision in HJ (Iran), the submissions of Ms Rhee focus  on
    the remaining section of Lord Dyson's opinion, in  particular  [113]  -
    [115].   Ms  Rhee  invites  us  to  distil  from  these  passages   the
    proposition that a compulsory adjustment of  a  person's  behaviour  in
    order to avoid persecution will not constitute  persecution  unless  it
    entails the forfeiture of a fundamental human right. In  [113],  having
    reflected on the "somewhat different analysis of the  problem"  in  New
    Zealand, Lord Dyson reiterated:

         "An interpretation of Article 1A(2) of the Convention which  denies
         refugee status to gay men who can only avoid persecution  in  their
         home country by behaving discretely (and who  say  that  on  return
         this is  what  they  will  do)  would  frustrate  the  humanitarian
         objective of the Convention and deny them the  enjoyment  of  their
         fundamental rights and freedoms without discrimination."


    We consider this passage to be consonant with what we have described as
    the dominant principles, which the court espoused unanimously.


39. In [114] - [115], Lord  Dyson  noted  that  the  New  Zealand  approach
    entails an analysis of the claimant's conduct from the  perspective  of
    whether it is "at the core of the right or at its margins  and  whether
    the prohibition or restriction imposed by the state is lawful in  terms
    of international human rights law", quoting from  [2005]  INLR  68,  at
    [120]. We consider the conjunctive in this  quotation,  which  we  have
    highlighted,  to  be  significant.   Furthermore,  the  discursive,  or
    obiter, character of  this  part  of  his  Lordship's  opinion  emerges
    clearly in the ensuing section, at [115]:

         "It is open to question how far  the  distinction  between  harmful
         action at the core of the right and harmful action at its margin is
         of relevance in  cases  of  persecution  on  grounds  of  immutable
         characteristics such as race and sexual orientation.  But it  is  a
         valuable  distinction  and  there  may  be  more  scope   for   its
         application in relation to cases concerning persecution for reasons
         of religion or political opinion."


    In addition to our obiter analysis of this passage, we find nothing  in
    it detracting from or diluting the dominant  principle  to  which  Lord
    Dyson subscribed (supra).  This we consider to be  reinforced  in  what
    follows in [116] - [118] and, in particular, the following  passage  in
    [118]:


         "Even if it could be imagined that Anne Frank, as an asylum seeker,
         would not objectively have been at risk of being discovered in  the
         attic, she would nevertheless have  had  a  well  founded  fear  of
         serious harm, a fear not eliminated by her decision to conceal  her
         identity as a Jew and live in the attic."

     Thus, as Lord Dyson acknowledged in [117]:

         "In other words, the threat of serious harm and the fear of it will
         remain despite the avoiding behaviour."

     In short, we find no  merit  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  "more  is
needed" argument.

    RT (Zimbabwe).

40. The Supreme Court soon had the opportunity to revisit this  subject  in
    this case. The Respondents (and, in one  case,  the  Appellant),  based
    their asylum claim on their unwillingness or  inability  to  positively
    demonstrate their loyalty to the Mugabe regime in the  event  of  their
    forced repatriation  to  Zimbabwe.   The  Court  of  Appeal  found  the
    distinction between individuals whose political beliefs formed  a  core
    part of their lives and those for whom political  beliefs  were  merely
    marginal to their existence  misconceived,  as  the  following  passage
    illustrates:

         "The  question  is  not  the   seriousness   of   the   prospective
         maltreatment (which is not at issue) but the reason for it. If  the
         reason is political opinion, or imputed political opinion, that  is
         enough to bring it within the Convention.   In  this  case  we  are
         concerned with imputed political opinions of those  concerned,  not
         their actual opinions.  Accordingly, the degree of their  political
         commitment in fact, and whether political activity is of central or
         marginal importance to their lives, is beside the point ....


         If the Tribunal finds that he or she would be willing to lie  about
         political beliefs, or about the absence of political  beliefs,  but
         that the reason for lying is to avoid persecution,  that  does  not
         defeat the claim ......."


        [Our emphasis]

    See [2010] EWCA Civ 1285 at  [36].   In  espousing  this  approach,  we
    consider that the Court of Appeal rejected the analysis of Elias LJ  in
    TM (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 916, at [41].


41.  The Supreme Court dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal.  We  draw
    attention, firstly, to the statement of Lord Dyson at [25]:

         "It is well established that there are no hierarchies of protection
         amongst the Convention reasons for persecution and the well founded
         fear of persecution test set out in the  Convention does not change
         according to which Convention reason is engaged ....


         Thus the Convention affords no less  protection  to  the  right  to
         express political opinion openly than it does to the right to  live
         openly  as  a   homosexual.    The   Convention   reasons   reflect
         characteristics or statuses  which  either  the  individual  cannot
         change or cannot be expected to change because they are so  closely
         linked to his identity or are an expression of fundamental rights."


         [Emphasis added.]

    Lord Dyson then turned to address  the  argument  that  the  HJ  (Iran)
    principle does not apply to the Convention ground of political  opinion
    in the case of a person to whom the relevant interference would  affect
    -


         "...  the margin, rather than the core, of the protected right  and
         would not cause him to forfeit a fundamental human right."

    Lord Dyson rejected this distinction.  In doing so,  he  reasoned  that
    the right not to  hold  a  political  opinion  is  a  fundamental  one,
    continuing at [42]:


         "A focus on how important the right not  to  hold  a  political  or
         religious belief is to the applicant is wrong in principle."


     Lord Dyson continued, at [43]:

         "As regards the point of principle, it is  the  badge  of  a  truly
         democratic society that individuals should  be  free  not  to  hold
         opinions.  They should not  be  required  to  hold  any  particular
         religious or political  beliefs.   This  is  as  important  as  the
         freedom to hold and (within certain defined limits) to express such
         beliefs as they do hold."



    Lord Dyson illuminated this  analysis  by  reference  to  the  sinister
    "thought  police"  in  George  Orwell's  novel  1984.    Notably,   the
    distinction was also rejected as being unworkable  in  practice.   Lord
    Dyson added at [51]:

         "What matters for present purposes is that nothing that was said ..
          in the HJ (Iran) case supports the idea that  it  is  relevant  to
         determine how important the right is to the individual.   There  is
         no scope for the application of the core/marginal distinction ...."

    The  Supreme  Court  was  unanimous  in  its  decision.   In  the  only
    concurring  judgment,  Lord  Kerr  formulated  his  rejection  of   the
    core/margins distinction in these terms, at [74]:


         "The level  of  entitlement  to  protection  cannot  be  calibrated
         according to the inclination of the individual who claims  it.  The
         essential character of the right is inherent to the nature  of  the
         right, not to the value that an individual places on it .......


         That is why the emphasis must be not  on  the  disposition  of  the
         individual liable to be the victim of persecution but on  the  mind
         of the persecutor."


     Our analysis

42. The main issue in this appeal has arisen in cases beyond these  shores.
    In Szatv v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2007] 233 CLR  18,
    the Appellant qualified as a civil engineer. Some years later, he began
    working as a journalist in a particular region  of  Ukraine,  where  he
    suffered  harassment  and  physical  maltreatment  on  account  of  his
    political views.  He fled to Australia, where he  sought  asylum.   The
    Refugee Review Tribunal rejected his claim on the ground that he  could
    return to a different part of Ukraine where he would not be  known  and
    could work in the construction industry there.  His appeal was  allowed
    on the basis that the fallacy in the Tribunal's reasoning was  that  in
    order to avoid persecution the Appellant would have to forfeit the very
    right to express his political opinions  without  fear  of  persecution
    which the Convention is designed to protect.   The  same  approach  was
    applied by the  High  Court  in  Appellant  S395/2002  v  Minister  for
    Immigration (216) CLR 473, at 489 especially.  Notably, these decisions
    were cited with approval by the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran).

43. In the specific context of the Qualification Directive, there  are  two
    relevant decisions of the CJEU.   One  concerns  religious  belief  and
    practice, while the other relates to membership of a particular  social
    group, namely homosexual males.  In the first, Joined cases C-71/11 and
    C-99/11 Y and Z, the main question examined by  the  CJEU  was  whether
    Article 2(c) of the Qualification Directive is  to  be  interpreted  as
    meaning that an applicant's fear of being persecuted is well founded in
    circumstances where he could  avoid  exposure  to  persecution  in  his
    country of origin by abstaining from certain religious practices.   The
    Court ruled in favour of the applicant, concluding at [79]:

         "It follows that where it is established that, upon his  return  to
         his country of origin, the person concerned will follow a religious
         practice which will expose him to a real risk  of  persecution,  he
         should be granted refugee status, in accordance with Article 13  of
         the  Directive.   The  fact  that  he  could  avoid  that  risk  by
         abstaining from  certain  religious  practices  is,  in  principle,
         irrelevant."


    Pausing at this juncture, this decision seems to us entirely  consonant
    with those in Ahmed and HJ (Iran).


44. Some of the steps in the Court's reasoning and  analysis  in  Y  and  Z
    repay careful analysis.  First,  the  Court  characterised  freedom  of
    religion a basic human right.  Second, having regard to the wording  of
    Article 9(1) of the Directive, it emphasised the threshold  of  "severe
    violation" of the right or freedom engaged.  This  was  followed  by  a
    distinction between limitations on the exercise of the basic right  (on
    the one hand) and the violation thereof (on the other), by reference to
    Article 10(1) and Article 52(1) of the Charter of  Fundamental  Rights.
    Continuing, the Court observed, at [62]:

         "For the purpose of determining, specifically, which  acts  may  be
         regarded as constituting persecution within the meaning of  Article
         9(1)(a) of the Directive, it is  unnecessary  to  distinguish  acts
         that interfere with the 'core  areas'  ('forum  internum')  of  the
         basic right to freedom of religion, which do not include  religious
         activities in public ('forum externum'), from  acts  which  do  not
         affect those purported 'core areas' .....


         [63] Such a distinction is incompatible with the  broad  definition
         of 'religion' given by Article 10(1)(b) of the Directive ......"


    In [65] the Court formulated the test of "the nature of the  repression
    inflicted on  the  individual  and  its  consequences".   In  [66],  it
    rephrased this, albeit to like effect, as "the severity of the measures
    and sanctions adopted or  liable  to  be  adopted  against  the  person
    concerned".


    The Court's consideration of the exercise  of  assessing  risk  to  the
    individual is striking, at [70]:


         "In assessing such a risk,  the  competent  authorities  must  take
         account of a number of factors, both objective and subjective.  The
         subjective circumstance that the observance of a certain  religious
         practice in public, which is subject to the restrictions at  issue,
         is of particular importance to the person  concerned  in  order  to
         preserve his religious identity is a  relevant factor to  be  taken
         into account  in  determining  the  level  of  risk  to  which  the
         applicant will be exposed in his country of origin  on  account  of
         his religion, even if the observance of such a  religious  practice
         does not constitute a core  element  of  faith  for  the  religious
         community concerned."


    In [72], the Court reiterated the necessary of evaluating "the personal
    circumstances of the person concerned".  Finally, as noted  above,  the
    Court rejected the "abstention" argument, namely the contention that  a
    person does not have a well founded fear of persecution  where  he  can
    abstain from religious practices.

45.  To like effect is the Court's conclusion in Joined cases  C-199-201/12
    X, Y and Z, at [75]:

         "It follows that the person must  be  granted  refugee  status,  in
         accordance  with  Article  13  of  the  Directive,  where   it   is
         established  that  on  return  to  his  country   of   origin   his
         homosexuality would expose him to a  genuine  risk  of  persecution
         within the meaning of Article 9(1) thereof.  The fact that he could
         avoid that risk by exercising greater restraint than a heterosexual
         in expressing his sexual  orientation  is  not  to  be  taken  into
         account in that respect."

    In short,  the  possibility  of  conduct  entailing  the  avoidance  of
    modification of certain types of  behaviour  related  directly  to  the
    right engaged is irrelevant. Thus this possibility must be disregarded.

46. In our judgement, the only issue on which there is a  possible  element
    of dissonance between the decisions of the Supreme Court and  those  of
    the CJEU is  whether  it  is  permissible  to  take  into  account  the
    avoidance or  modification  of  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  person
    concerned which is  voluntary.   This  emerges  particularly  from  the
    analytical exercise contained in [82] of the opinion of Lord Rodger  in
    HJ (Iran). It may be said that the approach espoused by  Lord  Hope  in
    [35] is in substance the same.  Lord Walker, at  [98],  concurred  with
    [82] of Lord Rodger's judgment.  So too did Lord Collins, at [100]  and
    Lord Dyson, at [132] while, simultaneously, observing in [123] that, in
    reality, there will be "no real choice".

47. Pausing at this juncture, we consider that the decisions of the  United
    Kingdom Supreme Court, the High Court of Australia  and  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union are in alignment with each  other.   They
    are united by their common espousal of the dominant principle that  the
    stature of the right and the unbridled freedom to exercise it  (subject
    only to limitations which do not arise in this appeal) rise  above  and
    eclipse other considerations.


48. To the extent that there is any disharmony between  the  approaches  of
    the Supreme Court and the CJEU, we are, by virtue of the  principle  of
    supremacy of EU Law, obliged to follow the latter.   However,  for  the
    reasons which we will explain, this issue is moot in the  present  case
    as we are satisfied that the Appellant succeeds on both approaches.

49. At this juncture, we remind ourselves of the relatively narrow distance
    which separates the parties on this issue.  It is  identifiable  in  Ms
    Rhee's submission that HJ (Iran) is authority for the proposition  that
    the compulsory modification of a person's conduct  in  order  to  avoid
    being persecuted will not amount to persecution  unless  tantamount  to
    forfeiture of a fundamental human right.  This, it is  argued,  is  the
    narrow ratio decidendi of HJ (Iran).  Thus, it is submitted, it is  not
    sufficient that the ground or status in question  simply  falls  within
    the scope of the protection afforded by the Refugee Convention.  It  is
    further submitted that, properly analysed, the right  espoused  by  the
    Appellant is a right to practice one's chosen profession, which is  not
    protected by the Convention.

50. We acknowledge at this point the Secretary of State's argument that the
    Refugee Convention does not protect a right to pursue a  profession  of
    one's choice.  This is a case of risk arising out of imputed  political
    opinion. We consider that the fact that the imputation of the political
    opinion arises in the context of the Appellant's chosen  profession  is
    immaterial and incidental.  Thus we consider this argument to  have  no
    merit.


51. The second main element of the Secretary of State's case  is  that  the
    modification  of  behaviour  under  scrutiny  will  not   involve   the
    forfeiture of a fundamental human right.   We  have  analysed  in  some
    detail the passages in HJ (Iran) invoked in support of this contention.
     We would add the following.   As our assessment above  indicates,  the
    espousal or expression of political opinion, or the imputation thereof,
    engages freedom of expression, which is a fundamental  right.   Insofar
    as  Ms  Rhee's  submission  involves  the  suggestion  that  there  are
    different degrees in the exercise of the right to espouse  and  express
    political opinions, her  argument  invites  a  quantitative  assessment
    which,  in  our  opinion,  is  not  merely  impracticable  but  is  not
    harmonious with the nature of the right in question.  We consider  that
    interference with this particular  right  is  not  to  be  measured  by
    reference to the extent to which the exercise of one right is adversely
    affected by the conduct, threatened or actual, of the persecutor.  This
    approach, in our view, neglects the  intrinsic  nature  of  the  right,
    which permits and protects the unconstrained expression of a  political
    opinion at any time, at the choice of the individual, as frequently  or
    infrequently as may be desired, subject only to  limitations  which  do
    not arise in this appeal. This is the quintessence  of  the  underlying
    right, namely freedom  of  expression.  Moreover,  to  accede  to  this
    argument would be tantamount to reinstating the discredited concept  of
    marginal versus core.  Finally, it suffers from the  further  infirmity
    that its operation would be utterly impracticable in cases  of  imputed
    political opinion.


52. Finally, having subjected the judgment of Lord Dyson in  HJ  (Iran)  to
    appropriate scrutiny, we are unpersuaded that  [110]  -  [118]  thereof
    support the Secretary of State's case, for the reasons we have given.

53. We  consider  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  "outright  forfeiture"
    argument must be rejected as the further  basis  of  its  impermissible
    shift of focus from the persecutors to the victim.


Omnibus Conclusion

54. We conclude:

     i) The enforced return of the Appellant to  Mogadishu,  Somalia,  will
        expose him to a real risk of persecution for the Refugee Convention
        reason of his political opinion, imputed, and/or a  breach  of  his
        rights under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.


    ii) The Appellant is not to be denied refugee status on the ground that
        it would be open to him to seek to engage in employment other  than
        in the journalistic or media sector.


   iii) Giving effect to these  conclusions,  we  remake  the  decision  by
        allowing the Appellant's appeal.







                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                        Date:   05 June 2015

















                                 Appendix 1

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 May 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     msm
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Somalia where he  was  born  in  October
    1985.  He has been granted permission to appeal the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devittie who for reasons given in  a  determination
    following a hearing on 17 February 2014 dismissed the appeal against  a
    notice of refusal  of  leave  to  enter  dated  2  January  2014.   The
    appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 October 2013  when  he
    claimed asylum.

 2. The appellant's claim was based on a fear of harm from  Al-Shabaab  due
    to his activities as a reporter/journalist.   This  was  an  occupation
    that he had taken up after previously working as  a  teacher.   In  May
    2011 he worked as a reporter for an independent  radio  station  "Sinba
    Radio".  Before coming to the United Kingdom the appellant had received
    threats from the Al-Shabaab via text messages which continued despite a
    change of number on his mobile phone.   No  action  was  taken  by  the
    authorities despite his employer having complained.  The  threats  from
    the Al-Shabaab were received at the end of 2012 which  pressurised  him
    into quitting his job.

 3. The respondent did not believe that the  appellant  had  received  such
    threats giving her reasons for doing so in a  letter  dated  2  January
    2014.  She accepted the appellant had worked as a  reporter  for  Sinba
    Radio since 2011.  She  referred  in  the  refusal  letter  to  country
    evidence indicating that journalists and those who worked in the  media
    were generally at risk in Somalia with  the  greatest  risk  for  those
    working for state-owned media companies.  She noted  that  Sinba  Radio
    was an independent radio station and was not linked in any way  to  the
    Somali government.  She concluded that although working as  a  reporter
    may place the appellant at risk, it was not a necessary risk as he  had
    transferrable skills as a teacher which would allow  him  to  live  and
    work peacefully in his home country.  It was deemed  therefore  he  was
    not at risk of persecution and did not qualify for asylum.

 4. The judge also disbelieved the appellant's claim of the threats from Al-
    Shabaab and turned his mind to whether the appellant would be  at  risk
    in Mogadishu on account of the fact that he had previously practised as
    a journalist there.  He concluded that Al-Shabaab would certainly  take
    an adverse interest if they had not done so before.  He then turned  to
    whether there was a reasonable degree of likelihood of future  risk  if
    the appellant on return resumed his profession  as  a  journalist.   He
    went on to observe at [15] of his determination,

         "It is an established principle of Refugee Law that  protection  is
         to be refused if it is shown that the  person  seeking  asylum  can
         reasonably be expected to take measures  to  avoid  the  threat  of
         persecution upon  his  return  to  his  country  of  origin.   This
         principle finds expression, for example, in the requirement for  an
         applicant to demonstrate that it would not be reasonable,  or  that
         it would be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to an area where
         he would not face the real likelihood of persecution."

 5. The judge observed on the evidence  before  him  that  the  appellant's
    dedication to his profession was such that he would have no option  but
    to continue to practice as a journalist.  He did  not  accept  this  as
    truthful observing that he had indicated at interview that he chose  to
    become a journalist in order to increase his income.  The  judge  found
    that: "it has not been a part of his  evidence  that  his  decision  to
    train as a journalist was motivated by a conviction he  held  and  that
    this was his vocation".

 6. The judge went on to observe that the principles in  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]
    UKSC 31 did not apply to the circumstances of the  case  and  expressed
    the following conclusions at [19] and [20] of his determination,

         "19. The distinction in this case is this.  The appellant's  change
             of his profession by returning to teaching would not involve a
             violation  of  or  a  denial  of  a  right  enshrined  in  the
             Convention.  The right to practise one's profession  does  not
             enjoy protected status under the convention.

         20.  In the circumstances I find  that  to  the  extent  that  this
             appellant would be at risk merely on account of his continuing
             to  practise  as  a  journalist  in  Mogadishu,  it  would  be
             reasonable to expect him to revert to teaching as a  means  of
             earning an income, and hence, avoid any risk that would befall
             him as a journalist at the hands of the Al-Shabaab."

 7. The judge went on to conclude that the appellant would not be  at  risk
    of indiscriminate violence were he to be returned.

 8. The challenge to this decision is threefold.  Having conceded that  the
    appellant was a journalist from 2011 in Mogadishu and that  journalists
    are "generally at risk" with no evidence of effective state protection,
    the appellant could show that he is a refugee.  The tribunal had failed
    to engage with the point at all even though it had  been  addressed  in
    the skeleton argument and in oral submissions.

 9.  The  second  ground  argues  that  the  respondent  could  not   force
    modification (by changing occupation) as this has been  unlawful  since
    the earlier cases of Danian and Iftikhar Ahmed as further  affirmed  in
    HJ (Iran) and HG (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  It is  argued  that
    if the appellant does voluntarily change his profession why would he do
    so.  It would be in the face of a risk from an imputed political and an
    imputed religious opinion from Al-Shabaab.  The appellant has  a  right
    not to share the views of Al-Shabaab and not to fear persecution on the
    basis that Al-Shabaab imposes views on  him  as  to  his  conduct  with
    reference to RT & Others v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38.  It is argued that  the
    judge materially directed himself as to the law in failing to  identify
    any legal authority since Danian which enables forced  modification  to
    evade persecution.  On this basis enforced modification is unlawful and
    the appeal falls to be allowed on asylum grounds.

10. The third ground relates to the judge's finding that the appellant  had
    not faced  targeting  by  Al-Shabaab.   The  positive  aspects  of  the
    appellant's case including consistency and prompt claim to  asylum  are
    relied on.  The First-tier Tribunal had failed to identify what  weight
    was attached to the appellant's wife's statement regarding the fate  of
    the SIM card.  In rejecting the police report, it is  argued  that  the
    judge had not made a reasoned finding especially where the  report  had
    been made  by  the  appellant's  employer  whose  evidence  as  to  the
    appellant's employment status with  them  had  been  accepted.   It  is
    argued that the approach of the First-tier Tribunal had therefore  been
    irrational and unfair as the evidence had not been  looked  at  in  the
    round.

11. At the hearing Mr Chelvan supplemented this ground with  argument  that
    the judge had failed to take into account the  undisputed  evidence  of
    the risks faced by journalists in Somalia in  considering  the  threats
    specific to the appellant.

12. Before hearing submissions I made an order  that  the  anonymity  order
    made in the First-tier Tribunal should continue in the Upper  Tribunal.
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise the appellant is
    granted anonymity.  This means that  no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.
    The direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

13. In the course of his  lengthy  and  forceful  submissions,  Mr  Chelvan
    followed the format of the grounds of challenge  and  referred  to  the
    skeleton  argument  on  which  he  had  relied  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In particular he maintained  that  the  principle  that  the
    appellant could be expected to modify his behaviour by changing his job
    to avoid persecution  had  no  basis  in  law.   In  the  case  of  the
    appellant, the concession by the Secretary  of  State  meant  that  the
    appellant was a refugee because of the political opinion that would  be
    imputed to him.  He acknowledged that in the light of the concession he
    had not prepared evidence for the First-tier Tribunal dealing with  the
    point whether persons who had previously been journalists would  be  at
    risk.  This drew attention to exactly what the judge had  concluded  on
    the appellant's intentions were he to return.

14. Mr Chelvan contended that with reference to [20] of  the  determination
    quoted above, that the  appellant  would  continue  to  practice  as  a
    journalist  in  Mogadishu.   Mr  Walker  submitted  however  that  this
    paragraph could be read in two  ways  and  there  remained  a  question
    whether the judge found the appellant would  be  at  risk  were  he  to
    continue  as  a  journalist  notwithstanding  his   negative   findings
    regarding any  risk  in  the  past.   He  accepted  that  the  analysis
    particularly in [20] lacked clarity which made the findings unsafe  and
    in his view there would need to be a total rehearing  and  even  though
    there were strong credibility findings, none could be said to be  safe.
    There would need to be a total rehearing.  Mr Chelvan  did  not  accept
    that the matter needed to be reheard relying on  the  concession  which
    had not been withdrawn.

15. I observed to the parties that I would  decide  what  findings  of  the
    judge could be preserved and would decide the  future  conduct  of  the
    appeal in a reserved decision.

16. I begin my consideration with the quality of the  fact-finding  by  the
    judge.  I see no material error in the reasoning regarding the  absence
    of threats from the Al-Shabaab before the appellant  set  out  for  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge took into account all the evidence including
    the statement from the appellant's wife.  The judge did not accept  the
    explanation as satisfactory why the appellant was unable to produce the
    mobile  phone  and  it  was  rationally  open  to  him  to  reject  the
    explanation that the threatening messages had  been  deleted  when  the
    phone was put in for repair by his wife.  The challenge  in  the  third
    ground is no more than  an  evidential  disagreement.   The  judge  was
    clearly aware of the concession which he referred to on more  than  one
    occasion  in  the  determination  and  he  was  aware  of  the  country
    information indicating the risks that journalists faced.  It  was  open
    to him to reject the employer's evidence of reference of the matter  to
    the police even though it had been accepted that the appellant had been
    employed as claimed.  There is no question that  the  judge  failed  to
    take into account all the evidence in the round.

17. At [16] the judge did not  accept  as  truthful  that  the  appellant's
    dedication to his profession was such that he would have no option  but
    to continue to practice as a journalist on  return.   What  is  missing
    from the  determination  is  a  finding  whether  the  appellant  would
    continue as a journalist and it is unclear that the judge concluded the
    appellant would practice as such on return.   There  will  need  to  be
    further evidence on this aspect.  I do  not  consider  that  this  will
    require the findings on the pre-flight  threats  to  be  disturbed  and
    these can be preserved.

18. If it is found that the appellant  will  resume  his  occupation  as  a
    journalist on return, the issue will be whether it would be  reasonable
    to expect him to change his career and to resume his earlier or another
    occupation.

19. This is an unusual case in that the Secretary of State  concedes  error
    by the First-tier Tribunal though for reasons different from  those  on
    which it  has  been  challenged.   The  points  at  issue  are  however
    important.  Were it not for  the  Secretary  of  State's  concessionary
    approach I would need some persuasion that there is much merit  in  the
    remaining grounds.  This is however an adversarial jurisdiction and the
    parties have acceded to a course of action that was open to them.

20. Accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   It
    will be remade in the Upper Tribunal and the findings in  [13]  of  the
    determination are to be preserved. The Tribunal will hear  evidence  on
    two aspects:

    (i)  the appellant's intentions so far as  a  career  is  concerned  on
         return;

    (ii) whether former  journalists  who  are  no  longer  pursuing  their
         occupation would nevertheless  be  in  need  of  protection  having
         regard to the Secretary  of  State's  concession  and  the  current
         situation in Somalia.


Signed                                           Date 16 June 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

                                 Appendix 2


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 March 2015                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

                                   Between

                                     MSM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:                 Mr S Chelvan and Ms V Hutton (both  of  Counsel),
             instructed                   by  Duncan   Lewis   and   Company
             Solicitors

Respondent:                Ms DJ Rhee (of Counsel), instructed by the
             Treasury Solicitor

UNCHR (intervening):   Ms M Demetriou QC, acting pro bono, instructed by
             Baker and                   McKenzie LLP

ANONYMITY

We maintain the anonymity  order  made  previously  under  Rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal
or a Court orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.
This  prohibition  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties  and   their
representatives.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

 1. This decision determines the following two issues:


     a) the applications of  the  Appellant  and  the  Respondent  to  have
        further evidence admitted; and


     b) the important factual question of the Appellant's future employment
        plans and intentions.

The proceedings to date

 2. The Appellant, who benefits from the  protection  of  anonymity,  is  a
    national of Somalia, aged 29 years. This appeal has its  origins  in  a
    decision made on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (the "Secretary of State"), dated 02 January  2014,  whereby
    the Appellant's application  for  asylum  was  refused.  The  Appellant
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")  which,  by   its
    determination promulgated on 18 March 2014, affirmed  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State.  The ensuing grounds of appeal raised the three
    issues of the asserted risk to the Appellant as a member  of  a  group,
    namely journalists in Somalia; the Appellant's likely conduct on return
    to Somalia and, in particular, whether he would, or  would  be  obliged
    to, transfer to a different  profession;  and  the  historical  factual
    issue of whether the Appellant had been specifically  targeted  by  the
    terrorist organisation "Al-Shabaab" ("AS").  Permission to  appeal  was
    duly granted.

 3. The error of law hearing before the Upper Tribunal was held on  29  May
    2014.  Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson held that the decision  of  the  FtT
    was vitiated by error of law. In a commendably  focused  determination,
    the Judge, having recorded a limited concession  by  the  Secretary  of
    State's representative, ruled, in  substance,  that  the  FtT  had  not
    properly directed itself in law in relation to the  matters  raised  in
    the first two grounds of appeal: see especially  [13]  -  [14]  of  the
    decision.  The Judge found no merit in the third ground of  appeal.  We
    draw particular attention to the following passages:

         "[17]    What is  missing  from  the  determination  is  a  finding
             whether the Appellant would continue as a journalist ...


              There will need to be further evidence on this aspect ....


         [18] If it is found that the Appellant will resume  his  occupation
             as a journalist on return, the issue will be whether it  would
             be reasonable to expect him to change his career and to resume
             his earlier [teaching] or another occupation."

    These passages  shape  the  essential  framework  of  the  exercise  of
    remaking the decision of the FtT which now falls to this Tribunal.

 4. Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson expressly preserved a series of findings of
    fact contained in the determination of the FtT, namely:

      ix) The Appellant worked as a journalist for Simba Radio in Somalia.


       x) He did not at any stage come to the adverse attention of  AS:  his
          evidence to the contrary was a total fabrication.

      xi) He did not receive any threats on his mobile phone from AS.

     xii) None of his colleagues at the radio station was targeted or harmed
          before the Appellant left Mogadishu.

    xiii) The Appellant's wife did not relocate to a place of safety.

     xiv) The Appellant's sister was aware of his intention to travel to the
          United Kingdom.

      xv) Little weight could be attributed to the documentary  evidence  on
          which the Appellant relied in support of his assertion that AS had
          threatened him.

    The preservation of these findings  obviously  has  a  bearing  on  the
    contours and outcome of the remaking exercise.

The Appellant's application to admit fresh evidence

 5. The subject  matter  of  rule  15  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the "2008 Rules") is "Evidence and  Submissions".
    Rule 15(2A) provides:

         "In an asylum case or an immigration case -


          a) If a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that
             was not before the First-tier Tribunal, that party  must  send
             or deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and any other  party
             -


             (i)  indicating the nature of the evidence; and


             (ii) explaining why it was not  submitted  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal;  and


          b) When considering whether to admit evidence that was not before
             the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal must  have  regard
             to whether there has been unreasonable delay in producing that
             evidence."

    This provision must be  considered  in  conjunction  with  rule  15(2),
    whereby:


         "The Upper Tribunal may -


          a) admit evidence whether or not -


             (i)  the evidence would be admissible in a civil trial in  the
             United Kingdom; or


              (ii)     the evidence was available  to  a  previous  decision
         maker; or


          b) exclude evidence that would otherwise be admissible where -


             (i)  the evidence was not provided within the time allowed  by
                  a direction or a practice direction;


             (ii) the evidence was otherwise provided in a manner that  did
                  not comply with a direction or a practice direction; or


              (iii)    it would otherwise be unfair to admit the evidence."

    In short, the  Upper  Tribunal  is  invested  by  rule  15(2A)  with  a
    discretionary power to admit evidence which was not placed  before  the
    FtT.  In deciding whether to exercise this power, it should  take  into
    account rule 15(2) and must have regard to  the  overriding  objective,
    per rule 2(3)(a).

 6. The Applicant's application for the admission of further  evidence  did
    not comply with rule 15(2A)(a).  No  acceptable  explanation  for  this
    failure was proffered.  The hearing suffered delay  and  disruption  in
    consequence.  We deprecate this  failure  to  comply  with  the  Rules.
    Fortunately for the Applicant, the provisions of rule 7 can be  invoked
    in these circumstances and, with some reluctance, we do so.

 7. The hearing date upon which this application unexpectedly  emerged  had
    not been allocated for this purpose and this was compounded by the lack
    of proper advance notice  in  compliance  with  the  Rules.   When  one
    considers the meticulous case management of this appeal  undertaken  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson  since  the  setting  aside  of  the  FtT's
    decision  in  June  2014,  the  eleventh  hour  developments  in  these
    proceedings must be condemned as inexcusable.  Matters were exacerbated
    by the unacceptable failure of the Appellant's legal representatives to
    disclose to either the Tribunal or  the  Respondent's  representatives,
    throughout the case management phase, the possibility  of  developments
    of  this  kind.    The   knowledge   possessed   by   the   Appellant's
    representatives was not shared.  This was entirely unacceptable in  the
    circumstances of this appeal. It is  universally  recognised  that  the
    late and unexpected  introduction  of  evidence  in  whatever  form  is
    incompatible with the principles which govern contemporary  litigation:
    see O'Sullivan v Herdmans [1987] 3 ALL  ER  129,  per  Lord  Mackay  of
    Clashfern at 137. The related principle of litigation cards face up  is
    now one of some antiquity.


 8. This duties on representatives imposed by these principles  apply  with
    particular force to issues relating to the acquisition  of,  disclosure
    of and reliance upon documents by any  party.   The  non-disclosure  of
    another,  parallel  process,  under  the  Data  Protection  Act   1998,
    throughout  a  protracted  period,  upon  which  we   shall   elaborate
    presently,  placed  the  hearing  date  in  serious  jeopardy,  to  the
    knowledge of the Appellant's representatives and no one else.  Disarray
    resulted and a substantial quantity of valuable court time was  wasted.
    This is intolerable.  We shall consider  at  a  later  stage  of  these
    proceedings whether an order for wasted costs under  section  29(4)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 or  Rule  10(3)  of  the
    2008 Rules, or any other order, is appropriate.

 9. The Tribunal's attempts to bring form and  focus  to  this  application
    during the hearing achieved limited success.  The documents  which  the
    Applicant wishes to have admitted as fresh evidence  are  a  series  of
    materials provided to the  Applicant's  solicitors  under  cover  of  a
    letter dated 06 March 2015 from UK Visas and  Immigration  (hereinafter
    "UKVI"), an agency which is described as "an operational command of the
    Home Office".  These documents were provided in response to a  "subject
    access request" under the provisions of the Data  Protection  Act  1998
    (the "1998 Act").  While  the  letter  is  dated  06  March  2015,  the
    attachments were not brought to the attention of the Tribunal until  23
    March 2015, the eve of hearing.  Furthermore, the  letter  makes  clear
    that the request was made by a letter sent as long ago as  25  November
    2014.  The significance of this is that during  the  period  of  almost
    four  months  preceding  the  hearing  which  elapsed  thereafter   and
    notwithstanding that case management  reviews  were  conducted  by  the
    Tribunal, the existence of this parallel  process  was  concealed  from
    all. This is quite unacceptable.

10. The documents disclosed were presented to the Tribunal in  two  groups.
    The submissions of Counsel made no reference whatsoever to  the  larger
    bundle which, upon a cursory perusal, consists of  materials  generated
    by the Applicant's application for asylum and the two  ensuing  appeals
    and is largely duplication. In  passing,  we  observe  that  the  costs
    involved in preparing and reproducing this large, redundant bundle  are
    unlikely to be recoverable, come what may. It seems to  us  a  paradigm
    illustration of the blizzard mentality,  regrettably  so  prevalent  in
    many areas of contemporary litigation.


11.  In advancing the application under Rule 15(2A), Counsel referred  only
    to a discrete collection of documents assembled  in  a  small  booklet.
    The context in which the Applicant's belated  application  unfolded  is
    shaped by two main elements.  The first of these is a passage contained
    in the Respondent's decision letter dated 02 January 2014:

         "[46]    The above information indicates that journalists and those
             who work in the media are generally at risk in  Somalia,  with
             those working for state-owned media companies at the  greatest
             risk. It is noted that Simba Radio  is  an  independent  radio
             station however and is not linked in any  way  to  the  Somali
             Government ....


         [47] It is also noted that you worked as a reporter for Simba Radio
             from May 2011 until September 2013 ....


              Before this you worked as a teacher for three years,  teaching
             mathematics and Somali language .....


         [48] It is therefore concluded that although working as a  reporter
             may place you at risk in Somalia, it is not a necessary  risk,
             as you have transferable skills as a teacher which would allow
             you to live and work peacefully in your  home  country.   When
             this was put to you in interview the only reason you cited for
             not pursuing a career as a teacher was that the salary is less
             than that of a reporter."

    The "above information" is an excerpt from the Home Office  publication
    entitled "Country Information and Guidance: Somalia"  (2013).   Drawing
    on identified sources, this report contains the following passages:


         "Despite the  violence,  dozens  of  radio  stations  aligned  with
         particular factions continued to  broadcast  in  Mogadishu  and  in
         other parts of  the  country.  The  TFG  [Transitional  Government]
         continued to support Radio Mogadishu ......


         This includes journalists from  popular  stations  ....   who  have
         found it challenging to operate under [AS] ......


         Journalists were subjected  to  violence,  harassment,  arrest  and
         detention in all regions.  The National Union of Somali Journalists
         reported 18 journalists were killed across the country in 2012  and
         14 were wounded in Mogadishu ...  This was the  deadliest  year  on
         record for the country's journalists .....


         Concerning the big number of assassinated journalists,  it  is  not
         justified to say that [AS] is targeting  this  group  specifically,
         according to the international NGO(B) Mogadishu.   [AS]  has  taken
         responsibility for the killings of only journalists from the  state
         run Radio Mogadishu.  Who is behind the rest  of  the  killings  of
         journalists is not clear. In this connection it should be mentioned
         that Shabelle Media has had a conflict for a  long  time  with  the
         Government.  It was added that most  journalists  will  not  report
         negatively about [AS]."

         [Emphasis added.]

     In its determination, the FtT stated, at [15]:

         "It is conceded by the Respondent that in general  journalists  may
         be at risk in Mogadishu."

    We consider it clear that  the  Judge  was  not  here  referring  to  a
    concession made by the Respondent's representative at the hearing.   He
    was, rather, adverting to those parts of the decision letter reproduced
    above.

12. Sequentially, the next material development to which we  refer  is  the
    written submission of Ms Rhee, Counsel for  the  Respondent,  dated  12
    November 2014, provided in response to the Upper Tribunal's directions.
     Having referred  to  [46]  of  the  decision  letter,  the  submission
    summarises the Respondent's position thus:

         "[10]    First, the Secretary of State was not  thereby  purporting
             to accept that  all  practising  journalists  in  Somalia  are
             necessarily at risk. The Secretary of State submits that  this
             is evidenced not only from the passages  of  the  COIS  Report
             ....  which do not support such a wide  concession,  but  also
             from the fact that she then went on to state ...........  that
             'working as a reporter may  place  [the  Appellant]  at  risk'
             [emphasis added].  That is, her decision was that in any event
             an individualised risk assessment would need to be undertaken,
             albeit against general background factors. .....


         [15] Second, if and to  the  extent  that  paragraph  [46]  of  the
             Secretary of State's refusal letter is considered to contain a
             concession that all  practising  journalists  in  Somalia  are
             necessarily at risk, then the Secretary of State confirms that
             she does indeed seek to  withdraw  such  concession.   Such  a
             concession is neither supported by the information in the COIS
             Report ...   nor ....   the information  in  the  current  CIG
             Report (April 2014).  Whilst both reports indicate that  there
             are known instances of journalists having been  targeted,  the
             evidential picture falls far short of  establishing  that  all
             journalists are generally at risk, let alone  journalists  who
             do not work for state owed  media  companies  (such  as  Simba
             Radio)."

    Ms Rhee's written submission further contains the proposition that  the
    question of risk will be a matter  for  adjudication  by  the  Tribunal
    based on all available evidence, including that postdating the decision
    letter, continuing:


         "The Secretary of State's position is that it is therefore somewhat
         artificial to seek to  isolate  a  concession  in  respect  of  the
         evidential position pertaining at a given moment in time, as in any
         event the position would need to be considered against the most  up
         to date and relevant evidence."

     Finally, the submission discloses the  Respondent's  wish  to  withdraw
    the "concession" if necessary.

13. The gist of the argument advanced to the Tribunal by  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant  was  that  to  permit  the  Respondent   to   withdraw   the
    "concession" would be to condone an act committed in bad faith and that
    withdrawal should not therefore be permitted.  In the skeleton argument
    it is contended:

         "The  Appellant  therefore  submits  that   on   the   balance   of
         probabilities he can prove that the Respondent  has  acted  in  bad
         faith  in  withdrawing  the  concession  as  she  has   not   acted
         reasonably, with good faith and upon lawful and relevant grounds of
         public interest."

    The Appellant's case is that bad faith on the part of the Respondent is
    evidenced by certain of the documents yielded  by  the  subject  access
    request.  It was submitted, in particular, that these documents support
    the contention that the Respondent's instructions upon which Ms  Rhee's
    aforementioned submission of November 2014  was  evidently  based  were
    tainted by bad faith.  The Tribunal was  referred  to  an  email  chain
    preceding Ms Rhee's submission.  We consider that  there  are  two  key
    items in this sequence, the first  and  the  last.   This  sequence  of
    communications begins with a four page document  generated  in  October
    2014.  One deduces readily that the author  of  this  document  is  the
    Senior Presenting Officer who had represented the Respondent at a  case
    management hearing held on 15 October 2014, resulting  in  a  direction
    from the Tribunal to the Respondent to provide a written submission  on
    the issue of the  "concession".   It  is  abundantly  clear  that  this
    document takes the form of instructions prepared by the client for  the
    benefit of the Respondent's solicitor and Counsel and for  the  purpose
    of seeking legal advice.   The ensuing email communications take  their
    hue and colour from  this  starting  point.   Some  of  the  electronic
    communications generated during this phase are routine and  might  not,
    individually, attract privilege.  This, however, is  to  be  contrasted
    with the lengthy opening communication (summarised above) and a further
    electronic communication, dated 04 November 2014, which marks  the  end
    of this discrete phase. This is  clearly  a  request  by  the  Treasury
    Solicitor for further instructions from the  Respondent,  triggered  by
    Counsel's  request  (quoted   therein)   for   clarification   of   the
    Respondent's instructions concerning the basis upon which withdrawal of
    the "concession" should be advanced.  The  sequence  of  communications
    ends here: there is no response  to  the  solicitor's  request  in  the
    materials provided to the Tribunal.

14. The genesis of the Appellant's quest to establish that the Respondent's
    wish to withdraw the "concession"  is  precluded  by  bad  faith  is  a
    passage in the decision of the Court of Appeal in NR (Jamaica)  -  v  -
    SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 856, the context whereof  was  a  concession  made
    before the first instance tribunal by the  Respondent's  representative
    that if the Appellant was a lesbian, she would be  at  real  risk  upon
    return to her country of origin.  The  Court  of  Appeal  espoused  the
    approach which it had previously taken  in  Davoodipanah  -  v  -  SSHD
    [2004] EWCA Civ 106, where Kennedy LJ stated at [22]:

         "It is clear from the authorities that where a concession has  been
         made before an adjudicator by either party the Tribunal  can  allow
         the concession to be withdrawn if it considers that there  is  good
         reason in all the circumstances to take that course ....


         What the Tribunal must do is to try  to  obtain  a  fair  and  just
         result.  In the absence of prejudice, if a presenting  officer  has
         made a concession which appears in retrospect to  be  a  concession
         which he should not have made, then justice will require  that  the
         Secretary of State be allowed to withdraw  that  concession  before
         the Tribunal."

    Pausing at this juncture, the applicability of this  statement  to  the
    "concession" contained in the decision letter is not disputed on behalf
    of the Appellant.  In NR (Jamaica),  Goldring  LJ,  having  quoted  the
    above passage, continued, at [12]:


         "....   The Tribunal may in its discretion permit a  concession  to
         be withdrawn if in its  view  there  is  good  reason  in  all  the
         circumstances for that course to be taken.  Its discretion is wide.
          Its exercise will depend on the particular  circumstances  of  the
         case before it.   Prejudice  to  the  appellant  is  a  significant
         feature.  So is its absence.  Its absence  does  not  however  mean
         that an application to withdraw a  concession  will  invariably  be
         granted.   Bad  faith  will  almost  certainly  be  fatal   to   an
         application to withdraw a concession.  In the final analysis,  what
         is important is that as a result of the exercise of its  discretion
         the Tribunal is enabled to decide the  real  areas  of  dispute  on
         their merits so as to reach a result which  is  just  both  to  the
         Appellant and the Secretary of State."

         We have highlighted the sentence on which the Appellant's  argument
rests.

15. The question for the Tribunal, therefore, is whether the Respondent  is
    acting in bad faith in seeking to  withdraw  the  "concession"  in  the
    decision letter.  We have consistently referred to the "concession"  in
    italics and inverted commas because of the terms in which it is phrased
    and the evidence upon which it is evidently based.  We do  not  readily
    identify black and white in  either  the  supporting  evidence  or  the
    formulation of the "concession".  Rather, there are several  shades  of
    grey.  The Respondent's submission is that the words in question should
    be construed in a certain way, as set out in [11]  above.  We  consider
    this a respectable argument.  The meaning of the words in any  document
    is a question of law for the court conducting a dispassionate, detached
    and objective exercise taking into account the full context.   This  we
    consider to be orthodox doctrine and no authority to the  contrary  was
    cited.  Furthermore, we consider that the Upper Tribunal is not in  any
    event bound by this kind of "concession" (if it be such) in proceedings
    of this nature.  The Tribunal is the ultimate arbiter  of  all  issues,
    including the key issue of future risk  to  the  Appellant  in  certain
    eventualities, having acquitted  its  duty  to  consider  all  material
    evidence, including the "concession", as construed by the  Tribunal  in
    due course, in the round.

16. On the assumption that the Appellant's construction of the words  under
    scrutiny is legally correct, we consider  that  this  application  must
    fail  because  the  Appellant  has  not  discharged   the   burden   of
    establishing bad faith in the manner asserted.  In contemporary  public
    law, bad faith and improper motive are sometimes interchangeable terms,
    or concepts.  Fundamentally, both denote the  misuse  of  power.   See,
    generally, De Smith's Judicial Review (7th Edition), para 5 - 087.   In
    SCA - v - Minister of Immigration [2002] FCAFC, bad faith is defined as
    "a lack of an honest or genuine  attempt  to  undertake  the  task  and
    involves a personal attack on the honesty of the decision  maker":  see
    [19].  The authors of De Smith continue, at paragraph 5 - 089:

         "Bad faith is a serious allegation which attracts a heavy burden of
         proof."

    In practice, bad faith typically denotes  conduct  on  the  part  of  a
    public official which  is  dishonest.   It  "always  involves  a  grave
    charge":  per Megaw LJ in Cannock Chase District Council -  v  -  Kelly
    [1978] 1 WLR 1 at 6.  Furthermore, this serious allegation requires, in
    every case, ample advance notice and  detailed  particularisation:  the
    present case is a  worrying   illustration  of  the  neglect  of  these
    imperatives.

17. In one of the earlier authoritative judicial formulations, it was  held
    that the onus entails establishing that the public authority was intent
    upon achieving an improper purpose "under colour  and  pretence"  of  a
    proper purpose: per Lord MacNaghten in Westminster Corporation  -  v  -
    London and North Western Railway [1905] AC 426, at 430.

18. The Appellant  invites  the  Tribunal  to  infer  bad  faith  from  the
    materials  highlighted  and  summarised  above.   We  conclude  without
    hesitation that the onus of proving bad faith has not  been  discharged
    by the Appellant.  We consider that the materials fall  well  short  of
    being tainted in the manner asserted.  In the first  of  the  two  main
    electronic communications, it is evident that  the  presenting  officer
    concerned was  simply  expressing  a  view  about  the  timing  of  the
    production of certain documents.  Crucially, the  words  used  do  not,
    expressly or inferentially, evince an  intention  to  conceal  material
    documents.  Rather, the author of the communication was simply  mooting
    the possibility of disclosing them at a later stage of the proceedings.
    Furthermore, this unfolded in  a  context  where  the  author  had  not
    received legal advice and was preparing instructions which would enable
    such advice to be provided. At its worst, this discloses a questionable
    tactic. As regards the second main electronic  communication,  we  find
    nothing untoward.  This, in our view,  reveals  that  the  Respondent's
    representatives were giving conscientious and serious consideration  to
    an issue which was, on any showing, a challenging one.  Importantly, it
    is clear that the representatives had been equipped by  the  Respondent
    with the most recent of the relevant reports (CIG, April 2014).   There
    can be no suggestion that the Respondent was  withholding  anything  of
    relevance  from  its  lawyers.   Nor  is  there  any  evidence  of  any
    misleading, incomplete or dishonest response by any of the Respondent's
    officials to  the  lawyers'  request  for  instructions.   Accordingly,
    whatever the meaning to be placed  on  the  relevant  passages  in  the
    decision letter, we conclude that the Respondent was not acting in  bad
    faith in the respects alleged.

19. The question of whether the  Respondent  is  legally  entitled  to  the
    return of some of the documents provided in  response  to  the  subject
    access request is, in our view, a quite separate  one,  notwithstanding
    that it was conflated with the bad faith issue in  the  submissions  of
    Counsel.  The test which is engaged has been articulated in a number of
    decided cases and is expressed with particular clarity in the  judgment
    of Peter Gibson LJ in Breeze - v - John Stacy and Sons  Limited  [1999]
    WL 477354, at page 6 of the transcript:

         "There is, on the authorities, a two stage  test.   First,  was  it
         evident to the solicitor receiving the privileged documents that  a
         mistake had been made? If so, the solicitor is expected  to  return
         the documents.  If it was no so evident would it have been  obvious
         to  the  hypothetical  reasonable  solicitor  that  disclosure  had
         occurred as a result of the mistake?"

    The wider principles expounded in Phipson on Evidence  (17th  Edition),
    paragraph  26  -  64,  do  not  apply.   Rather,  the  narrower  Breeze
    principle, summarised in paragraph 26 - 65, is engaged in  the  present
    context.


20. In applying this principle to the instant case, we have considered  the
    evidence contained in the two witness  statements  of  the  Appellant's
    solicitor, which  were  supplemented  by  her  oral  testimony  to  the
    Tribunal.  One of  the  exhibits  to  these  statements  confirms  that
    immediately upon discovering that certain materials were  contained  in
    the  Appellant's  bundles  for  hearing,  the  Respondent's   solicitor
    communicated, in writing, a contention that this is privileged material
    which had been provided to the Appellant's solicitors in error and that
    privilege had  not  been  waived.   The  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    solicitor informs, but is not determinative of,  our evaluation of  the
    "hypothetical  reasonable  solicitor"  test.   Having  considered  this
    evidence with care, we do not find it persuasive.  We consider that  it
    should have  been  abundantly  clear  to  the  hypothetical  reasonable
    solicitor that the two major documents examined  and  summarised  above
    were privileged  (which  the  solicitor  did  not  dispute),  had  been
    generated in the context and for the purpose of these proceedings (also
    not disputed) and, taking into account particularly the high  level  of
    importance which the discrete issue of the  "concession"  had  assumed,
    had been provided in error.  The hypothetical solicitor would have been
    cognisant of the full background, including the appeal proceedings, the
    identity of the Respondent's  Counsel,  the  content  of  the  latter's
    submission of November 2014 and the evident fact that the  provider  of
    the documents, UKVI, was acting without reference to and unbeknownst to
    the Respondent's litigation representatives.  The fact that one arm did
    not know what the other was doing would in  our  estimation  have  been
    obvious. Evaluating all the evidence objectively, we consider that  the
    error was a glaring one. This analysis is not undermined in any way  by
    the consideration that some of the disclosed documents were  edited  by
    masking, not least because the accompanying letter  of  06  March  2015
    expressly stated that this measure had been taken -


         "....  because  Home  Office  records   sometimes   include   other
         information that we are not able to release to you under  the  Data
         Protection Act 1998 (for example, another person's data),  so  this
         is blacked out."

    To  summarise,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  hypothetical  reasonable
    solicitor would have realised quickly that an unintended  windfall  had
    materialised in consequence of unmistakeable   oversight,  inadvertence
    or error.

21. Accordingly, we refuse the Appellant's application under  Rule  15(2A).
    We shall decide the issue of future risk to the Appellant by  reference
    to all relevant and available evidence  in  the  round,  including  the
    Respondent's decision letter and our construction of its terms.

22. Henceforth,  we  consider  that,  as  a  general  rule,  disclosure  of
    documents should be pursued within the ambit and framework of the legal
    proceedings in question,  applying  the  governing  procedural  regime.
    Parallel processes are to be firmly discouraged since, as  the  present
    case demonstrates,  they  are  inimical  to  the  important  values  of
    transparency, efficiency and expedition and have the potential to  give
    rise to ambush,  disruption  and  delay.   They  may  also  invite  the
    condemnation of sharp practice.

The Respondent's Fresh Evidence Application

23. This application also was not made in accordance with Rule 15(2A)(a) of
    the 2008 Rules.  The explanation  provided,  based  on  the  timing  of
    receipt of the  documents  by  the  Respondent's  representatives,  was
    flimsy. However, no objection to the admission of these  documents  was
    articulated on behalf of the Appellant and, in particular, no prejudice
    of any kind was asserted.  The key consideration  in  determining  this
    application is the nature of the documents.  On a brief  perusal,  they
    all have a direct bearing on the issue of future risk to the  Appellant
    and, hence, are plainly relevant.  The weight to be  attached  to  them
    individually is a matter upon which we do not pronounce at this  stage.
    We accede to the Respondent's application.

The Appellant's Future Employment

24. Although we have not had submissions  on  the  oral  testimony  of  the
    Appellant and his supporting witness, in the light of the limited cross
    examination and his responses to our questions, we  are  able  to  make
    findings on one of the core issues that we are required  to  determine,
    namely: what is the Appellant's employment likely to be if  he  returns
    to Mogadishu?

25. It weighs against the Appellant that he was untruthful before  the  FtT
    about the adverse interest in him of AS. It is also a matter of concern
    that the evidence he gave in English before us about his past  work  in
    Somalia and his future ambitions contained substantially greater detail
    than that in his statement dated  04  March  2015.  This  may  reflect,
    however, on the quality of statement  compilation  by  his  solicitors,
    which is surprising in the light of the direction  that  his  statement
    should stand as his evidence in  chief.   We  give  the  Appellant  the
    benefit of the doubt on this issue.

26. The Appellant gave his answers to questions  without  hesitation  in  a
    lucid and confident way. He is articulate in  English  and  is  clearly
    well educated. We consider that the SSHD was correct to accept that  he
    was involved in journalism before he left  Mogadishu.  So  far  as  his
    ambitions for the future are concerned, we note the evidence about  the
    peripheral role (giving due weight to the restrictions  on  employment)
    that the Appellant has  played  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  Somalia
    associated TV broadcasters. On balance, we find  it  reasonably  likely
    that  the  Appellant  will  seek  to  work  with  broadcasters  or  the
    information media on return and, further,  will  secure  employment  in
    this sector. Noting the absence of evidence of any  published  articles
    by the Appellant, we do not consider that he has in the  past  been  an
    investigative journalist; in reality, his ambition appears to  be  more
    akin to being a researcher and presenter,  the  latter  reflecting  the
    role that he probably had before coming to the  United  Kingdom.  As  a
    probability, his journalistic employment in Somalia was of this  genre.
    Following careful reflection on the factors adverse to the  Appellant's
    veracity, we consider it unlikely that he will seek to resume his  pre-
    journalism career as a teacher.

27. In summary, therefore, we find as a  matter  of  probability  that  the
    Appellant will, if returned, continue  to  pursue  his  interest  in  a
    career in broadcasting and media related activity. This will include  a
    creative role in terms of research and writing for broadcasts. To  this
    extent there will be a journalistic element. We consider  further  that
    he is likely to secure employment in this field.  Whether  he  will  be
    seen or perceived as a person who may  attract  adverse  attention  and
    interest amounting to  persecution  in  contravention  of  the  Refugee
    Convention is a matter to be determined.

OVERALL CONCLUSION

28. Giving effect to the analysis and  discrete  findings  and  conclusions
    above:

    (a)  The Appellant's application for the admission  of  fresh  evidence
         under Rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Rules is refused.

         (b)  The Respondent's corresponding application is granted.

     (c) We find that if he returns to Mogodishu the Appellant is likely  to
    be actively   employed as a researcher,  writer  or  presenter  in  the
    broadcasting sector.

DIRECTIONS

29. We make the following directions:

    (i)  As previously intimated  to  the  parties,  this  appeal  will  be
         relisted at 10.00 hours on 28 April 2015, for a half day.


    (ii) All three  parties  will  revise  their  written  submissions,  to
         reflect this ruling,  with  appropriate  deletions,  additions  and
         highlighting, based on the existing documents,  by 23 April 2015 at
         latest.


    (iii)     If the Appellant's  representatives  wish  to  augment  their
         written submissions, one hour will be allocated for this purpose.


    (iv)  Similarly,  one   hour   is   allocated   to   the   Respondent's
         representatives.

    (v)  Similarly, we allocate 45 minutes to the intervening party, UNCHR.


    (vi) Any application for a wasted costs order will be made  in  writing
         by 20 April        2015, with any response to be made in writing by
         27 April 2015.

    (vi) Liberty to apply on two clear days notice to the other parties.


    (vii)    These directions may be modified or supplemented as the  Upper
         Tribunal considers fit.









                                                           Signed:     [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                       Date:   31 March 2015

