

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Chirairo) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00411 (IAC)

                    on an application for JUDICIAL REVIEW

|At                                            |Decision signed:   17.11.2014|
|on    14.11.2014                              |Handed down:      18.11.2014 |

                                   Before

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

                                   Between

           The Queen on the application of Joshua Tinashe CHIRAIRO
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and



                                                                  Respondent
Counsel for the applicant: Michael Biggs
Counsel for the respondent:       Zane Malik

                                  JUDGMENT

1.     This is an application for judicial review of  the  decision  of  the
    respondent on 7 August 2013, to refuse an application for discretionary
    leave to remain by a citizen of Zimbabwe, born 20 June 1987. Permission
    was granted on the basis that the decision in this applicant's case was
    inconsistent with that in his sister's, for reasons which had not  been
    properly explained.

 2. The applicant's father arrived on a student visa in June  2001,  joined
    by his mother that October, and his sister Shumirai,  born  12  January
    1990, in August 2004, and the applicant himself on 5 March 2005, all of
    them with visas as the father's dependants. The  applicant's  visa  ran
    out on 31 October that year, and on the 21st they all applied for leave
    to remain, the applicant's mother and sister again as  dependants,  but
    the applicant separately. Their applications were refused on 30 January
    2006. Their appeals were allowed by Judge Oscar del Fabbro on 20  April
    2006: the judge was well aware that the applicant had already been over
    18 when he made his application.

 3. However Judge del Fabbro accepted that all the  applications  had  been
    sent together, and should have been considered together: he went on  to
    say this:

       On the basis that [the applicant's] position, other than his age,  is
       no different to [his sister's] a dependent child, I would  allow  his
       appeal  too.  He  was  under  18  years  of  age  when  his  original
       application to be admitted as a child of [his  father]  was  granted.
       The fact that he has since turned 18 years of age does not debar  him
       from being granted leave to remain in the same capacity which I  find
       remains unaltered.

 4. Right or wrong, so far as this applicant  was  concerned,  that  was  a
    judicial decision which the Secretary of State needed either to appeal,
    or to recognize: this was done by granting  the  whole  family  further
    leave to remain on 15 June 2006, valid till 7 November that year. On 30
    September the applicant's father applied for leave to remain as a  work
    permit holder, with the  others  as  his  dependants.  The  applicant's
    father, mother and sister were all granted leave; but he was refused it
    on 10 November. On the 24th the applicant made a fresh application; but
    that was not refused till 16 January 2008; following that,  no  further
    action was taken against him, till he made another,  on  29  May  2012,
    refused in the decision under challenge.

 5. Meanwhile the applicant's solicitors had made  further  representations
    to the Home Office, father and mother had each been granted  indefinite
    leave to remain, in 2011 and 6 January 2012 respectively. On 9  January
    his sister had been granted a further three years' discretionary  leave
    to remain, till 2015. The original decision letter for  this  applicant
    did not refer to what had happened to  the  rest  of  his  family:  his
    relationship with his parents was only mentioned as the basis  for  his
    application, which was refused as not recognized,  in  the  case  of  a
    grown-up, under appendix FM of the 'new Rules' (in force  from  9  July
    2012).

 6. The applicant's first ground  of  challenge  was  that  this  decision,
    dealing only with the 'new Rules' on an application made when  the  old
    ones were still in force, was contrary to  Edgehill  &  another  [2014]
    EWCA  Civ  402.  However,  I  accept  Mr  Malik's  argument  that  this
    applicant's position at the time would have been in line with  that  of
    the unsuccessful applicant 'HB' in Edgehill : like HB,  his  individual
    article 8 case, even under the 'old Rules', would have been a weak one.

 7. Following the grant of permission on 27 September 2014,  the  Secretary
    of State tried to rationalise her position by means of further decision
    letters: the relevant and last one came as lately as 10 November,  only
    four days before the application came before me.  Possibly  interesting
    arguments  were  raised  about  the  legitimacy  of  considering   this
    application on the basis of such a late letter; but those will  be  for
    another day in another case, as, for the reasons I am about to give,  I
    do not think the letter made any difference to the main question before
    me, set out in the grant of permission.

 8. The 10 November letter sets out some of the history of the Secretary of
    State's  dealings  with  the  applicant  and  his  family,  as  already
    outlined: it notes that the applicant did not appeal against  the  2008
    refusal, which is a valid point. However, while it  mentions  the  2006
    grant  of  leave  to  remain  to  the  applicant's  sister,   and,   by
    implication, draws the distinction between them,  also  valid  at  that
    point, that he was already over 18 (which she was not), it fails either
    to mention or explain the 2012 grant to her, at a  time  when  she  was
    already nearly 22.

 9. Mr Malik asked me to infer that the reason why the  applicant's  sister
    was given leave then, but he was not, is that she had  been  here  with
    leave as their father's dependant all along.  While that  is  perfectly
    possible, the explanation is not so obvious that  it  can  be  assumed.
    Though the applicant had not had leave since November  2006,  in  April
    that year Judge del Fabbro had said the Secretary of State should  give
    him some form of leave, as his father's dependant, although he  was  by
    then over 18. That decision may have been questionable at best; but the
    Secretary of State chose not to appeal it, but  to  give  him  a  short
    period of less than six months' leave, in  line  with  his  father  and
    mother and sister.

10. So far, so good; but when they were all granted further leave to remain
    later that year, the applicant was refused. Following that refusal,  no
    further action was taken against him, and his fresh application was not
    considered  till  2008,  while  the  further  representations  made  in
    response to  that  year's  decision  were  not  considered  till  2012.
    Meanwhile the applicant did not simply stay on, trying to remain  under
    the Home Office radar, but pursued his case with them through  his  MP.
    As usual in those days, the Home Office showed what can most kindly  be
    described as  complete  nonchalance  towards  the  public  interest  in
    enforcing immigration decisions. Certainly the applicant and  his  then
    solicitors were themselves to blame  for  not  appealing  or  otherwise
    challenging the 2006 refusal at the time; but he had  won  one  appeal,
    and they may not unreasonably have thought that result should  continue
    to tell in his favour.

11. In 2012, the applicant's latest application drew the decisions made  in
    favour of his family, and in particular his sister, who had again  been
    given discretionary leave to remain, though she was by now over 18 too,
    to the attention of the  Secretary  of  State.  That  resulted  in  the
    decision under challenge; but this did not explain, even in  its  final
    (10 November 2014) form why the distinction had been made  between  the
    applicant's sister, who had been given leave to remain all  along,  and
    the applicant himself, who Judge del Fabbro had said  should  have  it.
    This decision was only explicable on the basis that the Home Office had
    chosen, rather than following or appealing  the  judge's  decision,  to
    side-step it by granting a short period of leave, and then disregarding
    it. That amounted to a  clear  disregard  of  the  statutory  appellate
    procedure, and the decision must be set aside.

Application  granted
Decision under challenge set aside

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
