
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Bossade (ss.117A-D-interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 April 2015                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR YAN BOSSADE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr K Mak, Solicitor, instructed by MKM Solicitors


1. For courts and tribunals, the  coming  into  force  of  Part  5A  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (ss.117A-D)  has  not  altered
the need for a two-stage approach to Article 8 claims.

2. Ordinarily a court or tribunal  will,  as  a  first  stage,  consider  an
appellant's Article 8 claim by reference to the Immigration Rules  that  set
out  substantive  conditions,  without  any  direct  reference  to  Part  5A
considerations. Such considerations have no direct application to  rules  of
this kind.  Part 5A considerations  only  have  direct  application  at  the
second stage of the Article 8 analysis. This method  of  approach  does  not
amount to according priority to  the  Rules  over  primary  legislation  but
rather of recognising their different functions.

3. In the context of foreign criminal cases (because  the  provisions  found
in Part 13 of the Rules are a complete code encompassing both stages of  the
Article 8 assessment), this  means  that  Part  5A  considerations  have  no
direct role at the first stage when a court or tribunal is deciding  whether
an applicant meets the substantive conditions of paragraphs 399 or  399A  of
the Immigration Rules. They only have  direct  application  at  the  second-
stage, viz. assessment  under  the  rules  that  involve  a  proportionality
assessment: viz. paragraph 398 and (in revocation cases) paragraph 390A.  In
cases other than those concerning deportation of  foreign  criminals,  where
the Rules are not a complete code, it may  still  be  necessary  to  conduct
this second stage outside the Rules: see Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
Department v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 at [39].

4. Whilst Part 5A  considerations  may  have  indirect  application  to  the
Immigration Rules, including those setting out substantive  conditions  such
as paragraphs 399 and 339A, this is limited to their role as  statements  of
principles that can be used where appropriate to inform the meaning  of  key
terms set out in such paragraphs.

5. New paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules remains similar  to  the  old
in considering the foreign criminal deportee's situation both in the UK  and
in the country of return. However, so far as concerns focus  on  a  person's
situation in the UK, time in the UK is no longer relevant as such except  in
the context of lawful residence (399A(a)) and paragraph  399A(b)  introduces
new criteria that relate to social and cultural integration in the  UK.   So
far as concerns focus on the situation in the country of  return,  paragraph
399A no longer  looks at 'ties' per se but at the more inclusive  notion  of
integration and obstacles thereto. By requiring focus  on  integration  both
in relation to a person's circumstances in the UK as well as in the  country
of return, the new Rules achieve a  much  more  holistic  assessment  of  an
appellant's  circumstances.  Thereby  they  bring   themselves   closer   to
Strasbourg jurisprudence on Article 8 in expulsion cases  which  has  always
seen  consideration  of  both  dimensions  as   requiring   a   wide-ranging
assessment: see e.g.  Jeunesse  v  Netherlands  (GC)  App.No.  12738/10,  31
October 2014, paragraphs 106-109.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The  respondent  (hereinafter  "the  claimant")  is  a  national  of  the
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) aged 29.  On 23 July 2013  the  appellant
(hereinafter "the SSHD") decided to make a deportation order against him  on
the ground that  he  was  a  foreign  criminal  sentenced  to  a  period  of
imprisonment of at least twelve months.

2. In a determination of 24 June 2014, a  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  panel
comprising Judge Abebrese  and  N.L.M.  Richardson  allowed  the  claimant's
appeal under Articles 3 and 8 of  the  ECHR  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
Immigration Rules.  On 28 January 2015 we set  aside  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal for error  of  law  (the  principal  errors  found  were
inadequate treatment of Article 3; failure to recognise  that  the  claimant
was shut out from paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  by  suitability
requirements; and failure to assess objectively the issue  of  ties  in  the
country to which he would be deported).  In our decision  we  observed  that
whilst ideally the further hearing would not take  place  before  the  Upper
Tribunal had issued new country  guidance  on  the  Democratic  Republic  of
Congo, we might find it necessary, if that were  delayed,  to  proceed  with
the case nonetheless.  We made this observation in light of  the  fact  that
the Upper Tribunal had taken steps to convene a new  country  guidance  case
to address the issue of whether there was  a  risk  on  return  to  criminal
deportees, which Phillips J had had  to  engage  with  P  (DRC)  R  (on  the
application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC
3879 (Admin).

3. At the hearing before us we explained to the  parties  that  rather  than
adjourn  to  await  the  pending  country  guidance  case,  which  was  then
imminent, we would hear their submissions and then  give  them  a  specified
period in which to make written submissions dealing  with  the  implications
for our decision of the new country guidance once  reported.  Following  the
reporting of that decision, BM and Others (returnees  -  criminal  and  non-
criminal) Democratic Republic of Congo (CG) [2015]  UKUT  293  (IAC),  on  2
June 2015, we duly received submissions. It is convenient  to  say  at  this
stage that in light of the BM decision we are entirely  satisfied  that  the
claimant would not face risk on return to the DRC  by  virtue  of  the  fact
that he is a foreign national offender (FNO). He has never asserted that  he
falls into any of the risk categories identified in   BM  or  other  country
guidance cases on the DRC. Mr  Mak's  further  written  submission  that  we
should find that the claimant would face a real risk of being  detained  for
more than a day  because  he  had  been  away  from  the  DRC  so  long  was
unsupported by any evidence and can be rejected as purely  speculative.  Our
conclusion is that his case cannot succeed  on  asylum-related  grounds;  it
hinges entirely on Article 8 ECHR.

4. The claimant who was born in 1986 came to the UK when  aged  4.   He  was
granted indefinite leave to remain  (ILR)  in  1998.   He  began  committing
offences from 2002, with a history  of  convictions  in  2002,  2004,  2005,
2006, 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011, culminating  in  a  conviction  at  Croydon
Crown Court for robbery  and  related  offences  for  which  he  received  a
sentence of 42 months' imprisonment.  On 2  August  2006  the  claimant  was
issued  with  a  "warning  letter"  about  his  criminal  behaviour  (whilst
imprisoned in HMP Glen Parva).

5. At the hearing before the FtT the  claimant  gave  evidence  as  did  his
mother.  The claimant stated that he had two brothers born in the UK.   They
had different fathers.  The claimant had a difficult relationship  with  his
stepfather.  He entered a life of crime which spiralled  and  eventually  he
was sentenced to a term of imprisonment.  In his statement of  May  2014  he
said his most recent spell in prison and the deportation decision  had  made
him realise he had to change.  He now accepted full responsibility  for  his
crimes and his behaviour.  He had learnt and developed the right  skills  to
equip himself better for life outside.  He had no memory of life in the  DRC
and had always considered  himself  British.   He  had  never  met  his  own
father.  He had never been outside the UK.  He  did  not  speak  Lingala  or
French.  In the DRC he would have no friends, family, home or  knowledge  of
the language or culture.  He was not aware he had uncles in the DRC.

6. The FtT also heard from the claimant's mother.  She explained  that  when
he was a teenager he refused to listen to instructions  or  be  disciplined.
She believed it was possible for her son to have changed.

7. Before the FtT there was also an OASys Report indicating that  there  was
still an element of risk in respect of the claimant  and  that  his  licence
was due to expire in October  2015.   The  claimant  had  had  a  number  of
opportunities to stop re-offending which he had not taken advantage of.

8. Shortly after we set aside  the  FtT  decision,  the  parties  were  sent
directions putting both on notice that it was their responsibility  to  file
any documentary  evidence  upon  which  reliance  was  placed.   No  further
evidence was produced in response  to  that  direction  nor  was  there  any
application for the claimant or any other witness  to  give  oral  evidence.
In such circumstances we indicated to the parties that  the  hearing  before
us would be confined to submissions.

Submissions

9. At the outset both parties said that  we  should  decide  the  claimant's
appeal, not under the version of the Immigration Rules in force at the  date
of decision but as at the date before us.  That meant looking at  the  Rules
as they had been amended on 28 July 2014.  Both parties also reminded us  of
the need to apply Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act,  inserted  by  s.19  of  the
Immigration Act 2014. Before going further, it is convenient to set  out  in
full paragraphs 398 and 399A of the Rules (as amended on 28 July  2014)  and
Part 5A of the Act:

Paragraphs 398 and 399A provide:


    "398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
    the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    and
    (a) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because they have been convicted
    of an offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least 4 years;
    (b) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because they have been convicted
    of an offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
    (c) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because,  in  the  view  of  the
    Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are
    a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law, the
    Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider  whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public  interest
    in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where there are
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.
    ...
    399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -


    (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of  his
    life; and
    (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
    (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his  integration  into
         the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

Headed "Article 8 of the ECHR: Public Interest Considerations", Part 5A
provides:
      117A Application of this Part
      (1)  This Part applies where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
      determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
      (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and family  life
      under Article 8, and
      (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
      Act 1998.
      (2)  In  considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
      tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
      (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
      (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,  to  the
      considerations listed in section 117C.
      (3)  In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
      question of whether an interference with a person's right  to  respect
      for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).
      117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
      (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
      interest.
      (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
      of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
      seek to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
      English, because persons who can speak English-
      (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b) are better able to integrate into society.
      (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
      of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
      seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
      independent, because such persons-
      (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b) are better able to integrate into society.
      (4) Little weight should be given to-
      (a) a private life, or
      (b)  a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that   is
      established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the  United
      Kingdom unlawfully.
      (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
      person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
      (6) In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
      public interest does not require the person's removal where-
      (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      a qualifying child, and
      (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom.


      117C Article 8 additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
      criminals.
      (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
      (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
      greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
      (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
      to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
      requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.
      (4) Exception 1 applies where-
      (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's
      life,
      (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and
      (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration  into
      the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
      (5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect  of  C's
      deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
      (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
      period of imprisonment of at least four  years,  the  public  interest
      requires deportation unless there are very  compelling  circumstances,
      over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.
      (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken  into
      account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to  deport
      a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision
      was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.
      117D Interpretation of this Part
      (1)  In this Part-
      "Article 8" means Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights;
      "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-
      (a) is a British citizen, or
      (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of  seven
      years or more;
      "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
      (a) is a British citizen, or
      (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
      Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
      (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
      (a) who is not a British citizen,
      (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
      (c) who -
      (i) has been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at  least  12
      months,
      (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm, or


      (iii) is a persistent offender.
      (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a  person  subject  to  an
      order under-
      (a) section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964  (insanity
      etc),
      (b) section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (insanity
      etc), or (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order
      1986 (insanity etc), has not been convicted of an offence.
      (4)  In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to  a
      period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-
      (a)  do not include a person who has  received  a  suspended  sentence
      (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence or any  part  of
      it (of whatever length) is to take effect);
      (b)  do not include a person who has been sentenced  to  a  period  of
      imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue of being  sentenced
      to consecutive sentences amounting in  aggregate  to  that  length  of
      time;
      (c)  include a person who is sentenced to  detention,  or  ordered  or
      directed to be  detained,  in  an  institution  other  than  a  prison
      (including, in particular, a hospital  or  an  institution  for  young
      offenders) for that length of time; and
      (d)  include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment  or  detention,
      or ordered or directed to be detained, for  an  indeterminate  period,
      provided that it may last for at least that length of time.
      (5) If any question arises for the purposes of this Part as to whether
      a person is a British citizen, it is for  the  person  asserting  that
      fact to prove it."
10. Mr Jarvis for the SSHD contended that  because  the  claimant  had  been
sentenced to less than 4 years (3 years, 9 months) he fell  under  paragraph
399A(a)-(c).  As regards paragraph 399A(a), Mr Jarvis accepted the  claimant
met this condition as he had been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
his life: he was granted ILR on 24 September 1998, which meant he  had  over
16� years' lawful residence.

11.  As  regards  paragraph  399A(b),  however,  Mr   Jarvis   argued   that
notwithstanding he had received all his  schooling  in  the  UK  and  had  a
mother and two half-brothers who were British citizens, he was not  socially
and culturally integrated in the UK.  He had spent  significant  periods  of
his residence in prison and excluded from society.  Even when not in  prison
his pattern of offending showed his lifestyle was anti-social.  He had  also
failed to show he was financially  independent  to  any  significant  degree
whilst he was not  in  prison.   His  offending,  namely  repeated  robbery,
showed  an  obvious  disregard  for  the  safety  and  wellbeing  of  fellow
citizens.

12. In any event, even leaving paragraph  399A(b)  aside,  according  to  Mr
Jarvis the  claimant  could  still  not  meet  the  conditions  set  out  in
paragraph 399A(c), which required him to  show  that  there  would  be  very
significant obstacles to his integration into the country  to  which  it  is
proposed he is deported.  It would be open to the claimant  to  rebuild  his
private life in the DRC and integrate into that country's society.   It  was
not  accepted  he  was  not  conversant  in  French,  bearing  in  mind  his
upbringing with a mother from the DRC.  He could use whatever skills he  had
accrued in the UK to help him get by in the DRC.  He had  not  produced  any
evidence of mental or physical disability.  The wording  of  paragraph  399A
no longer referred anywhere to "ties" as such, but  clearly  the  matter  of
family connections  was  just  as  relevant  under  the  new  wording.   The
claimant had not shown he could not look to support from family in  the  DRC
whether that be financial, emotional etc.  Long residence was not enough.

13. Mr Jarvis said that the claimant could not benefit  from  paragraph  398
as  he  could  not  meet  the  very  high  threshold  of  "very   compelling
circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

14. Turning to Part 5A of the 2002  Act,  Mr  Jarvis  said  that  the  Upper
Tribunal was obliged to take  account  of  its  provisions,  including  when
making the proportionality assessment under paragraph 398.  Section  117C(3)
applied to the claimant and as such significant weight should  be  given  to
the  public  interest  in  deporting  him.   The  claimant  was  a   serious
recidivist criminal with an appalling  criminal  history  and  as  such  the
public interest in deportation was  particularly  strong  in  terms  of  the
historical impact of his offences; the risk of re-offending in  the  future;
and  the  importance  of  general  deterrence.  The   claimant's   extensive
involvement with the criminal justice system has also caused  a  substantial
cost to the public purse.

15. Mr Mak began his submission by taking issue with  the  Upper  Tribunal's
statement in its error of law decision that the claimant had four uncles  in
the DRC.  That was not the case and not what the claimant had  said  in  his
witness statement in May 2014.  He had two uncles in Congo, Brazzaville  and
two whom he had lost touch with - hence none in  the  DRC.   The  claimant's
evidence about this was not challenged by the respondent before the FtT.

16. As regards the relevant Immigration Rules, Mr Mak said he did  not  seek
to argue that the claimant could show "very compelling circumstances"  under
paragraph 398, but he did not need to as he  met  paragraph  399A.   Mr  Mak
noted that in that  regard  the  SSHD  agreed  the  claimant  met  paragraph
399A(a), so there was only dispute over the two other conditions set out  in
paragraph 399A(b)-(c).  He asked us to find that the  claimant  clearly  did
meet paragraph 399A(b) by virtue of the fact that  the  UK  was  effectively
the only country in which he had ever lived,  all  his  schooling  had  been
here, he only spoke English, his mother and half-brothers were  British  and
he had shared his upbringing with them.  The fact that he had been  lawfully
resident in the UK over half his life also fed into  the  paragraph  399A(b)
assessment.  It was  dangerous  and  wrong  to  read  paragraph  399A(b)  as
requiring (social and cultural) integrative behaviour  free  of  criminality
because the provision was predicated on someone  being  a  foreign  criminal
with less than four years' sentence.  In respect of paragraph  399A(c),  the
claimant could show that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his
integration in the DRC.  He had only lived there as a baby.  He had no  ties
in the DRC.  He did not speak Lingala.  If the claimant  could  not  satisfy
paragraph 399A(b) or (c), then who could?  The provision  was  not  intended
to allow only a small minority to satisfy its requirements.

17. Mr Jarvis enunciated as a general proposition that the  new  version  of
the Rules dealing with foreign criminals was  not  intended  to  effect  any
drastic changes but rather to ensure there was closer alignment with  higher
court decisions. That was true, he said, both of the Rules  in  general  and
paragraphs 399, 399A and 398 in particular. The main focus  of  this  appeal
was paragraph 399A. Mr Mak did not seek  to  advance  any  general  argument
regarding the new Rules but was in agreement with Mr Jarvis  that,  together
with Part 5A, paragraph 399A was at the heart of the claimant's appeal.

Analysis

The applicable Rules

18. We deal first with the applicable Rules (we  shall  address  more  fully
later why we start with them rather than with Part 5A considerations).   The
parties invited us to apply those in force now, rather than those  in  force
when the SSHD made her decision.  They did not cite authority but  in  light
of the conclusion set out by Aikens LJ in YM (Uganda)[2014]  EWCA  Civ  1292
at [37] and AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 at [7] they are  clearly  right
about that. Because we are re-making the decision (having set aside that  of
the First-tier Tribunal) we must apply the Rules in force  at  the  date  of
hearing before us.

19. This approach carries with it the difficulty that the Upper Tribunal  is
determining an appeal under a different version of the Rules than  the  SSHD
was when she made her decision, but that is one  the  legislative  framework
caters for (s.85(4) of the 2002 Act) and of course the  SSHD  (in  reply  to
Tribunal directions and through her representative, Mr Jarvis) was  able  to
inform us what view she takes.

The new Rules

20.  Whether  (as  Mr  Jarvis  contended)  the  new  Rules  are  largely   a
codification of existing case law or not, we of course have to approach  the
meaning of their provisions in the  light  of  the  guidance  given  by  the
Supreme Court in Mahad (and Others) v Entry Clearance  Officer  [2009]  UKSC
16.

21. Paragraph 399A,  like  paragraph  399,  only  applies  to  less  serious
foreign criminal cases falling within paragraph 398(b) or (c).  Put  another
way, a foreign criminal who has been convicted of an offence  for  which  he
has been imprisoned for at least 4 years - i.e. a foreign  criminal  falling
within paragraph 398(a) - is excluded from  consideration  under  paragraphs
399A and 399A  and can only seek  to  rely  on  the  residual  provision  in
paragraph 398 which requires him to show that  there  are  "very  compelling
circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs  399  and  399A".







Paragraph 399A

22.The previous version of paragraph 399A[1] did not  refer  to  integration
but rather to criteria relating to (i) the  period  of  time  a  person  has
lived in the UK continuously, discounting any period of imprisonment);  (ii)
age (if 25 or over, it was necessary to show a 20 year period; if under  25,
it was necessary to show  he  had  spent  at  least  half  his  life  living
continuously in the UK); and (iii) the nature of his ties in the country  to
which he would go if  required  to  leave  the  UK  ("and  he  has  no  ties
(including social, cultural or family) with the country to  which  he  would
have to go if required to leave the UK").  These criteria were  set  out  in
two subparagraphs, one  imposing  a  requirement  of  20  years'  continuous
residence; the other, applicable only to those under 25,  imposing  a  'half
of his life in the UK' criterion coupled with a 'no ties' test.  Except  for
requirements of time, the  focus  was  entirely  on  the  situation  in  the
applicant's country of return.

23. The new paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules remains similar  to  the
old in considering the foreign criminal deportee's situation both in the  UK
and in the country of return. However, so far as concerns  the  focus  on  a
person's situation in the UK, time in the UK is no longer relevant  as  such
except in the context of lawful residence (paragraph 399A(a)) and  paragraph
399A(b)  introduces  new  criteria  that  relate  to  social  and   cultural
integration in the UK. As before, the rule is cast  in  the  present  tense:
"he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK".  So  far  as  concerns
focus on the situation in the country of  return,  it  no  longer  looks  at
'ties' per se but at integration and obstacles thereto. By  requiring  focus
on integration both in relation to a person's circumstances  in  the  UK  as
well as in the country  of  return,  the  new  Rules  require  a  much  more
holistic assessment of an  applicant's  circumstances.  Thereby  they  bring
themselves closer to Strasbourg jurisprudence  on  Article  8  in  expulsion
cases which has always seen consideration of both dimensions as requiring  a
wide-ranging assessment:  see  e.g.  Jeunesse  v  Netherlands  (GC)  App.No.
12738/10, 31 October 2014, paragraphs 106-109. Sections 117A(2)(b) and  3(b)
of the 2002 Act also utilise the concept of "integration into society".

24. In  our  judgement,  the  gravamen  of  the  new  paragraph  399A(b)  is
integration in the UK.  Integration must be shown to exist in two  respects:
social and cultural.  Neither one nor the other  is  sufficient.   The  term
integration imports a qualitative test: in order to assess whether a  person
"is" socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  UK,  one  is  not  simply
looking at how long a person has spent in the UK or  even  at  whether  that
period comprises lawful residence: but the fact that an applicant has  spent
some or all of his time  in  the  UK  unlawfully  may  be  of  relevance  in
deciding whether he has integrated in these two  ways.   Another  difference
between the old and  the  new  Rules  is  that  whereas  the  previous  rule
required any period of imprisonment  to  be  discounted,  the  new  rule  is
silent on the matter. As a result we consider that it must  remain  open  to
the decision-maker to consider time spent in prison negatively,  because  it
does not bespeak integrative behaviour; but  the  rule  no  longer  mandates
that.
25. Mr Mak submitted that it is implicit in the paragraph 399A context  -  a
rule dealing with foreign criminals - that merely being a  foreign  criminal
cannot preclude a person from showing the necessary integration.  With  that
we can easily agree. Mr Mak further submitted  that  the  rule  cannot  have
been intended to assist only  a  few  such  persons.  With  that  we  wholly
disagree. The new Rules make even clearer than the pre-28  July  2014  rules
that deportation of foreign criminals is always in the public  interest  and
can only be outweighed in  very  limited  circumstances.  In  general  terms
imposition of  a  custodial  sentence  is  an  indication  that  the  person
concerned has not respected the values  of  the  host  society  (cf  in  the
context of EU  law  on  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  Case  C-400/12
Secretary of State v MG ECJI:EU:C2014:9 at [31]). Further, whilst in  prison
a person cannot be a useful member of society at  large;  during  that  time
such a person cannot as a  general  rule   show  integration  into  society.
Thus, although the new rule does not as such preclude time  in  prison  from
being considered as to whether social and  cultural  integration  is  shown,
its terms leave very little scope for such argument.
 Interrelationship between ss. 117A-D  considerations  and  the  Immigration
    Rules.

26. Both parties were adamant that in deciding the claimant's  case  it  was
necessary for the Tribunal to apply Part 5A of the Act  in tandem  with  the
relevant provisions of the Rules  However,  beyond  Mr  Jarvis's  submission
that to apply Part 5A  was  especially  important  in  the  context  of  the
paragraph 398 analysis, neither representatives offered any view as  to  how
the Tribunal should structure its decision-making  so  as  to  address  both
sets of provisions

27. The coming into force of Part 5A of the 2002 Act  has  complicated  life
for courts and tribunals. It has meant that in this area of  law  there  are
now two overlapping sets of domestic  provisions  dealing  with  Article  8.
Both reflect attempts to codify aspects of  Article  8  jurisprudence  (with
the Immigration Rules this process was only expressly begun  in  July  2012,
when the government decided to  incorporate  into  the  Rules  a  number  of
provisions dealing with Article 8). Just as when the  government  introduced
the  new  Immigration  Rules  in  June  2012  it  produced  an  "ECHR  memo"
explaining their purport, so too when it introduced the Immigration Bill  in
2013 it published an "ECHR Memorandum". Both sets of provisions reflect  the
will of Parliament although the Rules  do  not  carry  the  same  degree  of
democratic endorsement as does primary legislation: see MM & Ors, R (On  the
Application Of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 1)  [2014]
EWCA Civ 985 at [92]; R (on the application of Onkar  Singh  Nagre)  v  SSHD
[2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) at [25].  In  addition,  their  respective  contents
heavily overlap. For example, both s.117B(6) and paragraph  399(a)(ii)  deal
with a person who has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a  child
under the age of 18 years and is in the  UK  and  the  child  is  a  British
citizen or the child has lived continuously for at least  7  years;  whereas
s.117A(6)(b) refers to the circumstances where "it would not  be  reasonable
to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom",  paragraph  399A(b)
requires it to be shown that  it would be "unduly harsh" for  the  child  to
live in the country to which the person is to be deported and  it  would  be
"unduly harsh" for the child to remain in the UK without the person  who  is
to be deported. Both s.117C(5) and paragraph 399(a) (ii) (a) and (b)  employ
the criterion of "unduly harsh". We have already noted that  both  s.117C(4)
and paragraph 399A(b) employ the concept of integration.

28. That there should be broad overlap  in  content  is  hardly  surprising;
indeed something would be amiss otherwise, since both deal with  immigration
control and both require relevant decision-makers to act in compliance  with
a person's human rights (paragraph 2 of the Rules; s. 117A(1)  of  the  2002
Act). Both also reflect  the  desire  on  the  part  of  the  government  to
regulate  more  fully  the  importance  of  the  public  interest   in   the
maintenance of effective immigration control and in the Committee  stage  of
the Bill the then Minister of Immigration described the purpose of  Part  5A
as being that of "setting out the weight that judges  should  place  on  the
public interest in relation to certain factors", such a step being  seen  as
necessary because judges had observed that the Immigration Rules lacked  the
full democratic legitimacy of primary legislation (see Q194).

29. However, whilst this backdrop clarifies why it  was  felt  necessary  to
complement the Rules with primary legislation in the form  of  Part  5A,  it
does not assist us in  clarifying  their  interrelationship.  The  interplay
between these two regimes, one  of  primary  legislation,  the  other  of  a
subsidiary status, is one of the important issues arising out of the  recent
legislative reforms.

30. In seeking to analyse how they co-exist, we should first of all  clarify
that the coming into force of Part 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002 (ss.117A-D)  has  not  altered  the  need  for  a  two-stage
approach to Article 8 claims. It  is  inexorably  clear  from  higher  court
guidance, both that preceding the coming into force of  Part  5A  (see  e.g.
MF (Nigeria)) and that given subsequently (see e.g.  SSHD  v  SS  (Congo)  &
Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387), that assessment of Article  8  claims  requires  a
two-stage analysis.

31. The existing case law    makes  very  clear  that  in  foreign  national
deportation cases, the two-stage approach must be conducted entirely  within
the Rules because  they  are  a  "complete  code"  for  these  purposes  (MF
(Nigeria)[2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at [16]); the same  is  not  necessarily  true
for other types of cases where there may be gaps.   In  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636, Sales LJ  stated
at [39]:

    "The fact that the new rules [on foreign  criminals]  are  intended  to
    operate as a comprehensive code is significant, because it  means  that
    an official or a tribunal should seek to take account of any Convention
    rights of an appellant through the lens of the  new  rules  themselves,
    rather than looking to apply Convention rights for themselves in a free-
    standing way outside the new rules. This feature of the new rules makes
    the  decision-making  framework  in  relation  to   foreign   criminals
    different from that in relation  to  other  parts  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, where the  Secretary  of  State  retains  a  general  discretion
    outside  the  Rules  in  exercise  of  which,  in  some  circumstances,
    decisions may need to be made in order to  accommodate  certain  claims
    for leave to remain on the basis of Convention rights, as explained  in
    Huang and R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin)."

32. In SS (Congo) Sales LJ at [45] put matters this way:

     "The latter stage of the [two-stage analysis] analysis will be covered
    by the text of the Rules  themselves,  as  in  relation  to  the  Rules
    covering deportation of foreign criminals  reviewed  in  MF  (Nigeria).
    Those Rules laid down substantive conditions which, if satisfied, would
    lead to the grant of LTR, but also stated that LTR might be granted  in
    "exceptional circumstances" if  the  substantive  conditions  were  not
    satisfied in a particular case. Where the Rules take this form, it  can
    be said that they form a "complete code", in the sense that both stages
    of the analysis are covered by the text of the Rules. But this does not
    take one very far, since under the "exceptional  circumstances"  rubric
    one still has to allow for consideration of any matters bearing on  the
    application of Article 8 for the purposes of the second  stage  of  the
    analysis: see AJ (Angola [], above, at [46] and [55]. This is the basic
    point made by this court at paragraph. [44]-[46] of its judgment in  MF
    (Nigeria)."

33. We have seen cases in  which  tribunal  judges  have  regarded  Part  5A
considerations as provisions that have to be directly  applied  and  without
qualification  when  deciding  cases  under  the   Immigration   Rules.   We
respectfully suggest that such an approach cannot be correct  for  a  number
of reasons.

34.  In  the  first  place,  the  application  of  Part  5A   considerations
presupposes that the decision-maker has reached the stage in  an  Article  8
assessment of assessing proportionality. Part 5A considerations  are  not  a
complete code of the general law on Article 8. Sections 117A-D  do  not  for
example deal with the meaning of family life or private  life  or  with  the
issue of interference with the right to respect for private and family  life
or whether the decision is in accordance with the law. Put in Razgar, R  (on
the Application of) v. Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2004]
UKHL 27  terms, ss.117A-D are concerned only with Question 5: as  stated  in
Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) at [25]:  "in  effect  ss.117A-117D
are essentially a further  elaboration  of  Razgar's  Question  5  which  is
essentially  about  proportionality  and   justification   (Lord   Bingham's
Question 5 asks, assuming that in reply to previous questions  it  has  been
established that there had been an interference with the  right  to  respect
for private and family life, " [i]f so, is such  interference  proportionate
to the legitimate public end sought to  be  achieved?").  In  addition,  the
Part 5A considerations are not and do not purport to be a complete code  for
the conduct of the proportionality assessment enjoined  by  Razgar  Question
5. They do not purport to be an exhaustive set of  the  considerations  that
must be taken into account when assessing proportionality:  section  117A(2)
provides that the court or tribunal "must (in particular) have regard  to  .
. . considerations" that are then enumerated: see Dube, AM  (S.117B)  [2015]
UKUT 260 (IAC).

35. Second, ss.117A-D do not provide that  such  considerations  are  to  be
applied to the Immigration Rules or in what way. They state that they  apply
where a court or tribunal is required to determine  a  decision  made  under
the Immigration Acts, but they  do  not  specify  whether  they  are  to  be
applied to assessment of Article 8 claims either under the Rules or  outside
the  Rules.  Correspondingly,  the  Immigration  Rules  contain  no  express
provision making or requiring reference  to  Part  5A  notwithstanding  that
this was  brought into force on the same date as  the  new  version  of  the
Immigration Rules with which we are concerned (28 July 2014).

36. Third, the approach  that  Part  5A  considerations  should  be  applied
directly and in wholesale fashion to the Rules  misunderstands  that  a  key
characteristic of the Rules is that for the most part they set out  criteria
which are or may be determinative of a person's immigration status.  It  was
this  characteristic which was seen  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  R(Alvi)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 33 [2012] 1 WLR  2208
to constitute their raison d'etre. As was put by Lord Dyson at [94]:

    "...any requirement which, if not satisfied by the migrant,  will  lead
    to an application for leave to enter or remain being refused is a  rule
    within the meaning of section 3(2) [of the Immigration Act 1971].  That
    is what Parliament was interested in when it enacted section  3(2).  It
    wanted to have a say in the rules which set  out  the  basis  on  which
    these applications were to be determined".

and at [97]: "The key requirement  is  that  the  immigration  rules  should
include all those provisions which set out criteria  which  are  or  may  be
determinative of an application for leave to enter or remain".

37. How this characteristic of the Rules is woven into the rules on  foreign
criminals headed "Deportation and Article 8" needs some elaboration  because
of the unusual wording found in  paragraphs  398  and  390A.  The  Rules  on
foreign criminals include provisions  that  specify  substantive  conditions
that have to be met  and if they are met result in a decision that a  person
is or is not "successful" in  their  Article  8  claim  and  in  turn  on  a
decision whether to grant of limited leave etc. (paragraph  399B).  In  this
way, meeting these conditions has  a  determinative  effect  on  a  person's
status. This is the primary function of paragraphs  399  and  399A:  see  MF
(Nigeria) at  [35].  Being  a  set  of  conditions  they  are  qualitatively
different to "considerations". Paragraph 398 (like paragraph  390A)  has  to
be treated as sui generis  because it is settled law that its criterion  for
those who cannot succeed under paragraphs 399 or  399A  -  "very  compelling
circumstances over and above those described in paragraph 399  and  399A"  -
necessitates  a  full-blown  second-stage   Article   8(2)   proportionality
assessment.

38. There is thus a qualitative difference between the Rules in general  and
Part  5A.  By  contrast  (and  subject  to  a  possible  argument  regarding
s.117B(6) and s.117C(4)-(6) in some appropriate future case or  cases),  the
considerations set out in ss.117A-D are not determinative of whether or  not
a person qualifies on Article 8 grounds; they do not set out  necessary  and
sufficient  conditions.  Rather   they   are   obligatory   (non-exhaustive)
considerations to be applied in addressing the "public  interest  question".
This crucial difference remains notwithstanding that most of the  provisions
of Part 5A are either identical or broadly mirror those to be found  in  the
Rules: see above paragraph 27.

39. We have noted above that  certain provisions of Part 5A,  in  particular
s.117B(6) and   s.117C(4)-(6),  might  be  argued  to  operate  as  a  self-
contained set of legal requirements providing  a  complete   answer  to  the
"public interest question" and we have noted that decision  on  such  issues
is best left to a future cases or cases. All that we would observe  here  is
that even if one or both sets of provisions were found to  be  determinative
of the "public interest question" in a  particular  case,  it  remains  that
Part 5A is silent about what this means for the success  or  failure  of  an
Article 8 claim or about a person's consequential immigration status.

40.  Fourth,  the  wholesale  and  unstructured  application  of   Part   5A
considerations to the Rules would undermine the settled  law  regarding  the
two-stage approach, by effectively requiring the first stage to be  expanded
to incorporate or take into account considerations that are integral to  the
second stage. To apply Part 5A considerations directly and  indiscriminately
to decision-making under the Rules would subvert the legal certainty of  the
Rules. Despite the Rules making no reference to Part  5A  considerations  as
being any kind of "condition" or requirement, courts and tribunals would  in
effect be treating them as additional conditions or as sub-rules within  the
Rules. It would also pose  an  impossible  task  logically  since  it  would
require courts and tribunals to   simultaneously  decide  (i)   whether  the
substantive conditions of the Rules are met; and (ii) whether  the  Part  5A
considerations  operate  as  a   further   set   of   specific   substantive
requirements potentially requiring a different conclusion under  the  Rules.
The Rules stipulate that an  Article  8  claim  succeeds  if  it  meets  the
substantive conditions set out in paragraphs 398, 399 or 399A.

41. It might be argued that the above analysis is defeated by the fact  that
the Rules represent a striking of the Article 8 balance (between  individual
interests and the  interests  of  the  wider  community)[2]  and  have  been
formulated to reflect where the public interest lies. We have no  difficulty
with that argument insofar as it expresses that the new Rules were meant  to
incorporate more fully principles  of  Article  8  jurisprudence.  But  this
argument cannot mean that in general the new Rules provide criteria for  how
the decision-maker is to strike the  balance  in  the  context  of  a  free-
standing proportionality assessment. Leaving aside  the  unusual  provisions
to be found in paragraphs 398 (requiring it  to  be  shown  that  there  are
"other factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and  above
those described in paragraphs 399 and s99A") and  390A[3]  (requiring  there
to be "...exceptional circumstances" such that "the public interest  ...will
be outweighed by other factors"), the new Rules generally reflect a  balance
that has already been struck. They are designed without more  to  deliver  a
decision which is compliant with Article 8. This is the core of the  binding
Court of Appeal decisions which have addressed this fundamental  issues,  in
particular MM & Ors at [92].

42. It might separately be argued that the above analysis is  undermined  by
the fact that even when seeking to apply  the  substantive  requirements  of
the Rules (other than the "very  compelling  circumstances"  and  provisions
set out in paragraphs 398 and 390A  respectively) a  court  or  tribunal  in
any individual case has clearly to conduct a  balancing  exercise,  e.g.  in
deciding whether a person has shown  social  or  cultural  integration  into
society or has shown that the effect of their deportation on a  child  would
be unduly harsh. Furthermore, it might  be  argued  that  such  a  balancing
exercise  is  co-extensive  with  the  proportionality  assessment   to   be
conducted in deciding the public interest question under Part  5A.  We  find
any  such  argument  unconvincing.  Of  course  assessment  under  both  the
substantive  requirements  of  paragraphs  399  and  399A  and   under   the
proportionality assessment to be made  when  deciding  the  public  interest
question requires an exercise of judgement  which  may  involve  looking  at
factors for and against. But under paragraphs 399  and  399A  the  balancing
exercise is strictly limited to evaluation  of  the  relevant  condition  or
conditions - e.g. whether there is social or cultural  integration,  whether
the impact of deportation is unduly harsh. That is quite different from  the
wide-ranging multi--factored stage two proportionality  assessment  required
when deciding the  public  interest  question  in  order  decide  whether  a
decision is justified under Article 8(2).

43. The above analysis does not mean that Part 5A has no  relevance  to  the
legal regime formed by  the  Rules.  Even  though  imposing  obligations  on
courts  and  tribunals  only,  Part  5A  contains  a  clear  expression   of
statements of principle seen to govern identified elements of Article  8  in
the context of the Immigration Acts. In this way Part 5A could  be  said  to
underpin the Rules or to  be  overarching.  In  this  context  Part  5A  can
clearly have indirect application to the Rules, including to  rules  setting
out substantive conditions such as paragraphs 399 and 339A, for  example  by
possibly  informing the meaning of key terms set out in such paragraphs,  as
we have explored at [23] above (see also [54] below).

44. It has been important to the foregoing analysis to emphasise the  degree
of overlap in subject-matter between Part 5A and certain provisions  of  the
Rules. However,  in  light  of  what  we  have  just   said  about  Part  5A
containing  overarching statements of principle, it  is  pertinent  to  note
that some provisions of Part 5A find no precise  equivalent  in  the  Rules.
For example, the Rules do not contain a provision stating in terms, as  does
s.117(4)(a),  that little weight is to be given to a private  life  that  is
established by a person at a time when the person is in the  UK  unlawfully.
That  only  goes  to  reinforce  that  the  two  legal   regimes,   although
complementary, are different in kind, because the  private  life  provisions
of the Immigration Rules  represent  the  Secretary  of  State's  weighting,
without more, as to what conditions have to be met in  order  for  leave  to
remain to be granted on private life grounds.

Should Part 5A considerations be applied first?

45. There is a body of opinion that as a result of the coming into force  of
Part 5A courts and tribunals must begin their assessment of  all  Article  8
cases by reference to Part 5A. In this regard it is  emphasised  that  being
now enshrined in primary  legislation,  Part  5A  considerations  must  have
priority  over  the  Immigration  Rules  which  are  not   even   subsidiary
legislation in the strict sense. We think it will already  be  apparent  why
we must respectfully disagree with this view. The reasons we  have  set  out
at [26]-[43] above for concluding that Part 5A considerations  are  only  to
be directly applied to the Rules in carefully limited  ways  also  stand  to
explain why in our judgement  it would be wrong ordinarily to apply Part  5A
considerations at the first stage of the analysis. We would  emphasise  that
in light of our earlier analysis it is not a question of according  priority
to the Rules over  primary  legislation  but  rather  of  recognising  their
different functions. Consistent  with  the  two-stage  approach,  the  first
stage requires that courts and tribunals  first of all determine  whether  a
person meets the substantive requirements of the Rules. It is  only  at  the
second stage that Part 5A considerations have direct  application  and  even
if that second stage takes place within the Rules (as it  must  in  relation
to foreign criminals), it remains that they are not applied first.

46. Accordingly, it would be wrong as a general proposition to address  Part
5A considerations first.

Part 5A and the two-stage approach to Article 8 analysis summarised

47. In light of the above analysis it is now possible to summarise how  Part
5A impacts on the two-stage process.

48. Part 5A does not and is not intended to displace the ongoing need for  a
two-stage approach to Article 8 analysis.  The  only  question  is  to  what
extent it modifies it. In our view  it  cannot,  and  is  not  intended  to,
impact directly or in wholesale fashion on the first-stage.

49. In the context of considering an applicant  under  the  Rules  there  is
ordinarily no role for direct application in wholesale fashion  of  Part  5A
considerations. Those considerations only directly arise where  there  is  a
"public  interest  question"  which  is  defined  at  s.117A(3)  to  mean  a
proportionality assessment: or more precisely, "the question of  whether  an
interference with a person's right to respect for private  and  family  life
is  justified  under  Article  8(2)".  We  use  the  adverb  "directly"   to
differentiate the situation where the Part 5A  provisions  may  be  seen  to
have indirect application, by shedding possible  light  on  the  meaning  of
terms in the Rules - as we have considered above in relation to the  meaning
of "social and cultural integration" within paragraph 399(b)).

50. For Part 5A considerations to have a  direct  role,  therefore,  it  can
only be in the context of a proportionality assessment  in  accordance  with
Article 8(2).

51. Whilst it is now established that in some  respects  the  Rules  do  not
incorporate a two-stage approach, it is settled law that those dealing  with
foreign  criminals  do.  What  that  entails  for  the  role  of   Part   5A
considerations in a foreign criminal deportation  case  is  that  they  only
have direct application in the context of the unusual  provisions  contained
in paragraph 398 and paragraph A390  which  require  the  decision-maker  to
conduct a proportionality assessment in terms of whether there exist  "other
factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and  above  those
described in paragraphs  399  and  399A"  or  (in  the  revocation  context)
"only...in exceptional  circumstances...[where  there  are]  other  factors"
outweighing the  public  interest.  Assessment  of  such  circumstances  (by
reference  to  unspecified  "other  factors"  inevitably  requires  a  wide-
ranging, multi-factored assessment.

52.   It   is   true   that   success    under    the    "very    compelling
circumstances"/exceptional circumstances" criteria   set  out  in  paragraph
398 and 390A  (  both  which  have  to  be  applied  to  unspecified  "other
factors") also results in success in an Article 8 claim and in this  way  is
also determinative of a person's immigration status. But by  virtue  of  the
reading given phrases of this kind by the Court of Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)
they must be understood as having a sui generis  character,  since  although
they can be said to  constitute  a  substantive  criterion,  their  specific
nature is such that they have no fixed boundaries:  a  decision  on  whether
these criteria are met requires a full-bodied proportionality assessment  in
accordance with Article 8(2).




Application of the new rule to the claimant's circumstances

Paragraph 399A(a)

53. The claimant falls for consideration under  paragraph  399A  because  he
had been convicted of an offence for which he was sentenced to a  period  of
imprisonment of less than 4 years  (see  paragraph  398(b).  It  is  not  in
dispute in this case that the claimant meets the requirements  of  paragraph
399A(a) by virtue of the fact that he had resided in the  UK  lawfully  from
24 September 1998 (when he  was  granted  ILR)  to  the  date  of  the  SSHD
decision in July 2013.  What  is  meant  by  lawful  residence  may  require
interpretation  in  other  cases,  but  the  fact  of  such   residence   is
uncontroversial in this case.

Paragraph 399A(b)

54.  In  the  claimant's  case,  the  question  of  whether  he  meets   the
requirements  of  paragraph  399A(b)   requires   us   to   weigh   up   all
considerations relevant to social and cultural integration into the UK.   In
the claimant's favour, he has been in the UK since 1991 he  was  4  and  was
granted ILR in 1998, which means he has been the UK  lawfully  for  most  of
his life. His mother, sister and half-brother were  naturalised  as  British
citizens in 2003. He did not start offending until he was around 16. He  has
been to school in the UK. His mother tongue is English: that such  a  factor
should count in the claimant's  favour  is  lent  force  by  the  fact  that
s.117B(3)(b) of the 2002 Act identifies that persons able to  speak  English
"are better able to integrate into society".  The finding of  fact  made  by
the FtT was that he had shown an acceptance of his conduct and that  he  had
engaged in programmes that  will  assist  him  in  deviating  from  criminal
conduct in the future.

55. On the other hand, his history of offending (repeated robbery)  betokens
a serious discontinuity in his integration in the UK especially  because  it
shows blatant disregard for  fellow  citizens.   His  history  of  offending
includes a conviction for robbery for which he received  a  sentence  of  42
months imprisonment. The significant period of time he has spent  in  prison
in consequence of his offending has excluded him from  outside  society  for
that period. We also agree with Mr Jarvis that even when not in  prison  the
claimant's lifestyle over the period when he  was  committing  offences  was
manifestly anti-social.  This  lifestyle  and  his  period  in  prison  have
contributed to his not able to show he is financially independent.  We  have
to decide whether he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK in  the
present. He is now 29. Whilst his recent  acceptance  of  the  reprehensible
nature of his criminal conduct is  an  important  factor,  we  consider  the
negative factors we  have  just  mentioned  indicate  that  his  history  of
criminal  offending  broke  the  continuity  of  his  social  and   cultural
integration in the UK and he has not regained it. This means that  currently
he has not shown he is socially and culturally integrated.

Paragraph 399A(c)

56. Even had  we  considered  the  claimant  to  meet  the  requirements  of
paragraph 399A(b), we would still have concluded he  fails  under  paragraph
399A because he fails to meet paragraph 399A(c) and (as  explained  earlier)
to succeed under paragraph 399A, the requirements of both (b)  and  (c)  (as
well as (a)) must be met and we are not persuaded that there would  be  very
significant obstacles to his integration into the country  to  which  it  is
proposed he is deported.  We accept there would  be  significant  obstacles:
in particular he would be required to overcome the fact  that  he  does  not
speak Lingala; that he has no experience of living in such a country  as  an
adult or indeed even as a young person (only as an  infant).  Whilst  we  do
not accept that the respondent has ever resiled from her  position  set  out
in her refusal decision that the claimant has uncles in  the  DRC,  for  the
purposes of this appeal we are also prepared  to  decide  his  case  on  the
basis of his own claim as set out in his witness statement that  he  has  no
uncles there.

57. But the paragraph 399A(c) test is more stringent: it is not  met  simply
by showing that a person has no close family ties in the  country  to  which
it is proposed he is  deported;  it  requires  "very  significant  obstacles
to...integration" to be shown. In our judgement the obstacles  the  claimant
faces do not meet this demanding standard.  In relation to  his  command  of
language spoken in the DRC, it was his own mother's  evidence  that  he  had
been brought up in a household where  French  was  spoken.   The  DRC  is  a
Francophone country. In any event, it was not suggested on his  behalf  that
there  would  be  any  reasons  related  to  physical  or  mental  inability
preventing him from learning the local language or dialect.  As regards  his
lack of knowledge of the  culture,  whilst  it  was  his  evidence  that  he
identified with British culture, it was not suggested  he  had  specifically
rejected or no longer understood  his  cultural  origins.   Furthermore,  as
regards lack of family ties, he is now a young adult and the skills  he  has
acquired through attending classes in prison will assist him in  being  able
to earn a living without the need to be  a  dependant.   Further,  we  agree
with Mr Jarvis that it is reasonable to infer that his mother  and/or  other
relatives here will seek to help him financially, at least until he has  had
time to find his own feet.  We agree with Mr Jarvis that  it  has  not  been
shown that he would be  prevented  by  reason  of  any  physical  or  mental
ability from developing social and cultural ties in the DRC.  He  is  young,
able-bodied and of an adaptable age.

58. For the above reasons we conclude that the claimant does  not  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 399A in full - in particular he  does  not  fulfil
the requirements of either paragraph 399A(b) or  (c).

59. Given  our  conclusion  that  he  fails  to  meet  the  requirements  of
paragraphs 399 or 399A, the claimant can only succeed  under  the  Rules  if
able to  show,  pursuant  to  paragraph  398  (stage  2  of  the  Article  8
assessment), that "the public interest in  deportation  [is]  outweighed  by
other factors where there are very compelling circumstances over  and  above
those described in 399 and 399A".

60. Mr Mak did not entirely abandon the argument  that  the  claimant  could
succeed under this provision set out in paragraph 398 but he  was  realistic
enough to accept that it imposed a very high  threshold  and  that,  in  the
circumstances of the claimant's case, if he could not bring  himself  within
399A, he was very  unlikely  to  be  able  to  demonstrate  very  compelling
circumstances.  Furthermore and in any  event,  we  are  entirely  satisfied
that the claimant's circumstances come nowhere near meeting this  threshold.


The claimant's case in relation to Part 5A considerations

61. In reaching our conclusion that the  claimant  cannot  demonstrate  very
compelling circumstances as set out in paragraph 398 we have  conducted  the
proportionality  assessment  that  this  requires  by   applying   Part   5A
considerations directly. As regards s.117B considerations, whilst  s.117B(2)
 can be said to entitle him to  say  his  ability  to  speak  English  is  a
characteristic that is in the public interest and makes him "better able  to
integrate into society", in respect of s.117B(3) he has  not  been  able  to
show that  he  has  established  financial  independence  free  of  criminal
behaviour.  He is not a parent. As regards s.117C(1) and (2),  his  offences
include robbery and related offences for which he received a sentence of  42
months and being more serious than many others, the public interest  in  his
deportation must be greater than if that were not  the  case.  He  does  not
have a qualifying partner or child so as to fall within s.117(5)  (Exception
2). In relation to  s.117C(4)(Exception  1),  we  find  that  for  the  same
reasons that he fails to meet the requirements  of  paragraphs  399A(b)  and
(c) he does not meet the requirements of s.117C (b)  and  (c).  We  note  in
this regard that the requirements of s.117C(4) (b) and (c) are identical  to
those set out in paragraph 399A(b) and (c). Indeed in  relation  to  foreign
criminals if the Rules were more harsh than s.117C, they would no longer  be
a complete code.

62. For the above reasons we find the  claimant  cannot  succeed  under  the
Immigration Rules. He cannot succeed under the first-stage of  the  analysis
of his Article 8 circumstances as embodied in paragraph 399A nor  under  the
second-stage  analysis  of  his  Article  8  circumstances  conducted  under
paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.


Notice of Decision

63. The appeal is dismissed.
No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey



-----------------------
[1] This stated:" 399A. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or
(c) applies if -
(a) the person has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision (discounting  any
period of imprisonment) and he has no ties (including  social,  cultural  or
family) with the country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave
the UK; or
(b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least  half  of  his
life living continuously in the UK immediately preceding  the  date  of  the
immigration decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has  no
ties (including social, cultural or family) with the  country  to  which  he
would have to go if required to leave the UK.
[2] That is not to say that the Rules are themselves required to guarantee
compliance with Article  8: see MM & Ors at [134].
[3]  Paragraph  390A  provides  that:  "Where  paragraph  398  applies   the
Secretary of State will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,
if it does not, it will  only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
public interest in maintaining the deportation order will be  outweighed  by
other factors."

