
                                    [pic]

In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of MBT) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
(restricted leave; ILR; disability discrimination) [2019] UKUT 00414 (IAC)

|Heard at Field House                         |
|On 13 November 2019                          |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE NICOL
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                  The Queen
                         (on the application of MBT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Applicant:     Ms A. Weston, QC, and Stephen Clark, Counsel,
                    instructed by Birnberg Peirce
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Anderson, Counsel, instructed by the
                    Government Legal Department


(i)   A decision of the Secretary of State not to grant indefinite leave  to
remain to a person subject to the restricted leave policy ("the RL  policy")
does not normally engage Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
Rights.  However, Article 8 may be engaged by a decision to refuse to  grant
indefinite leave to  remain  where,  for  example,  the  poor  state  of  an
individual's mental and physical  health  is  such  that  regular,  repeated
grants of restricted leave are  capable  of  having  a  distinct  and  acute
impact on the health of the individual concerned.

(ii)  Once Article 8 is engaged by a decision to refuse indefinite leave  to
remain under the RL policy, the import of Article 8 will be inherently fact-
specific, and must be considered in light of the  criteria  set  out  in  MS
(India) and MT (Tunisia) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2017] EWCA Civ 1190.  The views of the Secretary of State  attract  weight,
given her  institutional  competence  on  matters  relating  to  the  public
interest  and  the  United  Kingdom's  reputation  as  a  guardian  of   the
international rule of law.

(iii) To obtain indefinite leave to remain under the  Immigration  Rules  on
the basis of long (partially  unlawful)  residence  in  cases  involving  no
suitability concerns, paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii), taken with paragraph  276DE,
requires a total of 30 years' residence.  A person who  satisfies  paragraph
276ADE(1)(iii) following 20  years'  residence  is  merely  entitled  to  30
months' limited leave to remain on the ten year route to settlement.


(iv)   Paragraph 16 of Schedule 3 to the Equality Act  2010  disapplies  the
prohibition against disability discrimination contained  in  section  29  of
the Act in relation to a decision to grant restricted leave  that  is  taken
in  connection  with  a  decision  to  refuse  an  application  for  a  more
beneficial category of leave in  the  circumstances  set  out  in  paragraph
16(3).

(v)   To the extent that paragraph 16 of Schedule  3  to  the  Equality  Act
2010  disapplies  the  prohibition  against  discrimination  on  grounds  of
disability, there is a  corresponding  modification  to  the  public  sector
equality duty imposed on the Secretary of State by section 149 of the Act.


                                  JUDGMENT

   1.  This  application  for  judicial  review  concerns  the  content  and
      application of the  respondent's  Restricted  Leave  policy  ("the  RL
      Policy").  The policy  makes  provision  to  grant  short  periods  of
      limited leave to remain, with stringent conditions, to those who  are,
      the policy states, "not welcome" in the United Kingdom and  who  would
      otherwise  be  deported  or  administratively  removed,  but  due   to
      "barriers" under the European Convention on Human Rights ("the  ECHR")
      they cannot  be  removed.   The  policy  applies  primarily  to  those
      excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention,  or  otherwise
      not entitled to its protection, due to their commission of criminal or
      other reprehensible acts and, who, for similar  reasons  are  debarred
      from Humanitarian Protection.  Grants of  so-called  restricted  leave
      are typically for 6 months at a time, and attract conditions  intended
      to restrict the individual's ability to establish a private life here,
      enable the respondent to monitor their presence and achieve  a  number
      of other objectives, to which we shall return.

   2. The nature of the RL policy means that recipients of restricted  leave
      are subject to regular and renewed grants of short periods of  limited
      leave to remain, in a process which can continue for many years.   The
      applicant in this case has contended for some time that he  should  be
      granted indefinite leave to remain, instead of  merely  being  granted
      repeated periods of restricted leave.  The central issue is whether it
      was unlawful for the respondent to refuse to grant indefinite leave to
      remain to him,  following  his  lengthy  residence  pursuant  to  many
      repeated  periods  of  initially   discretionary,   and   then   later
      restricted, limited leave, in light of his health,  family  life,  and
      the claimed diminishing  likelihood  of  him  ever  being  removed  to
      Tunisia.

   3. The RL policy  provides  that  indefinite  leave  to  remain  is  only
      appropriate in "exceptional  circumstances",  which,  it  states,  are
      likely to be rare.  It is the applicant's case that his case is one of
      those rare, exceptional situations where he is entitled to  indefinite
      leave to remain.

   4. There are two decisions under challenge.  The first is dated 31 August
      2018 ("the 2018 decision");  the  second,  22  July  2019  ("the  2019
      decision").  Each refused to grant the applicant indefinite  leave  to
      remain, but instead conferred limited restricted leave upon him.

   5. The 2019 decision was issued by the respondent the  night  before  the
      substantive hearing concerning the 2018 decision was due to  be  heard
      on 23 July 2019. That necessitated an  adjournment  of  that  hearing.
      The Tribunal gave directions to the applicant to serve the  additional
      grounds upon which he sought to challenge the 2019 decision.   It  was
      just and convenient to allow the 2019 decision to be challenged within
      the existing proceedings, rather than require the applicant to make  a
      fresh application, which would potentially have resulted in  a  future
      substantive hearing being eclipsed  (again)  by  a  further  grant  of
      restricted leave, upon the  expiry  of  that  conferred  by  the  2019
      decision.  It was in those circumstances that the matter  came  before
      us sitting as a panel.

Factual background

   6. The applicant, MBT, is a citizen of Tunisia, born on 20 December 1966.
       He was detained and tortured by  the  Tunisian  authorities  for  the
      membership of a political party in the late  1980s  and  early  1990s.
      The  enduring  adverse  health  impact  that  experience  had  on  the
      applicant forms a significant part  of  his  case  for  being  granted
      indefinite leave to remain.   It is common ground that  the  applicant
      cannot presently be removed to Tunisia due  to  the  risk  of  further
      mistreatment at the hands of the authorities, although there  is  some
      dispute  between  the  parties  as  to  the  prospects  of  that  risk
      diminishing.

   7. Following his release from detention, the applicant  fled  Tunisia  in
      1991, intending to claim asylum in Spain.   He  was  unable  to  reach
      Spain because, on 19 January 1998 he was convicted  in  France,  along
      with a  number  of  other  Tunisian  citizens,  of  terrorism  related
      offences, following  a  lengthy  period  on  remand.   These  offences
      included the possession and transportation  of  unauthorised  weapons,
      unlawful entry  to  France,  forgery  of  an  official  document,  and
      association with other malfaiteurs. For these offences, the  applicant
      was sentenced to a period of five years' imprisonment, most  of  which
      he had already served, with  the  consequence  that  he  was  released
      shortly after he was sentenced. He was also subject  to  an  expulsion
      order from  France,  and  a  10  year  re-entry  ban.   The  applicant
      maintains that he did not receive a fair trial in France.  He contends
      that he did not appeal against his conviction, for  to  have  done  so
      could have  exposed  him  to  the  jeopardy  of  having  his  sentence
      increased retrospectively. His case is that  he  left  France  without
      challenging the conviction on purely pragmatic grounds. We, of course,
      must proceed on the basis that  he  was  validly  convicted  of  these
      offences in France.

   8. In May 1999, the applicant arrived in this country, clandestinely.  He
      immediately claimed asylum. He declared his convictions in France.  In
      July 2004, the respondent refused his claim for asylum, on the grounds
      that he was excluded from the Refugee Convention, under Article  1F(b)
      and (c) (respectively, the commission of a serious non-political crime
      outside the country of refuge, and being guilty of  acts  contrary  to
      the purposes and principles of the United  Nations).  He  was  instead
      granted discretionary leave to remain, initially for a period  of  six
      months, under the relevant policy then in force. The RL policy was not
      in force at that stage.  The first iteration of  the  RL  policy  came
      into force on 2 September 2011.

   9. The applicant also contends that he has been convicted  and  sentenced
      in absentia in Tunisia of a range of further offences. Although  there
      is no  suggestion  that  those  convictions  form  the  basis  of  the
      respondent's decision  to  exclude  the  applicant  from  the  Refugee
      Convention, or  indeed  that  they  could  be  categorised  as  "safe"
      pursuant to ECHR minimum standards, it is the  applicant's  case  that
      the mere existence of such convictions provides a further  reason  why
      his return to Tunisia is  not,  and  never  will  be,  feasible.   The
      politically motivated convictions are evidence of his  persecution  at
      the hands of the  Tunisian  state,  he  contends.  They  will  not  be
      overturned.   He  remains  liable  to   serve   lengthy   periods   of
      imprisonment in Tunisia,  with  the  corresponding  risk  of  repeated
      mistreatment in detention.

  10. Following his initial grant of  discretionary  leave  to  remain,  the
      applicant was granted  further,  repeated,  periods  of  discretionary
      leave. However, there was a delay in the respondent's consideration of
      the application (also for indefinite leave to remain) he submitted  on
      30 July 2009, which led him to bring judicial  review  proceedings  to
      challenge  the  respondent's  inaction.   That  was  in  2013.   Those
      proceedings were settled by consent.  The respondent took  a  decision
      on the  application,  granting  the  applicant  his  first  period  of
      restricted leave, for six months, on 21 August 2013.

  11. The applicant experiences a range of debilitating medical  conditions.
      He suffers from symptomatic epilepsy, and has around two seizures each
      week, during which he experiences a lack of muscle tone, falls to  the
      floor, and can  lose  control  of  bodily  functions.  He  has  severe
      shoulder and back  pain,  which  he  experiences  all  the  time.  The
      shoulder pain is caused by a herniated  disc  in  his  cervical  spine
      which dates to what has been described  as  a  "very  violent  torture
      injury". He can support himself when walking, but when doing so he has
      to hold his left arm very still in  order  to  avoid  jarring  it  and
      causing sudden pain to his left shoulder  and  neck.  He  has  sciatic
      referral to the left leg,  making  walking  and  sitting  painful  and
      exhausting. He suffers from severe  secondary  headaches,  which  stem
      from  numerous  historical  head  injuries.  His  neck   rotation   is
      restricted to the left, even for short periods of time.  He  has  high
      blood pressure.

  12. The applicant has  been  diagnosed  as  suffering  from  severe  post-
      traumatic  stress  disorder.  He  displays  symptoms  of   flashbacks,
      intrusive  memories,  noise  sensitivity,   claustrophobia,   dramatic
      nightmares, anxiety attacks, sleeplessness, and panic  attacks.  These
      are attributable to the major catastrophic  trauma  arising  from  the
      detention and torture he experienced in Tunisia, and the  very  severe
      ongoing stress and uncertainty as to the length of his  residence  and
      immigration status in this country. He displays symptoms of depressive
      disorder, experiencing pervasive feelings of  despair,  worthlessness,
      appetite and sleep disturbance,  negative  thoughts  and  very  severe
      intrusive preoccupations, melancholic depressive ruminations,  beliefs
      that he has destroyed other people's lives, suicidal  ideation,  self-
      harm, and depressive hallucinations.  These factors are set out in the
      report of Dr Bell, Consultant Psychiatrist, dated 18 April  2019,  and
      letters dated 1 August 2017 from Lucy Bracken, a Registered  Osteopath
      with the Helen Bamber Foundation, and 3 November 2017 from Mark  Fish,
      a Senior Psychotherapist, also with the Helen Bamber Foundation.

  13. In addition to the currently accepted Article  3  risk  the  applicant
      faces from the Tunisian  authorities,  he  contends  that  his  health
      conditions are such that his removal would be prevented by  Article  3
      ECHR in any event. He maintains that his private and  family  life  in
      this country are such that his removal is now,  and  always  will  be,
      disproportionate under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR. Since his arrival
      in this country, he has not engaged in any conduct which suggests that
      he represents any form of ongoing security risk or  threat.  While  he
      does not accept that he was fairly convicted in France, he  highlights
      that, in any event, he has led a blameless life in  this  country.  He
      has integrated.  His children are British. He has lived  here  for  20
      years.

Earlier procedural history

  14. The applicant has  previously  challenged  earlier  decisions  of  the
      respondent under the RL policy.   In  a  decision  handed  down  on  4
      September 2015, this Tribunal (Dove J. and Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill)
      dismissed an application for judicial review brought by the  applicant
      in relation to an earlier decision of the respondent, dated 21  August
      2013, to refuse to grant him indefinite leave to remain, granting  him
      only a further period of restricted leave,  with  conditions.  In  the
      course  of  that  judicial  review  application,  the  applicant  also
      challenged  the  respondent's  RL  policy  itself.  See  R   (on   the
      application of MS) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      (excluded persons: Restrictive Leave policy)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00539
      (IAC).  The Upper Tribunal's decision was considered by the  Court  of
      Appeal which, in a judgment dated 31 July 2017, dismissed the  appeal,
      and found the RL policy as it  then  existed  to  be  lawful:  see  MS
      (India) and MT (Tunisia) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
      [2017] EWCA Civ 1190, [2018] 1 WLR 389.  The Court of  Appeal  made  a
      number of observations about the circumstances when those  subject  to
      the RL policy may be entitled to indefinite leave to remain, to  which
      we shall return.

The decisions under challenge

  15.  The  time-limited  nature  of  restricted  leave  is  such  that  the
      respondent regularly takes fresh decisions to confer a further  period
      of restricted leave upon the expiry of the previous period.

  16. The 2018 decision granted the applicant six months'  restricted  leave
      from 31 August 2018, with conditions in the following terms:

           "a)   You must reside at your current  address  and  notify  the
                 Secretary of State to any change of address;

           b)    You must not take up employment, paid or unpaid, or engage
                 in any business or profession  without  the  prior  written
                 consent from the Secretary of State;

           c)    You must not enrol on a study  course,  either  classroom-
                 based or remote, without the prior written consent from the
                 Secretary of State; and

           d)    You must report to an immigration reporting  centre  every
                 two months."

      The 2018 decision refused the applicant's application  for  indefinite
      leave to remain.  It considered  that,  in  view  of  the  applicant's
      exclusion  from  the  Refugee  Convention  on  the  grounds   of   his
      involvement in terrorism in France, the public interest in his removal
      remained, and that he should not be allowed to settle here.

  17. The applicant was granted limited permission  to  apply  for  judicial
      review on the papers by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson to challenge  the
      application of the RL policy in  the  2018  decision.  Permission  was
      granted on two grounds:

        a. Ground 1: the decision breaches article  8  ECHR,  in  that  the
           respondent failed to undertake  a  sufficiently  individual  and
           particularised  assessment  of  the  relevant  factors  in   the
           applicant's case (in accordance with the guidance given  by  the
           Court  of  Appeal  in  MS  (India))  and  the  decision   is   a
           disproportionate interference with the private and  family  life
           of the applicant, his wife and British  children  in  breach  of
           article 8 ECHR and section 6 of the human rights act 1998;

        b. Ground 4: the decision is irrational,  in  that  the  respondent
           took into account irrelevant matters and/or failed to take  into
           account relevant matters.

  18. Judge Jackson refused permission in  relation  to  the  following  two
      grounds. The applicant  has  applied  to  renew  his  application  for
      permission to bring  judicial  review  proceedings  on  these  grounds
      orally:

        a. Ground 2: the decision  breached  sections  15  and  29  of  the
           Equality Act 2010 ("the EA 2010") (taken  with  or  without  the
           duty to make reasonable adjustments contained  in  section  20),
           and/or Article 14 of the ECHR, taken with Article 8, in that the
           respondent treated the applicant, his wife  and  children,  less
           favourably on account of the applicant's disability, or  applied
           the RL  policy  in  such  a  way  as  to  impact  the  applicant
           disproportionately because of his disability;

        b. Ground 3: the RL policy breached the public sector equality duty
           contained in section 149 of the EA 2010.

  19. The 2019 decision was made in response  to  an  application  dated  26
      February 2019 for indefinite leave to remain and the  application  was
      supported by additional written representations submitted in March and
      April.  The applicant's representations placed extensive  reliance  on
      the report of Dr Bell.  That report considered the matters relating to
      the applicant's mental health outlined in paragraph  12,  above.   The
      representations featured further and more detailed reasons as  to  why
      it was contended that the applicant would not be "removable".

  20. The 2019 decision refused to grant the applicant indefinite  leave  to
      remain, but instead granted him  12  months'  restricted  leave,  with
      conditions materially identical to those in the  2018  decision,  with
      one distinction.  The 2019 decision reduced the reporting requirements
      from every two months in the 2018 decision to "4 times per  year  i.e.
      every three months".

  21. The grounds  upon  which  the  applicant  seeks  permission  to  bring
      judicial review proceedings against the 2019  decision  are  based  on
      those  initially  advanced  against  the  2018  decision,   with   two
      additional grounds. The manner  in  which  the  total  six  additional
      grounds have been set out in the applicant's statement  of  facts  and
      grounds and his skeleton argument could  have  been  clearer,  as  the
      applicant did not set out separate and fresh grounds of challenge, but
      merely sought to  adopt  and  apply  (presumably  with  the  necessary
      implied modifications)  grounds  1  to  4  in  relation  to  the  2018
      decision, with two additional grounds specific to the  2019  decision.
      For ease of reference, having clarified the grounds with Ms Weston  at
      the hearing, we will set out all six grounds in their entirety:

        a. Ground 5:  the  respondent  irrationally  failed  to  take  into
           account and  address  by  way  of  adequate  reasoning  relevant
           matters,  in  particular  the   representations   and   material
           available  to  the   respondent   concerning   the   applicant's
           removability, and the report of Dr Bell;

        b. Ground 6: the respondent breached her duty of inquiry concerning
           the applicant's risk on return;

        c. Ground 7 (original ground 1): the decision  breaches  article  8
           ECHR, in that the respondent failed to undertake a  sufficiently
           individual and particularised assessment of the relevant factors
           in the applicant's case (in accordance with the  guidance  given
           by the Court of Appeal in MS (India))  and  the  decision  is  a
           disproportionate interference with the private and  family  life
           of the applicant, his wife and British  children  in  breach  of
           article 8 ECHR and section 6 of the human rights act 1998;

        d. Ground 8 (original ground 2): the decision breached sections  15
           and 29 of the Equality Act 2010 ("the EA 2010") (taken  with  or
           without the duty to make  reasonable  adjustments  contained  in
           section 20), and/or Article 14 of the ECHR, taken  with  Article
           8, in that the respondent treated the applicant,  his  wife  and
           children,  less  favourably  on  account  of   the   applicant's
           disability, or applied the RL policy in such a way as to  impact
           the applicant disproportionately because of his disability;

        e. Ground 9 (original ground 3): the RL policy breached the  public
           sector equality duty contained in section 149 of the EA 2010.

        f. Ground 10 (original ground 4): the decision  is  irrational,  in
           that the respondent took into account irrelevant matters  and/or
           failed to take into account relevant matters.

  22. Thus grounds 5 and 6 are new.  Grounds 7 to 10 replicate the  original
      grounds 1 to 4, applied to the 2019 decision. The  only  grounds  upon
      which the applicant has permission to challenge the 2018 decision  are
      grounds 1 and 4.  He needs permission to pursue all remaining grounds.
       He requires permission on all  his  grounds  to  challenge  the  2019
      decision. As such, the hearing before us was a substantive hearing  in
      relation to grounds 1 and 4 of the  2018  decision,  combined  with  a
      rolled up hearing in relation to the remaining grounds and a rolled up
      hearing in relation to the 2019 decision.



RELEVANT LAW AND POLICY

Articles 1F and 33 of the Refugee Convention

  23. Article 1F(b) and (c) of the Refugee Convention provides:

           "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person
           with respect to whom there are serious reasons  for  considering
           that:

                 [...]

                 (b) he has committed a serious non-political crime  outside
                 the country of  refuge  prior  to  his  admission  to  that
                 country as a refugee;

                 (c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and
                 principles of the United Nations."

  24. The focus of Article 1F of the Refugee  Convention  is  the  exclusion
      from its scope of those persons who - like this applicant - engaged in
      certain conduct before  seeking  refuge  in  the  host  state.    When
      engaged, Article 1F  prevents  the  individual  concerned  from  being
      recognised as a refugee.

  25. Article 33 of the Refugee Convention provides:

           "Prohibition of expulsion or return ('refoulement')

           1. No Contracting State shall expel  or  return  ('refouler')  a
           refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories
           where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of  his
           race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
           group or political opinion.

           2. The benefit of the present provision  may  not,  however,  be
           claimed by a refugee  whom  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for
           regarding as a danger to the security of the country in which he
           is, or who, having been convicted  by  a  final  judgment  of  a
           particularly  serious  crime,  constitutes  a  danger   to   the
           community of that country."

  26. By definition,  the  non-refoulement  principle  is  only  engaged  in
      relation to  those  already  recognised  under  the  Convention  as  a
      refugee.  Article 33(2) deprives existing refugees from the benefit of
      the non-refoulement  principle  in  consequence  to  the  presence  of
      grounds to regard the refugee as posing a security risk  to  the  host
      country, or as a result of criminal convictions which post-date  their
      recognition as a refugee.

  27. In practice, a person in relation to whom  Article  33(2)  is  engaged
      would never  be  removed  in  circumstances  which  would  lead  to  a
      contravention of the ECHR, even if they had been subject to a decision
      to revoke their refugee status.   Similarly,  persons  in  the  United
      Kingdom who are excluded from the  scope  of  the  Refugee  Convention
      under Article 1F would not be removed if to  do  so  would  place  the
      United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under the ECHR.

European Convention on Human Rights

  28. Article 8 of the ECHR, Right to respect for private and  family  life,
      provides:

           "1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
           life, his home and his correspondence.

           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with  the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
           national security, public safety or the economic  well-being  of
           the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others."

  29. Article 14 of the ECHR, Prohibition against discrimination, provides:

           "The enjoyment of the rights and  freedoms  set  forth  in  this
           Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground
           such as sex, race,  colour,  language,  religion,  political  or
           other opinion, national or social  origin,  association  with  a
           national minority, property, birth or other status."

Domestic legal framework

  30. Section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971 ("the 1971 Act") makes provision
      for the control of the entry and duration of stay of those subject  to
      immigration control.  Section 3(1)(b) provides:

           "(1)  Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act, where a
           person is not a British citizen...

                 (b)  he may be given leave to enter the United Kingdom (or,
                 when already there, leave to remain in the United  Kingdom)
                 either for a limited or for an indefinite period..."

  31. Subsection (2) makes provision for the  Secretary  of  State  to  make
      rules "as to the practice to be followed in the administration of this
      Act for regulating the entry into and stay in the  United  Kingdom..."
      The  Immigration  Rules  must  be  laid  before,  and   approved   by,
      Parliament.

  32. Subsection (3) enables the Secretary of State to impose conditions  on
      a grant of limited leave to remain.

           "(3)  In the case of a limited leave to enter or remain  in  the
           United Kingdom,-

                 (a)   a  person's  leave  may   be   varied,   whether   by
                 restricting,  enlarging  or  removing  the  limit  on   its
                 duration, or by adding, varying or revoking conditions, but
                 if the limit on its duration  is  removed,  any  conditions
                 attached to the leave shall cease to apply; and

                 (b)   the limitation on and any conditions  attached  to  a
                 person's  leave  (whether  imposed  originally  or   on   a
                 variation) shall, if not  superseded,  apply  also  to  any
                 subsequent leave he may obtain after an  absence  from  the
                 United Kingdom within the period limited for  the  duration
                 of the earlier leave."

  33. The Secretary of State also has a discretionary power under  the  1971
      Act to grant leave to enter or remain, even where leave would  not  be
      granted under the Immigration Rules.  See the  summary  at  Agyarko  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 at  [4]  per
      Lord Reed:

           "The manner in which that discretion is  exercised  may  be  the
           subject of a policy, which may be expressed in guidance  to  the
           Secretary of State's officials."

  34. In relation to cases where Article 8  of  the  ECHR  is  engaged,  the
      Immigration Rules and the Secretary of State's policies "are based  on
      the Secretary of State's policy as  to  how  individual  rights  under
      Article 8 should  be  balanced  against  competing  public  interests"
      (Agyarko at [46]).

  35. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  makes
      statutory provision for certain public interest considerations  to  be
      considered  when  a  court  or  tribunal   is   concerned   with   the
      proportionality of  a  person's  removal  under  the  ECHR.   Of  most
      relevance for present purposes is section 117B(6), which provides:

           "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and

                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

  36. Section 117D(1)  defines  "qualifying  child"  to  include  a  British
      citizen child, or a child who has resided continuously in  the  United
      Kingdom for seven years.

Equality Act 2010

  37. The Equality Act 2010 prohibits discrimination,  as  defined,  in  the
      conduct of certain functions.

  38. Section 15 of the Equality Act defines what amounts to  discrimination
      arising from disability, as defined in section 6, in these terms:

           "(1)  A person (A) discriminates against a disabled  person  (B)
           if-

                 (a)  A treats B unfavourably because of  something  arising
                 in consequence of B's disability, and

                 (b)  A cannot show that the treatment  is  a  proportionate
                 means of achieving a legitimate aim.

           (2)  Subsection (1) does not apply if A shows  that  A  did  not
           know, and could not reasonably have been expected to know,  that
           B had the disability."

  39. Section 29 of the Act prohibits service  providers  from  engaging  in
      discrimination.  Where relevant, it provides:

           "(1)   A  person  (a  "service-provider")  concerned  with   the
           provision of a service to the public or a section of the  public
           (for payment or not) must  not  discriminate  against  a  person
           requiring the service by  not  providing  the  person  with  the
           service.

           (2)  A service-provider (A) must not, in providing the  service,
           discriminate against a person (B)-

                 (a)  as to the terms on which A provides the service to B;

                 (b)  by terminating the provision of the service to B;

                 (c)  by subjecting B to any other detriment.

            [...]

           (6)  A person must not, in the exercise  of  a  public  function
           that is not the provision of  a  service  to  the  public  or  a
           section  of   the   public,   do   anything   that   constitutes
           discrimination, harassment or victimisation.

           (7)  A duty to make reasonable adjustments applies to-

                 (a)  a service-provider (and see also section 55(7));

                 (b)  a person who exercises a public function that  is  not
                 the provision of a service to the public or  a  section  of
                 the public."

  40. Paragraph 16 of Schedule 3 to the Equality Act 2010 disapplies section
      29 in relation to certain immigration functions carried out by service
      providers.  Paragraph 16 provides:

           "(1)   This  paragraph  applies  in   relation   to   disability
           discrimination.

           (2)  Section 29 does not apply to-

                 (a)  a decision within sub-paragraph (3);

                 (b)  anything done for the purposes of or in pursuance of a
                 decision within that sub-paragraph.

           (3)  A decision is within this sub-paragraph if it is a decision
           (whether or not taken in accordance with immigration  rules)  to
           do any of the following on the ground that doing so is necessary
           for the public good-

                 (a)  to refuse entry clearance;

                 (b)  to refuse leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                 Kingdom;

                 (c)  to cancel leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                 Kingdom;

                 (d)  to vary  leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                 Kingdom;

                 (e)  to refuse an application to vary  leave  to  enter  or
                 remain in the United Kingdom.

           (4)  Section 29 does not apply to-

                 (a)  a decision taken, or guidance given, by the  Secretary
                 of State in connection with a decision within sub-paragraph
                 (3);

                 (b)  a decision taken in accordance with guidance given  by
                 the Secretary of State in connection with a decision within
                 that sub-paragraph."

  41. Section 149 of the Act establishes the public sector equality duty, in
      these terms:

           "(1)  A public authority must, in the exercise of its functions,
           have due regard to the need to-

                 (a)  eliminate  discrimination,  harassment,  victimisation
                 and any other conduct that is prohibited by or  under  this
                 Act;

                 (b)  advance equality of opportunity  between  persons  who
                 share a relevant protected characteristic and  persons  who
                 do not share it;

                 (c)  foster good relations  between  persons  who  share  a
                 relevant protected characteristic and persons  who  do  not
                 share it.

           (2)  A person who is not a public authority  but  who  exercises
           public functions must, in the exercise of those functions,  have
           due regard to the matters mentioned in subsection (1).

           (3)  Having due regard  to  the  need  to  advance  equality  of
           opportunity between  persons  who  share  a  relevant  protected
           characteristic and persons who do not share it  involves  having
           due regard, in particular, to the need to-

                 (a)  remove or minimise disadvantages suffered  by  persons
                 who share a  relevant  protected  characteristic  that  are
                 connected to that characteristic;

                 (b)  take steps to meet the needs of persons  who  share  a
                 relevant protected characteristic that are  different  from
                 the needs of persons who do not share it;

                 (c)  encourage  persons  who  share  a  relevant  protected
                 characteristic to participate in  public  life  or  in  any
                 other activity in which participation by  such  persons  is
                 disproportionately low.

           (4)  The steps involved in meeting the needs of disabled persons
           that are different  from  the  needs  of  persons  who  are  not
           disabled include,  in  particular,  steps  to  take  account  of
           disabled persons' disabilities.

           (5)  Having due regard to the  need  to  foster  good  relations
           between persons who share a  relevant  protected  characteristic
           and persons who do not share it involves having due  regard,  in
           particular, to the need to-

                 (a)  tackle prejudice, and

                 (b)  promote understanding.

           (6)  Compliance with the duties  in  this  section  may  involve
           treating some persons more favourably than others; but  that  is
           not to be taken as permitting conduct that  would  otherwise  be
           prohibited by or under this Act.

           (7)  The relevant protected characteristics are-

                 age;

                 disability;

                 gender reassignment;

                 pregnancy and maternity;

                 race;

                 religion or belief;

                 sex;

                 sexual orientation.

           (8)  A reference to conduct that is prohibited by or under  this
           Act includes a reference to-

                 (a)  a breach of an equality clause or rule;

                 (b)  a breach of a non-discrimination rule.

           (9)  Schedule 18 (exceptions) has effect."

The Restricted Leave policy

  42. The RL policy addresses the practical gulf that arises  between  those
      excluded from the scope of the Refugee Convention under Article 1F, or
      refugees who are deprived of the  protection  of  the  non-refoulement
      principle, on the one hand, and any applicable ECHR-based restrictions
      on their removal, on the other.  It confers legal - albeit  restricted
      - status on such individuals and seeks to  enable  the  respondent  to
      achieve certain objectives set out in the policy.

  43. The version of the RL policy under consideration in these  proceedings
      was published on 25 May 2018.  It was still in force at  the  date  of
      both decisions. It opens in these terms:

           "The government's policy is that foreign nationals who  are  not
           welcome in the UK because of their conduct will be  deported  or
           administratively removed from the UK, unless there is  an  [sic]
           European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (ECHR)  barrier.   This
           includes those whose conduct brings them within  Article  1F  or
           Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention, or  paragraph  339D  of
           the Immigration Rules..."

  44. The RL policy identifies  the  following  objectives  in  denying  the
      benefits of protection status and instead conferring a shorter  period
      of restricted leave with specific conditions. The  objectives  include
      the public  interest  in  maintaining  the  integrity  of  immigration
      control through the conferral of short periods of  leave,  accompanied
      by regular reporting conditions.  The policy seeks to enable  frequent
      review by the respondent of those subject to the policy with a view to
      facilitating their removal, should circumstances change such that  the
      previous barriers to removal no  longer  apply.  This  ensures  "close
      contact" is maintained with the individual concerned, and also gives a
      "clear  signal"  that  the  person   concerned   should   not   become
      "established" in this country.  The  repeated  grants  of  only  short
      periods of leave emphasise the intended impermanence of the  residence
      of a person subject to the RL policy.  The policy is intended to  make
      it more difficult for such persons to put down roots here, or build up
      private or family  life  which,  if  established,  may  later  present
      difficulties for the removal of the individual, if and when conditions
      in the destination country change such that removal becomes feasible.

  45. The policy  also  states  that  it  is  for  the  purposes  of  public
      protection, adding that it is legitimate to impose conditions designed
      to ensure that the respondent is able to monitor where a person  lives
      and works. In turn, this enables the respondent to prevent  access  by
      the individual to positions of influence or trust.

  46. Finally, a further stated policy objective of the policy is to prevent
      the United Kingdom becoming a "safe haven"  for  those  whose  conduct
      merits  their  exclusion  from  refugee  status.  This  supports   the
      principle that war criminals and persons  with  a  reprehensible  past
      cannot establish a new life in this country.  The policy is also  said
      to support the United Kingdom's broader international obligations  and
      commitment to supporting the rule of law at the  international  level.
      The RL policy contends that it reinforces the message that the  United
      Kingdom's intention is to remove such individuals from the country  as
      soon as possible.  The  target  audience  of  this  "message"  is  the
      international community of States as a whole.

Indefinite leave to remain under the RL Policy

  47. The RL policy addresses indefinite leave to remain in  similar  terms.
      The policy is that  there  will  "almost  always  be  public  interest
      reasons not to grant ILR" (page  33).   It  notes,  at  page  6,  that
      granting those subject to the policy indefinite leave to remain  would
      "send a message" that there  is  no  longer  any  public  interest  in
      deporting or removing them from the  United  Kingdom.  That  would  be
      "wholly contrary" to the RL policy, as set out above.

  48. The policy provides, at page 32, that there is no limit  on  how  many
      times a person can be  granted  restricted  leave,  as  long  as  they
      continue to fall within the scope of the policy. The policy states  at
      page 33, with emphasis added:

           "Where a person falls within this policy  because  of  behaviour
           described  in  Article  1F  or  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
           Convention or paragraph 339D of the Immigration  Rules  (whether
           or not the person is made a protection claim) there will  almost
           always be public interest reasons not  to  grant  ILR.  This  is
           because the government's view  is  that  such  persons  are  not
           welcome in the UK, even if the adverse behaviour was committed a
           long time ago and the person has not committed any crimes in the
           UK. In most cases, a decision to grant ILR would  undermine  the
           intention of the restricted leave policy..."

  49. It continues in these terms, on the same page:

           "Where a person applies for ILR outside the  Immigration  Rules,
           consideration must be given to all relevant  factors,  including
           all representations  that  have  been  submitted,  to  determine
           whether the application should be granted or  refused.  It  will
           only be in exceptional circumstances that those within the scope
           of the restricted leave policy will ever be able to qualify  for
           indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,   and   such
           exceptional circumstances are likely to be rare. Usually,  given
           our international obligations to prevent the UK from becoming  a
           safe haven for those who have committed very serious crimes, the
           conduct will mean that the application should  be  refused,  but
           decisions must be taken on a  case-by-case  basis  applying  the
           principles set out above and the general grounds for refusal  in
           part 9 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  alongside  the  section  55
           duty..."

  50. The conditions imposed on those subject to restricted leave is one  of
      the means by which the policy objectives of the RL policy are said  to
      be achieved. Once a person is granted indefinite leave to remain,  the
      policy notes, the imposition of conditions is no longer  possible.  As
      such, granting indefinite leave to remain could  lead  to  individuals
      obtaining  employment  or  accessing  positions  of  trust  which  are
      unsuitable, given the reasons  they  were  initially  subject  to  the
      restricted leave  policy  in  the  first  place.   The  imposition  of
      reporting conditions would no  longer  be  possible,  making  it  much
      harder  for  the  respondent  to  keep  track  of  those  who   would,
      circumstances permitting, otherwise be considered for removal.

  51. Finally, indefinite leave to remain would be contrary  to  the  United
      Kingdom's international  obligations  and  the  need  to  support  the
      international rule of law. The policy considers that granting  ILR  to
      such excluded persons would damage the United Kingdom's  international
      reputation and would be contrary to the expected and accepted approach
      of the international community as a whole to such  persons.  Thus,  at
      page 32, the RL policy notes that there is no period of time which  is
      likely automatically to be regarded as too long as  being  subject  to
      the RL policy, although it notes that all such  applications  must  be
      considered on a case-by-case basis. Even long  periods  of  expiation,
      remorse and good behaviour are "neutrally balanced."  Compliance  with
      the criminal law domestically is not a positive factor, but  rather  a
      minimum standard of behaviour expected of anyone present in the United
      Kingdom. The policy concludes on this point at page 33 stating that,

           "it will only be in exceptional circumstances that those  within
           the scope of the restricted leave policy will ever  be  able  to
           qualify for indefinite leave to remain... And  such  exceptional
           circumstances are likely to be rare."

      There is no provision in the Immigration  Rules  to  grant  indefinite
      leave to remain  to  those  subject  to  the  RL  policy;  the  policy
      envisages that any such grants will take place outside the rules.

DISCUSSION

The 2018 decision

  52. We can deal briefly with the 2018 decision. The  challenge  to  it  is
      academic. The decision conferred  a  period  of  restricted  leave  to
      remain which has since expired. Before us, Ms  Weston  was  unable  to
      identify any operative  reasons  why  it  was  necessary,  within  the
      confines of the discretionary nature of judicial  review,  for  us  to
      consider the 2018 decision.  She  submitted  that  the  2019  decision
      repeats and thereby compounds the errors which contaminated  the  2018
      decision, but realistically accepted that, to the extent she sought to
      establish that the 2019 decision was unlawful or disproportionate,  it
      would be possible to make the appropriate submissions by reference  to
      that decision alone, without the need for substantive consideration of
      the 2018 decision in its own capacity.

  53. We see no reason to entertain consideration of the  2018  decision  in
      any further depth. The grounds in relation  to  which  permission  has
      been granted are now otiose, as the decision is no longer in force.

  54. We refuse the application in relation to grounds 1  and  4.   For  the
      same reason, we refuse permission on grounds 2 and 3,  in  respect  of
      which permission has not already been granted.

The 2019 decision

  55. The focus of Ms Weston's challenge to the 2019 decision  was  not  the
      proportionality of  the  conditions  it  imposed  on  the  applicant's
      restricted leave, such as the frequency of his reporting requirements,
      or even the length of the grant  of  restricted  leave.   Rather,  the
      challenge was to the decision to not  to  grant  indefinite  leave  to
      remain and to continue to subject the applicant to the terms of the RL
      policy.

  56. The 2019 decision was in response to an application to the  respondent
      submitted online on 26 February  2019,  initial  accompanying  written
      representations dated 14 March 2019, and further  representations  and
      medical evidence dated 26 April  2019,  including  Dr  Bell's  report.
      Collectively, the representations featured three elements.

  57. Current barriers to removal: The 2019 application provided reasons why
      the applicant cannot - at the present time - be removed to Tunisia, on
      grounds of Article 3, 5 and 8 ECHR.  The Article 3 grounds related  to
      the risk of further detention and torture at the hands of  the  state,
      and the applicant's present health conditions.   The  Article  5  risk
      (right to liberty and security) was connected to  the  applicant's  in
      absentia convictions in Tunisia.

  58. Through her grant of restricted leave to the applicant, the respondent
      accepts that the applicant cannot presently  be  removed  to  Tunisia.
      Although the decision states that "all your client's  submissions  and
      the evidence provided on his behalf have been considered...", it  does
      not state what, in  the  Secretary  of  State's  view,  the  operative
      factors were that led to the grant of restricted leave, rather than  a
      removal decision.  There is  no  indication,  for  example,  that  the
      respondent accepts that Article 8 provides a barrier to removal.   The
      respondent has previously proceeded on the basis that the applicant is
      "irremovable" due to the Article 3 risk of further torture in  Tunisia
      and has not indicated that she accepts the other claimed  barriers  to
      removal.

  59. Duration of leave: The application contended that the requirements  of
      Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR  were  such  that  MBT  was  entitled  to
      indefinite leave to remain.  In reliance upon the report  of  Dr  Bell
      and the letters from Mr Fish and Ms Bracken, the applicant stated that
      the mental anguish arising from his precarious immigration status  and
      previous experiences was such that only  indefinite  leave  to  remain
      would be appropriate.  Anything  less,  said  the  application,  would
      continue to exacerbate MBT's conditions.

  60. The representations contended that Article 3 ECHR imposed  a  positive
      obligation on the United Kingdom to grant indefinite leave to  remain,
      based on pursuant to Pretty v United Kingdom (2002)  35  EHRR  1.   At
      [52], the Strasbourg Court held that naturally occurring  physical  or
      mental illnesses may give rise to certain obligations:

           "The suffering which flows  from  naturally  occurring  illness,
           physical or mental, may be covered by Article 3, where it is, or
           risks being, exacerbated  by  treatment,  whether  flowing  from
           conditions of detention, expulsion or other measures, for  which
           the authorities can be held responsible..." (emphasis added)

      The applicant contended that the term "expulsion  or  other  measures"
      encompasses the duration of a grant of leave.  Not granting indefinite
      leave to remain would be one of the "other measures" which exacerbates
      the  pre-existing  mental  health  conditions  of  the  applicant,  he
      contended.

  61. Ms Weston did not pursue the representations that Article 3  conferred
      a right to ILR.

  62.  The  applicant  also  contended  that  his  right  to  "psychological
      integrity", encompassed within Article 8  ECHR,  required  him  to  be
      granted indefinite leave  to  remain,  relying  on  Bensaid  v  United
      Kingdom [2001] INLR 325 at [47].

  63. The application pointed out that MBT had resided in the United Kingdom
      for 20 years continuously, with leave for 15 years.  He was now  a  52
      year  old  father  of  four.   His  ability  to  demonstrate  positive
      rehabilitation was significantly  limited,  however,  by  his  medical
      conditions, which largely prevented him from leaving his house due  to
      the fear of seizures and other mobility issues.

  64. MS (India) criteria: Finally concerning the  duration  of  leave,  the
      applicant contended that the  criteria  enunciated  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal in MS (India) and MT (Tunisia) meant  that,  under  the  common
      law, he was entitled to indefinite leave to remain.  We will return to
      the Court of Appeal's criteria in further depth shortly;  in  summary,
      they are the length of residence in the United Kingdom, the gravity of
      the conduct that led  to  expulsion,  and  the  extent  to  which  the
      applicant had changed following exclusion,  plus  other  case-specific
      factors.

  65. In the alternative, the letter contended that the applicant should  be
      granted more than the standard period of six months' leave,  and  that
      the reporting conditions should  be  relaxed,  if  not  removed.   The
      application made additional representations going to the conditions of
      restricted leave, if granted; given Ms Weston confined her submissions
      to the proportionality of the decision not to grant  indefinite  leave
      to remain, rather than the conditions attached to the current grant of
      restricted leave, it is not  necessary  to  say  any  more  about  the
      representations as to conditions.

Ground 7 - Article 8 ECHR - insufficiently particularised assessment

  66. Ground 7 contends that the 2019 decision failed  to  comply  with  the
      requirements  of  Article  8  ECHR  in  that  it  did  not  feature  a
      sufficiently individual, particularised and structured  assessment  of
      the factors applicable to that issue, in accordance with the  guidance
      given by the Court of Appeal in MS (India).

  67. We must first determine whether Article 8 was engaged in  relation  to
      the decision not to grant indefinite leave to remain.   The  point  is
      significant  because,  in  the  case  of  rights  under  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights,  our  task  would  not  be  limited  to  a
      conventional  public  law  rationality  review  of  the   respondent's
      decision, but rather it would entail considering  for  ourselves  what
      the requirements of the Convention are.

  68. Plainly, the application of the RL policy is liable to interfere  with
      the Article 8 rights of the individual concerned.  The  objectives  of
      the policy are designed to prevent those subject to it from forming or
      developing  private  and/or  family  life.  At  the  very  least,  the
      conditions imposed under the RL policy have the very real potential to
      have a significant impact on the fabric of  the  individual's  private
      life. So much was clear from [102] of the Court of  Appeal's  judgment
      in MS (India).

  69. However, the question as to whether Article 8 -  or  other  Convention
      rights - are engaged by the decision as to the form  and  duration  of
      leave granted is a different matter.  The Court of  Appeal  considered
      this issue at [124] of MS (India), noting that the question  was  "not
      entirely straightforward."  Underhill LJ said that he did not  believe
      "that the refusal of ILR as such engages Article 8 at  all"  (emphasis
      added).  He drew an analogy between those - such as  MBT  -  who  have
      accrued long periods of residence while subject to the RL policy,  and
      those who present the immigration authorities of a host state  with  a
      fait accompli following a long period  of  "tolerated"  residence,  as
      considered by the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human  Rights
      in Jeunesse v Netherlands (2014) 60 EHRR 17.

  70. In Jeunesse, the Grand Chamber considered the Article 8  impact  of  a
      host state tolerating the presence  of  unlawful  migrants  pending  a
      decision on an application for a residence permit, an appeal, or while
      awaiting some other procedural event. It considered whether the family
      life and private life roots that such migrants  will  inevitably  have
      formed while awaiting progress on their case could ever be  such  that
      the host state would be obliged by Article 8 to enable the migrants to
      settle. The Court held that there was no  such  automatic  right.   It
      said at [103] that the  fact  that  such  persons  would  have  formed
      integrating links of that sort:

           "...does not automatically entail that the  authorities  of  the
           Contracting  State  concerned  are,  as  a  result,   under   an
           obligation pursuant to Article 8 of the Convention to allow  him
           or  her  to  settle  in  their  country.  In  a  similar   vein,
           confronting the authorities of the host country with family life
           as a fait accompli does not entail that those  authorities  are,
           as a result, under an obligation pursuant to Article  8  of  the
           Convention to allow the applicant to settle in the country.  The
           Court has previously held that,  in  general,  persons  in  that
           situation  have  no  entitlement  to  expect  that  a  right  of
           residence will be conferred upon them..."

  71. Underhill LJ considered that those residing in this  country  pursuant
      to the RL policy were in an analogous position  to  the  applicant  in
      Jeunesse presenting a fait accompli; those under the  RL  policy  were
      likely to have accrued residence in defiance of the wishes (if not the
      international obligations under Article 3 ECHR) of the United Kingdom.
      Their presence was being tolerated until removal  would  be  possible.
      While awaiting the possibility of lawful removal to  arise,  it  would
      not be open for such persons to rely on Article 8  of  the  Convention
      for an automatic right to settle in the United Kingdom, based upon the
      length of residence that had elapsed while their  presence  was  being
      reluctantly tolerated.

  72. Underhill LJ added, again at [124], that it was clear  that  decisions
      under the RL policy did not consist solely in  the  territory  of  the
      binary issue of whether indefinite leave to remain would  be  granted,
      or not. The impact of the conditions imposed by the RL policy had  the
      potential to interfere with, and thereby engage, the Article 8  family
      and private life rights of those subject  to  the  policy,  and  their
      families. He noted that any such interferences would necessarily be of
      a "limited character", given that those subject to the RL policy  were
      still able to form relationships, work, live, and engage  in  life  in
      other material respects.

  73. Against that background, the question arises as to what  Underhill  LJ
      meant at [124] when he said that the refusal of ILR "as such" does not
      engage Article 8?

  74. In the course of addressing the potential impact of  Article  8  on  a
      decision to grant indefinite leave to remain,  Underhill  LJ  recalled
      that he had already quoted extensively from the decision of the  Upper
      Tribunal under consideration in that appeal, at [108]  to  [109].   At
      [129] of the Upper Tribunal's judgment (quoted as [130] by  the  Court
      of Appeal), the panel said:

           "...the decision to grant... six months leave to remain does not
           interfere with the development of family life in  principle.  At
           its height, it may have an impact on the quality of family  life
           bearing in mind the potential  insecurity  which  being  granted
           successive periods of time limited leave  may  create.  However,
           bearing in mind the objective of retaining  the  opportunity  to
           remove someone excluded from the refugee Convention by virtue of
           Article 1F at the earliest opportunity, the  provision  of  such
           time limited leave is not  in  and  of  itself  disproportionate
           insofar as it may interfere with the quality of the  development
           of article 8 rights and insofar as it is subject to the  overall
           governing consideration that there may come a point in time when
           the failure to grant ILR will be unreasonable  bearing  in  mind
           the particular circumstances of the case." (Emphasis added)

      At [109], Underhill LJ said, "I  have  quoted  that  passage  in  full
      because I entirely agree with it."

  75. In our judgment, by using the term "as such" Underhill LJ  meant  that
      the refusal of ILR cannot automatically, and is usually  unlikely  to,
      engage Article 8.  Read as a whole, the Court of Appeal's judgment did
      not rule out the possibility  that  Article  8  is  capable  of  being
      engaged by a decision to refuse indefinite leave to remain.   So  much
      was  clear  from  the  extensive  quotation  with  approval  of   this
      Tribunal's judgment in MS (India),  at  [108],  which  said  that  the
      proportionality  of  the  extent  of,  and  conditions  attached   to,
      restricted leave is subject to the "overall  governing  consideration"
      that there may come a point in time when it is "unreasonable"  bearing
      in mind the particular circumstances of the case to  refuse  to  grant
      indefinite leave to remain

  76. In adopting that approach, Underhill LJ was entirely  consistent  with
      that of Richards LJ in  Kardi  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ 934, which held that a  case-specific  time
      will come when  those  subject  to  the  RL  policy  are  entitled  to
      indefinite leave to remain.   Mr  Kardi  was  subject  to  an  earlier
      version of the RL policy and had resided in the United Kingdom  for  a
      considerable period. In the context of discussing the  proportionality
      of any interferences with Mr Kardi's Article 8 rights,  including  the
      impact of the conditions imposed and the length of his residence  (see
      [30]), Richards LJ said at [32]:

           "There may of course come a point where the appellant  has  been
           in the United Kingdom for so long and/or  the  prospect  of  his
           removal to Tunisia is so remote, that the only course reasonably
           open to the Secretary of State is to grant him indefinite  leave
           to remain.  That point had not been  reached,  however,  at  the
           date of  the  March  2012  decision  under  challenge  in  these
           proceedings..."

  77. In Babar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ
      329, the Court of Appeal considered an appeal against  a  decision  of
      the Secretary of State to refuse to grant indefinite leave  to  remain
      under  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules,   which   governs
      entitlement to indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  ten  years'
      lawful residence.  Mr Babar had  been  an  officer  in  the  Pakistani
      police.  He and those under his  command  had  beaten  and  threatened
      those they had detained in order to extract information from them. The
      US State Department had reported that  the  police  in  Pakistan  were
      highly  politicised  and  routinely  and  systematically  used  brutal
      investigation  procedures,   including   torture,   and   engaged   in
      extrajudicial killing; Mr Babar had been part of  that  apparatus.  He
      applied for indefinite leave to remain in this country,  following  14
      years' residence under the RL policy (and its predecessors), to  which
      he was subject after the Secretary of State decided  that  his  crimes
      against humanity in Pakistan  excluded  him  from  the  scope  of  the
      Refugee Convention, but that he was not removeable. The  Secretary  of
      State subsequently took a decision to return Mr Babar to Pakistan,  on
      the basis that he had been able to return on at least  five  occasions
      without difficulty and without experiencing the harm  or  mistreatment
      which had previously merited him being dealt with under the RL policy.
      The refusal of Mr Babar's human rights  claim  generated  a  statutory
      right of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal ("the FTT") in which  a
      central issue was whether Mr Babar was  entitled  to  ILR  under  rule
      276B.  The appellant was successful  before  the  FTT  and  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  On the Secretary of State's appeal to the Court of  Appeal,
      at [32], Sir Patrick Elias held:

           "I do not accept that the commission of these  offences  against
           humanity necessarily and inevitably meant that Mr Babar could in
           no circumstances be  granted  ILR....  Paragraph  276B  [of  the
           Immigration Rules] envisages the  possibility  that  even  where
           such very serious offences have been committed in the past,  all
           the relevant factors should be considered and the  circumstances
           may be sufficiently compelling to justify granting ILR."

      Mr Babar's appeal was ultimately dismissed, pursuant to the  Court  of
      Appeal's assessment that it would be proportionate, for  the  purposes
      of Article 8(2) of the Convention, for him to be returned to Pakistan.
      At no stage did the Court of Appeal hold that there was  no  statutory
      jurisdiction in a human rights appeal in relation to those elements of
      his case which concerned indefinite leave to remain, or that Article 8
      was not engaged by the underlying decision of the Secretary of State.

  78. We also recall that the Court of Appeal held at [124]  of  MS  (India)
      that decisions under the RL policy do engage Article 8, principally in
      relation to the impact the conditions of restricted leave will have on
      the private and family life of the person concerned.  We see no  basis
      for there to be a "cap" on the issues that may be considered  pursuant
      to an Article 8 analysis; we find no support for the proposition  that
      certain, lesser considerations (e.g. conditions of leave) are  capable
      of engaging Article 8, whereas far more fundamental questions, such as
      the availability of indefinite leave to remain, are never  capable  of
      engaging Article 8, in appropriate cases.   That  approach  would  not
      make sense, given the Court of Appeal in Kardi, Babar and  MS  (India)
      held, in the context of addressing proportionality  under  Article  8,
      that there would come a point when indefinite leave to remain would be
      the only reasonable option.

  79. It is likely that, in most cases, a decision as to  whether  a  person
      under the RL policy is entitled to indefinite leave to remain does not
      engage Article 8.  Any  interferences  arising  from  the  refusal  of
      indefinite leave to remain would be likely to be minimal, and thus not
      engage Article 8.  But that is not to say that there will not be case-
      specific scenarios where, due to the particular circumstances  of  the
      individual concerned, Article 8 is engaged by the decision  to  refuse
      to grant indefinite leave to remain, and to maintain  the  application
      of the RL policy.

  80. We do not consider Jeunesse to be authority to the contrary, nor  that
      the Court of Appeal in MS (India)  precluded  the  possibility  of  us
      taking this  approach.   The  Grand  Chamber  was  not  stipulating  a
      principle that tolerated migrants would never be able  to  settle,  in
      any circumstances.  The Strasbourg Court,  of  course,  noted  in  the
      extract from  Jeunesse  quoted  by  the  Court  of  Appeal,  that  the
      substantive requirements of Article 8 did not "automatically" entail a
      corresponding entitlement to settlement for a tolerated but  irregular
      migrant.  It did not rule out the possibility that some migrants would
      be eventually be entitled to settle in cases where that was  the  only
      proportionate outcome.  Nor did the Court of Appeal in MS (India).

  81. For these reasons, while the decision to  grant  indefinite  leave  to
      remain does not "as such" engage Article 8 of the ECHR, it is  capable
      of doing so in an appropriate case.

The import of Article 8

  82. Having found that Article 8 is, in principle, capable of being engaged
      in relation to a decision to  refuse  to  grant  indefinite  leave  to
      remain, we return to the questions of whether (i) Article 8 is engaged
      in relation to the 2019 decision's  refusal  to  grant  the  applicant
      indefinite leave to remain; and (ii) if so, whether  the  decision  to
      refuse to grant indefinite leave to  remain  was  proportionate  under
      Article 8(2)?

  83. Cases such as the present are always  likely  to  be  inherently  fact
      specific matters. We see little  merit  in  attempting  to  articulate
      general propositions which  could  potentially  go  to  the  issue  of
      whether Article 8 is engaged in all cases across the board. Rather, we
      shall focus on the facts of the present matter. We consider  that  the
      poor state of MBT's mental and physical health, and the  distinct  and
      acute impact that the regular and repeated grants of restricted  leave
      are having upon him, has the effect of engaging Article 8 in  relation
      to the decision to refuse to grant him indefinite leave to remain.  Dr
      Bell's report suggests that the psychological  impact  of  not  having
      security of tenure in the United Kingdom exacerbates the long term and
      enduring impact of the applicant's detention and  torture  experiences
      in Tunisia: see page 9 of the report, which highlights the  impact  of
      the ongoing stress and uncertainty experienced by the applicant on the
      underlying conditions triggered by  the  major  catastrophic  dramatic
      events which have taken place in his history.  MBT's health was not an
      issue before the Upper Tribunal previously, or the Court of Appeal  in
      MS (India).  It is a new issue, with new implications.

  84. The health dimension to this case must be considered in the context of
      the total length of the applicant's residence, which is  now  over  20
      years.  On any view, this is a  lengthy  period.   Combined  with  the
      applicant's significant health problems, we consider that  the  length
      of the applicant's residence are factors which lead to Article 8 being
      engaged in relation to the question of whether or not he  is  entitled
      to indefinite leave to remain.

  85. Given we accept that Article 8 is engaged, the intensity of our review
      is greater.  We must decide for ourselves what the requirements of the
      Convention are, in order to assess  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
      reached a lawful decision to refuse to grant the applicant  indefinite
      leave to remain.

  86. We will analyse  the  applicant's  case  through  the  prism  of  Lord
      Bingham's five stage test in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 at [17]:

           (1)  Will the proposed [refusal of indefinite leave  to  remain]
           be an interference by a public authority with  the  exercise  of
           the applicant's right to respect for his private or (as the case
           may be) family life?

           (2)  If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of  such
           gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

           (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

           (4)  If so, is  such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
           society in the interests of national security, public safety  or
           the economic well-being of the country, for  the  prevention  of
           disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

           (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
           public end sought to be achieved?

  87. Modified to fit the facts of this case, we have already  answered  the
      first and second Razgar questions in the affirmative. The interference
      with the applicant's Article 8 rights will be of such  gravity  so  as
      potentially to engage the operation of Article 8 (Razgar 2).

  88. The interference is in accordance with the law, in the sense  that  it
      is conducted pursuant to the framework set out in  section  3  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971 for the imposition of conditions on the grant  of
      limited leave to  remain  (Razgar  3).  The  Secretary  of  State  has
      published policy setting  out  the  principles  she  will  apply  when
      imposing conditions in matters such as the present.

  89. As to the fourth Razgar question, the  RL  policy  is,  in  principle,
      capable of achieving one of the  goals  set  out  in  the  derogations
      contained in Article 8(2)  of  the  Convention.   At  [29]  of  Kardi,
      Richards LJ held that the stated aims  of  the  policy  were  all,  in
      principle, legitimate aims.  He said:

           "The various  elements  of  the  stated  rationale  are  all  in
           principle legitimate  aims,  though  it  will  be  necessary  to
           consider the extent to which they are  specifically  engaged  in
           the appellant's case. More needs to be said, however, about  the
           stated wish to give a clear signal that the  person  should  not
           become established in the United Kingdom. The rationale  of  the
           previous discretionary leave policy was described by Cranston  J
           in R (Mayaya) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
           [2011] EWHC 3088 (Admin), [2012] 1 All ER 1491, at paragraph 57,
           as being "not simply to ensure regular reviews so  that  foreign
           national prisoners [the specific category of persons in issue in
           that case] can be removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  when  the
           opportunity arises", but also "to plant road blocks in  the  way
           of foreign national prisoners settling here", though  settlement
           might in practice still occur. In  other  words,  the  grant  of
           short periods of leave emphasised the intended  impermanence  of
           the individual's stay in this country and made it more difficult
           to put down roots here and to build  up  a  private  life,  thus
           reducing the prospect of removal being prevented  on  Article  8
           grounds  when  the  opportunity  otherwise  arose.  The  current
           restricted discretionary leave  policy,  by  providing  for  the
           imposition of specific conditions on  the  grant  of  leave,  is
           intended to reduce further the opportunity to put down roots and
           thereby to reinforce  the  roadblocks  planted  in  the  way  of
           settlement here. It does  not  prevent  the  establishing  of  a
           private life but makes it more difficult and  so  increases  the
           chance that the delay before removal can be  effected  does  not
           operate to prevent removal  altogether.  That  is  a  legitimate
           aspect of immigration control."

  90. In MS (India), Underhill LJ held at [107] that:

           "The language of 'placing obstacles' and 'creating  Road-blocks'
           may have, out of context, a pejorative ring. But the context  is
           all-important.  The  category  of  migrants  with  whom  we  are
           concerned have, by definition, committed serious crimes (in  the
           sense identified above), typically  of  a  terrorist  character.
           They have no right to be in this country and are only  permitted
           to stay because, having come  here  unlawfully,  it  has  proved
           impossible  to  remove  them.  I  see  nothing   even   arguably
           illegitimate in seeking to prevent them putting down roots,  for
           the reasons clearly stated in the policy itself."

  91. Addressing the derogations under Article 8(2) directly,  it  is  trite
      law that the maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  an
      accepted subset of the need to  establish  national  security,  public
      safety and economic well-being based derogations, when  combined  with
      the prevention of disorder or crime, protection of health  or  morals,
      and the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.  The  reasons
      given by the Secretary of State for restricting the grant of leave  to
      MBT to a further period of restricted leave  are  all,  in  principle,
      capable of  being  regarded  as  a  permitted  derogation  within  the
      parameters of Article 8(2).

Proportionality of decision to refuse indefinite leave to remain

  92. We turn to the fifth Razgar question:  whether  the  decision  not  to
      grant indefinite leave to remain to the applicant  was  proportionate.
      This question requires consideration  of  the  reasons  given  by  the
      respondent for refusing to grant indefinite leave to  remain,  in  the
      context of the reasons and objectives for, and given in, the RL policy
      itself, set against the representations and submissions  made  by  the
      applicant.

  93. It  is  important  to  recall  the  wider  context  within  which  our
      assessment is to sit; as Underhill LJ noted at [116]  of  MS  (India),
      "the starting point must be the terms of the policy."  The  effect  of
      the  policy  is  that  ILR  should  only  be  granted  in  exceptional
      circumstances:  see  [40]  and  [41]  of  MS.  Only  where  there  are
      "compelling reasons for a departure from the general rule" will it  be
      appropriate for an individual  to  be  granted  ILR.   The  "essential
      question" concerning the  ILR  issue  is,  "whether  in  the  case  in
      question the Secretary of State should have found that such compelling
      reasons were present" (per Underhill LJ, also at [116]).

  94. In MS (India) the Court of Appeal outlined three  indicative  criteria
      which were likely to be relevant to the "compelling reasons" issue, in
      addition  to  any  case-specific  factors  raised  on  behalf  of   an
      applicant.  We will address  these  considerations  in  light  of  the
      applicant's submissions.  We emphasise that we have considered all the
      relevant factors, in the round, before reaching our decision.

Length of residence

  95. The first relevant consideration is the length  of  residence  in  the
      United Kingdom (see [120]).  The Court of Appeal  held  that,  "in  an
      appropriate case", the length of residence may bring a case  into  the
      exceptional category.  The court noted that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)
      of the Immigration Rules, which governs the  length  of  unlawful  but
      tolerated residence needed to secure leave  to  remain  on  Article  8
      grounds, was 20 years, commenting that that provided  "some  context".
      The  Court  of  Appeal  proceeded  on   the   basis   that   paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iii) confers a right to indefinite leave to remain after  20
      years' unlawful residence.  The Court of Appeal appeared not  to  have
      had the benefit of  full  argument  or  accurate  submissions  on  the
      interpretation and application of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii).   Rather
      than leading to a grant of indefinite leave to remain, as the Court of
      Appeal must  have  been  led  to  believe,  the  import  of  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iii) is that, upon  20  years'  residence,  it  entitles  an
      applicant to limited leave to remain, which  will  usually  be  for  a
      period of 30 months. Twenty years of unlawful residence merely  places
      the migrant at  the  start  of  the  so-called  "ten  year  route"  to
      settlement.

  96. Paragraph 276ADE(1) provides, where relevant:

           "276ADE (1). The requirements to be  met  by  an  applicant  for
           leave to remain on the grounds of private life  in  the  UK  are
           that at the date of application, the applicant:

                 (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the  grounds  in
                 Section S-LTR 1.1  to  S-LTR  2.2.  and  S-LTR.3.1.  to  S-
                 LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and

                 (ii) has made a valid application for leave  to  remain  on
                 the grounds of private life in the UK; and

                 (iii) has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
                 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)..."

      We note that the introductory wording to the root paragraph  uses  the
      term "leave to remain", rather  than  "indefinite  leave  to  remain".
      Paragraph 276BE(1) makes provision concerning the practical outcome of
      successful applications under paragraph  276ADE(1),  in  these  terms,
      with emphasis added:

      "276BE(1). Limited leave to remain on the grounds of private  life  in
           the UK may be granted for  a  period  not  exceeding  30  months
           provided that the Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
           requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1) are met or,  in  respect  of
           the requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and (v), were met in
           a previous application which led to a grant of limited leave  to
           remain under this  sub-paragraph.  Such  leave  shall  be  given
           subject to a condition of no recourse to public funds unless the
           Secretary of State considers  that  the  person  should  not  be
           subject to such a condition."

      As emphasised above, successful applications under 276ADE(1)  lead  to
      limited leave to remain, for 30 months, rather than  indefinite  leave
      to remain.

  97. Paragraph 276DE makes provision for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on
      private life grounds.  The central length-based criterion features  in
      paragraph 276DE(a).  It is that the applicant "has been in the UK with
      continuous leave on the grounds of private life for  a  period  of  at
      least 120 months..."  Such leave would be that granted pursuant  to  a
      successful application under paragraph 276ADE(1).

  98. Taken together, paragraphs 276ADE(1)(iii), BE(1) and DE  mean  that  a
      person seeking indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long
      (initially  unlawful)  residence  will  need  a  total  of  30  years'
      residence; the first 20 years lead to a grant of leave under paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iii) for a duration of 30 months.  Four successive grants of
      leave in that capacity, giving a total of 120 months,  or  ten  years,
      are required before a person becomes eligible for indefinite leave  to
      remain.

  99. It follows, therefore, that the temporal comparator  under  the  rules
      for a "normal" migrant with long, initially unlawful, residence is  30
      years residence for the acquisition of ILR.  There are, of course, key
      distinctions between a person in a paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)  situation
      and those under the RL policy. Those to whom paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)
      applies would not necessarily have had  Article  3-based  barriers  to
      their return to their state of origin, meaning they had an element  of
      choice about whether  to  have  remain  here  during  that  time.   By
      contrast, those subject to the RL policy  do  not  have  that  choice,
      provided their purported inability to return to their state of  origin
      has not been overstated (as had been the case in Babar).  On the other
      hand, those eligible for limited leave under  276ADE(1)(iii),  or  ILR
      under 276DE,  will  not  present  suitability  concerns  of  the  sort
      presented by this applicant, and  instead  must  demonstrate  positive
      good character, providing an additional facet to the  comparison.   As
      Underhill LJ noted,  "I  do  not  say  that  the  two  situations  are
      analogous, but simply that that rule provides some context."

 100. We consider that the context provided by the comparison with paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iii) does provide a degree of assistance.  We  take  account
      of  the  fact  that  the  applicant  has  accrued  his  residence   in
      circumstances when he effectively had no  choice  but  to  live  here.
      Nevertheless, the total length of the applicant's residence  has  only
      just reached the threshold  in  relation  to  which  someone  with  no
      suitability concerns would be entitled  to  only  30  months'  limited
      leave to remain.  On any view, it is difficult to see how  the  length
      of  the  applicant's  residence,  in  isolation,   could   amount   to
      exceptional or  compelling  circumstances  necessitating  a  grant  of
      indefinite leave to remain, given  it  falls  short  of  the  "normal"
      threshold by a significant margin.

 101. The 2019 decision appeared to base its analysis of the "20 year" point
      on the Court of Appeal's approach to the operation of the rule  in  MS
      (India), assuming that after 20 years  a  "normal"  migrant  would  be
      entitled to ILR.  That was an incorrect comparison, although it was an
      incorrect comparison in the applicant's favour.   It  meant  that  the
      decision assumed that the applicant had accrued residence  of  such  a
      length that, under the Immigration Rules, would pave the way for  ILR.
      The large disparity which, in fact,  exists  between  the  applicant's
      length  of  residence  and  the   criteria   for   ILR   pursuant   to
      276ADE(1)(iii) taken with 276DE is stark: the applicant is  ten  years
      short of the length of residence  required  for  indefinite  leave  to
      remain for a "normal" migrant under the rules.   The  2019  decision's
      assessment could have been adverse  to  the  applicant  to  a  greater
      extent but was not.  Bearing in mind  that  the  comparison  with  the
      approach taken by the Immigration Rules is capable of providing  "some
      context", we entirely agree with the spirit of the  following  extract
      of the refusal letter:

           "...a period considerably in excess of 20 years is likely to  be
           required as compelling settlement  in  the  case  of  a  foreign
           criminal guilty of conduct of the type that falls within Article
           1F of the Refugee Convention."

 102. We agree that, taken in  isolation,  the  length  of  the  applicant's
      residence is incapable of amounting to a "compelling reason" to depart
      from the normal rule. It is necessary, of course, to view the  reasons
      advanced on behalf of the applicant in the round,  before  reaching  a
      considered view.  A considerably longer period would be  required,  in
      light of  the  public  interest,  public  protection  and  safe  haven
      objectives of the RL policy.

Gravity of conduct

 103. The second consideration is the gravity of the conduct which  led  the
      applicant to be excluded from humanitarian protection: see [121] of MS
      (India).

 104. At page 5 of the decision, the respondent stated:

           "Your client is aware of the  circumstances  that  surround  his
           conviction in France  on  19  January  1998,  so  they  are  not
           reiterated. The Secretary of State notes that  your  client  has
           never provided a detailed account of those circumstances nor any
           object of evidence as to the intended or actual use to which the
           arms provided were put. It is  a  matter  of  record  that  this
           conviction for possession and transportation of  arms  connected
           to  terrorist  activities  led  to  a  sentence  of   5   years'
           imprisonment and your client  was  excluded  from  France.  Your
           client entered the UK illegally so there is no objective  record
           of your client's entry to the UK. Your  client  has  claimed  no
           prior connection to the UK."

 105. The decision continued (see page 9):

           "The Court of Appeal indicated in MS (India)...  at  [121]  that
           some forms of misconduct  were  so  serious  as  to  exclude  an
           individual from ILR at any time. That could not  be  assumed  in
           all cases since  Article  1F  covered  the  'ordinary'  criminal
           offending in addition to international crimes, so some  offences
           may not be as serious in  nature  as  others.  Considering  your
           client's case, it is noted that this is not a case of 'ordinary'
           criminal offending of a less serious kind. Rather, your client's
           conviction relates to involvement  in  international  terrorism,
           which the Secretary of State regards as falling the  higher  end
           of the spectrum of seriousness of offending covered by  the  RLR
           policy. Your client's case directly engages the public  interest
           reflected  in  the  'no  safe  haven'  policy.  Therefore,  your
           client's offending is a factor that weighs heavily  against  the
           grant of ILR in all the circumstances."

 106. In our view, the applicant has engaged in extremely  serious  criminal
      offending in France.   The  offences  involved  weapons  and  a  large
      conspiracy.  The conduct had  a  cross-border  element,  in  that  the
      applicant committed the offences in a country other than that  of  his
      nationality, with 29 other Tunisian citizens,  having  entered  France
      illegally.  The applicant has never expressed remorse for his  actions
      and has at every stage sought to deny or minimalise his involvement in
      the offences, refusing to take  responsibility  for  the  convictions.
      Although he has written in a statement prepared for these  proceedings
      that  he  experienced  difficulties  with  the  lawyer  appointed   to
      represent him and was convicted on what we paraphrase as a  "guilt  by
      association" basis, he did not appeal against his conviction.  We note
      his explanation for not having sought to appeal but note also that  he
      has not provided any expert evidence to support his suggestion that he
      was at risk of his  sentence  being  increased  retrospectively.   The
      conviction was imposed pursuant to a judicial procedure  in  a  Member
      State of the European Union and a Contracting Party  to  the  European
      Convention  on  Human  Rights.   There  was  no  evidence  before  the
      respondent, and there is no evidence before us,  which  suggests  that
      the proceedings were unfair, or that the applicant was  prejudiced  in
      anyway by the process adopted.  The applicant has not said that he did
      not speak French, or that he was  unable  to  understand  the  process
      taking place around him.  Put simply, the applicant committed  serious
      offences, in respect of which he continues to deny responsibility.

 107. We reject the submissions of Ms Weston that the  conduct  was  at  the
      less  serious  end  of  the  spectrum,  thus  demanding  more  lenient
      treatment by the respondent - and by us. Of course, it is possible  to
      envisage more serious offending. It often is. We accept that  this  is
      not necessarily a case where it is  "self-evident"  that  there  could
      never be circumstances meriting a departure from the general rule that
      ILR is not granted: MS (India) at [117].  The applicant does not  fall
      into the "obvious example" category outlined by Underhill LJ in  these
      terms:

           "An obvious example would be where the migrant continues to pose
           a risk to national  security  or  has  been  guilty  of  serious
           criminal conduct since their admission. Another is likely to  be
           where there is good reason  to  believe  that  the  barriers  to
           removability may soon  be  lifted,  as  a  result  of  political
           changes in the migrant's country of origin or otherwise.  It  is
           also important to bear in  mind  that  if  ILR  is  granted  the
           Secretary of State loses the power to impose conditions, so that
           if there is a continuing need for such conditions because of the
           nature of the offending, ILR will not be appropriate."

      We have not been informed,  for  example,  that  there  is  a  current
      national security threat assessment in relation to the applicant.   He
      is not recorded as having committed  any  criminal  offences  in  this
      country.  By contrast, the applicant is the father  to  four  children
      and appears to have led a blemish-free life since his arrival here.

 108. However, the applicant's sentence of five years'  imprisonment,  taken
      with the nature of his offences, is by no means at the lowest  end  of
      the spectrum of severity.  Five years is a significant period.  By way
      of  comparative  example,  in  section  72(2)  of   the   Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, Parliament has legislated to  provide
      for a rebuttable presumption that those who  have  been  convicted  in
      this country of an offence of at least 2 years' imprisonment are to be
      presumed to have been convicted of a "particularly serious" crime, for
      the purposes of Article 33(2) of the  Refugee  Convention.   The  term
      "particularly serious" contrasts  with  the  description  of  offences
      leading to exclusion in Article 1F(b), which omits any  suggestion  of
      "particularly", merely providing that the commission of "serious  non-
      political" offences outside the country of  refuge  is  sufficient  to
      exclude persons from the scope of the Refugee  Convention  altogether.
      Given Parliament has deemed it appropriate to categorise "particularly
      serious" offences as  those  resulting  in  the  comparatively  lesser
      sentence of two years, we consider the imposition  of  a  sentence  of
      five years to be  more  serious,  by  a  considerable  degree,  taking
      account of Parliament's approach when calibrating our own  assessment.
      We ascribe limited weight to this comparison,  as  direct  comparisons
      between different jurisdictions can be difficult, but nevertheless  we
      do consider there to be some limited relevance in approaching  matters
      in this way.

 109. We also reject Ms Weston's submission that the 2019  decision  refused
      to  engage  in  an  analysis  of  the  relative  seriousness  of   the
      applicant's criminal offences.  In the extract from the 2019  decision
      we have quoted at paragraph 104, above, the respondent clearly  states
      that the conduct was not "of  a  less  serious  kind",  and  that  the
      Secretary of State regarded it as "falling at the higher  end  of  the
      spectrum of seriousness..."

 110.  Recalling,  in  particular,  the  public  interest  and  safe   haven
      objectives  of  the  RL  policy,  we  consider  that  it  is  entirely
      appropriate to  withhold  ILR  when  the  nature  of  the  applicant's
      offending is taken into consideration.



Positive conduct after offending

 111. The third potentially relevant consideration is the  extent  to  which
      the migrant has "changed"  since  the  conduct  in  question:  see  MS
      (India) at [122]. Underhill LJ said:

           "...good evidence that the migrant [has] repudiated his  or  her
           past conduct and turned  their  lives  round  so  as  to  become
           valuable members of society (to the extent that the restrictions
           on their leave may have allowed) should weigh in  the  necessary
           assessment, particularly where there has been some very positive
           contribution to society."

 112. The 2019 decision highlighted the approach of Babar to  such  positive
      factors not merely amounting to an absence of negative conduct.  In  a
      passage that is a little difficult to follow, the decision  said  that
      Babar:

           "reflects ordinary administrative law principles  that  relevant
           factors ought  to  be  considered  and  does  not  constitute  a
           'benefit' that is afforded routinely in all or  any  cases  save
           were the individual  circumstances,  exceptionally,  demonstrate
           such conduct."

      It seems to us that what the above extract is seeking to establish  is
      the fact that the mere absence of poor or  criminal  behaviour  during
      the period of residence in the United Kingdom does  not  amount  to  a
      sufficiently positive contribution such that  it  will  be  a  weighty
      factor in the proportionality assessment. That must be right.

 113. On the issue of rehabilitation, the decision letter said:

           "It is noted that  your  client  has  not  taken  any  steps  to
           demonstrate genuine  rehabilitation.  Throughout  your  client's
           residence in the UK  there  has  been  no  evidence  of  genuine
           remorse on his part for his criminal  conduct  provided  to  the
           Secretary of State. Your client has not provided  any  statement
           that unequivocally condemns  his  criminal  conduct,  terrorism,
           extremism or the use of violence to achieve desired ends in this
           context. No cogent evidence has been provided of  any  intention
           by your client to rehabilitate, with no commitment as to why and
           how that would be achieved by him. The mere  effluxion  of  time
           does not demonstrate any positive change or belief."

 114. The applicant's representations, in reliance upon  the  report  of  Dr
      Bell and the other medical evidence, stated that it was not reasonable
      to expect him to engage in such positive conduct.   His  physical  and
      mental disabilities prevented him from doing so.  Ms Weston  submitted
      that to the extent that  the  respondent  failed  to  make  sufficient
      reasonable adjustments to her expectations of his rehabilitation,  she
      discriminated against him on grounds of disability,  contravening  the
      Equality Act 2010, and Article 14 of the ECHR, taken with Article 8.

 115. We accept that the applicant's medical  conditions  mean  that  it  is
      unreasonable to expect substantial evidence of outward  activities  or
      reform, for example, in the form of a high profile role in  which  the
      applicant is  widely  regarded  for  having  renounced  terrorism  and
      encouraged others to do the same. We do not hold the applicant to  the
      standards which, for example, were accepted by the FTT in Ruhumuliza v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  117  as
      amounting to meriting the conclusion  that,  "[w]e  find  it  hard  to
      believe that the respondent now  considers  the  appellant  to  be  an
      undesirable alien..." In that case, the appellant had  been  a  senior
      church leader who acquiesced in the Rwandan genocide, although was not
      an active participant.   He  had  since  engaged  in  extensive  post-
      genocide  reconciliation  and  accountability  initiatives.   He   was
      accepted and trusted  by  the  regime  of  President  Kagame  in  that
      capacity during return visits.  He had been a member  of  the  Rwandan
      delegation at a Commonwealth reception at  Buckingham  Palace.   Those
      were all  factors  that  the  FTT  considered  to  be  important  when
      considering his appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of his
      human rights claim.  The decision was upheld by  the  Upper  Tribunal,
      which was in turn upheld by the Court of Appeal (Singh LJ dissenting).
       The decision was upheld principally because there had been  no  error
      of law in the assessment of the FTT, and Underhill  LJ  held  that  it
      must be respected.

 116. We consider it would be wholly unreasonable, and therefore irrational,
      to expect a  Ruhumuliza  level  of  positive  contribution  from  this
      applicant.  We do not consider the 2019 decision falls into  error  on
      this issue; the respondent did not  expect  such  standards.  The  key
      factor relied upon by the 2019 decision is one with which we  entirely
      agree; the applicant has demonstrated no remorse,  nor  has  he  taken
      responsibility for his offending in France. At every stage,  including
      before these proceedings, he has sought to minimise his responsibility
      for the offences of which he was convicted. Although  in  a  statement
      prepared  for  these  proceedings  the  applicant  seeks  to  renounce
      terrorism and underline his commitment to achieving  political  change
      through peaceful and democratic means, those are, with respect,  empty
      words in light of his denial of responsibility for his offences. There
      is  no  suggestion  in  the  medical  evidence  that  the  applicant's
      reasoning is impaired to such an extent that he lacks the capacity  to
      demonstrate  such  reform.   It  was  entirely  appropriate  for   the
      respondent to deal with this issue in the terms outlined above. In any
      event, as we understand the 2019 decision, the respondent  was  saying
      that the absence of evidence of rehabilitative conduct meant that this
      was not  a  factor  which  counted  in  the  applicant's  favour.  The
      respondent was not saying that this counted against him.  It  was  the
      applicant's French conviction which counted against him.





Other relevant factors

 117. At [123] of MS (India), the Court of Appeal said that there may  be  a
      variety of individual circumstances  which,  either  in  isolation  or
      taken  with  other  factors,  bring  the  case  into  the  exceptional
      category.  The additional factors in the present  matter  include  the
      applicant's physical and mental health  conditions,  and  the  claimed
      wider impact of the grant  of  restricted  leave  on  his  family,  in
      particular his minor children.

Best interests of the children

 118. It is clear that life on restricted leave has had  an  impact  on  the
      applicant's family, mainly by virtue  of  the  collateral  impact  his
      health conditions will have had on them.  From the materials  we  have
      seen, the impact is of a limited nature.  The applicant has been  able
      to establish family life in this country through marrying  and  having
      four children.  His wife enjoys ILR and his children are  all  British
      citizens.  Three of his children are still minors; they are  aged  17,
      15 and 13.  The applicant does not presently face removal.

 119. In his statement prepared for these proceedings, the applicant writes:

           "It is a hard feeling to be in a country for 20 years,  starting
           with so much hope for the future, and gradually  realising  that
           in the opinion of the place which is your home you are  a  hated
           foreigner and there is  nothing  you  can  do  to  improve  your
           situation. I feel guilty that this hatred from the state affects
           my children and their futures..."

      At page 8 of Dr Bell's report, the applicant  is  recorded  as  having
      said, "I feel like I have destroyed their life" when speaking  of  the
      impact of his difficulties upon his children.

 120. Other than the applicant's  assertions  that  his  immigration  status
      affects his children,  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
      conferral of ILR is necessary in their best interests.  The  applicant
      himself has said that he does not know  if  being  granted  ILR  would
      alleviate his feelings of helplessness (see paragraph  128).   Despite
      the thrust of Dr Bell's report being that the applicant  requires  ILR
      on, in effect, medical grounds, he writes at page 12 that a  grant  of
      ILR would be unlikely to have an immediate effect, due to the severity
      of his psychological state.

 121. The leading authorities concerning the assessment of the best interest
      interests of children in the immigration context require  analysis  of
      the "real world context" in which the migrant and  their  family  find
      themselves.   Perhaps  revealingly,  they   are   addressing   removal
      scenarios, rather than situations  where,  as  here,  removal  is  not
      currently within scope.  In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the
      Home Department [2018] UKSC 53, Lord Carnwath endorsed what  was  said
      in EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2014] EWCA Civ 874 concerning this issue, at [58]:

           "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests
           of the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as
           they are in the real world.  If  one  parent  has  no  right  to
           remain, but the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the  background
           against which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has
           the right to remain, then that is the background  against  which
           the assessment is conducted. Thus, the  ultimate  question  will
           be: is it reasonable to expect the child to  follow  the  parent
           with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

 122. The "real world" context of this matter is  distinct  from  the  cases
      before the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria); there is no question of  the
      applicant being removed at the present time.  He does have  the  right
      to remain.  His children are British.  By definition, it would not  be
      reasonable to expect the children  to  accompany  their  father  to  a
      country where he would be at real risk of serious harm (and  there  is
      no suggestion that he will be removed while such a risk persists).

 123. We accept that, to the extent there is an element of precariousness to
      the applicant's immigration status,  that  may  lead  to  feelings  of
      uncertainty for his children, and that it may be said  to  be  in  the
      best interests of the applicant's children for him to be granted  ILR,
      although that is only marginally so.  We  accept  that  most  children
      would feel a sense of unease and concern if they knew  and  understood
      the precarious nature of their parent's immigration status.   To  that
      limited extent, the best interests of the applicant's children are for
      him to be granted ILR.  But in the  main,  their  best  interests  are
      reflected in the applicant remaining in the United  Kingdom,  for  the
      time being.

 124.  Ms  Weston  submitted  that  section  117B(6)  of  the   Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is dispositive of the ILR issue in the
      applicant's favour.  It is not.  We put aside  whether  the  applicant
      could properly be regarded as a person "not liable to deportation", as
      we did not hear full argument on the  statutory  construction  of  the
      provision.  However,  at  its  highest,  it  confers  protection  from
      removal  while  the  applicant  enjoys  a   genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship with a "qualifying child", which would  include  each  of
      his minor British children.  Section 117B(6) says  nothing  concerning
      entitlement to ILR.   It  sits  in  the  context  of  section  117B(1)
      emphasising the public interest  in  the  maintenance  of  immigration
      controls.  Taken at its highest, section 117B(6) would confer upon the
      applicant protection from removal until  his  youngest  child  was  an
      adult  (approximately  five  years  away),  provided   the   applicant
      maintained a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his
      youngest child during that period.  It is irrelevant to  the  question
      of ILR.

Applicant's health

 125. Turning specifically  to  the  applicant's  health,  we  have  already
      outlined some of his health conditions: see paragraphs 11, 12 and  83,
      above.   In  diagnosing  the  applicant  with  post-traumatic   stress
      disorder, Dr Bell wrote at page 9:

           "...there have been a series  of  major  catastrophic  traumatic
           events. I refer here to the originating cause of  the  symptoms,
           i.e. the experiences of detention  and  torture,  and  the  very
           severe ongoing stress and uncertainty as to his safety in the UK
           and his future, which serve,  to  perpetuate  the  symptoms  and
           cause further deterioration... A more appropriate  diagnosis  in
           this case would be severe chronic traumatised state."

      Dr Bell continues at page 10 in these terms:

           "Psychiatric disorders such as these are highly sensitive to the
           external environmental context. It is not uncommon for those who
           have been subjected to torture and other degradations to sustain
           in themselves a belief in  the  goodness  of  the  world,  often
           believed to reside in the country where they are seeking asylum.
           The sudden loss of this hope can cause  a  sudden  deterioration
           into severe depression - I think this is likely to be  the  case
           here - that is the fact that he has not  been  given  indefinite
           leave to remain  and  is  subject  to  what  he  experiences  as
           surveillance  and  state  animosity  towards  him  (through  the
           deployment of 'restricted leave' against him) resulted  in  this
           loss of hope." (Emphasis added)

 126. Continuing his analysis of the impact of the  applicant's  immigration
      status on his mental health, Dr Bell writes at page 11:

           "... disorders such as this are highly sensitive to the external
           context. It is clear to me that the continuous stress  of  being
           subject to a formalised  measure  of  hostility  by  the  state,
           feeling insecure, subject to  restrictions  on  his  freedom  to
           function as any other autonomous human being and not knowing his
           future is safe as he is only ever given short periods  of  leave
           to remain in the  UK,  all  act  as  major  continuous  external
           stressors causing him to  deteriorate  and  preventing  recovery
           from his condition."

 127. Also, on page 11, under the heading "Treatment", Dr Bell  writes  that
      the applicant should be under the care of the appropriate  psychiatric
      team. Although the  applicant  takes  prescribed  medication  for  his
      psychiatric disorder, it does not "seem  to  be  effective",  Dr  Bell
      continues. This is  not  surprising,  he  writes,  as  pharmacological
      treatment can only have a very limited role to play in such disorders.
      Dr Bell continues that the existence of a "major external stressor" is
      what acts to prevent recovery and cause  deterioration.  He  concludes
      the penultimate paragraph on that page stating, "I refer here  to  the
      ongoing uncertainty  as  to  whether  and  when  he  will  be  granted
      permission to remain in the UK permanently."

 128. The applicant's own views on the impact of ILR are less clear. On page
      4, Dr Bell writes, having summarised the feelings of hopelessness  and
      despair that characterise the applicant's thinking:

           "I asked him at this point if he thought all this  would  change
           if you were granted indefinite leave to remain in his answer was
           quite revealing. He said he didn't know. He feels like this  all
           the time.

 129. Ms Weston places significant reliance on  what  she  contends  is  the
      decision  letter's   failure   to   have   regard   to   the   medical
      representations, particularly those made in light of the report of  Dr
      Bell concerning the medical need for ILR to be granted, as well as the
      letters from Mr Fish and Ms  Bracken.   She  contends  that  the  2019
      decision failed to take sufficient account of  the  Bell  report  when
      considering whether the applicant was entitled to ILR, and that it  is
      flawed on that basis.

 130. There is modest superficial force to this submission, in so far as  it
      focusses on the respondent's consideration of  the  Bell  report  when
      addressing the issue of ILR.  In this section of  the  2019  decision,
      the respondent did not expressly address "other factors", pursuant  to
      MS (India) at [123].

 131. However, this submission cannot withstand scrutiny, for the  following
      reasons.

 132. First, the second paragraph of the  2019  decision  stated  that  each
      aspect of the applicant's circumstances and submissions had been given
      specific and individual consideration.

 133. Secondly, it is clear from the 2019 decision that the  respondent  had
      the  contents  of   the   Bell   report,   and   the   other   medical
      representations,  in   mind   when   assessing   the   three   primary
      considerations enunciated by Underhill LJ in MS (India).  So  much  is
      clear from the respondent's acceptance, under  the  heading  "Positive
      conduct after the offending" on pages 9 and 10.  There the  respondent
      accepted that the applicant's ability to contribute to  society  would
      feature limitations on account  of  his  mental  and  physical  health
      conditions.  The respondent was clearly mindful of the impact  of  the
      applicant's physical and mental health conditions when addressing  the
      issue of ILR.

 134. Thirdly, having decided that there were no exceptional  or  compelling
      circumstances meriting a departure from the "general run  of  case  to
      which the normal approach properly applies", the respondent  addressed
      the issue of limited leave to remain.  It was at  that  stage  in  her
      analysis that she considered the  impact  of  the  applicant's  health
      conditions.  At page 11 the decision states, with emphasis added:

           "...set against the factors that indicate  the  normal  approach
           should be taken, the Secretary of State has given full weight to
           the considerations in your client's circumstances that weigh  in
           favour of departure from the standard  approach  of  granting  6
           months' [restricted leave to remain].  In particular, due regard
           has been given to the medical  evidence  that  your  client  has
           provided in support his claim that the duration of leave granted
           may have a future adverse effect on his  mental  health,   Also,
           consideration has  been  given  to  the  extent  that  there  is
           evidence that the  period  of  leave  granted  may  affect  your
           client's family and family life (taking account of the  findings
           of the Upper Tribunal and the Court of Appeal  on  the  inherent
           limitations on this where a family can continue to live together
           as a family unit for the duration of the  leave  and  the  grant
           does not affect the childrens' [sic] immigration status  in  the
           United Kingdom."

 135. The letter continued:

           "In light of the specific evidence in your client's case and  in
           his particular circumstances, it has been decided to depart from
           the normal period of 6 months'  leave  to  remain  to  grant  12
           months' leave to remain with reduced reporting.   This  balances
           your client's private interests against the public interest  and
           takes a proportionate and reasonable approach  bearing  in  mind
           that there is no evidence capable of  directly  calibrating  the
           period of leave with any particular inevitable  effect  on  your
           client's mental or physical health..."

 136. It is plainly the case that  the  respondent  considered  the  medical
      materials and adjusted her  normal  approach  to  granting  restricted
      leave accordingly.  The standard length of leave was doubled, and  the
      reporting requirements were relaxed to four times annually, down  from
      every other month.  It is clear that the respondent paid  full  regard
      to the contents of the Bell  report  when  addressing  the  length  of
      restricted leave.

 137. It is necessary  to  read  the  decision  as  a  whole.   Ms  Weston's
      submission is essentially one of disagreement with the weight ascribed
      by the respondent to the  medical  evidence.   Rather  than  it  being
      relevant to the length of restricted leave, or the conditions attached
      to it, Ms Weston's submission is that the medical  evidence  was  such
      that it was disproportionate for the respondent not to grant ILR.  Put
      another way, greater weight should have been ascribed to  the  medical
      evidence, she contends.

 138. The respondent's views as to where the public  interest  lies  in  the
      proportionality or otherwise of whether the applicant is  entitled  to
      ILR attract great weight.  See MS (India) at [124]:

           "The [Secretary of State's] assessment is also likely to involve
           aspects  on  which  particular  respect  must  be  paid  to  the
           judgement of the Secretary of  State.  In  all  cases  involving
           terrorist offences full weight must be accorded to her view that
           it is not in the public interest to allow this country to become
           a safe haven for terrorists and to  any  other,  more  specific,
           aspects of the case requiring a judgement on matters of national
           security  or  foreign  relations.  Particular   respect   should
           likewise be paid to any view she may express as  to  the  public
           acceptability of the grant of ILR to migrants who have committed
           certain kinds of offending."

 139. In light of these  considerations,  we  must  consider  for  ourselves
      whether the  respondent's  analysis  of  the  best  interests  of  the
      children, and the medical evidence was proportionate.

 140. While this is a human rights decision, necessitating us  deciding  for
      ourselves where we consider the proportionality balance to lie, it  is
      nevertheless important for us to take into  account  the  respondent's
      views.  That is not to say - as the Court of  Appeal  rejected  in  MS
      (India)  at  [119]  -  that  the  Secretary  of  State's   views   are
      "unchallengeable".  Rather  it  is  to  ascribe  the  weight  that  is
      appropriate to the Secretary of State's views  concerning  the  public
      interest reflected in the objectives of the RL  policy.   Taking  into
      consideration the institutional competence of the Secretary  of  State
      to make finely balanced judgements about the public interest  and  the
      United Kingdom's reputation as a guardian of the international rule of
      law, we consider that the approach of the 2019 decision to the medical
      evidence is lawful, for the following reasons.  There is necessarily a
      degree of overlap with our reasoning  in  relation  to  the  other  MS
      (India) criteria.

 141. The applicant stands convicted of very  serious  offences  in  France.
      The objectives pursued by the RL policy are legitimate, as we have set
      out above.  The best interests of the children only marginally  favour
      the  applicant  being  granted  ILR;  their  interests  are  reflected
      primarily in the non-removal, for the time being,  of  the  applicant.
      Considered alongside the factors we have dealt with under our analysis
      of  the  first  three  MS  (India)  criteria,  we  conclude  that  the
      interferences  with  the  applicant's  private  and  family  life  are
      proportionate.

 142. Although the Bell report contends that the  applicant  should  receive
      ILR to pave his way to recovery, Dr Bell candidly accepts at  page  12
      that that would not lead to immediate results.  It  would,  writes  Dr
      Bell, "create the preconditions  for  him  to  be  able  to  begin  to
      improve..." (emphasis added), but other "protective factors" would  be
      required.  Such factors, he states, could include the ability for  the
      applicant  "actively  to  parent  his  children",  to   support   them
      financially, and to be a good example as the head of his  family.   As
      we have already stated, the applicant is able to parent  his  children
      at the moment (indeed, Ms Weston's reliance on section 117B(6) of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 must be predicated on the
      existence of a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  between
      the applicant and his children).  He can work, with the permission  of
      the Secretary of State (although we note that the Department for  Work
      and Pensions has assessed him  to  be  unfit  to  work,  there  is  no
      suggestion that that assessment is founded upon health conditions said
      to be attributable to the ILR issue).  He enjoys  recourse  to  public
      funds.  It is not clear, therefore, why Dr Bell writes that  "none  of
      this [being a parent, working to support  his  family,  being  a  good
      example as head of the family] is currently within his reach..."  when
      the conditions of the applicant's restricted  leave  permit  all  such
      activities, and the applicant's own  case  under  section  117B(6)  is
      predicated on the existence  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with his children.  Although we accept that  a  grant  of
      ILR would provide the applicant with the certainty  he  seeks,  it  is
      difficult to see how the absence of ILR  stands  in  the  way  of  the
      applicant engaging  in  some  of  the  very  activities  which  he  is
      currently able to undertake.

 143. As Ms  Anderson  points  out,  the  Bell  report  pre-dates  the  2019
      decision, and had been drafted following  many  years  of  repeated  6
      month grants of leave, where there had never been any  prospect  of  a
      longer period of limited leave.  We do  not  have  "Bell  II",  as  Ms
      Anderson puts it, analysing whether there  has  been  any  qualitative
      change in the  applicant's  mental  health  conditions  following  the
      conferral of  12  months'  restricted  leave  and  the  relaxation  of
      reporting requirements.  The applicant's reliance on the  Bell  report
      to support the contention that the exceptional (in the sense of  being
      an exception to the normal rule) grant of 12 months' limited leave  to
      remain was at odds  with  the  requirements  of  Article  8  features,
      therefore, an element of speculation.

 144. Ms Weston also submits that the statement in the  2019  decision  that
      "there is no evidence capable of directly calibrating  the  period  of
      leave with any particular inevitable effect..." is plainly  wrong,  in
      light of Dr Bell's opinion that only indefinite leave to remain  would
      pave the way for the applicant to engage with his mental health.  With
      respect, that submission misreads this part of the letter.  The  above
      statement features in the context of  discussing  lengths  of  limited
      leave to remain ("the period of leave..."),  rather  than  the  binary
      issue of whether ILR should be granted or  not.   The  quoted  extract
      from  the  decision  highlighted  the  absence  of  medical   evidence
      concerning specific periods of limited leave, for  example  concerning
      the impact of six months, or twelve months, or some other period being
      granted.  The decision was correct to say that there  was  no  medical
      evidence going to specific periods of limited  leave  to  remain;  the
      thrust of the evidence was that ILR  should  be  granted,  on  medical
      grounds, rather than a period of limited, restricted leave.

 145. In our judgment, therefore, the Bell report viewed as a whole provides
      at best only muted support for the contention that  ILR  is  the  only
      means by which the applicant is able to recover.

Conclusion on Article 8

 146. In light of the above analysis, having considered the  materials  that
      were before the respondent for ourselves, and with  anxious  scrutiny,
      we find that  that  was  an  approach  entirely  consistent  with  the
      requirements of Article 8, for the reasons given.   The  Secretary  of
      State was entitled, on the basis  of  the  materials  before  her,  to
      conclude that the time had not yet come when the only proportionate or
      reasonable response  to  the  applicant's  mental  health  conditions,
      length of residence, and the other factors set out above, was to grant
      ILR.

 147. We grant permission  on  ground  7  but  refuse  the  application  for
      judicial review on this ground.

Grounds 5 and 10 - irrationality

 148. In light of our conclusions concerning Article 8,  we  can  deal  with
      grounds 5 and 10, irrationality, in brief terms.  As we have set  out,
      she took extensive account of Dr  Bell's  report,  and  the  remaining
      representations, and reached a decision which - having considered  the
      matter for ourselves - was entirely consistent with  the  approach  we
      would have taken.   The  respondent  was  entitled  to  ascribe  great
      significance to the fact of, and known circumstances relating to,  the
      applicant's conviction.  She did not  fetter  her  discretion,  as  Ms
      Weston submits, but engaged in  an  assessment  of  the  evidence  and
      submissions she had received that was open to her on the facts.

 149. Contrary to the submissions of Ms Weston, the applicant has had  every
      opportunity to evidence change on his part.  The 2019  decision  makes
      clear that the Secretary of State does not expect from  the  applicant
      progress that would not be possible to evidence or demonstrate,  given
      the health constraints to which he is subject.  It  remains  the  case
      that the applicant has never expressed remorse for  his  offences,  or
      demonstrated any understanding of how  serious  they  were,  or  their
      potential  consequences.   His  general  renouncement   of   terrorism
      attracts little weight given his failure to  take  responsibility  for
      the very serious terrorist convictions  he  received  in  France.  The
      applicant has had many years to  demonstrate  that  he  has  begun  to
      rehabilitate, but defiantly refuses to even contemplate doing so.

 150. Nor can it be said that the absence of  a  current  national  security
      threat posed  by  the  applicant  renders  the  respondent's  decision
      irrational.  Although the Court of Appeal observed in  MS  (India)  at
      [118] that the applicant was not  said  to  pose  a  current  national
      security threat, it did not consider that to be a determinative factor
      in maintaining the decision not to grant  him  ILR.   Indeed,  it  was
      precisely because the applicant did  not  pose  a  current  threat  to
      national  security  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  set  out  the  three
      considerations relevant to the question of ILR.  Were it the case that
      the  applicant  did  pose  a  national  security  threat,   then   the
      observations at [117] of MS would have applied, namely:

           "...there will be some classes of case where it is  self-evident
           that  there  are  no  compelling  circumstances   justifying   a
           departure from the general rule. An  obvious  example  would  be
           where  the  migrant  continues  to  pose  a  risk  to   national
           security..."

      The applicant was not in that category, thus the analysis conducted by
      the respondent was required.

 151. The absence of a contemporary national security  threat  merely  means
      that a case-specific assessment is needed to ascertain  whether  there
      are exceptional or compelling circumstances meriting a departure  from
      the normal approach.  It does not, as is the logical consequence of Ms
      Weston's submissions, mean that the only rational outcome would be for
      ILR to be granted.  If there were  a  contemporary  national  security
      threat, it would not be necessary to engage in any of the  MS  (India)
      analysis at [120] to [123].  By definition, the criteria at  [120]  to
      [123] are only engaged where there is not a national security  threat.
      The respondent engaged in precisely the correct assessment, as we have
      demonstrated in our analysis of the Article 8 issue.

 152. Ms Weston submitted that the applicant had been caught by surprise  by
      the reference at page 11 of the 2019 decision to  there  being,  "good
      reason to consider that the evolving position on Article 3 ECHR claims
      and removability to Tunisia requires ongoing review."   The  applicant
      had had no advance warning that the Secretary  of  State  was  in  the
      process  of  forming  the  view  that  conditions  pertaining  to  his
      removability were improving, she contends. She  further  submits  that
      the  respondent  has  not  particularised  what  she  meant   by   her
      assertions.

 153. We do not consider that the respondent has a duty to put the applicant
      on notice of her evolving assessment of the likelihood  of  change  in
      Tunisia, given this is a decision which concerns not  the  applicant's
      removal, but a further - and longer - period of him  being  placed  on
      restricted leave. His removal is not presently  envisaged.   When  the
      applicant's removal  becomes  a  realistic  prospect,  we  expect  the
      respondent to engage with him to that end, giving him the  opportunity
      to make representations ahead of a decision being taken.  But that  is
      not an issue in these proceedings.  We accept that the  2019  decision
      could have been clearer, by explaining what the "good reason" was, but
      in isolation, that does not render the  decision  unlawful,  primarily
      because removal is not within scope.

 154. The respondent took account of all relevant factors, within the  broad
      margin of appreciation she  enjoys.   In  doing  so,  she  reached  an
      outcome consistent  with  her  policy,  which  she  properly  applied,
      reaching a conclusion that was open to her on the facts.

 155. There is no merit to these grounds for judicial review and  we  refuse
      permission on those grounds.

GROUNDS 8 AND 9 - EQUALITY ACT 2010

 156. Ms Weston submits that the application of the RL policy to MBT amounts
      to disability discrimination.  The impact  of  restricted  leave,  its
      conditions,  and  the  non-conferral  of  ILR  amounts  to  disability
      discrimination, which is, she submits, prohibited by section 29 of the
      Equality Act 2010 ("the 2010 Act").  The Secretary of State  does  not
      enjoy the protection of paragraph 16 of Schedule 3 to  the  2010  Act,
      she submits, because the decision under  consideration  was  to  grant
      leave, rather than to refuse it.

 157. We consider this submission to be without merit.  The  application  to
      the Secretary of State was for the applicant to be granted ILR.   That
      application was refused.  The refusal of ILR is the  primary  decision
      under challenge in  this  application,  and  we  have  considered  the
      lawfulness of that refusal  at  length  in  this  decision.   We  have
      accepted that  the  refusal  was  necessary  for  the  "public  good",
      pursuant to the now well-established objectives  of  the  RL  policy's
      approach to applications for ILR.  Paragraph 16(3)(b) of Schedule 3 is
      engaged in relation to such a decision "to refuse leave  to  enter  or
      remain in the United Kingdom".

 158. Having refused to grant the applicant ILR, in  light  of  the  present
      barriers to his removability, it was necessary for some form of status
      to be conferred upon him, and for the respondent to adopt a  range  of
      conditions to achieve the objectives of the RL policy.  As  Ms  Weston
      recognised at the hearing, it would not be lawful for  the  respondent
      simply to have allowed the  applicant  to  languish  in  legal  limbo,
      irremovable, but unwelcome.  Some form of status had  to  be  granted:
      see S and Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]
      EWCA Civ 1157 at, for example, [46].

 159. Parliament can  be  presumed  to  have  legislated  in  light  of  the
      applicable requirements of the common law.  In doing so, when enacting
      the 2010 Act, it must have known that, by its inclusion of a  decision
      "to refuse leave... to remain in  the  United  Kingdom"  in  paragraph
      16(3)(b) of Schedule 3 to the 2010 Act, it would be necessary for  the
      Secretary of State to grant  some  form  of  lesser  status  to  those
      subject to such a decision.  By  definition,  such  persons  would  be
      within the United Kingdom.   The  construction  for  which  Ms  Weston
      contends would, if correct, deprive paragraph 16(3)(b) of its utility,
      to the extent a public good decision concerned a refusal of  leave  to
      remain.

 160. As such, the decision to grant 12  months'  restricted  leave  to  the
      applicant, pursuant to  the  RL  policy  falls  squarely  within  sub-
      paragraph (4)(b) of paragraph 16 to the Schedule.  It was "a  decision
      taken in accordance with guidance given by the Secretary of  State  in
      connection with a decision within that sub-paragraph..."  Put  another
      way, the  decision  to  grant  restricted  leave  was  one  taken  "in
      connection" with the primary decision to refuse to grant ILR.  It  was
      an ancillary decision taken pursuant to the primary refusal  decision.



 161. That being so, the import of paragraph 16 of Schedule 3  is  that  the
      section 29 duty on providers of services is not engaged in relation to
      the applicant.  As Ms Weston accepted at the hearing,  section  15  of
      the 2010 Act merely defines  disability  discrimination.   It  is  not
      engaged in the absence of the criteria in section  29  being  applied.
      It does not impose a free-standing duty.

 162. It is not, therefore, necessary to consider whether the 2019  decision
      was discriminatory towards the applicant, as the respondent's  section
      29 duty was disapplied by paragraph 16 of Schedule 3.

Public sector equality duty

 163. In our judgment, the  operative  requirements  of  the  public  sector
      equality duty contained in section 149(1)(a) of the 2010 Act are  only
      engaged to the extent that the underlying conduct at which the duty is
      aimed at is prohibited by the Act.  Its  engagement  stands  or  falls
      with the engagement -  or  otherwise  -  of  the  prohibition  against
      discrimination contained in the  Act.   So  much  is  clear  from  the
      obligation in section 149(1)(a) to eliminate  "discrimination...  that
      is prohibited by or  under  this  Act."   As  we  have  set  out,  the
      discrimination of which the applicant complains is not  prohibited  so
      far as the respondent's decision to refuse to grant him ILR, and grant
      restricted leave instead, was concerned.  That is not, of  course,  to
      say that the applicant's disabilities are irrelevant: we have set  out
      at length our analysis on the impact of his health conditions.  It  is
      simply to say that, in the course of establishing the statutory regime
      contained in the 2010 Act, there  is  certain  conduct  which  is  not
      subject to the obligations of the Act.

 164. The disapplication of section 29 goes only to section 149(1)(a), as it
      has effect only in relation to prohibited conduct under the  Act.  The
      broader duties contained in  subsection  (1)(b)  and  (c),  namely  to
      advance equality of opportunity between  persons  sharing  a  relevant
      protected characteristic and those who do not, and the need to  foster
      good relations between such persons, are wider  free-standing  duties.
      Ms Weston was unable to articulate what steps  the  respondent  should
      have taken in order to further these objectives pursuant to the public
      sector equality duty in relation to the RL policy. Given  the  context
      of the RL policy, we struggle to see how it could be used as a vehicle
      specifically to advance equality of  opportunity  or  to  foster  good
      relations. To an extent, of  course,  those  objectives  are  subsumed
      within the wider public interest, public  safety  and  no  safe  haven
      objectives of the policy. A policy which endorses  the  conduct  which
      those excluded from the Refugee Convention, or deprived of the benefit
      of Article 33(2), will have engaged  in  cannot  be  said  to  advance
      equality of opportunity, or foster good relations. The  objectives  of
      the policy encompass wider societal goals which reflect the objectives
      of the duties contained in section 149(1)(b) and (c).

 165. To the extent that the RL  policy  needs  specifically  to  engage  in
      positive steps in  order  to  comply  with  the  duties  contained  in
      paragraphs (b) and (c), we consider that the  policy  itself  features
      sufficient inherent flexibility to enable the Secretary  of  State  to
      adapt its application tailored to the circumstances of the  particular
      individual.

 166. The 2019 decision's  approach  to  this  applicant  demonstrates  this
      principle applying  in  practice.  In  relation  to  the  duration  of
      restricted leave, at page 14,  the  policy  states  that  there  is  a
      discretion to grant periods longer than the standard six  months,  "if
      justified by  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case."  A  non-
      exhaustive list of indicative considerations is set out  on  the  same
      page, the first of which is  "the  individual's  circumstances".  This
      permits  the  respondent  to   take   into   account   the   protected
      characteristics of the individual concerned, and to  the  extent  that
      individual has made representations that the  circumstances  of  their
      restricted  leave   should   take   into   account   their   protected
      characteristics, it is possible for the respondent to do  so.  We  see
      nothing more that the respondent could reasonably be expected to do in
      furtherance of the duties imposed by paragraphs (b) and (c).

Article 14 of the ECHR

 167. Article 14 of the  ECHR  imposes  anti-discrimination  obligations  on
      contracting parties in relation to conduct which is within  the  ambit
      of a substantive Convention rights. It is common ground that the final
      two words of the article,  "other  status"  can  encompass  disability
      status. That means that, although the 2010 Act is not engaged for  the
      reasons we have already given, the applicant may, in  principle,  rely
      directly on the convention for redress.

 168. We do not consider that the applicant has been treated less favourably
      on account of his disabilities. We accept that if he were  treated  in
      identical terms to those without the physical and  mental  impairments
      from which he suffers, there may be grounds to conclude that some form
      of discrimination has  taken  place,  such  that  it  falls  upon  the
      Secretary of State to provide the necessary justification.

 169. The applicant has been treated differently, in a manner beneficial  to
      him, from those who do not experience the mental and  physical  health
      problems  set  out  above.  The  respondent  took  into  account   his
      representations and granted a length of  restricted  leave  which  was
      double the normal length, and reduced his  reporting  requirements  to
      four times annually, as against every other month. It  is  simply  not
      the case that he has been treated in a manner identical to  those  who
      do not suffer the problems which he experiences. He has  been  treated
      differently, precisely because the  respondent  adapted  the  way  the
      policy applied to him, in light of his representations concerning  his
      disabilities.

 170. We reject the submission on behalf of the applicant that the placement
      of "roadblocks" in the way of his private life developing  has  had  a
      disproportionately  adverse  impact  upon  him,  in   light   of   his
      disabilities. We have set out above how the respondent did not  impose
      wholly unreasonable expectations  upon  the  applicant.  She  did  not
      expect him to make positive contributions  to  society,  precisely  on
      account of the  health-based  representations  he  made  to  her.  The
      applicant has not been required to  demonstrate  rehabilitation  going
      over and above that  which  he  is  physically  or  mentally  able  to
      provide. Taken at its highest,  the  Secretary  of  State  has  sought
      evidence of genuine remorse. For the reasons we have already set  out,
      the applicant  has  refused  to  engage  his  responsibility  for  the
      terrorist offences  he  committed  in  France.  There  is  no  medical
      evidence that the applicant was prevented from doing so on account  of
      his disabilities, or, for example, capacity issues.

 171. We do not consider, therefore, that the applicant's situation  amounts
      to one of being the victim  of  discrimination  for  the  purposes  of
      Article 14 ECHR.  The question of justification does not arise.

 172. We refuse permission to bring judicial review proceedings on grounds 8
      and 9.

Ground 6 - duty of enquiry concerning risk on return

 173. Ms Weston's skeleton argument did not feature any argument  concerning
      this ground, and she did not pursue the submission at the hearing.  We
      see no merit in the  suggestion  that  there  is  any  duty  upon  the
      respondent to make enquiries concerning the applicant's risk on return
      given that his return is not currently envisaged.

 174. We refuse permission on this ground.



CONCLUSION

 175. In conclusion, our decision on the individual grounds is as follows:

      Grounds 1, 4     Application in  relation  to  the  2018  decision  is
                            dismissed. In relation to  the  2019  decision,
                            permission is refused.

      Grounds 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10      Permission refused so  far  as  both
                            decisions are concerned.

      Ground 7    (In relation to both decisions) Permission is granted, the
                            application in relation to  both  decisions  is
                            dismissed

Signed Stephen H Smith                                   13 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

