

                             [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

        BD (work permit - "continuous period") Nigeria [2010] UKUT 418 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at:   Field House
On:         11 October 2010

                                                     Determination notified:


                            Before

                     The Honourable Mr Justice Cranston
                       Senior Immigration Judge McKee


Between:
                                     BD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Adam Pipe, instructed by Goshen Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mr Mark Blundell, Senior Presenting Officer


Paragraph 134 of the Immigration Rules provides for indefinite leave  to  be
granted to a work permit holder who has spent  "a  continuous  period  of  5
years lawfully in the UK" in that  capacity.   Unlike  the  'long  residence
rule' at paras 276A-D, no definition of this  requirement  is  given  in  HC
395, and there is currently no guidance  to  be  had  from  the  Immigration
Directorates' Instructions. However, "a continuous period"must be  construed
sensibly, so as to allow periods of absence abroad.  Where such absence  has
been required by the appellant's employer in the course of his  work  permit
employment, it need not impair the  strength  of  connexion  to  the  United
Kingdom which is normally established by five years' residence.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.  This case raises an interesting point of  construction.   What  does  it
mean to have "spent a continuous period of 5  years  lawfully  in  the  UK",
which is required by paragraph 134 of the  Immigration  Rules  in  order  to
obtain indefinite leave to remain as a work permit holder?

2.  The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria now aged  29,  first  came  to  this
country thirteen years ago, at the age of 16, and after  pursuing  a  course
of studies from foundation through undergraduate to postgraduate  level,  he
was recruited in 2004 to the 'Global Graduate Development  Programme'  of  a
large British company, IMI plc.  A work permit was  obtained  for  him,  and
for the next five years the appellant  continued  in  approved  work  permit
employment.  Much of that period - in  fact  more  than  half  -  was  spent
abroad, posted by the company to branches of IMI in other  countries,  owing
(as he puts it) to the 'global nature' of his job.  But  his  earnings  were
all paid into his bank account in England,  he  paid  UK  tax  and  national
insurance, he enrolled onto  the  company's  UK  pension  plan,  and  indeed
bought a house of his own in Wolverhampton.  Normally, if a person  has  had
leave to remain as a work  permit  holder  for  five  years,  and  is  still
required for the employment in question,  he  will  qualify  for  indefinite
leave  to  remain.   But  when  the  appellant  made  his  application   for
indefinite leave in September 2009, after his five  years,  he  was  refused
because, although he had been a work permit holder for five  years,  he  had
not "spent a continuous period of 5 years lawfully in the UK",  as  required
by paragraph 134(i) of HC 395.

3.  The Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  of  12  January  2010  also  considers
whether the appellant should be granted indefinite leave  on  the  basis  of
ten years' continuous lawful residence  under  paragraph  276B(i)(a)  of  HC
395, but finds that he is excluded from this  category  too  because,  under
paragraph 276A(a)(v), continuity of residence is  regarded  as  having  been
broken if the applicant "has spent a total of more  than  18  months  absent
from the United Kingdom during the period in question."  The letter goes  on
to consider Article 8, but because of his long absences in Germany  and  the
United States, does not accept that the appellant has established a  private
life in the United Kingdom.

4.  When the appeal came before Immigration Judge McLachlan on 3 March  2010
she heard evidence from three  witnesses,  including  two  senior  personnel
from IMI plc.  It will be pertinent to quote her summary of the evidence  of
one of those witnesses, set out at paragraph 9 of her determination.

      "Mr Adcock is the Group Supply Chain director for IMI plc, joining the
      company in February 2009.  He is aware of the  progress  made  by  the
      Appellant through the Graduate Development Programme and  his  current
      employment, achieved despite stiff competition, with  the  company  as
      Global Logistics Manager.  He referred to the Appellant's  outstanding
      reputation within the company and his value to the company as a member
      of the team.  He  confirmed  that  all  candidates  under  the  Global
      Graduate Scheme are expected to do  temporary  assignments  abroad  on
      behalf of the company.  The company make all travel and  accommodation
      arrangements in respect of work done by such graduates  for  and  with
      subsidiary companies established abroad wholly or jointly promoted  by
      IMI plc.  Mr Adcock explained that if the Appellant had to  leave  the
      United Kingdom it would have a 'pretty devastating'  effect  upon  the
      company work.  Now that the Appellant had achieved his position within
      the company, which is on a permanent basis, it is  expected  that  the
      Appellant's travel outside the United Kingdom will become more focused
      and will occupy less time."

5. The judge  dismissed  the  appeal  under  paragraph  134  of  the  Rules.
Although she accepted that the appellant had  been  working  abroad  at  the
behest of his employer, that he was employed by a British company  and  that
he intended to make his home in this country, he  had  simply  not  spent  a
continuous period of five years in the  United  Kingdom.   She  went  on  to
dismiss the appeal under the 'long residence' rule and under  Article  8  as
well.

6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, settled  by  Mr  Pipe,  deal
mostly with Article 8,  but  also  contend  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
interpretation of 'continuous residence' which, unlike  paragraph  276A,  is
not defined in paragraph 134.  "The plain meaning  of  continuous  residence
in the context of a work permit holder", says Mr Pipe, "should include  work
visits abroad on behalf of the Appellant's employer."

7. Leave to appeal was initially  refused  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, but on renewal to the Upper Tribunal leave was granted  by  Senior
Immigration Judge Allen because he thought it arguable  that  "a  continuous
period of five years lawfully in the UK" could include time spent abroad  at
the direction of a work permit holder's  employer.   When  the  matter  came
before us, Mr Pipe repeated his contention, while Mr  Blundell  argued  that
the  plain  wording  of  the  rule  would  simply  not  bear  the   strained
interpretation sought to be given to it.  He acknowledged that if the  words
were taken literally, then any absence from the  United  Kingdom,  even  for
one day, would break the continuity of the five-year period,  and  that  the
Secretary of State did in fact waive periods of absence abroad, such as  for
holidays, when calculating whether an  applicant  had  spent  "a  continuous
period" of five years in this country.  But Mr Blundell had been  unable  to
find anything in the Immigration Directorates' Instructions as  to  how  the
discretion to waive breaks  in  the  continuity  of  five  years'  residence
should be exercised.  He did, on the other hand, give us copies of the  IDIs
on 'Long Residence', issued in April  2009  and  dealing  chiefly  with  the
application of paragraphs 276A-D.

8.  Having  also  heard  submissions  on  Article   8,   we   reserved   our
determination.  A striking feature of this case is the absence  of  anything
much to guide us on the interpretation  of  paragraph  134(i).   We  suspect
that the reason why Mr Blundell was unable to find anything on it among  the
Immigration Directorates' Instructions is that the work  permit  scheme  was
replaced from 27 November 2008 by Tier 2 of the  Points  Based  System,  and
that the guidance for Home Office caseworkers on how to implement  the  work
permit scheme has since been deleted.  It is not only on  the  UKBA  website
that one will now search in vain for guidance on  the  work  permit  scheme.
Butterworth's Immigration Law Service used to have a large section  on  work
permit employment, including many decided  cases,  but  this  has  now  been
entirely replaced by material on the Points Based System.  The same is  true
for the  current  edition  of  Jackson  &  Warr.   The  only  practitioner's
textbook which still has  anything  relevant  to  our  purpose  is  the  7th
edition of Macdonald, which at 5.14 talks about those categories  under  the
Immigration  Rules  -  not  only  work  permit  holders,  but   businessmen,
investors, innovators, retired persons of independent means, and so forth  -
in which  people  would  qualify  for  indefinite  leave  after  spending  a
continuous period  of  five  years  here  in  that  capacity.   There  is  a
tantalizingly brief passage on continuity of residence.

      "A person whose continuity of residence in  the  UK  has  been  broken
      would only qualify for an extension of stay in the same  capacity  and
      not for settlement.  The general practice is to disregard absences  of
      three months in any one year, and, exceptionally, longer periods."

9.  It is not stated where the source of this 'general practice'  is  to  be
found.  It may have been contained in IDIs  which  have  now  been  deleted.
There is a footnote, however, citing an old case of the  Immigration  Appeal
Tribunal, Shahbakhti (16978), in which it was held that "20  months  absence
in four years was too long for a work permit holder."   Four  years,  rather
than five, used to be the 'continuous period' needed for  indefinite  leave.
Shahbakhti does not provide us with a precedent, however,  as  it  does  not
concern an appellant whose periods of absence were  spent  working  for  his
British employer while his base remained in this country,  as  is  the  case
with this appellant.

10.  The question of interpretation comes down to  this.   Paragraph  134(i)
is not meant to be taken literally.  If it were so taken, anyone who  wanted
to qualify for indefinite leave after five years would  be  unable  to  take
even a day trip to France, or visit his own country on  family  matters.   A
comparison with paragraph  276B  is  illuminating.   That  rule  caters  for
people in categories which do not normally  lead  to  settlement.   If  such
persons have managed to stay in the United Kingdom lawfully for ten years  -
and this does happen with students - then they  can  get  indefinite  leave.
But what counts as breaks in  the  continuity  of  residence,  disqualifying
them from indefinite leave, is actually set out in the Rules themselves,  at
paragraph 276A(a),  as  well  as  being  the  subject  of  guidance  in  the
Immigration Directorates' Instructions on Long Residence.   The  reason  for
this, we apprehend, is that for categories which do not in  themselves  lead
to settlement, the strength of connexion to the United Kingdom which  merits
the grant of indefinite leave is established  by  actual  residence  in  the
United Kingdom for most of the ten years,  with  a  cap  being  put  on  the
amount of time spent abroad.

11.  As Mr Pipe pointed out, there is no such definition  applying  to  rule
134, and as we have indicated, there is no longer any  guidance  as  to  how
the Secretary  of  State  might  exercise  her  discretion.   As  a  literal
construction makes no sense, the rule has  to  be  construed  sensibly.   It
clearly imports a discretion - a discretion which can be exercised by  us  -
as to  how  much  absence  can  be  disregarded  in  the  calculation  of  a
'continuous period' of five years.  Of relevance, in our view, will  be  the
reason for the abscence, and the  strength  of  the  person's  ties  to  the
United  Kingdom,  as  shown  in  other  ways.   In  the  instant  case,  the
appellant's absences have been required of him by his  employer,  a  British
company, and he has at all times retained his base in  the  United  Kingdom.
He is domiciled here for tax purposes, and would seem to have established  a
domicile of choice for other purposes.  He has  clearly  made  this  country
his home.  In those circumstances,  we  find  that  he  does  meet  all  the
requirements of rule 134, and that IJ McLachlan erred in law by  giving  the
rule a restrictive interpretation.  She was right, however, to  dismiss  the
appeal under paragraph 276B.  As for Article 8,  while  we  think  that  the
appellant has a strong claim, it will not be necessary for  us  to  reach  a
concluded view on that matter, as he succeeds under the Rules.


DECISION

12. The appeal is allowed under paragraph 134 of the Immigration Rules.





Signed

Senior Immigration Judge McKee
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)






