
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

VOM (Error of law - when appealable) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 00410 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                 |Decision Promulgated **       |
|On 19 July 2016                              |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President,
                         Vice President Ockelton and
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

                                   Between

                                     VOM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr R Khubber, of counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
           Solicitors
Respondent:   Ms J Anderson, of counsel, instructed by the Government Legal
           Department


In a statutory appeal, the right of appeal under s 13 of the 2007 Act does
not arise until the Upper Tribunal has completed the process required by s
12.


                           INTERLOCUTORY DECISION


 1. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    We emphasise at the outset that the Appellant  has  the  protection  of
    anonymity. Accordingly, unless and until a tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of
    her family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
    Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction


 2. This is a case in which both parties have been  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal (the "UT").  We  shall,  for  convenience,
    continue to describe the original appellant, VOM,  as  "the  Appellant"
    and the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department,  the  original
    respondent, as "the Respondent".

The Issue


 3. The issue hereby determined is whether a party to appeal proceedings in
    the Upper Tribunal (the "UT") has a right to apply  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  against  a  determination  of  the  UT
    incorporating the twin elements of (a) finding an error of law  in  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")  and  setting  such
    decision aside accordingly. While these are the  specific  contours  of
    the question which has arisen in the instant case, it may be said  that
    the broader question which arises is whether there is a right to  apply
    for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  against  any  act  or
    determination of the UT which is not finally dispositive of the  appeal
    of which it is seized. The resolution  of  this  issue  hinges  on  two
    provisions of primary legislation, namely Sections 12  and  13  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (the "2007 Act").

The Proceedings to Date


 4. The stimulus for the successive appeals to the FtT and the UT in  these
    proceedings was  a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  26
    September 2013, refusing to revoke a deportation order made in  respect
    of the Appellant, a national of Nigeria aged 38 years.   This  decision
    has generated the following series of judicial interventions:

 a) By its decision promulgated on 01 August 2014  the  FtT  dismissed  the
    ensuing appeal under the Immigration Rules and allowed it under Article
    8 ECHR.

 b) By a decision dated 15 August 2014 a  Judge  of  the  FtT  refused  the
    Appellant's application for permission to appeal to the UT.

 c) The Secretary of State also applied to the FtT for permission to appeal
    to the UT and, by oversight, this application was not determined.

 d) By the decision of a Judge of the UT  dated  04  December  2014,  which
    omitted to take cognisance of the oversight  noted  immediately  above,
    both parties were granted permission to appeal to the  UT.  As  regards
    the Appellant, the case made in the grounds of appeal was that  the  UT
    should have allowed his appeal under the Immigration Rules and  Article
    3 ECHR.

 e) The last-mentioned decision was set aside in part for irregularity by a
    further decision of a Judge of the UT dated 19 November 2015.

 f) By a separate  decision  of  the  same  date  the  same  Judge  granted
    permission to the Secretary of State to appeal  to  the  UT,  based  on
    arguable error of law in the appeal having been allowed under Article 8
    ECHR.

 5. The upshot of this entangled procedural history was a  listing  of  the
    combined appeals before a Judge of the UT on  12  January  2016.   This
    gave rise to the following  determination dated 05 February 2016:

         "The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law insofar as the  assessment
         of exceptional circumstances in paragraph 398  of  the  Immigration
         Rules is concerned.  I set aside the decision insofar as it relates
         to that finding.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in its
         findings with regard to Article 3 and  I  do  not  set  aside  that
         decision".

    The  UT  Judge  formulated  certain   consequential   case   management
    directions  relating  to  the  provision  of  evidence  and,   further,
    provisionally relisting the appeal for hearing on 15 March 2016 for the
    purpose of remaking the decision of the FtT.

 6. The last-mentioned judicial act of  the  UT  was  the  impetus  for  an
    application by the Appellant, by a notice dated 25  February  2016,  in
    the following terms:

         "The Appellant seeks permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal
         against the decision of the UT -

         (i)  On Article 8 ECHR and by way  of  the  UT  setting  aside  the
             decision of the FtT which had allowed the  Appellant's  appeal
             previously.

         (ii) On Article 3 ECHR, by way of the UT concluding that there were
             no material errors of law in the determination of the  FtT  on
             this ground such that the FtT's decision  should  not  be  set
             aside and reconsidered".

    In short, the Appellant contends that the twofold conclusion of the  UT
    Judge (a)  finding an error of law in the decision of the FtT  (to  the
    Appellant's  detriment)  and  (b)  setting  aside  such   decision   in
    consequence is vitiated by error of law.   For  the  purposes  of  this
    decision no exploration of the asserted errors of law is necessary.

Statutory Framework


 7.  The  statutory  lineage  begins  with  certain   provisions   of   the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the  "2002   Act").
    References in section 82 to "the Tribunal" denote the FtT.

    Section 82

         "Right of appeal to the Tribunal

         (1)  A person ('P') may appeal to the Tribunal where -

             (a)  the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection
                  claim made by P,

             (b)  the Secretary of State has  decided  to  refuse  a  human
                  rights claim made by P, or

             (c)   the  Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to  revoke  P's
                  protection status.

         (2)  For the purposes of this Part -

             (a)  a 'protection claim' is a claim made by  a  person  ('P')
                  that removal of P from the United Kingdom -

                  (i)  would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
                      the Refugee Convention, or

                  (ii) would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  in
                      relation  to  persons  eligible  for   a   grant   of
                      humanitarian protection;

             (b)  P's protection claim is refused if the Secretary of State
                  makes one or more of the following decisions -

                  (i)  that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would  not
                      breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
                      Refugee Convention;

                  (ii) that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would  not
                      breach the United Kingdom's obligations  in  relation
                      to persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of  humanitarian
                      protection;

             (c)  a person has 'protection status' if the person  has  been
                  granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  as
                  a  refugee  or  as  a  person  eligible  for  a  grant  of
                  humanitarian protection;

             (d)   'humanitarian  protection'  is  to   be   construed   in
                  accordance with the immigration rules;

             (e)   'refugee'  has  the  same  meaning  as  in  the  Refugee
                  Convention.



         (3)  The right of appeal under subsection (1)  is  subject  to  the
             exceptions and limitations specified in this Part."

    Section 104

         "Pending appeal

         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) is pending during the period-

             (a)  beginning when it is instituted, and

             (b)  ending  when  it  is  finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
                  abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).

         (2)  An appeal under section 82(1) is not  finally  determined  for
             the purpose of subsection (1)(b) while -

             (a)  an application for permission to appeal under section  11
                  or 13 of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007
                  could be made or is awaiting determination,

             (b)  permission to appeal under either of those  sections  has
                  been granted and the appeal is awaiting determination, or

             (c)  an appeal has been remitted under section  12  or  14  of
                  that Act and is awaiting determination.

         (4A) An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is
             in the United Kingdom shall be treated  as  abandoned  if  the
             appellant is granted leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom (subject to [subsection (4B)] 5 ).

         (4B) Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so far  as  it
             is brought on [a ground specified in section 84(1)(a)  or  (b)
             or 84(3) (asylum or  humanitarian  protection)]  6  where  the
             appellant-

              (b) gives notice,  in  accordance  with  [Tribunal  Procedure
                  Rules]

         These provisions of  primary  legislation  must  be  considered  in
         tandem with those of the 2007 Act rehearsed above."

 8. While the principal ingredients of the statutory matrix are Sections 12
    and 13 of the 2007 Act, we begin with Section  11,  which  provides  in
    material part:

    Section 11

         "Right to appeal to Upper Tribunal

         (1)  For the purposes of subsection (2), the reference to  a  right
             of appeal is to a right to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on any
             point of law arising from a decision made  by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal other than an excluded decision.

         (2)  Any party to  a  case  has  a  right  of  appeal,  subject  to
             subsection (8).

         (3)  That right may be  exercised  only  with  permission  (or,  in
             Northern Ireland, leave).

         (4)  Permission (or leave) may be given by -

             (a)  the First-tier Tribunal, or

             (b)  the Upper Tribunal,

             on an application by the party.

         (5)  For the purposes of subsection (1), an 'excluded decision'  is
             -

             (a)  any decision of the First-tier Tribunal on an appeal made
                  in exercise of a right conferred by the Criminal  Injuries
                  Compensation Scheme in compliance with section 5(1)(a)  of
                  the  Criminal  Injuries  Compensation  Act  1995  (c.  53)
                  (appeals against decisions on reviews),

             (aa) any decision of the First-tier Tribunal on an appeal made
                  in exercise  of  a  right  conferred  by  the  Victims  of
                  Overseas Terrorism Compensation Scheme in compliance  with
                  section 52(3) of the Crime and Security Act 2010,

             (b)  any decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  an  appeal
                  under section 28(4) or (6) of the Data Protection Act 1998
                  (c. 29) (appeals against national security certificate),

             (c)  any decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  an  appeal
                  under section 60(1) or (4) of the Freedom  of  Information
                  Act  2000  (c.  36)  (appeals  against  national  security
                  certificate),

             (d)  a decision of the First-tier Tribunal under section 9 -

                  (i)  to review, or not to review, an earlier  decision  of
                      the tribunal,

                  (ii) to take no action, or  not  to  take  any  particular
                      action, in the  light  of  a  review  of  an  earlier
                      decision of the tribunal,

                  (iii)    to set aside an earlier decision of the tribunal,
                      or

                  (iv) to refer, or not to refer,  a  matter  to  the  Upper
                      Tribunal,

             (e)  a decision of the First-tier Tribunal that is  set  aside
                  under section 9 (including  a  decision  set  aside  after
                  proceedings on an appeal  under  this  section  have  been
                  begun), or

             (f)  any decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  is  of  a
                  description  specified  in  an  order  made  by  the  Lord
                  Chancellor.

         (6)  A description may be specified under subsection (5)(f) only if
             -

             (a)  in the case of a decision of that description, there is a
                  right to appeal to a court,  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  any
                  other tribunal from the decision and  that  right  is,  or
                  includes, something other than a right (however expressed)
                  to appeal on any point of law arising from  the  decision,
                  or

             (b)  decisions of that description are made in carrying out  a
                  function transferred under section 30  and  prior  to  the
                  transfer of the function under section 30(1) there was  no
                  right to appeal from decisions of that description.

         (7)  Where -

             (a)  an order under subsection (5)(f) specifies a  description
                  of decisions, and

             (b)  decisions of that description are made in carrying out  a
                  function transferred under section 30,

             the order must be framed so as to come  into  force  no  later
             than the time when  the  transfer  under  section  30  of  the
             function takes effect (but power to revoke the order continues
             to be exercisable after that time,  and  power  to  amend  the
             order continues to be exercisable  after  that  time  for  the
             purpose of  narrowing  the  description  for  the  time  being
             specified).

         (8)  The Lord Chancellor may by order make provision for  a  person
             to be treated as being, or to be treated as not being, a party
             to a case for the purposes of subsection (2)."

    Section 12

         "Proceedings on appeal to Upper Tribunal

         (1)  Subsection (2) applies if the Upper Tribunal, in  deciding  an
             appeal under section 11, finds that the making of the decision
             concerned involved the making of an error on a point of law.

         (2)  The Upper Tribunal -

             (a)  may (but need not) set aside the decision of  the  First-
                  tier Tribunal, and

             (b)  if it does, must either-

                  (i)  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
                      directions for its reconsideration, or

                  (ii) re-make the decision.

         (3)  In acting under subsection (2)(b)(i), the Upper  Tribunal  may
             also -

             (a)  direct that the members of the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
                  are chosen to reconsider the case are not to be  the  same
                  as those who made the decision that has been set aside;

             (b)   give  procedural  directions  in  connection  with   the
                  reconsideration of the case by the First-tier Tribunal.

         (4)  In acting under subsection (2)(b)(ii), the Upper Tribunal-

             (a)  may make any decision which the First-tier Tribunal could
                  make  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  re-making   the
                  decision, and

             (b)   may  make  such  findings  of  fact  as   it   considers
                  appropriate. "

    Section 13

         "Right to appeal to Court of Appeal etc.

         (1)  For the purposes of subsection (2), the reference to  a  right
             of appeal is to a right to appeal to  the  relevant  appellate
             court on any point of law arising from a decision made by  the
             Upper Tribunal other than an excluded decision.

         (2)  Any party to  a  case  has  a  right  of  appeal,  subject  to
             subsection (14).

         (3)  That right may be  exercised  only  with  permission  (or,  in
             Northern Ireland, leave).

         (4)  Permission (or leave) may be given by-

             (a)  the Upper Tribunal, or

             (b)  the relevant appellate court,

             on an application by the party.

         (5)  An application  may  be  made  under  subsection  (4)  to  the
             relevant appellate court only if  permission  (or  leave)  has
             been refused by the Upper Tribunal.

         (6)  The Lord Chancellor may,  as  respects  an  application  under
             subsection (4) that falls within subsection (7) and for  which
             the relevant appellate court is the Court of Appeal in England
             and Wales or the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland, by order
             make provision for permission (or leave) not to be granted  on
             the application unless the Upper Tribunal or (as the case  may
             be) the relevant appellate court considers-

             (a)  that the proposed appeal would raise some important point
                  of principle or   practice, or

             (b)  that there  is  some  other  compelling  reason  for  the
                  relevant appellate court to hear the appeal.

         (6A) Rules of court may make provision for  permission  not  to  be
             granted on an application under subsection (4) to the Court of
             Session that falls within  subsection  (7)  unless  the  court
             considers -

             (a)  that the proposed appeal would raise some important point
                  of principle [ or practice] , or

             (b)  that there is some other compelling reason for the  court
                  to hear the appeal.

         (7)  An application falls within this subsection if the application
             is for permission (or leave) to appeal from  any  decision  of
             the Upper Tribunal on an appeal under section 11.

         (8)  For the purposes of subsection (1), an 'excluded decision'  is
             -

             (a)  any decision of the Upper Tribunal  on  an  appeal  under
                  section 28(4) or (6) of the Data Protection Act  1998  (c.
                  29) (appeals against national security certificate),

             (b)  any decision of the Upper Tribunal  on  an  appeal  under
                  section 60(1) or (4) of the  Freedom  of  Information  Act
                  2000  (c.   36)   (appeals   against   national   security
                  certificate),

             (c)  any decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  on  an  application
                  under section  11(4)(b)  (application  for  permission  or
                  leave to appeal),

             (d)  a decision of the Upper Tribunal under section 10-

                  (i)  to review, or not to review, an earlier  decision  of
                      the tribunal,

                  (ii) to take no action, or  not  to  take  any  particular
                      action, in the  light  of  a  review  of  an  earlier
                      decision of the tribunal, or

                  (iii)    to set aside an earlier decision of the tribunal,

             (e)  a decision of the Upper Tribunal that is set aside  under
                  section  10  (including  a  decision   set   aside   after
                  proceedings on an appeal  under  this  section  have  been
                  begun), or

             (f)   any  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  is  of  a
                  description  specified  in  an  order  made  by  the  Lord
                  Chancellor.

         (9)  A description may be specified under subsection (8)(f) only if
             -

             (a)  in the case of a decision of that description, there is a
                  right to appeal to a court  from  the  decision  and  that
                  right is,  or  includes,  something  other  than  a  right
                  (however expressed) to appeal on any point of law  arising
                  from the decision, or

             (b)  decisions of that description are made in carrying out  a
                  function transferred under section 30  and  prior  to  the
                  transfer of the function under section 30(1) there was  no
                  right to appeal from decisions of that description.

         (10) Where -

             (a)  an order under subsection (8)(f) specifies a  description
                  of decisions, and

             (b)  decisions of that description are made in carrying out  a
                  function transferred under section 30,

             the order must be framed so as to come  into  force  no  later
             than the time when  the  transfer  under  section  30  of  the
             function takes effect (but power to revoke the order continues
             to be exercisable after that time,  and  power  to  amend  the
             order continues to be exercisable  after  that  time  for  the
             purpose of  narrowing  the  description  for  the  time  being
             specified).

         (11) Before the Upper Tribunal decides an application  made  to  it
             under subsection (4), the  Upper  Tribunal  must  specify  the
             court that is to be the relevant appellate court  as  respects
             the proposed appeal.

         (12) The court to be specified under subsection (11) in relation to
             a proposed appeal is whichever of the following courts appears
             to the Upper Tribunal to be the most appropriate -

             (a) the Court of Appeal in England and Wales;

             (b) the Court of Session;

             (c) the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland.

         (13)  In  this  section  except  subsection  (11),  'the   relevant
             appellate court', as  respects  an  appeal,  means  the  court
             specified as respects that appeal by the Upper Tribunal  under
             subsection (11).

         (14) The Lord Chancellor may by order make provision for  a  person
             to be treated as being, or to be treated as not being, a party
             to a case for the purposes of subsection (2).

         (15) Rules of court may make provision as to the time within  which
             an application under subsection (4) to the relevant  appellate
             court must be made."

 9. The term "excluded decisions" in Section 13(1) of the 2007 Act is given
    flesh  by  a  Statutory  Instrument,  namely  the   Appeals   (Excluded
    Decisions)  Order  2009  (the  "2009  Order").   Article  2  lists  two
    decisions of the FtT which are  "excluded  decisions".   In  Article  3
    there is a list comprising thirteen "excluded decisions"  of  both  the
    FtT and the UT.  While only the last of these, Article 3 (m), which was
    added by the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  (Miscellaneous
    Provisions) Order 2010, effective from 15 February 2010,  falls  to  be
    considered in the present  context,  it  is  appropriate  to  reproduce
    Article 3 in full:

         "For the purposes of sections 11(1) and  13(1)  of  the  Tribunals,
         Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, the  following  decisions  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal are excluded decisions -

         (a)  any decision under section 20(7), (8B) or  (8G)(b)  (power  to
             call for documents of taxpayer and  others),  20B(1B)  or  (6)
             (restrictions  on  powers  under  sections  20  and  20A)   or
             20BB(2)(a) (falsification etc.  of  documents)  of  the  Taxes
             Management Act 1970 1;

         (b)  any decision under section 35A(2) (variation of undertakings),
             79A(2)  (variation  of  undertakings)  or  219(1A)  (power  to
             require information) of the Inheritance Tax Act 1984;

         (c)  any decision under section  152(5)  (notification  of  taxable
             amount of certain benefits) or 215(7)  (advance  clearance  by
             Board  of  distributions  and  payments)  of  the  Income  and
             Corporation Taxes Act 1988;

         (d)   any  decision  under  section  138(4)  of  the  Taxation   of
             Chargeable  Gains  Act  1992  (procedure  for   clearance   in
             advance);

         (e)   any  decision  under  section  187(5)  or  (6)  (returns  and
             information) of, or paragraph 3(2)  or  6(2)  of  Schedule  21
             (restrictions on powers under section 187) to, the Finance Act
             1993;

         (f)  any decision under paragraph  91(5)  of  Schedule  15  to  the
             Finance  Act  2000  (corporate   venturing   scheme:   advance
             clearance);

         (g)  any decision under paragraph  88(5)  of  Schedule  29  to  the
             Finance Act 2002  (gains  and  losses  from  intangible  fixed
             assets: transfer of business or trade);

         (h)  any decision under paragraph 2, 4, 7,  9,  10,  11  or  24  of
             Schedule 13 to the Finance Act  2003  (stamp  duty  land  tax:
             information powers);

         (i)  any decision under section 306A (doubt as  to  notifiability),
             308A  (supplemental  information),  313B  (reasons  for   non-
             disclosure:  supporting  information)  or   314A   (order   to
             disclose) of the Finance Act 2004;

         (j)  any decision under section 697(4) of the Income Tax  Act  2007
             (opposed notifications: determinations by tribunal);

         (k)  any decision under regulation 10(3)  of  the  Venture  Capital
             Trust  (Winding  up  and  Mergers)  (Tax)   Regulations   2004
             (procedure for Board's approval);

         (l)  any decision under regulation 5A (doubt as to  notifiability),
             7A  (supplemental  information),   12B   (reasons   for   non-
             disclosure: supporting information) or 12C (order to disclose)
             of the National Insurance Contributions (Application of Part 7
             of the Finance Act 2004) Regulations 20074.

         (m)  any procedural, ancillary  or  preliminary  decision  made  in
             relation to an appeal against a decision under section 40A  of
             the  British  Nationality  Act  1981,  [section  82   of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002] , or  regulation
             26 of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
             2006."

10. We draw attention also to certain provisions of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the "2008 Rules") which have  featured  in
    the debate.  First there is the overriding objective:

    Rule 2

         "Overriding objective and parties' obligation  to  co-operate  with
         the Upper Tribunal

         (1)  The overriding objective of these Rules is to enable the Upper
             Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.

         (2)  Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes -

             (a)  dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate  to
                  the importance of the case, the complexity of the  issues,
                  the anticipated costs and the resources of the parties;

             (b)  avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in
                  the proceedings;

             (c)  ensuring, so far as practicable,  that  the  parties  are
                  able to participate fully in the proceedings;

             (d)   using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
                  effectively; and

             (e)   avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with   proper
                  consideration of the issues.

         (3)  The Upper Tribunal must seek to give effect to the  overriding
             objective when it -

             (a)  exercises any power under these Rules; or

             (b)  interprets any rule or practice direction.

         (4)  Parties must -

             (a)   help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  further  the  overriding
                  objective; and

             (b)  co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally."

    Next, the UT is given extensive case management powers:

    Rule 5

         "Case management powers

         (1)  Subject to the provisions  of  the  2007  Act  and  any  other
             enactment, the Upper Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.

         (2)  The Upper Tribunal may give a direction  in  relation  to  the
             conduct or disposal of proceedings at any  time,  including  a
             direction amending, suspending or  setting  aside  an  earlier
             direction.

         (3)  In particular, and without restricting the general  powers  in
             paragraphs (1) and (2), the Upper Tribunal may -

             (a)  extend or shorten the time for complying with  any  rule,
                  practice direction or direction;

             (b)   consolidate  or  hear  together  two  or  more  sets  of
                  proceedings or parts of proceedings raising common issues,
                  or treat a case as a lead case;

             (c)  permit or require a party to amend a document;

             (d)  permit or require a party or another  person  to  provide
                  documents, information, evidence  or  submissions  to  the
                  Upper Tribunal or a party;

             (e)  deal with an issue in the proceedings  as  a  preliminary
                  issue;

             (f)  hold a hearing to consider any matter, including  a  case
                  management issue;

             (g)  decide the form of any hearing;

             (h)  adjourn or postpone a hearing;

             (i)  require a party to produce a bundle for a hearing;

             (j)  stay (or, in Scotland, sist) proceedings;

             (k)  transfer proceedings to another court or tribunal if that
                  other court or tribunal has jurisdiction  in  relation  to
                  the proceedings and-

                  (i)  because  of  a  change  of  circumstances  since  the
                      proceedings  were  started,  the  Upper  Tribunal  no
                      longer  has   jurisdiction   in   relation   to   the
                      proceedings; or

                  (ii) the Upper Tribunal considers that the other court  or
                      tribunal  is  a  more  appropriate  forum   for   the
                      determination of the case;

             (l)  suspend the effect of its own decision pending an  appeal
                  or review of that decision;

             (m)  in an appeal, or an application for permission to appeal,
                  against the decision  of  another  tribunal,  suspend  the
                  effect of that decision pending the determination  of  the
                  application for permission to appeal, and any appeal;

             (n)  require any person, body or other tribunal whose decision
                  is the subject of proceedings before the Upper Tribunal to
                  provide reasons for the decision, or other information  or
                  documents in relation to the decision or  any  proceedings
                  before that person, body or tribunal.

         (4)  The Upper Tribunal may direct that a fast-track case cease  to
             be treated as a fast-track case if -

             (a)  all the parties consent; [or]

             (b)  the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that [...]the  appeal  or
                  application could not be  justly  determined  if  it  were
                  treated as a fast-track case [.]

         (5)  In a financial services case, the Upper  Tribunal  may  direct
             that the effect of  the  decision  in  respect  of  which  the
             reference has  been  made  is  to  be  suspended  pending  the
             determination of the reference, if it is satisfied that to  do
             so would not prejudice -

             (a)   the  interests  of  any  persons   (whether   consumers,
                  investors or otherwise) intended to be protected  by  that
                  notice; [...]

             (b)  the smooth operation or integrity of any market  intended
                  to be protected by that notice [; or]

             (c)  the stability of  the  financial  system  of  the  United
                  Kingdom.

         (6)  Paragraph (5) does not apply in the case  of  a  reference  in
             respect of a decision of the Pensions Regulator.

         (7)  In a wholesale energy case, the Upper Tribunal may direct that
             the effect of the decision in respect of which  the  reference
             has been made is to be suspended pending the determination  of
             the reference."

    We would also highlight, briefly, Rule 21,  which  contains  the  power
    exercised in this case to grant permission  to  appeal  to  the  UT  in
    circumstances where the FtT has refused to do so  and  the  outworkings
    thereof, found in Rules 22 and 22A.

11. Completing the statutory jigsaw we  draw  attention  to  the  so-called
    "second appeal" test viz the test to be applied in the determination of
    applications for permission to appeal from  the  UT  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  Section 13(6) of the 2007 Act provides:

         "The  Lord  Chancellor  may,  as  respects  an  application   under
         subsection (4) that falls within subsection (7) and for  which  the
         relevant appellate court is the Court  of  Appeal  in  England  and
         Wales or the Court of Appeal in Northern  Ireland,  by  order  make
         provision for permission (or  leave)  not  to  be  granted  on  the
         application unless the Upper Tribunal or (as the case may  be)  the
         relevant appellate court considers -

         (a)  that the proposed appeal would raise some important  point  of
             principle or practice, or

         (b)  that there is some other compelling reason  for  the  relevant
             appellate court to hear the appeal.

         (6A) Rules of court may make provision for  permission  not  to  be
             granted on an application under subsection (4) to the Court of
             Session that falls within  subsection  (7)  unless  the  court
             considers -

             (a)  that the proposed appeal would raise some important point
                  of principle [ or practice] , or

             (b)  that there is some other compelling reason for the  court
                  to hear the appeal".

    The exercise of the power conferred on  the  Lord  Chancellor  by  this
    provision is contained in the Constitutional Reform Act 2005.

12. We would also mention the combined Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice  Direction,
    dated 10 February 2010, issued by the Senior  President  of  Tribunals.
    Part 3 of this instrument  reflects  the  staged  nature  of  the  UT's
    decision making process contemplated by section 12  of  the  2007  Act.
    Paragraph 3.1 provides:

         "Where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted,
         then, unless and to the extent that they  are  directed  otherwise,
         for the purposes of preparing for a hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal
         the parties should assume that:-

         (a)  the Upper Tribunal will  decide  whether  the  making  of  the
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an
             error on a point of law, such that the decision should be  set
             aside under section 12(2)(a) of the 2007 Act;

         (b)  except as specified in Practice  Statement  7.2  (disposal  of
             appeals by Upper Tribunal), the Upper Tribunal will proceed to
             re-make the decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii), if  satisfied
             that the original decision should be set aside; and

         (c)  in that event, the Upper Tribunal will consider whether to re-
             make the decision by reference to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
             findings of fact and any new  documentary  evidence  submitted
             under UT rule 15(2A) which it  is  reasonably  practicable  to
             adduce for consideration at that hearing."

    The sequencing which the final decision making may involve is reflected
    in the next three succeeding provisions:

         "3.2  The parties  should  be  aware  that,  in  the  circumstances
             described  in  paragraph  3.1(c),  the  Upper  Tribunal   will
             generally expect to proceed, without any further  hearing,  to
             re-make the decision, where this  can  be  undertaken  without
             having to hear oral evidence. In  certain  circumstances,  the
             Upper Tribunal may give directions  for  the  giving  of  oral
             evidence at the relevant hearing, where it appears appropriate
             to do so. Such directions may  be  given  before  or  at  that
             hearing.

         3.3  In a case where no oral evidence is likely to be  required  in
             order for the Upper Tribunal  to  re-make  the  decision,  the
             Upper Tribunal will therefore expect any documentary  evidence
             relevant to the re-making of the decision  to  be  adduced  in
             accordance with  Practice  Direction  4  so  that  it  may  be
             considered at the  relevant  hearing;  and,  accordingly,  the
             party seeking to rely on such  documentary  evidence  will  be
             expected  to  show  good  reason  why  it  is  not  reasonably
             practicable  to  adduce  the  same  in  order  for  it  to  be
             considered at that hearing.

         3.4  If the Upper Tribunal  nevertheless  decides  that  it  cannot
             proceed as described in paragraph 3.1(c) because  findings  of
             fact are needed which it is not in a  position  to  make,  the
             Upper Tribunal will make arrangements for the  adjournment  of
             the hearing, so that the proceedings may be  completed  before
             the same constitution of the Tribunal;  or,  if  that  is  not
             reasonably practicable, for  their  transfer  to  a  different
             constitution, in either case so as to enable  evidence  to  be
             adduced for that purpose."

    The exercise of fitting the decision of the UT dated  12  January  2016
    into the framework of both section 12 and  the  Practice  Direction  is
    easily performed.

The Parties' Contentions In Outline


13. The cornerstone of the submissions of  Mr  Khubber  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant was that the words "a decision made by the Upper Tribunal" in
    Section 13(1) of the 2007 Act embrace - within the compass  of  Section
    12(1) and (2) - a finding that the decision of  the  FtT  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law and/or a consequential decision of
    the UT setting aside the decision of the  FtT.   Mr  Khubber  submitted
    that the statutory language is sufficiently broad  and  unqualified  to
    warrant this construction.  He further submitted that this is supported
    by the restrictive nature of the second appeal test.   He  argued  that
    the determination of the UT under scrutiny  in  this  case  is  not  an
    "excluded decision" within the meaning of  Article  3(m)  of  the  2009
    Order.  Finally, he submitted that to reject the construction  espoused
    by him would violate an appellant's right of access to a court.

14. The main thrust of the argument development by Ms Anderson on behalf of
    the Secretary of State was that the construction of Sections 12 and  13
    of  the  2007  Act  advocated  by  the  Appellant  would   produce   an
    unsatisfactory and  unworkable  result  which  Parliament  cannot  have
    intended.  She submitted  that  the  statutory  regime  contemplates  a
    single, indivisible appeal (our formula) from the UT to  the  Court  of
    Appeal only at  the  stage  when  the  UT  appeal  process  is  finally
    completed.  This, it was submitted, would give effect to  the  presumed
    parliamentary intention of a sensible,  coherent  and  workable  appeal
    model.  Ms Anderson's alternative submission was that the appeal  which
    the Appellant purports to pursue is precluded by Article  3(m)  of  the
    2009 Order in any event.

Discussion


15. We take as our starting point the well known principle that  no  appeal
    lies to a superior  court  or  tribunal  unless  expressly  created  by
    statute.  This principle is stated unambiguously in Halsbury's Laws  of
    England, Volume 37 (4th Edition Reissue), paragraph 1501:

         "An appeal is an application to a superior  Court  or  Tribunal  to
         reverse, vary or set  aside  the  judgment,  order,  determination,
         decision or award of an inferior Court or Tribunal in the hierarchy
         of Courts or Tribunals on the ground that it was  wrongly  made  or
         that as a matter of justice or law it requires to be corrected.   A
         right of appeal is conferred by statute or  equivalent  legislative
         authority; it is not a mere matter of  practice  or  procedure  and
         neither the superior nor the inferior Court or  Tribunal  nor  both
         combined can create or take away such a right."

    [Emphasis added.]

    As Lord Atkin stated with  admirable  simplicity  in  Evans  v  Bartlam
    [1937] AC 473, at 480:

         "Appellate jurisdiction is always statutory................".

    Most recently one finds this fundamental principle illustrated  in  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in Re D (A Child) [2016]  UKSC  34  which
    involved the construction of section 40 of  the  Constitutional  Reform
    Act 2005 and the Brussels II (Revised) Regulation.

16. Next we remind ourselves of some basic  legal  doctrine.   We  commence
    with the truism that the interpretation of any statute is  a  far  from
    academic jaunt. Exercises in statutory  interpretation  are,  per  Lord
    Bingham of Cornhill:

         "...  directed to a particular statute,  enacted  at  a  particular
         time, to  address  (almost  invariably)  a  particular  problem  or
         mischief".

    (R v Z [2005] UKHL 35, at [17]).

    In R (Quintavalle) v the Secretary of State for Health [2003] 2 AC 687,
    Lord Bingham stated at 695:

         "The court's task, within the permissible bounds of interpretation,
         is to give effect to Parliament's purpose.   So  the  controversial
         provisions should be read in the context of the statute as a whole,
         and the statute as a whole should be read in the historical context
         of the situation which led to its enactment".

17. Bearing in mind  the  latter  principle,  we  would  observe  that  the
    delivery of swift, inexpensive and uncomplicated justice has long  been
    the overarching ethos of tribunal adjudication. See, for  example,  the
    discussion in Wade and Forsyth, Administrative Law (10th Edition),  per
    pp 773 - 774.  This forms part of the context in which the 2007 Act was
    introduced.  The background to this enactment includes  the  report  of
    Sir Andrew Leggatt, followed by  a  White  Paper  (CM.6243/2004)  which
    accepted many of its recommendations.  Sir Andrew's report contains the
    following noteworthy passage, at paragraph 1.2:

         "...   Tribunal's  procedures  and  approach  to   overseeing   the
         preparation of cases and their hearing  can  be  simpler  and  more
         informal than the courts, even after the civil justice reforms."

    One of the main aims of the legislation which followed, in the form  of
    the 2007 Act, was to introduce  the  "user-oriented  service"  strongly
    recommended by Sir Andrew (see paragraph 1.4 of his report).

18. A second, inter-related aspect of the context in which the 2007 Act was
    devised is the overriding objective, with its emphasis  on  expedition,
    finality and  the  suppression  of  avoidable  delay.   The  overriding
    objective was, by 2007, firmly established in  civil  proceedings,  was
    gaining a foothold in criminal proceedings and was being introduced  in
    tribunal proceedings, at both tiers.  As regards the Upper Tribunal, it
    is contained in Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008, which came into operation on 3 November 2008.  Generally, in  the
    United Kingdom  legal  system  the  overriding  objective  and  related
    measures, including wholesale reform of  rules  of  procedure  in  both
    courts and tribunals, progressively gained traction during a period  in
    which the imperative of  defeating  the  so-called  unholy  trinity  of
    avoidable delay, excessive costs and  unwarranted  complication  became
    increasingly dominant. By 2007 the Civil Procedure  Rules  were  firmly
    entrenched, having been introduced on 26 April 1999.

19. While the developments in civil and tribunal procedure noted above have
    occurred during the last two decades,  there  is  nothing  novel  about
    them.  The principle that legal  proceedings  should  be  concluded  as
    expeditiously as possible is expressed in the longstanding Latin  maxim
    interest rei publicae ut sit finis litium.  Over a century  has  passed
    since this maxim was recognised as possessing "extreme value": by  Lord
    Loreburn LC in Brown v Dean [1910] AC 373, at 374.   The  operation  of
    this maxim in the discrete context of statutory construction and appeal
    rights is illustrated in R v Pinfold [1988] QB 462, where Lord Lane  CJ
    stated at 464:

         "...  One must read those provisions against the background of  the
         fact that it is in the interests of  the  public  in  general  that
         there should be  a  limit  or  a  finality  of  legal  proceedings,
         sometimes put in a Latin maxim,  but  that  is  what  it  means  in
         English".

    This maxim was also applied in a comparable legal  context,  albeit  in
    matrimonial proceedings, in Hewitson v Hewitson [1995]  1  ALL  ER  472
    (see particularly per Butler-Sloss LJ at [63] - [65].  Finally, in this
    context,  we  remind  ourselves  of  the   presumption   of   statutory
    construction that the law should serve the public interest: Bennion  on
    Statutory Interpretation (Sixth Edition), page 722.

20. We further take into account that, while this has manifested itself  in
    contexts other than the present, one of the emerging  features  of  the
    modern legal system is that of strong resistance  to  what  has  become
    known as "satellite" litigation.  This species of litigation takes  the
    form of proceedings in a  higher  court  or  tribunal,  frequently  via
    judicial review challenges, brought in circumstances where the  process
    of the lower court or tribunal  is  incomplete.   This  is  illustrated
    particularly, and perhaps most famously, in  R  v  Director  of  Public
    Prosecutions, ex Parte Kebeline [2000] 2 AC 326, at 371 per Lord Steyn.
     This is further  illustrated  in  the  rejection  of  judicial  review
    challenges to aspects of inquest proceedings pursued at  a  stage  when
    the process is not complete.  See in particular McLuckie v Coroner  for
    Northern Ireland [2011] NICA 34, at [26].

21. This feature of contemporary litigation may be viewed as the up-to-date
    application  of  the  venerable  maxim  discussed  above.   It  is  the
    rationale of decisions such as Allen v Allen [1985] Fam 8,  which  held
    that a construction of statutory provisions  requiring  a  litigant  to
    pursue  separate  and  distinct  courses  of  appeal  against   various
    decisions arrived at in  the  same  proceedings  will  if  possible  be
    avoided.  This approximates very closely to the context under  scrutiny
    in the present case.

22. The key to answering the question of whether the Appellant can seek  to
    pursue an  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  at  this  stage  of  the
    proceedings,  via  an  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  lies,
    firstly, in the construction of  Section  12  of  the  2007  Act.   Our
    analysis and dissection of Section 12 are as follows:

 a) The function, and responsibility, of the UT is to determine whether  an
    appealable decision of the FtT is vitiated by error of law: see Section
    11.

 b) In performing this function, the first task of the UT is  to  determine
    whether the decision of the FtT "involved the making of an error  on  a
    point of law": per Section 12(1).

 c) If the UT "finds" (the statutory word) that the decision of the FtT did
    not involve the making of an error on a point of  law,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed and the decision of the FtT affirmed.

 d) If the UT finds that the decision of the FtT involved the making of  an
    error on a point of law, it must then progress to a second stage  which
    entails deciding whether to set aside the decision of  the  FtT  -  see
    Section 12(2)(a) - an exercise which entails the assessment of  whether
    the error  of  law  diagnosed  is  material.   This  is  the  rationale
    underpinning the discretionary  power  conferred  on  the  UT  in  this
    respect.

 e) Where the UT, having found that the decision of the  FtT  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law, concludes, at the  second  stage,
    that the error was  not  material  the  appeal  is  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the FtT affirmed.

 f) If, on the other hand, the  UT  decides  that  the  error  of  law  was
    material, this completes the second stage and triggers a  third  stage,
    at which a further decision must be made, namely whether to  remit  the
    case to the FtT with directions for its reconsideration  or  to  remake
    the decision of the FtT.

 g) The operation of Section 12, therefore, throws up a series of  possible
    steps, stages and outcomes.  The chief characteristic of some of  these
    is that they are intermediate in nature.  This analysis applies to:

 i) A finding that the decision of the UT was erroneous in law.

ii) A determination, whether in tandem with or separate from  (a),  to  set
    aside the decision of the FtT.

iii) A determination, normally made in tandem  with  a  positive  set  aside
    determination, of whether to remit the case to the FtT or retain it  in
    the forum of the UT for the purpose of remaking the decision.

23. In the present case, the act of the  UT  under  scrutiny  combined  the
    three elements of finding an error of law of the FtT in  one  specified
    respect, setting aside the decision of the  FtT  in  such  respect  and
    retaining the appeal in the forum of the UT for the purpose of remaking
    the decision of the FtT.  The Appellant's contention is that Section 13
    of the 2007 Act permits intervention by the Court  of  Appeal  at  this
    stage.  This contention can be sustained only if the UT decision of  05
    February 2016 constitutes, in the language of Section 13(1) "a decision
    made by the Upper Tribunal  other  than  an  excluded  decision".   The
    question is whether it is a "decision" within the meaning and intent of
    section 13.

24.  The contention that the Appellant is entitled to  seek  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal in order to challenge this type of purely
    intermediate  determination  possesses,  in   our   view,   superficial
    attraction  only.   The  fundamental  question  is  whether  Parliament
    intended that an  interim  determination  of  this  species  should  be
    challengeable on  appeal  at  an  interlocutory  stage  of  the  appeal
    process.   We  have  identified  above  a  series  of  principles   and
    imperatives which, we  consider,  inform  and  illuminate  the  correct
    answer to this  question.   These  were  canvassed  with  the  parties'
    counsel in the course of the hearing, eliciting no suggestion that this
    approach is in any way misguided.  The panel explored with Mr  Khubber,
    inter alia, the inter-related questions of what imperative is served by
    the intervention of an appeal to the Court of Appeal at this  stage  of
    these proceedings and what mischief flows from the assessment that this
    recourse is not available to the Appellant now but arises only when the
    process of the UT is completed.  We are unable to identify in counsel's
    submissions any imperative to be served or any mischief to  be  avoided
    in the construction advanced on behalf of the Appellant.

25. Quite the contrary.  We consider that the combination of principles and
    imperatives identified above impel  overwhelmingly  to  the  conclusion
    that Parliament cannot have intended  to  establish  a  right  to  seek
    permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  against  an  intermediate
    decision of this genre.  This intermediate decision  will,  ultimately,
    merge with the final decision of the UT, thereby generating a composite
    decision and it will be open to the Appellant to seek to challenge  any
    aspect thereof if so  advised.   Contrary  to  the  submissions  of  Mr
    Khubber, this does not deny the Appellant the  right  of  access  to  a
    court.  The Appellant is actively enjoying the exercise of  this  right
    at present and the only further right which arises is a right  to  seek
    to pursue an appeal against the final, dispositive decision of  the  UT
    in accordance with the  terms  which  the  legislature  has  chosen  to
    prescribe.  There is no denial of this  discrete  right.   Rather,  the
    correct analysis is that it  does  not  arise  at  this  stage  of  the
    proceedings.

26.  We  further  consider  that  this  analysis  is  reinforced   by   the
    finding/decision dichotomy clearly identifiable in section 12 and, as a
    matter of linguistic construction, the strong indication that in  cases
    where an error of law is found this will simply constitute one  element
    of an uncompleted whole, a partial decision at most, a judicial act not
    constituting a "decision" within the meaning and intent  of  s  13.  We
    elaborate on this assessment as follows.

27. What is notable is that while there may be pauses in the process, s  12
    does not allow the UT to stop until it has completed its task.  The  UT
    is not permitted merely to determine that the FtT decision contains  an
    error and cannot stand.  If it reaches that stage the UT  is  compelled
    by the statute (the word in s 12(2)(b)(ii) is 'must')  to  replace  the
    decision or make arrangements for its replacement,  that  is,  it  must
    remit the case to the FtT or remake  the  decision  itself.   Both  the
    language and the process preclude the characterisation of  any  of  the
    steps on the way to the  conclusion  as  a  'decision'.   The  language
    precludes it because the section eschews the use of the word 'decision'
    and its cognates for each of the steps  we  have  set  out  except  any
    remaking of the decision of the FtT at the end  of  the  process.   The
    process precludes it because if either of  the  earlier  steps  were  a
    'decision' within the meaning and intent of the  section  it  would  in
    principle be appealable; and an appeal would destroy the continuity  of
    the process enforced by s 12 as a whole, thereby rendering  otiose  and
    impotent the imperative command  effected  by  the  word  'must'  in  s
    12(2)(b).

28. Instead, the section begins with a very clear signpost: the  steps  are
    steps 'in deciding an appeal under s 11'.  This means  that  the  whole
    process is 'deciding an appeal' (which  expresses  with  precision  the
    full scope of the statutory power of  the  UT  in  this  context):  the
    intermediate steps are not deciding anything  at  all  but  are  simply
    interim stages within the process of 'deciding an appeal' en  route  to
    the ultimate outcome, namely the UT's decision on the appeal.

29. Of course it goes without saying that the finding that  the  making  of
    the FtT decision involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law  and  the
    determination of the question  whether  it  should  be  set  aside  are
    judicial acts.  But, for the reasons we have given, although  they  are
    parts of a decision-making  process  they  are  not  themselves  to  be
    categorised as 'decisions' within the meaning and intent of s 13 .

30. There is a further point, raised by Ms Anderson, which we  consider  to
    have some force.  There are numerous decisions of the Court of  Appeal,
    where there has been an appeal against the decision of the  UT  reached
    after termination of the process  envisaged  by  s  12  and  where  the
    argument before the court has been that the UT ought not to have  found
    an error of law.  Sometimes those arguments  are  successful,  and  the
    Court of Appeal has restored the decision of the FtT  or  remitted  the
    case to the UT.  If Mr Khubber's argument is  right,  the  argument  in
    these cases would have been directed to either the first (error of law)
    or second (set-aside) determination of the UT,  which  would  typically
    have occurred some time before the final decision  on  the  appeal.  Mr
    Khubber's argument unavoidably involves the proposition that  countless
    appeals to the Court of  Appeal  have  been  well  out  of  time.  This
    reflection,  in  our  judgement,  confounds   further   the   statutory
    construction espoused on behalf of the Appellant

31. In order to deal with one discrete issue canvassed  at the  hearing  we
    also indicate what our view would be if we had been persuaded that  the
    UT had already made in this case a 'decision' carrying in  principle  a
    right of appeal.  In our judgement, if any of the steps taken so far by
    the UT constitutes a 'decision' within the meaning and intent of s  13,
    such is an 'excluded decision' within the meaning of  Article  3(m)  of
    the 2009 Order.

32. Article  3(m)  excludes  'any  procedural,  ancillary  or  preliminary'
    decision made in relation to an appeal.  We  consider  that  there  are
    good reasons for categorising the steps so far taken by the UT in  this
    appeal as having the characteristics not merely of one but of all three
    of those categories.  They are 'procedural' because they  are  part  of
    the statutory procedure prescribed by s 12 and do not finally determine
    the merits of the appeal.  They are 'ancillary'  because  they  provide
    necessary support to the prime task of 'deciding an appeal under  s  11
    (see s 12(1)), an adjunct to the central and ultimate task of  the  UT.
    They are 'preliminary' because they have to be made at an early  rather
    than late stage of the process, necessarily preceding  the  performance
    of the ultimate task of the UT.  If there were any  doubt  about  their
    exclusion, we would pray in  aid  the  same  reasoning   that  we  have
    deployed earlier: if these are 'decisions' there is no good  reason  to
    interpret the 2009 Order so as not to have them 'excluded'   and  there
    are very good reasons for interpreting the Order as excluding them from
    any right of appeal.

Conclusion


33. The appeal which the Appellant seeks to pursue at this intermediate  of
    these proceedings would be an expensive  and  delaying  distraction,  a
    diversion having no discernible  utility,  fulfilling  no  identifiable
    imperative, countering no mischief and, fundamentally,  vindicating  no
    legal right.

34. We conclude that an appeal lies to the Court of Appeal only  against  a
    decision of the UT which is finally dispositive of an appeal  from  the
    FtT. We thus decide on the ground that this is the correct construction
    of Sections 12 and 13 of the 2007 Act.  Our alternative  conclusion  is
    that no appeal lies to the Court of Appeal against any decision of  the
    UT other than one which is finally dispositive of an  appeal  from  the
    FtT as this is an excluded decision within the compass of Article  3(m)
    of the 2009 Order.




                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                        Date: 09 August 2016
