
  [pic]
IAC-FH-KH-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 Alarape and anr (Article 12, EC Reg 1612/68) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00413(IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 2 June 2011                              |                            |
|                                            |............................|
|                                            |...........                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DIGNEY

                                   Between

                          MS OLAITAN AJOKE ALARAPE
                           olukayode azeez Tijani

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

            AIRE CENTRE                          Third-party Intervener

Representation:

For the Appellants:     Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli of Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr Kyriacou, Home Office Presenting Officer
Third-party intervener:  AIRE Centre

1. The term "child" in Article 12 of Regulation (EEC)  No.1612/68  [see  now
Article 10 Regulation (EU)  No.  492/2011]  (which  guarantees  a  right  of
access to education) should be read to include "stepchild".

2. An order for preliminary  reference  to  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
European Union is made in this case in relation to other questions.


      ORDER FOR REFERENCE TO THE COURT OF JUSTICE OF THE EUROPEAN UNION

1. The appellants are mother and son, born on 9 July 1970  and  28  February
   1988 respectively.  They are citizens of Nigeria.  They arrived in the UK
   illegally in 2001. The first appellant married Jen Thierry Salama  on  13
   May 2003.  Both were given five years residence as family members  of  Mr
   Salama on the basis that he being  a  national  of  France  was  a  Union
   citizen/EEA national exercising Treaty rights.  That grant  of  residence
   came to an end on 17 February 2009. In 2006/2007 the  first  appellant's
   marriage ran into difficulties, Mr Salama leaving the matrimonial home at
   some time during this period.  On 29 January 2010 the respondent  refused
   to grant either of the appellants a permanent residence card.   They  had
   applied for such a card on the basis that they were family members of  Mr
   Salama who was said to have exercised Treaty rights in the  UK  for  over
   five continuous years. They appealed.  By the time of the hearing  on  20
   May 2010, the first appellant's marriage had been formally terminated  by
   divorce (on 16 February 2010).  In a determination notified  on  7  June
   2010 the First-tier Tribunal dismissed their appeals.  Immigration  Judge
   Dulwich found that the appellants had failed to prove that Mr Salama  had
   been exercising Treaty rights in the UK over the  relevant  period.   The
   documents submitted only established, the FTT found,  that  he  had  been
   employed between April 2004 and 21 April 2006.

2.   In light of these findings the FTT rejected the appellants' claim  that
   they qualified for permanent residence on the basis of being able to show
   that Mr Salama had exercised Treaty rights for  a  continuous  period  of
   five years (regulation 15(1)(b) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
   Area) Regulations 2006) prior to the February 2010 divorce. The FTT  also
   rejected the appellants' contention that the first appellant had acquired
   a retained right of residence  upon  her  divorce  which,  by  virtue  of
   regulation 15(1)(f) of the same Regulations, made it  possible  that  the
   requisite five years of residence before that date could comprise in part
   retained residence under regulation 10. It also found they had failed  to
   show that these decisions breached their human rights. Noting that  under
   Article 8 ECHR jurisprudence  relationships  between  adult  siblings  or
   adult children and their parents would  not  normally  constitute  family
   life within the meaning of Article 8 unless it was established that  they
   enjoyed  more  than  normal  emotional  ties,  the  FTT  found  that  the
   appellants had failed to show the existence of such  ties  and  had  also
   failed to show that the refusal decisions amounted to a  disproportionate
   interference with their right to respect for private life.

3.  The appellants successfully applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal and, following a  hearing  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Digney, the Tribunal reconvened for their appeals to  be  heard  by
   the  present  panel.  The  appellants  adduced  grounds  of  appeal  that
   reiterated their contention that they should have been found  to  qualify
   for  permanent  residence  either  under  regulation  15(1)(b)  or  under
   regulation 15(1)(f) and to succeed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  They  also
   raised, for the first time, an argument based on Article 12 of Regulation
   (EEC) No. 1612/68. It is as well to clarify at this point that Regulation
   (EEC) No. 1612/68 was repealed  by  Regulation  (EU)  No.  492/2011  with
   effect from 25 April 2011, the equivalent provision now being Article  10
   of this new Regulation. We continue to refer to Article  12  of  the  old
   Regulation because our immediate task in these appeals  is  to  establish
   whether the FTT erred in law when it dealt with them in June  2010,  when
   this was still the relevant EU provision.

4.  On 22 September 2010 the respondent sent a response to  the  grounds  of
   appeal under rule 24 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
   2008 stating that it did not oppose the appellants' contention  that  the
   FTT had erred in law and that it wished the Upper Tribunal to proceed  to
   decide whether the second appellant had a right to reside to  pursue  his
   studies and whether the first appellant thus had  a  corollary  right  of
   residence. That continued to be the position  taken  by  Mr  Kyriacou  in
   submissions before us.

5.    Following our hearing of these appeals on 2 June 2011  we  decided  to
   seek submissions from the parties in relation  to  a  draft  decision  in
   which we set out, inter alia, the terms of the preliminary  reference  we
   proposed to make to the Court of Justice of the European Union (hereafter
   the "Court of Justice"). Both parties responded stating that they did not
   oppose our making such a reference and they had no comments  to  make  on
   our proposed draft of those questions. The  respondent  stated  that  she
   reserved her right to make observations,  comments,  submissions  etc  in
   response to the questions later on in the reference proceedings.   On  20
   September the appellant's  (new)  representatives,  Seraphus  Solicitors,
   forwarded submissions with respect to  our  proposed  reference,  stating
   that they had no comment to make on the proposed questions but  did  wish
   the Tribunal to consider reconvening in order to hear further argument on
   certain matters dealt with in our draft decision (as explained  below  at
   paras 20-21 we rejected that request).  On 21  September  2011  the  AIRE
   Centre wrote requesting permission to be admitted to the case as a third-
   party intervener,  in  accordance  with  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008.  We acceded to that request.  Our  reasons  for  so
   acceding are the same as those identified by the   President  in  MR  and
   Others (EEA extended family members) Bangladesh [2010]  UKUT  449  (IAC),
   para 48. The AIRE Centre is thus made a party to these proceedings in the
   exercise of our case management powers.  In  further  correspondence  the
   AIRE Centre said that they had  no  comments  to  make  on  our  proposed
   questions.

6.  In response to Upper Tribunal directions in advance of the  hearing  the
   appellants submitted further evidence including  written  statements.  At
   the hearing the second appellant  also  gave  oral  evidence.  Whilst  Mr
   Kyriacou sought to clarify several matters, he did not  seek  to  dispute
   any of their evidence. We are thus in a position to set out the  accepted
   facts in this case as follows.

The facts

 7. The appellants arrived in the UK illegally sometime in 2001. On 13  May
    2003  the  first  appellant  married  Jean  Thierry  Salama,  a  French
    national. It is not in  dispute  that  he  was  at  that  time  an  EEA
    national. The first appellant was granted residence as the spouse of  a
    Union citizen/EEA national exercising Treaty rights from July  2004  to
    17 February 2009. The second appellant was  granted  residence  as  the
    family member of Mr Salama from 6 August 2005 to 17 February 2009.  The
    first appellant was twice pregnant (first in 2004, then in 2006) by her
    husband but on both occasions she lost the baby.  After  several  years
    the marriage began to break down, the  first  appellant  filing  for  a
    divorce in May 2008 and eventually obtaining a decree  absolute  on  16
    February 2010. The FTT found that her husband left the family  home  in
    April 2006.

 8. The first appellant has been working in the UK on a part time and  self
    employed basis and has a  monthly  income  amounting  to  approximately
    �1600. She has been making tax and national insurance contributions.

 9. The second appellant has been in full-time education since his  arrival
    in the UK. In July 2008 he was awarded  a  BSc  degree  in  Engineering
    (Honours) at London Metropolitan University and in November 2009 he was
    awarded a Masters degree in Petroleum Engineering at London South  Bank
    University. Originally he intended to  return  to  that  university  to
    continue his studies for a PhD in Engineering and Electronics for three
    years commencing on 1 September 2010 but he then took up  an  offer  to
    pursue a  similar  degree  at  Edinburgh  University  (Engineering  and
    Electronics (Energy Systems)). During 2006-2008 he did part-time  work;
    he spent the money he earned from this  employment  on  books  for  his
    studies. He has been formally accepted on the PhD course  at  Edinburgh
    University which is due to start  in  September  2011.  Whilst  in  the
    longer term  it  is  possible  his  mother  would  consider  moving  to
    Edinburgh (along with his two other siblings), he has made arrangements
    to live with a University lecturer in Edinburgh during term  time.  The
    first appellant's two other children who came to the  UK  in  1990  and
    1992 respectively, are also undergoing further education; their precise
    citizenship  and  immigration  status  is  not  entirely   clear,   the
    appellants' submissions having said at  one  point  they  were  British
    citizens and at another point  that  they  were  granted  residence  as
    family members of an EEA nationals; in witness statements both of these
    siblings  say  that  their  Nigerian  passports  were   endorsed   with
    indefinite leave to enter the UK and  in  support  of  that  there  are
    copies of their passports endorsed with "indefinite leave to remain" on
    dates in 2005. In any event their status  is  not  an  issue  in  these
    appeals.


The legal framework

a) Relevant national law

10. We begin by  setting  out  the  relevant  national  law,  contained  in
    regulations 10 and 15 of the 2006 Regulations.

11. Regulation 10, so  far  as  relevant  to  divorced  spouses  of  [Union
    citizens]/EEA nationals, is as follows:


      "10. (1) In these Regulations, "family member  who  has  retained  the
      right of residence" means, subject to  paragraph  (8),  a  person  who
      satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).


      ....


      (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-


        (a) he ceased to be a family member of a qualified  person  on  the
           termination  of   the  marriage  or  civil  partnership  of  the
           qualified person;


        (b) he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with  these
           Regulations at the date of the termination;


        (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and


        (d) either-


              i)  prior  to  the  initiation  of  the  proceedings  for  the
                 termination of the marriage or the  civil  partnership  the
                 marriage or civil partnership had lasted for at least three
                 years and the parties to the marriage or civil  partnership
                 had resided in the United Kingdom for  at  least  one  year
                 during its duration;
             ii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified  person
                 has custody of a child of the qualified person;
            iii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified  person
                 has the right of access to a child of the qualified  person
                 under the age of 18 and  a  court  has  ordered  that  such
                 access must take place in the United Kingdom; or
             iv) the continued right of residence in the United  Kingdom  of
                 the  person  is   warranted   by   particularly   difficult
                 circumstances, such as he or another family  member  having
                 been a victim of domestic violence while  the  marriage  or
                 civil partnership was subsisting.
      (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-
        (a) is not an EEA national but would, if he were an  EEA  national,
           be a worker,  a    self-employed  person  or  a  self-sufficient
           person under regulation 6; or
        (b) is the family member of a person  who  falls  within  paragraph
           (a).
                    ..."
 12.    Regulation 15 provides:
      "15 Permanent right of residence
      (1) The following persons shall acquire the right  to  reside  in  the
      United Kingdom permanently--
        (a) an EEA national who  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
        accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period  of  five
        years;


        (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not  himself  an  EEA
        national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
        national in accordance with  these  Regulations  for  a  continuous
        period of five years;


        (c) a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;


        (d) the family member of a worker or self-employed person  who  has
        ceased activity;


        (e) a person who was the family member of a worker or self-employed
        person where-


             (i) the worker or self-employed person has died;
             (ii) the family member resided with him immediately before  his
             death; and
             (iii)  the  worker  or   self-employed   person   had   resided
             continuously in the United Kingdom for at least the  two  years
             immediately before his death or the death was the result of  an
             accident at work or an occupational disease;

                    (f) a person who -

             (i) has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with  these
             Regulations for a continuous period of five years; and
             (ii) was, at the end of that period, a family  member  who  has
             retained the right of residence.


      (2) Once  acquired,  the  right  of  permanent  residence  under  this
      regulation shall be lost only through absence from the United  Kingdom
      for a period exceeding two consecutive years.


      (3) But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b)."
13.    Regulation 19 (3)(b) states:
    "19.
       ...
      (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), a person who has been  admitted
      to, or acquired a right to reside in, the United Kingdom  under  these
      Regulations may be removed from the United Kingdom if-
         (a) he does not have or ceases to have  a  right  to  reside  under
         these Regulations; or
         (b) he would otherwise be entitled to reside in the United  Kingdom
         under these Regulations but the Secretary of State has decided that
         his removal is justified on the grounds of  public  policy,  public
         security or public health in accordance with regulation 21.
      (4) A person must not be removed under paragraph (3) as the  automatic
      consequence of having recourse to the social assistance system of  the
      United Kingdom.
      (5) A person must not be removed under paragraph (3) if he has a right
      to remain in the United Kingdom by virtue of leave granted  under  the
      1971 Act unless his removal is justified  on  the  grounds  of  public
      policy, public security or public health in accordance with regulation
      21."
(b) Directive 2004/38/EC (the Citizens Directive)

14.  Reference should also  be  made  to  the  corresponding  provisions  of
    Directive 2004/38/EC (the Citizens Directive). Recital 15 states:

    "Family members should be legally safeguarded in the event of the death
    of the Union citizen, divorce, annulment of marriage or termination  of
    a registered partnership. With due regard for  family  life  and  human
    dignity, and in certain conditions to  guard  against  abuse,  measures
    should therefore be taken to ensure that in such  circumstances  family
    members already residing within the territory of the host Member  State
    retain their right of residence exclusively on a personal basis".

15.    Article 2(1) lists those who qualify as a "family member". This  list
    includes "(a) the spouse" and "(c) the direct descendants who are under
    the age of 21 or are dependants and those of the spouse or  partner  as
    defined in point (b)".

16. Then there are the provisions of Articles 12 - 14:

    "Article 12


    Retention of the right of residence by family members in the  event  of
    death or departure of the Union citizen


    1.       Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  the  Union
         citizen's death or departure from the host Member State  shall  not
         affect the right of residence of his/her  family  members  who  are
         nationals of a Member State.


         Before acquiring the right  of  permanent  residence,  the  persons
         concerned must meet the conditions laid down in  points  (a),  (b),
         (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).


    2.        Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  the Union
         citizen's death shall not entail loss of the right of residence  of
         his/her family members who are not nationals of a Member State  and
         who have been residing in the host Member State as  family  members
         for at least one year before the Union citizen's death.


         Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  Member  State,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall  be  as
         defined in Article 8(4).


         Such  family  members  shall  retain  their  right   of   residence
         exclusively on a personal basis.


    3.       The Union citizen's departure from the  host  Member  State or
         his/her death shall not entail loss of the right  of  residence  of
         his/her children or of the parent who has  actual  custody  of  the
         children, irrespective of nationality, if the  children  reside  in
         the  host  Member  State  and  are  enrolled  at   an   educational
         establishment,  for  the  purpose  of  studying  there,  until  the
         completion of their studies.


    Article 13


    Retention of the right of residence by family members in the  event  of
    divorce, annulment of marriage or termination of registered partnership


    1.       Without  prejudice  to  the  second   subparagraph,   divorce,
         annulment of the Union citizen's marriage or termination of his/her
         registered partnership, as referred to in point 2(b) of  Article  2
         shall not affect the right of residence of his/her  family  members
         who are nationals of a Member State.


         Before acquiring the right  of  permanent  residence,  the  persons
         concerned must meet the conditions laid down in  points  (a),  (b),
         (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).


    2.       Without  prejudice  to  the  second   subparagraph,   divorce,
         annulment of marriage or termination of the registered  partnership
         referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2 shall not entail loss of the
         right of residence of a Union citizen's family members who are  not
         nationals of a Member State where:


          (a)    prior to initiation of the divorce or annulment proceedings
             or termination of the registered partnership  referred  to  in
             point  2(b)  of  Article  2,  the   marriage   or   registered
             partnership has lasted at least  three  years,  including  one
             year in the host Member State; or


         (b)     by agreement between the spouses or  the  partners referred
             to in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order, the spouse or
             partner who is not a national of a Member State has custody of
             the Union citizen's children; or


         (c)     this is warranted by particularly  difficult circumstances,
             such as having been a victim of domestic  violence  while  the
             marriage or registered partnership was subsisting; or


         (d)    by agreement between the spouses or partners referred to  in
             point 2(b) of Article 2 or  by  court  order,  the  spouse  or
             partner who is not a national of a Member State has the  right
             of access to a minor child, provided that the court has  ruled
             that such access must be in the host Member State, and for  as
             long as is required.


         Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  Member  State,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall  be  as
         defined in Article 8(4).


              Such family members shall retain  their  right  of  residence
         exclusively on a personal basis."


    Article 14


    Retention of the right of residence


    1.       Union citizens and their family members shall have  the  right
         of residence provided for in Article 6, as  long  as  they  do  not
         become an unreasonable burden on the social  assistance  system  of
         the host Member State.


    2.       Union citizens and their family members shall  have  the right
         of residence provided for in Articles 7, 12 and 13 as long as  they
         meet the conditions set out therein. In specific cases where  there
         is a reasonable doubt as to whether  a  Union  citizen  or  his/her
         family members satisfies the conditions set out in Articles  7,  12
         and 13, Member States may verify if these conditions are fulfilled.
         This verification shall not be carried out systematically.


    3.       An expulsion measure shall not be the automatic consequence of
         a Union citizen's or his or her family  member's  recourse  to  the
         social assistance system of the host Member State.


    4.      By way of derogation  from  paragraphs  1  and  2  and  without
         prejudice to the provisions of Chapter VI, an expulsion measure may
         in no case be  adopted  against  Union  citizens  or  their  family
         members if:


         (a)     the Union citizens are workers or self-employed persons, or


         (b)     the Union citizens entered the territory of the host Member
             State in order to seek employment.


         In this case, the Union citizens and their family members  may  not
         be expelled for as long as the Union citizens can provide  evidence
         that they are continuing to seek employment and that  they  have  a
         genuine chance of being engaged."

(c) Article  12 of Regulation (EEC) No.1612/68 and Article 10 of  Regulation
(EU) No 492/2011

17.   Article 12 of Regulation (EEC) No. 1612/68 states:

      "The children of a national of a member  state  who  is  or  has  been
      employed in the territory of another member state shall be admitted to
      that  state's  general  educational,  apprenticeship  and   vocational
      training courses under the same conditions as the  nationals  of  that
      state, if such children are residing in its territory.


      Member states shall encourage all efforts to enable such  children  to
      attend these courses under the best possible conditions."

18.   The provision which replaced it, with effect from 25  April  2011,  is
    Article 10 of Regulation (EU) No 492/2011:  see  also  Article  41  and
    Annex II (Correlation table). The wording of the latter is identical.


 The principal legal issues

19.   In the light of the agreed facts and having  considered  the  parties'
    submissions  we  consider  that  notwithstanding  the  respondent   not
    opposing a finding that the  IJ  had  materially  erred  in  law,  that
    remains a live issue before us. In order  to  decide  whether  the  FTT
    materially erred in law there are three main issues we have to  decide:
    (1)   whether   the   appellants   are   entitled   to   a   right   of
    residence/permanent  residence  under  the  2006  Regulations  or   the
    Citizens Directive by virtue of being able to show a continuous  period
    of residence for five years in accordance with the conditions laid down
    in the Directive; (2) whether the second appellant is entitled to an EU
    right of residence under Article 12 of Regulation No. 1612/68; and  (3)
    whether the first appellant can derive an Article 12-related  EU  right
    of residence from the second appellant as his primary carer.  There  is
    also a fourth issue, but it is convenient not to  identify  this  until
    later on: see below para 41.

Permanent residence under the 2006 Regulations and Citizens Directive

20.  In relation to (1),  we  are  satisfied  that  the  FTT  was  wrong  to
    consider that the evidence before it was only sufficient  to  establish
    that Mr Salama had worked between April 2004 - April  2006  since  that
    evidence included the fact that he had been issued a residence document
    in  February  2004.  Under  the  definition  of  "residence   document"
    contained in the  EEA  Regulations  in  force  in  February  2004  (the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2000) such a  document
    constitutes "proof of the holder's right of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom" (regulation 2). However, that  mistake  at  best  extends  the
    period about which there was evidence of Mr  Salama  exercising  Treaty
    rights from February 2004 to April 2006 and that is still well short of
    the requisite five years. We can appreciate that  Mr  Salama's  leaving
    the matrimonial home in 2006/2007 may have made it more difficult  than
    otherwise for the appellants  to  obtain  evidence  of  his  employment
    history. However, the appellants failed to produce credible evidence of
    having taken reasonable steps to obtain further and better  particulars
    of Mr Salama's work history and they did not request the FTT to make an
    interlocutory order (under  Rule  50  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005). The burden of proving Mr  Salama  had
    been exercising Treaty rights for the requisite period rested on  them:
    see Amos v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    552. Hence the appellants had not been able to prove that Mr Salama was
    exercising Treaty rights except between (at best) February 2004 - April
    2006. There was accordingly no material error of law on the part of the
    FTT in finding that the appellants failed to show they were entitled to
    permanent residence documentation on the basis of Mr Salama's  exercise
    of Treaty rights. The further  evidence  submitted  by  the  appellants
    fails to add in any significant  way  to  the  state  of  the  evidence
    regarding Mr Salama's employment history. Accordingly they are not able
    to show either (a) that the Union citizen/EEA national  ever  exercised
    Treaty rights for a continuous  period  of  five  years  prior  to  the
    termination of the marriage; or  (b)  that  he  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights at the date of termination of the marriage in February 2010 (the
    latter being a prior condition for the appellants to  have  acquired  a
    retained right of residence). As to (a), it  is  true  that  the  first
    appellant was granted residence documentation for  five  years  between
    February 2004 and February 2009 (the second appellant between 6  August
    2005 and 17 February 2009), but such residence documentation  does  not
    prove the continuation of the underlying right  of  residence  for  the
    period of validity of the document:  see  Dias  (European  citizenship)
    [2011] EUECJ Case C-325/09 (21 July 2011); and Samsam (EEA:  revocation
    and retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 165 (IAC); [2011] Imm AR 663.

21.  In reaching our conclusions on (1), we have taken  careful  account  of
    the  further  submissions  made  by  the  appellants'  new   solicitors
    (Seraphus Solicitors) dated 20 September 2011 in which they urged us to
    reconvene so as to hear further argument as to whether  the  burden  of
    proof in order to show Mr Salama had been working for a  longer  period
    than identified above rested on the appellants and whether  Article  13
    of the Directive did require an applicant to show  that  the  ex-spouse
    was exercising Treaty rights at the time  of  the  termination  of  the
    marriage.  On both these issues we consider that we are  bound  by  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Amos and we are confident that  that
    judgment correctly interpreted the Directive.

22.   Before turning to the second issue as such,  we  should  mention  that
    both the 2006  EEA  Regulations  and  the  Citizens  Directive  contain
    provisions designed to  cover  similar  but  not  identical  ground  to
    Article 12 of Regulation No. 1612/68: see Advocate-General  Opinion  in
    Ibrahim (European Citizenship) [2009] EUECJ  Case  C-310/08,  para  31.
    However those provisions, as set out in regulation 10(3)  of  the  2006
    Regulations and Article 12(3)  of  the  Citizens  Directive,  confer  a
    retained right of residence only in respect of family  members  in  the
    event of death or departure from the host Member  State  of  the  Union
    citizen. Neither of these events arises on the facts of this case.  If,
    however, they had then it might have been possible for  the  appellants
    to show that they qualified for permanent residence on the  basis  that
    the second appellant had been attending an educational course which  he
    had not yet completed.

23.  Thus (subject to  the  matter  we  raise  below  at  paras  41-46)  the
    appellants are not able to establish any rights of residence under  the
    2006 Regulation or the Citizens Directive.

Article 12 of Regulation No. 1612/68

24.  This leaves the second and third issues, both of which  revolve  around
    Article 12 of        Regulation No. 1612/68.  In relation to the  scope
    and meaning of this provision  we  are  much  assisted  by  the  recent
    judgments of the Court of Justice in Ibrahim and Case C-480/08 Teixeira
    [2010] Imm AR 487, both of which in turn build on  previous  case  law,
    Case C-7/94 Gaal; Joined  Cases  C-389/87  and  390/87  Echternach  and
    Moritz [1989] ECR 723; and Case C-413/99 Baumbast and R [2002]  ECR  I-
    7091.


25.   In relation to (2), the second issue,  we consider that  the  FTT  may
    nevertheless have erred in law in failing to address whether the  first
    and second appellants were entitled to an EU right of  residence  under
    Article 12 of Regulation No. 1612/68 (the second appellant on the basis
    that he was still in full-time education; the first  appellant  on  the
    basis that she was the primary carer of the second  appellant).  Albeit
    the appellants' representatives did not raise Article 12 of  Regulation
    No. 1612/68 in their grounds of appeal to the FTT or at the hearing, it
    was raised  in  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  its
    potential relevance to the EU rights of both appellants  was  a  point,
    given the state of the evidence before  it,  that  it  was  obliged  to
    consider, even of its own motion.  If we eventually decide that one  or
    both appellants can derive rights from Article  12  (see  below),  then
    this would suffice for us to find a material error of law and set aside
    the decision of the FTT,  preserving  all  of  its  findings  of  fact,
    subject only to a correction in respect of the exercise of Mr Salama's
    exercise of Treaty rights between February 2004 and April 2004.

    At this stage it is convenient to set out the submissions we  had  from
    the parties and  our  response  to  them.  We  start  with  the  second
    appellant.


The second appellant

26.   On the issue of whether the  second  appellant  qualifies  for  an  EU
    right of residence on the basis of Article 12,  Mr  Kyriacou,  for  the
    respondent, accepted, with one caveat, that  if  the  second  appellant
    fell within the meaning of the term "children" in Article  12  then  he
    had an EU right of residence for as long as he  remained  in  full-time
    education.  Mr  Kyriacou's  caveat  was  that  the  second  appellant's
    enjoyment of an Article 12  right  "may"  have  been  affected  by  his
    parents' divorce in February 2010.   Ms  Bassiri-Dezfouli  argued  that
    there could be no such caveat. We agree with her and indeed it seems to
    us that in argument Mr Kyriacou himself identified why this is so when
    he referred us to  observation by the Court of Justice in Baumbast  and
    R at para 63:

          "In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the  first  question
          must be that children of a citizen of the European Union who  have
          installed themselves in a member  State  during  the  exercise  by
          their parent of rights of residence as a  migrant  worker  in  the
          Member State are entitled to  reside  there  in  order  to  attend
          general educational courses  there,  pursuant  to  Article  12  of
          Regulation No. 1612/68.  The fact that the parents of the children
          concerned have meanwhile divorced, the fact that only  one  parent
          is a citizen of the Union and that  parent  has  ceased  to  be  a
          migrant worker in the host member State  and  the  fact  that  the
          children are not themselves citizens of the Union  are  irrelevant
          in this regard" (emphasis added).

27.   The only unresolved matter, therefore, relating to the application  of
    Article 12 to the second appellant concerns whether he is a child.   As
    already noted, he  is  not  the  natural  child  of  Mr  Salama  but  a
    stepchild.  The text of Article 12 does not contain a definition of the
    term "children", although Article 10 of the same  Regulation  (1612/68)
    defines close family members of workers who are  nationals  of  another
    Member State as follows:


             "(a) his spouse and their descendants who are under the age  of
                 21 years or are dependants;
               (b)     dependent relatives in  the  ascending  line  of  the
         worker and his spouse."


28.  Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli submitted that there were two reasons why the  term
    "children" in Article 12 should  be  read  to  include  "stepchildren".
    First, both under  Article  10,  Regulation  No.  1612/68  and  in  the
    subsequent provisions dealing with close family  members  contained  in
    Article 2(2) of the Citizens Directive, it is clear that those able  to
    qualify in the descending line include the natural children of  both  a
    Union citizen/EEA national  and  his  or  her  spouse.   Logically  the
    natural child of a spouse is  the  stepchild  of  his  or  her  married
    partner.  Second, she relied on the acceptance by the Court of  Justice
    in the Baumbast and R case that Mr Baumbast's stepchild came within the
    ambit of Article 12.

29.   We see the force of Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli's first  point,  although  the
    Court has been at pains to point out that the scope of  Article  12  of
    Regulation No. 1612/68 is not co-terminous with that of Article  10  of
    the same Regulation: see Gaal C-7/94 [1995] ECR  I-1031,  paras  21-25.
    But the plain fact that both of  the  children  of  the  spouse  of  Mr
    Baumbast, including the one who  was  a  stepchild,  were  accepted  as
    coming within the ambit of Article 12, puts the matter beyond doubt.

30.  The fact that the second appellant is now over 21 is not  in  itself  a
    reason why he cannot qualify as a child for Article  12  of  Regulation
    No. 1612/68 purposes because the Court  has  held  that  the  right  is
    intended to obtain until the completion of full-time studies: see again
    Gaal, paras 24-25. Nor is it necessary that the child continues  to  be
    dependent on his parent(s): Gaal, para 25.

31.   Hence we are satisfied that the second appellant qualifies as a  child
    for the purposes of Article 12  of  Regulation  No.  1612/68.   On  the
    evidence before us he has held an EU right of residence since  February
    2005 (that being the first date on the evidence on which Mr Salama  had
    employment). As he has been in full-time education ever since,  and  is
    about to commence full-time PhD studies in Edinburgh, he  continues  to
    benefit from this right.

The first appellant

32.  This brings us to the first appellant's status in  respect  of  Article
    12.  Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli submits that she qualifies for an  Article  12
    right of residence derived from that of the  second  appellant  as  his
    primary carer.  Mr Kyriacou maintains that she  does  not  because  the
    evidence does not establish that the ongoing support  she  provides  to
    the appellant, now aged 25, can properly be described as "care".

33.   On the accepted facts, it seems to us that in  assessing  whether  the
    first appellant is the  second  appellant's  primary  carer  there  are
    considerations pointing in opposite directions. On the one hand, it  is
    clear from the decided cases on Article 12 of  Regulation  No.  1612/68
    that so long as full-time education is not completed an  applicant  can
    still come within its scope even if over 21. And up to the present  the
    second appellant has been both a dependant on his mother and  a  member
    of her household. Albeit he has  had  some  part-time  employment,  his
    mother has been providing him with material support for  his  essential
    needs and this will continue even when he goes to  study  at  Edinburgh
    University. Article 12 of  Regulation  No.  1612/68  refers  to  Member
    states encouraging "all efforts to enable such children to attend these
    courses under the best possible conditions". His father has no role  in
    his life and she is the one who had continuous custody until he  became
    an adult. If the first appellant is still the second appellant's carer,
    there is no issue, therefore, that it is she and she alone who  is  his
    primary carer. The evidence of both appellants was also  that  the  two
    have a close relationship. Doubtless that reflects the fact that she is
    supporting the family, consisting of the second appellant and  her  two
    other sons, and the second appellant is the oldest child. It is also of
    possible relevance that the European Court of  Human  Rights  has  held
    that in certain circumstances "family life" as well as  "private  life"
    within the meaning of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights can be said to exist between a parent and an adult child who  is
    still involved in education: see most  recently  AA  v  United  Kingdom
    (Application no. 8000/08) [2011] ECHR 1345 (20 September 2011). It must
    also be borne in mind that it is the constant case law of the Court  of
    Justice that rights of residence afforded by EU legislation are  to  be
    given a broad interpretation.

34.   On the other hand, the appellant  is  now  25  and  is  due  to  begin
    studies in another city, at Edinburgh University in September. Although
    it is said to be "possible" at some time in the future that  the  first
    appellant and the other two boys will relocate to Edinburgh, it is  put
    no higher than that and the second appellant has made concrete plans to
    live in accommodation provided by an academic in  Edinburgh  who  is  a
    friend of the family. Albeit still financially dependent on his  mother
    the second appellant is now an adult who has entered the labour  market
    at least for the purposes of doing part-time work. Even given that  the
    first  appellant  will  continue  to  support  the   second   appellant
    financially and no doubt the second appellant will return to his family
    home during term holidays, it is unclear that such ongoing  support  as
    she provides can be described as her being present in  his  life  as  a
    carer. Arguably the concept of care imports a degree of close  physical
    and emotional support. The second appellant is healthy and able-bodied.
    The fact that a child student has reached adulthood and is indeed  over
    21 does not in itself render it impossible for him to  have  a  primary
    carer, but equally it  would  seem  incongruous  if  the  notion  could
    encompass even a parent with whom an adult child will not be living  as
    soon as the last lap of his  full-times  studies  begins  in  September
    2011.

35.    In Teixeira the Court stated at para 87 that:

       "the right of residence in the host Member State of the  parent  who
       is the primary carer for a child of a  migrant  worker,  where  that
       child is in education in that State, ends when the child reaches the
       age of majority, unless the child continues to need the presence and
       care of that parent in order to be able to pursue and  complete  his
       or her education."(emphasis added)
         Plainly by using the terms "presence and care" the Court must  have
    had in mind the need to show some ongoing connection  of  a  particular
    quality between the child in education and the parent. The terms  would
    appear to import more than the provision of financial  support  by  the
    parent. They would also appear to denote more than the  mere  provision
    by the parent of a home or household for the child to go to when he  is
    not engaged in full-time studies  in  another  city.  It  would  appear
    likely that the terms require  more  than  the  existence  of  a  close
    emotional relationship between the parent and child student, the latter
    not  necessarily being a relationship in which the child is  cared  for
    by that parent. In the absence of further clarification from the  Court
    of Justice, the  national  court  is  left  with  important  unanswered
    questions. Could for example the term "carer"  be  applied  in  a  case
    where the child was neither supported financially  by  the  parent  nor
    living mostly with the parent nor having any significant emotional ties
    with the parent? Posing this question  serves  to  underline  that  the
    parameters of the concept are very unclear and  that  it  is  difficult
    with complete confidence or sufficient certainty to  decide  where  the
    line falls in any particular case.
36.  Surveying the competing arguments  we  consider  that  we  cannot  with
    complete confidence interpret the meaning of the term "primary  carer".
    That term is not to be found in any EU legislation, but it is the  term
    employed by the Court of Justice when developing the derived  right  of
    residence in relation to parents of children in full-time studies.
37.   A further dimension of difficulty is that the terms used by the  Court
    have varied. In Baumbast and R at paragraph 73 the Court held that:
       "The right conferred by Article 12 of Regulation No 1612/68  on  the
       child of a  migrant  worker  to  pursue,  under  the  best  possible
       conditions, his education  in  the  host  Member  State  necessarily
       implies that that child has the  right  to  be  accompanied  by  the
       person who is his primary carer and, accordingly, that  that  person
       is able to reside with him in that Member State during his  studies.
       To refuse to grant permission to remain  to  a  parent  who  is  the
       primary carer of the  child  exercising  his  right  to  pursue  his
       studies in the host Member State infringes  that  right."  (emphasis
       added)


    In Teixeira the Court stated at para 87 that:


       "the right of residence in the host Member State of the  parent  who
       is the primary carer for a child of a  migrant  worker,  where  that
       child is in education in that State, ends when the child reaches the
       age of majority, unless the child continues to need the presence and
       care of that parent in order to be able to pursue and  complete  his
       or her education."(emphasis added)


    The fact that  different  terms  are  used  in  these  two  passages  -
    residence and presence - adds to the difficulties we have when  seeking
    to construe their implications for the issue of in what circumstances a
    parent is to be seen as a primary carer.  Those  difficulties  are  not
    lessened by the knowledge that in other areas of EU  law  -e.g.  social
    security rights of migrant workers, rights of custody of children cases
    - the  terms  "habitual  residence",  "residence"  and  "presence"  are
    interpreted in ways specific  to  their  context  in  the  relevant  EU
    legislation: see e.g. Stewart (Social  security  for  migrant  workers)
    [2011] EUECJ Case C-503/09; Mecredi  (Area  of  Freedom,  Security  and
    Justice) [2010] EUECJ Case C-497/10. There  are  no  ready  answers  to
    questions such as: "Does residence/presence mean physical  presence  of
    something else and if so, what else?"

38.   We are conscious of the test for making a reference as set out in R v
    Stock Exchange ex parte Else [1993] QB 534, namely whether we are  able
    with complete confidence to decide the matter ourselves. We  have  also
    had regard to the guidance given by a panel chaired by the President of
    the Upper Tribunal in MR  and  ors  (EEA  -  extended  family  members)
    Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 449 (IAC).

39.  In deciding whether to make such a reference  we  have  also  benefited
    from the Information Note on references  from  national  courts  for  a
    preliminary ruling  (OJ 2009/C-297/01,  5 December 2009).  We  note  in
    this regard that in this case: the facts are not in dispute; the EU law
    issues are likely to be determinative of the outcome of these  appeals;
    the appeals have been pending for some time and if a reference needs to
    be made  the sooner it is made the better; prior to the hearing of this
    case the parties were asked to consider the issue of whether to make  a
    reference and  in response to a draft decision we sent to  the  parties
    subsequently setting out our proposed reference and  the  questions  we
    would ask, both parties confirmed that they did not oppose the proposed
    reference and had no comments to make on  the  proposed  questions.  In
    response to a request from us the AIRE Centre, whom we have accepted as
    a third party intervener, also confirmed that it  had  no  comments  to
    make on our proposed questions.

40.   Accordingly  we  consider  that  we  should  make  a  reference  aimed
    primarily at obtaining clarification as to the scope and meaning of the
    term "primary carer" in the context of the right to access to education
    conferred by Article 12 of Regulation No. 1612/68.

Relevance of Article 12-derived rights of  residence  to  qualification  for
    permanent under the Citizens Directive

41.   There is a further difficult issue of interpretation  -  this  is  the
    "fourth issue" we foreshadowed earlier at para  19.   It  arises  as  a
    result of our earlier finding that the second appellant qualifies as  a
    child for the purposes of Article 12 of Regulation No. 1612/68 and that
    on the evidence before us he has held an EU right  of  residence  since
    February 2005 (that being the first date on the evidence on  which  his
    Union citizen father, Mr Salama, had employment).  As he  has  been  in
    full-time education ever since, and is about to commence full-time  PhD
    studies at Edinburgh University, he  continues  to  benefit  from  this
    right: see above para 26. The difficulty  arises  in  relation  to  the
    question of whether he thereby possesses a permanent right of residence
    under the Citizens Directive and so must be  issued  with  a  permanent
    residence card on the basis that he has held an EU right  of  residence
    now for over five years continuously.

42.   On one interpretation, his EU right of residence is not  one  that  is
    within the scope of the Citizens Directive (reading  the  reference  to
    "resided legally" in  Article  16  of  this  Directive  as  meaning  in
    accordance with the conditions laid down in the Directive) and hence he
    cannot qualify for a right of permanent residence under that  Directive
    and his appeal cannot succeed on that basis. That is the approach taken
    by the Court of Appeal in Okafor & Ors v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 449, 20 April 2011: see e.g. paras  31-
    33. At para 20 the Court of  Appeal  considered  that  whereas  Article
    12(1) and Article 12(2) of the Citizens Directive provide for  a  route
    for certain family members to acquire a right of  permanent  residence,
    the scope of Article 12(3) (which provides for the right  of  residence
    of a Union citizen's children or of the parent who has  actual  custody
    of the child not to cease in the event of the Union citizen's departure
    from the host Member State or his/her death if the children  reside  in
    the host Member State and are in education) is limited  to  acquisition
    of a right of residence.

43.  An alternative interpretation would be  to  treat  the  fact  that  the
    second appellant has held legal residence under EU law as sufficient to
    qualify him under Articles 16 and 17.  Just  as  the  Court  in  Lassal
    (European citizenship) Case C-162/09; [2011]  Imm  AR  134  (7  October
    2010) (paras 40, 59) and most recently (and post-Okafor &  Ors)  on  23
    July 2011 in Dias (para  43)  has  ruled  that  legal  residence  under
    predecessor EU legislation can qualify for the  purposes  of  acquiring
    permanent residence under the Directive, so it might  be  thought  that
    the Court would regard legal residence under co-existing EU legislation
    as  also  qualifying  a  person  for  permanent  residence  under   the
    Directive.  It  might  be  considered  that  further  support  for  the
    alternative interpretation is to be found in  the  principle  of  equal
    treatment as enshrined in both the Directive and primary  EU  law.  The
    question can be raised, is it consistent with either the  principle  of
    equal treatment or with Article 21 of the Treaty on the Functioning  of
    the European Union (TFEU) for such a  person  to  be  denied  the  same
    rights as are  enjoyed  by  a  beneficiary  of  a  right  of  permanent
    residence under the Citizens Directive when in each case there has been
    a continuous period of five years in which  the  person  concerned  has
    held an EU right of residence?

44.   If  the  alternative  interpretation  is   adopted   it   would   have
    consequences for the exercise of jurisdiction of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    which (in common with that  of  the  FTT)  is  to  decide  whether  the
    decision  appealed  against  by   the  second  appellant   (and   first
    appellant) - refusal to issue a permanent residence  card  -  "breaches
    the appellant's rights under the [EU] Treaties in respect of  entry  to
    or residence in the United Kingdom" (s. 84(1)(d)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

45.  The Upper Tribunal would have to decide whether,  in  order  to  ensure
    that the second appellant's  rights  under  the  EU  Treaties  are  not
    breached,  it  is  necessary  not  only  for  it  to  set   aside   the
    determination of the FTT for legal error and  remake  the  decision  by
    allowing his  appeal, but also to declare that the second appellant has
    acquired a right of permanent residence and is entitled to a  permanent
    residence card (or at least to declare  that  his  position  should  be
    assimilated to that of a person who is so entitled). Were we to  decide
    that the first appellant had a derived  right  of  residence  from  the
    second appellant, similar considerations would arise in her case.

46.   In our view this further difficult matter of  interpretation  is  also
    one which we cannot with complete confidence decide for  ourselves.  We
    are not aware of any post-Dias  tribunal  or  higher  court  authority,
    either in the United Kingdom or in any other Member State,  that  helps
    us resolve  the  difficulties  identified  above.  The  main  questions
    arising in Case  C-424/10    Ziolkowski  and  others  (the  appellant's
    representatives made reference to the recent Advocate  General  opinion
    in this case in their 20 September 2011 submission) appears  to  relate
    to the relevance of residence acquired under national law.

47.   The decision in this case is that we are unable to decide whether  the
    FTT materially erred in law or to proceed any further without  guidance
    from the Court of Justice. In the nature of the  preliminary  reference
    procedure, our further deliberation of  this  case  must  therefore  be
    adjourned to await a ruling from the Court of Justice.

48.    In light of the above  our  order  for  reference  to  the  Court  of
Justice is as follows:

a. The facts: see above paras 7-9.

b. Relevant law: see above paras 10-18.

c. Relevant submissions: see above paras 26-28, 32.

d. The questions: see Schedule below.


        SCHEDULE OF QUESTIONS TO BE REFERRED TO THE COURT OF JUSTICE

   1. For a parent to qualify as a "primary carer" so as to derive  a  right
      of residence from a child over 21 exercising  a  right  of  access  to
      education under Article 12 Regulation No. 1612/68 [see now Article  10
      Regulation (EU) No. 492/2011], is it necessary for that  child  to  be
      (i) dependent on  such  a  parent;  (ii)  residing  in  that  parent's
      household; and (iii) receiving emotional support from that parent?


   2. If in order to qualify for such a derived right  of  residence  it  is
      unnecessary for  a  parent  to  show  that  all  three  of  the  above
      circumstances obtain, is it sufficient to show that only  one  obtains
      or that only two obtain?


   3. In relation to (ii) above, can there continue to be residence  on  the
      part of an  adult  student  child  in  a  common  household  with  his
      parent(s) even when the former  is  living  away  from  home  for  the
      duration of his studies (save for holidays and occasional weekends)?


   4. In relation to (iii) above, is it necessary for the emotional  support
      provided by the parent to be of a particular quality  (viz.  close  or
      physically proximate) or is it sufficient if it consists in  a  normal
      emotional tie between a parent and an adult child?


   5. Where a person has held an EU right of residence under Article  12  of
      Regulation No.  1612/68  [see  now  Article  10  Regulation  (EU)  No.
      492/2011] for a continuous period of more than five years,  does  such
      residence qualify for the purposes of acquiring a right  of  permanent
      residence under Chapter  IV  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  (the  Citizens
      Directive) on "Right of Permanent Residence) and being issued  with  a
      residence card under Article 19 of the same Directive?




Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
Immigration and Asylum Chamber








