

R (on the application of Prathipati) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (discretion - exceptional circumstances) [2018] UKUT 00427 (IAC)


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                      (IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)


Leeds Combined Court Centre,
1, Oxford Row, Leeds LS1 3BG

Judgment handed down at:
Civil Justice Centre,
1 Bridge Street West
Manchester M60 9DJ

Heard on: 10 October 2018
Handed down on: 26 October 2018


                                   BEFORE

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE KERR

                                   Between

|             |SNEHA SUDHA PRATHIPATI                     |             |
|             |                                           |Applicant    |
|             |and                                        |             |
|             |THE SECRETARY OF STATE                     |             |
|             |FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                    |             |
|             |                                           |Respondent   |


                            - - - - - - - - - - -

                      The Applicant appeared in person
    Mr Colin Thomann (instructed by Government Legal Department) for the
                                 Respondent

   1) The Secretary of State has a discretion to allow  an  application  for
      leave to remain to succeed even if made outside the 28 day  period  of
      grace referred to in  paragraph  319C(j)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
      provided that supporting  evidence  of  exceptional  circumstances  is
      produced at the same time as making  the  application.   The  temporal
      requirement must, to  avoid  unfairness  and  absurdity,  be  read  as
      subject to the caveat that it cannot rigidly be applied  if  ignorance
      of what constitutes the exceptional circumstances makes it  impossible
      to comply with that requirement.


   2) The efficacy of administrative review  as  an  alternative  remedy  to
      judicial review depends on the ability  of  reviewers  to  detect  and
      reverse decisions flawed by error at  the  initial  stage.   The  more
      narrowly the remedy is circumscribed, the greater the risk that it may
      fail to do so.

      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

       - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE KERR:

Introduction:


    1. I am the seventh judge to consider this claim for judicial review of
       the  refusal  of  the  respondent  on  21  August  2015  (upheld  on
       administrative review on  17  September  2015)  of  the  applicant's
       application for leave to remain as the unmarried partner of a Tier 2
       Migrant.  The delays that have  beset  this  case  occurred  because
       permission to apply for judicial review was at first refused  at  an
       oral hearing but was eventually granted by the Court of Appeal  over
       two years later.

    2. The Court of Appeal referred the case back to this tribunal for  the
       substantive hearing, which took place  before  me  in  Leeds  on  10
       October 2018.  The parties agreed that the  applicant's  application
       for  leave  to  remain  was  considered  on   a   basis   that   was
       unsatisfactory in two respects.  First, the  applicant  was  unaware
       that she would be regarded as an overstayer, because a  decision  of
       this tribunal did not reach her.   Second,  documents  sent  to  the
       respondent,  on  which  she  relied,  were  not  considered  by  the
       respondent.

    3. The question for me is whether those two points, or either of  them,
       make  the  respondent's  decision  unlawful,  as  contended  by  the
       applicant who represented herself with eloquence  and  courtesy;  or
       whether, as contended by  the  respondent  ably  represented  by  Mr
       Thomann of  counsel,  those  shortcomings  in  the  decision  making
       process did not result in any unfairness to the applicant and do not
       make the decision challenged unlawful.

Facts:

    4. The applicant is an Indian national, born in June 1990.  She came to
       this country with a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant  visa,  valid
       until 30 October 2013 and then extended until 31 May 2014.  The  day
       before it expired she applied for a further extension, on  the  same
       basis, but that was rejected in July 2014, with a  right  of  appeal
       which she exercised.

    5. The First-tier Tribunal (FTT) rejected  her  appeal,  in  a  written
       decision dated  24  November  2011.   The  judge  decided  that  the
       applicant had not made her case that she had adequate funds; a  loan
       agreement she produced was not in her name.  Her case had  not  been
       adequately made.  On 2 December 2014, she applied for permission  to
       appeal against that decision to the Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and
       Asylum Chamber).

    6. While awaiting the outcome of that application, on 28  January  2015
       she moved from [             ],  Newcastle-upon-Tyne,  to  different
       accommodation at [                 ], also in Newcastle.   The  same
       day, her then solicitors wrote to the  FTT  by  fax,  notifying  the
       change of address.  An authority to act signed by the applicant  was
       enclosed.  The fax number used (ending 987) was the  one  designated
       as "IAFT4 (Permission to Appeal)" at the time, in the FTT's guidance
       for users.

    7. On the same day, the solicitors emailed the customer services  email
       address of the "IAC" (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  of  the  FTT,
       notifying the change of address but without the signed authority  to
       act.  On 2 February 2015, IAC emailed back saying that  the  request
       to log the change of address could not be processed without a signed
       written notification of authority to act  as  legal  representative.
       The email also gave an address and a different  fax  number,  ending
       895, designated as for "General Correspondence".

    8. On 3 February 2015, the solicitors repeated their request, enclosing
       the  signed  written  authority  to  act  but  sending  it  to   the
       "Permission to Appeal" fax number, ending 987.   They  did  not,  as
       they should have done,  fax  that  letter  and  the  signed  written
       authority to the "General Correspondence" fax  number,  ending  895.
       So the change of address was not registered with the FTT.

    9. Then, on or before 19 February 2015, the FTT refused the application
       for permission to appeal.  Notification of the decision was sent  by
       post to the  applicant's  old  address  at  [                     ],
       together with reasons for the decision which I have not  seen.   The
       applicant did not receive the notification letter, having moved to [
                     ].  The letter also mentioned the right  to  apply  to
       the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal.

   10. The FTT's decision has been assumed by everyone in this case to have
       been validly promulgated and effective and binding on the  applicant
       from 19 February 2015, even though the applicant knew nothing  about
       it until months later.   The  decision  was,  indeed,  sent  to  the
       address  at  [                     ]  which  was  the  only  address
       accepted by the FTT as an address of record for the applicant.

   11. On that assumption, on expiry of the time limit for making a further
       application to the Upper Tribunal  for  permission  to  appeal,  the
       applicant became "appeal rights exhausted".  The time limit  expired
       on 6 March 2015.  The consequence of  that  was  she  was,  and  is,
       regarded by the respondent as having  become  an  "overstayer"  from
       that date.  She did not know this  at  the  time  and  nor  did  her
       solicitors.

   12. On 18 June 2015, having heard nothing, the  solicitors  emailed  the
       IAC customer services email address referring back to  the  previous
       correspondence,  expressing  concern  that  "you   may   have   sent
       correspondence to our client's previous address" and asking what was
       the status of "our client's appeal (IAFT-4) and when we  can  expect
       to receive a decision on same".  That email was not  copied  to  the
       respondent.  The FTT did not reply to it.

   13. The applicant, not knowing she would be regarded as  an  overstayer,
       decided her best  strategy  was  to  withdraw  her  application  for
       permission to appeal and instead to make  a  fresh  application  for
       leave to remain as the unmarried partner of a Tier 2 Migrant.  On 14
       July 2015, her solicitors wrote to the FTT, again to the fax  number
       ending 987, saying they had "instructions  to  withdraw  her  appeal
       with immediate  effect".   This  must  be  taken  to  refer  to  the
       application for permission to appeal that had already been refused.

   14. There is no evidence that the FTT ever responded  to  this  request,
       which from its perspective would be academic since  the  application
       had already been refused, though it was evident from the request  to
       withdraw that the solicitors were unaware of that.   The  applicant,
       under the same misapprehension, applied on or about 12 July 2015 for
       leave to remain as the unmarried partner of a Tier 2  Migrant.   She
       made an appointment to attend  personally,  paying  a  fee  for  the
       "premium service".

   15. On 15 July 2015, she attended the appointment with her partner.  She
       met the respondent's case worker, Mr Christopher Duncan  Wood.   She
       produced documents  to  show  a  subsisting  relationship  with  her
       partner of at least two years' duration.  These are the documents in
       the first exhibit to her witness statement.  The  documents  were  a
       tenancy agreement, bank statements, joint account  bank  statements,
       utility  bills,  photographs,  letters,  appeal  letters   and   the
       solicitors' letter seeking to withdraw her appeal.

   16. The case worker went through the documents and asked  the  applicant
       to provide further documents,  to  show  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship covering the period from February to August  2013.   He
       said nothing about the applicant being an overstayer.  I infer  that
       he may not have known about the FTT's  decision  and  may  not  have
       checked the  position  at  the  time.   But  the  respondent  as  an
       organisation, the Home Office, knew of it then or  soon  afterwards,
       because it relied on the FTT's decision just over a month later.

   17. The applicant provided the requested documents by post, about a week
       after the appointment.   These  are  the  documents  in  the  second
       exhibit to her witness statement.   The  documents  dated  from  the
       period from February to August 2013, to  which  reference  had  been
       made by Mr Duncan Wood, the  case  worker.   They  were  prints  and
       photographs from gmail conversations, a car rental receipt,  uploads
       and posts on Facebook, telephone bills and further  photographs  and
       letters.

   18. On 21 August 2015, the respondent wrote to  the  applicant  refusing
       her application.  The refusal letter was in the name  of  Mr  Duncan
       Wood.  Among the reasons for  the  decision  was  the  news  to  the
       applicant that her permission to appeal  application  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal "was refused on 19 February 2015, and  your  Appeal  Rights
       were exhausted on 06 March 2015".  That was how the applicant  found
       out about the FTT's decision.  Mr Duncan Wood  went  on  to  explain
       that the application had been made 130  days  after  expiry  of  the
       applicant's leave to remain and was therefore refused.

   19. The  reasons  also  included  reference  to  the  first  tranche  of
       documents, but not the second  tranche  which  Mr  Duncan  Wood  had
       himself requested.  He went on to say in the  decision  letter  that
       "[b]ased  on  the  above",  i.e.  based  on  the  first  tranche  of
       documents, "it is not accepted that you have  provided  evidence  to
       show that you have been living together in a  relationship  akin  to
       marriage for 2 years prior to your application on 15 July 2015".

   20. The decision letter included advice that the applicant could seek an
       administrative review if she thought an error had  been  made.   She
       sought administrative review.  The application was submitted  online
       on 3 September 2015.  Her solicitors helped her complete the part of
       the form giving details of why she contended that the respondent had
       "applied  the  Immigration  Rules  incorrectly".    The   solicitors
       addressed each of the two grounds of refusal separately.

   21.  They  explained  the  misapprehension  about  the  status  of   the
       application for permission to appeal and the request to withdraw the
       appeal made under that misapprehension; and  pointed  out  that  the
       case worker had been shown the letter requesting  withdrawal.   They
       said the case worker should  have  "considered  the  background  and
       considered exercising discretion for  the  delay",  given  that  the
       applicant did not know she had  stayed  beyond  the  28  days  after
       exhaustion of appeal rights that are normally disregarded.

   22. The solicitors also pointed out that the second tranche of documents
       had been returned with the refusal letter,  proving  that  they  had
       been received after being sent by recorded delivery.  Despite  that,
       they pointed out, it was clear from  the  refusal  letter  that  the
       second tranche of documents "was not considered at  all".   Yet  the
       evidence sent "clearly demonstrates that the relationship  had  been
       subsisting for the required time ...".

   23. The administrative review application did not succeed.  The response
       was a letter of 17 September 2015 stating that the applicant  should
       leave the United Kingdom, or she would be liable to be detained  and
       removed and could be prosecuted.  The reasons  given  restated  that
       the applicant had become an overstayer after the FTT's decision  and
       that the applicant had  not  demonstrated  the  necessary  two  year
       relationship with her partner.  The reasons did not engage with  the
       points  made  by  the  solicitors  in  the   administrative   review
       application.

   24. They included repetition of the statement that  the  FTT's  decision
       meant the applicant was "appeal rights exhausted" from 6 March 2015.
        They stated that the respondent had "no evidence that  your  appeal
       was withdrawn".  Further, the reasons stated,  based  on  the  first
       tranche of documents only - there  was  no  mention  of  the  second
       tranche - that the applicant had not shown the  necessary  two  year
       relationship.  The result was therefore that the  original  decision
       was maintained.

   25. After that, correspondence and the  present  judicial  review  claim
       ensued.  The next few years saw the matter  proceed  through  twists
       and turns at the permission stage.   This  took  an  unusually  long
       time, as I have said.  Permission  was  at  first  refused  in  this
       tribunal but was eventually granted by Singh LJ and Henderson LJ  on
       17 May 2018, for reasons given in Singh  LJ's  judgment  given  that
       day, with which Henderson LJ agreed.


Law and Policy Framework:

   26. At the relevant time and so far as material here, paragraph 319C  of
       the Immigration Rules provided that for  a  person  to  qualify  for
       entry clearance or leave to remain as the  unmarried  partner  of  a
       "Relevant Points Based System Migrant":


         "... an applicant must meet the requirements listed below.  If  the
         applicant meets these requirements, entry  clearance  or  leave  to
         remain will be  granted.   If  the  applicant  does  not  ....  the
         application will be refused... .


         ....


         (c) An applicant who is the unmarried .... partner  of  a  Relevant
         Points  Based  System  Migrant  must  also   meet   the   following
         requirements: ...


             (iii) the applicant  and  the  Relevant  Points  Based  System
             Migrant must have  been  living  together  in  a  relationship
             similar to marriage ... for a period of at least 2 years.


         ...


         (j) The applicant must not be in the UK in  breach  of  immigration
         laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28  days
         will be disregarded."



   27. I was shown relevant  policy  guidance  dating  from  November  2015
       which, I was assured,  was  not  materially  different  in  July  to
       September 2015 when the applicant's case  was  considered.   On  the
       topic of applications made "after expiry of last period  of  leave",
       paragraph 37 stated, so far as material:

         "Applications for leave to remain under  the  Points  Based  System
         will fall for refusal if you have overstayed for more than 28  days
         on  the  date  of  application,  unless  there   were   exceptional
         circumstances which prevented you from applying within the  28  day
         period.  The 28 day period of overstaying is  calculated  from  the
         latest of:


                 . ....


                 . the end of any extension of leave under sections 3C or 3D
                   of the Immigration Act 1971, or

                 . .... .

         If there are exceptional circumstances  which  prevented  you  from
         applying in time  you  must  submit  evidence  of  the  exceptional
         circumstances  with  your  application.   The  threshold  for  what
         constitutes 'exceptional circumstances' is high and will depend  on
         the individual circumstances of  the  case,  but  for  example  may
         include  delays  resulting   from   unexpected   or   unforeseeable
         circumstances such as the following:


                 . serious illness ....


                 . travel or postal delays ...

                 . inability to provide  necessary  documents.   This  would
                   only apply to exceptional  or  unavoidable  circumstances
                   beyond your control, such as the  Home  Office  being  at
                   fault in the loss  of,  or  delay  in  returning,  travel
                   documents, or delay in  obtaining  replacement  documents
                   following a loss as a result  of  theft,  fire  or  flood
                   (where supported by evidence of the date of loss and  the
                   date replacement documents were sought)."



   28. The wording of the provision has since changed so as to substitute a
       requirement  to  show  "good  reasons"  rather   than   "exceptional
       circumstances", but at the relevant times in 2015 the wording was as
       set out above.

   29. Paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules was considered  by  Nicholas
       Padfield QC, sitting as a deputy judge  of  the  High  Court,  in  R
       (Binaura) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWHC
       1578 (Admin).  The applicant had leave to remain  as  the  dependent
       spouse of a Tier 4 (General) Student.   When  her  leave  to  remain
       expired, she made a further application for leave to remain,  within
       28 days of her leave expiring.  When that  was  refused  (without  a
       right of appeal), she applied again, 183 days after  expiry  of  her
       leave to remain.

   30. The Secretary of State refused that application on the  ground  that
       she  had  overstayed  by  more  than  28  days  when  she  made  the
       application.  On administrative review,  the  secretary  of  State's
       decision was maintained.  Having  obtained  permission  to  bring  a
       judicial review, Ms Binaura argued that  her  application  had  been
       refused "solely because she was an overstayer" by more than 28 days,
       i.e. outside the 28 day period provided for at paragraph 319C(j)  of
       the Immigration Rules: see the judgment at [13].

   31. The Secretary of State, it  was  argued,  should  have  exercised  a
       "discretion" and had, among other failings, omitted  to  follow  her
       "published policy" (ibid. at [16]).  The deputy judge held that  the
       Secretary of State had no discretion.  The  rule  was  prescriptive;
       while an overstay of 28  days  or  less  would  be  disregarded,  an
       overstay  of  more  than  28  days  was  necessarily  fatal  to   an
       application.

   32. The judge rejected an argument that  the  rule  was  too  rigid  and
       should be applied flexibly and relaxed where fairness  so  required.
       Mandatory rules were consistent with high authority and  not  unfair
       or ultra vires.  The principle that discretion must not be  fettered
       by rigidity in applying a policy does not apply where the rule being
       applied contains no discretion.  The only remedy was to make a fresh
       application outside the Immigration Rules.

   33. The judge also dismissed an argument that the Secretary of State had
       failed to follow her established policy by failing to  consider  the
       guidance on  "exceptional  circumstances".   The  argument  did  not
       assist Ms Binaura because  the  policy  guidance  provided  that  an
       applicant  must  submit  evidence,  with  her  application,  of  the
       exceptional circumstances precluding her from applying within the 28
       day period provided for in paragraph 319C(j).

   34. Ms Binaura had not done so: see the judgment at [32]-[36].  This was
       a "mandatory requirement" (ibid. at [33]).  The Secretary  of  State
       was only under a  duty  to  consider  the  question  of  exceptional
       circumstances if the applicant  had  fulfilled  the  requirement  to
       supply evidence of them at the point of submitting the  application.
       The guidance provided that the evidence must  be  supplied  "at  the
       same time as her application for leave to remain is made" [36].

   35. I also need to refer to the remedy  of  administrative  review.   In
       2014 and 2015, measures were introduced to reduce substantially  the
       scope of immigration related decisions against  which  there  was  a
       right of appeal.  In many  cases  where  the  right  of  appeal  was
       stopped, a right to seek an "administrative review"  of  a  decision
       was substituted.  The remedy of administrative review was  described
       at the time as a means of correcting simple errors.

   36. It is common ground that in this case, the  decision  challenged  by
       the  applicant   was   an   "eligible   decision"   susceptible   to
       administrative  review  and,  indeed,  the  applicant  invoked  that
       remedy.  When her case was  considered,  the  applicable  provisions
       were, then as now, set  out  in  an  Appendix  "AR"  (administrative
       review) to the Immigration Rules.   Paragraph  AR2.1  provided  that
       administrative review "is the review  of  an  elegible  decision  to
       decide whether the decision is wrong due to a case working error".

   37. A case working error is "an  error  in  decision  making  listed  in
       paragraph AR3.4...".  There is no paragraph AR3.4, but  the  parties
       agreed that the decision making  covered  by  administrative  review
       covered the applicant's case.  A reviewer  could  not  consider  any
       evidence that was not before the  original  decision  maker  "except
       where evidence that was not before the original  decision  maker  is
       submitted to demonstrate that a case working  error  as  defined  in
       paragraph AR2.11(a), or (b) has been made" (AR2.4).

   38.  So  you  have  to  look  at  AR2.11(a)  and  (b)  to  see  in  what
       circumstances fresh evidence can be looked at by the  reviewer.   He
       or she can do so where the "case working error" arises  because  the
       original  decision  maker's  decision  on  various  specific   bases
       involving false representations (not relevant  to  this  case)  "was
       incorrect" ((a)); or, pertinently for this case, "where the original
       decision maker's decision to refuse an application on the basis that
       the date of application was beyond any time limit in these Rules was
       incorrect" ((b)).

   39. The relevant provision here is (b), because of the limit of 28  days
       for disregard of overstaying.  I was also shown Home Office guidance
       dating from April 2015, on the  subject  of  administrative  review.
       This replicates the effect of the rules  on  administrative  review,
       which I have just quoted.  Examples are then given in  the  guidance
       of  particular  types  of  case  working  errors   that   might   be
       encountered.  None of them fits the facts of the present case.

Issues, Reasoning and Conclusions:

   40. The applicant, Ms Prathipati, submitted that the  respondent  failed
       to consider the reasons for her overstaying, which occurred  without
       her knowledge, was inadvertent and  unintentional.   She  could  not
       have known that her appeal rights were exhausted in March 2015  and,
       had she known, she would have taken steps to preserve her rights and
       not allowed the overstay to happen.

   41. She pointed out that the letter  withdrawing  the  appeal  had  been
       explained to the case worker at the appointment on 15 July 2015  and
       the case worker had  said  nothing  about  the  earlier  refusal  of
       permission to appeal, for reasons that are unclear.   She  had  only
       discovered the refusal of  permission  on  receipt  of  the  refusal
       letter of 21 August 2015.  If Mr Duncan Wood, the case  worker,  had
       mentioned the point at the appointment on 15 July,  she  would  have
       been able to present the evidence in  support  of  her  "exceptional
       circumstances" straight away.

   42. She added that, on the administrative review, the respondent did not
       consider properly the evidence either in relation  to  the  overstay
       and the exceptional  circumstances  in  which  it  occurred,  or  in
       relation to her subsisting relationship with her partner, documented
       in the unconsidered second tranche of documents in addition  to  the
       first tranche of documents, said to be insufficient.  The case  made
       in the online  application  for  administrative  review  was  simply
       ignored.

   43. The applicant pointed out that she had made enquiries of her  former
       solicitors about the reason why her new address was not  substituted
       for her old address on the FTT's system.  She  had  done  everything
       she could to discover the status of appeal.  It was not realistic or
       fair to say that  she  could  have  withdrawn  her  application  for
       permission to appeal earlier; she had no reason to do  so.   If  the
       appeal went against her, she would have up to 28 days  in  which  to
       make a fresh application.

   44. In the  event,  she  did  not  wait  for  the  outcome  of  the  FTT
       proceedings, once she had tried and  failed  to  discover  the  true
       position.  The faxes that were sent by the solicitors had been  sent
       to the "IAFT4", "permission to appeal" department  as  indicated  by
       the FTT and "if that's not where we [were] supposed to send the  fax
       they could have reverted with some sort of communication or at least
       they shouldn't be accepting it".

   45. For the respondent, Mr  Thomann  did  not  dispute  the  applicant's
       proposition that the second tranche of documents was overlooked.  He
       accepted that this was a procedural  flaw.   He  accepted  also  the
       applicant's factual case that she had been unaware of the outcome of
       the FTT proceedings until she received the decision letter.  He said
       that despite all that, the decision was not unlawful  because  there
       was no possibility of the applicant  being  able  to  establish  the
       necessary "exceptional circumstances".

   46. He pointed out that, according to the mandatory  guidance,  to  show
       exceptional circumstances, an applicant for leave to remain  had  to
       produce the supporting evidence at  the  same  time  as  making  the
       application for leave to remain.  Without such evidence, there could
       be  no  exceptional  circumstances  that  could,  according  to  the
       guidance, confer a discretion to allow the  application  to  succeed
       even if made outside the 28 day  period  of  grace  referred  to  in
       paragraph 319C(j) of the Immigration Rules.

   47. Mr Thomann's argument was that the mix up over fax numbers  was  the
       fault of  the  applicant's  solicitors  and  could  not  qualify  as
       exceptional circumstances since it was a fault attributable  to  the
       applicant.  Furthermore, as demonstrated by the  Binaura  case,  the
       regime under paragraph 319C created "bright line" rules admitting of
       no discretion except as provided  for  in  the  mandatory  guidance,
       which required to be done what was not done in this case:  producing
       the evidence supporting special circumstances at the  same  time  as
       making the application for leave to remain.

   48. Mr Thomann submitted that where an application for leave  to  remain
       is made outside the 28 day period of grace, even  if  the  applicant
       does not know that period has expired, and the application  is  made
       without any evidence to support a case of exceptional circumstances,
       the  respondent  is  not  required  to   consider   exercising   any
       discretion.  It does not help the applicant that  ignorance  of  the
       evidence supporting the special circumstances  is  what  constitutes
       the special circumstances.

   49. He went on to submit that at the administrative  review  stage,  the
       review process is confined to remedying  case  working  errors.   At
       that stage, the reviewer is presented with  a  decision  for  review
       which was, at the time, made  without  evidence  supporting  special
       circumstances for going beyond the 28 day period.   Accordingly,  Mr
       Thomann argued, no case working error was made and the reviewer  was
       justified in upholding  the  decision  on  the  ground  of  overstay
       exceeding 28 days.

   50. Therefore, Mr Thomann submitted, the reviewer's adverse decision was
       correct even though he or she wrongly overlooked the second  tranche
       of documents supporting the existence of the two year  relationship.
       That defect did not matter because there was no prospect of  the  28
       day threshold being  disregarded.   That  meant  the  applicant  was
       without a remedy, but that was the fault of her solicitors, a  fault
       attributable to the applicant herself.

   51. As he put it in his skeleton argument: "regardless of  the  question
       whether  the  matters  advanced  by  the   Applicant   amounted   to
       exceptional circumstances, the Applicant simply did not  submit  any
       of this evidence ... to the Secretary of State at the  time  of  the
       impugned decision in August 2015; the failure to exercise discretion
       was not, it is clear, unlawful".  The regime is rigid, he said;  the
       applicant's remedy here is  to  make  a  fresh  human  rights  based
       application.

   52. I come to  my  reasoning  and  conclusions.   The  main  grounds  of
       challenge are, first, that the manner in which the  application  was
       determined was  unfair  to  the  applicant;  and  second,  that  the
       respondent  failed  to  exercise   the   discretion   to   recognise
       exceptional circumstances which would  justify  a  disregard  of  an
       overstay lasting longer than 28 days.  As will be  seen,  these  two
       grounds of challenge are linked.

   53. The essence of the applicant's  case  was  helpfully  summarised  as
       follows in the judgment of Singh LJ granting permission  to  appeal,
       at [29]:

         "The Secretary of State has, it is conceded,  a  discretion.   That
         discretion must  be  exercised  in  accordance  with  her  publicly
         pronounced policy .... .  Further, it is submitted that  there  was
         an  acknowledged  failure  even   to   consider   exercising   that
         discretion.  For that reason it is straightforwardly submitted that
         the outcome of a reconsideration  if  there  were  a  correct  self
         direction as to the law, cannot be anticipated by the court  or  by
         the Upper Tribunal."



   54. It is noteworthy  that  the  reference  to  a  "discretion"  in  the
       respondent's  guidance  is  not  found  in  the  Immigration   Rules
       themselves.  The text of paragraph 319C contains no reference to any
       discretion to waive the maximum  28  day  overstay  disregard.   But
       despite the mandatory language in which paragraph 319C is framed (as
       pointed out in the Binaura case), the guidance recognises  that  the
       inflexibly worded rules must be, to a degree, treated  as  including
       an element of flexibility in their application.

   55. Thus, while the rules themselves say nothing about such "exceptional
       circumstances", the guidance does.  Examples are given in it of what
       might  constitute  such  circumstances.   They  are  stated  to   be
       examples, not an exhaustive list.  The guidance does also state that
       evidence to support a case  of  exceptional  circumstances  must  be
       presented at the time when the application is made.

   56. In the present case, the time when the application was made was very
       shortly before 15 July 2015, the date on which the applicant and her
       partner went to see the case worker,  Mr  Duncan  Wood.   Among  the
       documents presented to him that day, potentially supporting  a  case
       of  exceptional  circumstances,  was  the   letter   purporting   to
       "withdraw" the application for permission to  appeal.   That  letter
       was, on its face, inconsistent with the  applicant  being  aware  of
       having overstayed for more than 28 days.

   57. Mr Duncan Wood did not provide  a  witness  statement  and  nor  did
       anyone else from the respondent.  I am  therefore  left  unaware  of
       when and how he, or anyone within the  organisational  structure  of
       the respondent, became aware of the outcome of the  application  for
       permission to appeal against the FTT's decision.  It is likely  that
       someone within the Home  Office  had  access  to  a  record  of  the
       decision from shortly after 19 February  2015,  when  it  was  made.
       Just as it was sent to the applicant (at her old address), so it was
       presumably sent to the respondent.

   58. At any rate, Mr Duncan Wood had become aware  of  it  by  21  August
       2015, if not earlier.  At the oral hearing of  this  application,  I
       asked Mr Thomann if  he  could  shed  light  on  how  and  when  the
       respondent, as an organisation, became aware of the FTT's  decision.
       He was unable to do so, being without instructions on the point.  In
       the absence of other evidence, I infer that  the  respondent  as  an
       organisation was probably on notice of the  decision  from  February
       2015.

   59. But even if no one at the respondent had become  actually  aware  of
       the decision by 15 July 2015, Mr Duncan Wood on that  date  had  the
       letter purporting to withdraw the  appeal,  which  was  inconsistent
       with what he undoubtedly knew by 21 August, namely that the FTT  had
       determined the matter back in February.  Yet, the letter  purporting
       to withdraw the appeal was not treated as evidence supporting a case
       of exceptional circumstances.

   60. The second flaw in the decision making process is agreed: the second
       tranche of documents was overlooked, both in the first decision  and
       on administrative review.  Mr Thomann  says  that  does  not  matter
       because there was no possible case on exceptional circumstances; the
       evidence supporting it was not produced at the time the  application
       was made.  So the question for me is whether Mr Thomann  is  correct
       and the decision must stand for  that  reason  although  the  second
       tranche of documents was overlooked.

   61. In my view, Mr Thomann's submission is incorrect  and  the  decision
       was unlawful  and  cannot  stand.   The  categories  of  exceptional
       circumstances are not closed.  In the guidance, examples  are  given
       of what could constitute  such  circumstances,  but  they  are  only
       examples and each case depends on its facts.  In the  present  case,
       it was in principle a question of fact and degree whether a case  of
       exceptional circumstances could be made out.

   62. In my judgment, it is far from obvious  that  the  substance  of  an
       exceptional circumstances argument would be doomed to fail.  In this
       respect, I respectfully disagree with  the  learned  judge  of  this
       tribunal who initially refused permission to  proceed.   He  thought
       such a case  was  doomed  to  fail  because  of  the  fault  of  the
       applicant's solicitors in failing to  establish  themselves  on  the
       record.

   63. It is true that the solicitors appear to bear  (though  I  emphasise
       that I have not heard their side of the  story)  responsibility  for
       failing   to   send   correspondence   to   the   correct   "General
       Correspondence" fax number, to which their attention was drawn.  But
       they  were   not   solely   responsible   for   the   breakdown   in
       communications.  The  "IFT4"  fax  number  denoting  "permission  to
       appeal" was, initially, a not unlikely candidate for the correct fax
       number since the applicant was applying for permission to appeal.

   64. Some responsibility lies with the administration of the FTT for  not
       responding even when sent  correspondence  later  that  was  plainly
       inconsistent with the applicant being aware of the  FTT's  decision;
       and for providing a bewildering mix of email and fax numbers which a
       person attempting to communicate has to navigate, not an easy  task.
       Some responsibility lies with the respondent for failing  to  impart
       to the applicant the FTT's decision which the  respondent,  but  not
       the applicant, possessed.

   65. In my judgment, the fault of the applicant's solicitors was a factor
       to be  considered  in  considering  whether  the  case  was  one  of
       exceptional circumstances, but was not a necessarily fatal  blow  to
       the applicant's case that the circumstances were indeed exceptional.
        Furthermore, it was procedurally unfair of the  respondent,  as  an
       organisation, not to alert the applicant to the  FTT's  decision  at
       any time before 21 August 2015, when Mr Duncan Wood  certainly  knew
       about it.

   66. If the applicant could be fixed with constructive knowledge  of  the
       FTT's decision without actual knowledge of it,  then  so  could  the
       respondent unless a double standard is to be applied.   Furthermore,
       when the respondent became actually aware of it (whenever that was),
       and when (at some point on or before 21 August 2015) Mr Duncan  Wood
       personally became aware of it, the  respondent  and  he  kept  their
       counsel and did not alert the applicant to the decision and give her
       the opportunity to comment on the position.

   67. Instead, the applicant was "ambushed" with the FTT's decision in the
       letter of 21 August 2015.  That was  not  consistent  with  ordinary
       standards of plain dealing and procedural  fairness  required  under
       our administrative law.  Mr Duncan Wood made his decision  based  on
       factual material of which the applicant was ignorant, and  of  which
       he either knew or should (based at least on the letter purporting to
       withdraw the appeal) have known she was ignorant.

   68. It is true  that,  in  a  literal  sense,  the  evidence  supporting
       exceptional circumstances was not produced by the applicant  at  the
       same time as her application for leave to remain was  made,  as  the
       guidance states must be done.  The application for leave  to  remain
       was made a few days before the appointment with Mr Duncan  Wood,  at
       which the letter purporting to withdraw  the  appeal  was  produced.
       But  the  temporal  requirement  must,  to  avoid   unfairness   and
       absurdity, be read as subject to the caveat that it  cannot  rigidly
       be  applied  if  ignorance  of  what  constitutes  the   exceptional
       circumstances makes it impossible to comply with.

   69. The  guidance  is  indeed  expressed  in  mandatory  terms  and  was
       described as mandatory in the Binaura case; but it is,  nonetheless,
       guidance not statute.  It must  be  interpreted  and  applied  in  a
       manner that does not destroy the respondent's ordinary obligation to
       observe procedural fairness.  Unless the caveat  just  mentioned  is
       read  into  the  guidance,  its  operation  may  be  oppressive  and
       procedurally unfair.

   70. In the present case, if the applicant had been capable of  complying
       with the temporal requirement in the guidance, it is likely that the
       circumstances would not have been exceptional; she would  have  been
       aware of the FTT's decision and would probably not  have  needed  an
       extension of time beyond the 28 day period of grace.

   71. I conclude that it was incumbent on the respondent to  consider  the
       question  of  exceptional  circumstances   and   to   exercise   its
       discretion; and that it failed to do so.  The Binaura  case  is  not
       authority to the contrary.  In that case, there was no ignorance  of
       what made the circumstances arguably exceptional.

   72. It is no answer to say that the applicant has another remedy because
       she can make a fresh application  for  leave  to  remain,  on  human
       rights grounds.  The right to make such an application says  nothing
       about the lawfulness of the manner in which her 2015 application was
       determined.

   73. It is necessary, finally, to consider also the administrative review
       decision.  Mr  Thomann,  sensibly,  accepted  that  the  applicant's
       judicial review challenge, expressed as a  challenge  to  the  first
       decision made on 21 August 2015, also embraced,  by  implication,  a
       challenge to the administrative review part of the process  and  the
       maintaining of the decision on review.

   74. As Singh LJ pointed out when granting permission to proceed in  this
       case, the remedy of administrative review is clearly designed, among
       other things, to create a  swift  and  economic  alternative  remedy
       which may avoid the  need  for  protracted  and  expensive  judicial
       review proceedings.  It is a  remedy  which  would,  other  than  in
       exceptional cases, need to  be  invoked  as  an  alternative  remedy
       before embarking on judicial review.

   75. However, the efficacy of administrative  review  as  an  alternative
       remedy depends on the ability of reviewers  to  detect  and  reverse
       decisions flawed by error at the initial stage.  The  more  narrowly
       the remedy is circumscribed, the greater the risk that it may, as in
       this case, fail to do so.  Here, the reviewer was presented  with  a
       clear and cogent explanation of what had gone wrong but, instead  of
       correcting the errors, compounded them.

   76. For those reasons, the decision to refuse leave to remain,  made  on
       21 August  2015  and  maintained  on  administrative  review  on  17
       September 2015, must be  quashed.   The  application  for  leave  to
       remain will be remitted to the respondent  for  reconsideration.   I
       will deal with any consequential matters arising from this  judgment
       on the basis of brief written submissions, which must be  copied  to
       the other party.  I am grateful to the applicant Ms Prathipati,  and
       Mr Thomann, for their helpful contributions.


