

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of SM & Others) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (Dublin Regulation - Italy) [2018] UKUT 00429 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 21, 23 and 24 May 2018               |                            |
|                                        |                            |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF

                                   1) S M
                                  2) S O M
                                   3) R K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Applicants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For SM:           Mr G. � Ceallaigh, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For SOM:          Ms V. Laughton, instructed by Wilsons Solicitors
For RK:           Mr D. Chirico, instructed by Wilsons Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr A. Payne and Mr J. Anderson, instructed by the
Government Legal Department

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
cases involve protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  applicants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of  their  families.  This  direction
applies both to the applicants and to the respondent.


(1)       Subject to paragraph (2) below, on the evidence before the  Upper
      Tribunal, no judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  properly  directed,
      could find there is a real risk of an asylum seeker or Beneficiary  of
      International Protection (BIP) suffering Article  3  ill-treatment  if
      returned to Italy pursuant to the Dublin Regulation, by reason only of
      the situation that the person concerned may be  reasonably  likely  to
      experience in Italy, as a "Dublin returnee".  The  evidence  does  not
      rebut  the  general  presumption  that  Italy  will  comply  with  its
      international obligations in such cases.

(2)       However, the evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  markedly
      different from  that  previously  considered  by  the  High  Court  in
      "Dublin" cases concerning Italy, such that it cannot, without more, be
      said a human rights claim based on Article 3 is bound to fail, if  the
      claim is made by a 'particularly vulnerable person' (as  described  in
      paragraph (3) below).

(3)          The  categories  of  "vulnerable  persons"  identified  in  the
      Reception Directive are a  starting  point  for  assessing  whether  a
      person has  a  particular  vulnerability  for  the  purposes  of  this
      paragraph. The extent of a person's particular vulnerability  must  be
      sufficiently severe to show a potential breach of  Article  3.  It  is
      difficult to specify when a  particular  vulnerability  might  require
      additional safeguarding to protect a person's rights under Article  3.
      The assessment will depend on the  facts  of  each  case.  However,  a
      person who makes  general  assertions  about  mental  health  problems
      without independent evidence or who has been  diagnosed  with  a  mild
      mental health condition or has a minor disability may have  sufficient
      resilience to cope with the procedures on return to Italy, even if  it
      entails the possibility of facing  a  difficult  temporary  period  of
      homelessness or basic conditions in first-line  reception  facilities.
      There will be cases  where  a  person's  particular  vulnerability  is
      sufficiently serious that the risk  of  even  a  temporary  period  of
      homelessness  or  housing  in  the  basic  conditions  of   first-line
      reception might cross the relevant threshold. Such cases are likely to
      include those with significant mental or physical health  problems  or
      disabilities. Other people  may  have  inherent  characteristics  that
      render them particularly vulnerable e.g. unaccompanied children or the
      elderly.

(4)          In  the  case  of  a  'particularly  vulnerable  person',   the
      following considerations apply:

        i) A failure by the respondent  to  consider  whether  to  exercise
           discretion under article  17(2)  of  the  Dublin  Regulation  is
           likely to render the certification decision unlawful;


       ii) If the respondent considers whether to exercise such  discretion
           but decides not to do so, the return and reception of the person
           concerned will need to be  well-planned.  Although  the  Italian
           authorities would not want to leave  a  particularly  vulnerable
           asylum seeker or BIP without  support,  the  evidence  indicates
           that there is no general process, similar to that  which  exists
           for  families  with  children,  to  ensure   that   particularly
           vulnerable persons will  not  be  at  real  risk  of  Article  3
           treatment, while waiting for suitable support and accommodation,
           of which there is an acute shortage. In  order  to  protect  the
           rights of such a person  in  accordance  with  the  respondent's
           duties under the European Convention, the respondent would  need
           to seek an assurance from the Italian authorities that  suitable
           support and accommodation will be in place, before  effecting  a
           transfer.

      iii) It follows that a failure to obtain such an assurance  prior  to
           the transfer of a particularly vulnerable person  is  likely  to
           give rise to a human rights claim that is not necessarily 'bound
           to fail' before the First-tier Tribunal.






























































































                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

     Note: underlined headings are bookmarked in the electronic version

                                                              Page

GLOSSARY                                                      7

INTRODUCTION                                                  8

LEGAL FRAMEWORK                                          8

THE EVIDENCE                                                  18

Introduction to the evidence                                  18

      Scope of the assessment                                       18

      Summary of the evidence                                       19

      Comments on the 'Fact-finding Mission Report'                 21

Overview         of         the         situation          in          Italy
24

Overview of the asylum procedure                              30

      Initial registration (fotosegnalamento)                       30


      Formal registration (verbalizzazione and C3 form)             30


      Interview and decision by the Territorial Commission (CTRPI)  30


      Suspension of the procedure                              31


      Access to reception and accommodation                    32


Reception and accommodation                                   32

      Emergency facilities - CPSA / Hotspots                        33


      Temporary reception facilities - CAS                          34


      First-line reception facilities - Regional Hubs (CARA / CDA)  37


      Second-line reception facilities - SPRAR                            38


      Other sources of support and accommodation                    45

Vulnerable persons                                                  45

Transfers under the Dublin Regulation                               52

      Overview of the procedures                              52

          Issues     relating     to     registration     and      reception
55

      Rome                                                    57

      Milan                                                   62

      Venice                                                        67

      Bari, Brindisi and Lecce                                      68

      Naples                                                   70

Living conditions                                                   70

Access to healthcare                                          73

Beneficiaries        of        International        Protection        (BIPs)
76

      Assistance on return                                    78

      Renewal of permits                                            78


      Accommodation and integration                                 80

The Tribunal's observations on the evidence                         84

GENERAL CONCLUSIONS                                      88

A.     'Ordinary cases' (not exhibiting particular vulnerabilities
    or disabilities)                                                88


B.      Vulnerable   persons   (including   asylum   seekers    and    BIPs)
   91

C.           Beneficiaries        of        International         Protection
   95

THE INDIVIDUAL CASES                                     96

Findings relating to SM                                             97

Findings relating to SOM                                            98

Findings relating to RK                                             99

ANNEX

Schedule of Background Evidence                               101

                                  GLOSSARY

AIDA        Asylum Information Database

AMIF        Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund

ANCI        National Association of Italian Municipalities
           Associazione Nationale Comuni Italiani

ASGI        Association for Juridical Studies on Immigration
            Associazione per gli Studi Giuridici sull'Immigrazione

CARA        Centre for the Reception of Asylum Seekers
            Centro di accoglienza per richiedenti asilo

CAS         Emergency Accommodation Centre
            Centro di accoglienza straordinaria

CDA         Accommodation Centre for Migrants
            Centro di accoglienza

CNDA  National Commission for the Right of Asylum
           Commissione nazionale per il diritto di asilo


CPSA        First Aid and Reception Centre
            Centro di primo soccorso e accoglienza

CTRPI       Territorial Commission  for  the  Recognition  of  International
Protection
           Commissione territoriale per il reconoscimento della  protezione
           internazionale

MEDU  Doctors for Human Rights
            Medici per i diritti umani

MSF         Doctors without Borders
            Medecins Sans Frontieres

SPRAR System of Protection for Asylum Seekers and Refugees
           Sistema di protezione per richiedenti asilo e rifugiati

SRC         Swiss Refugee Council











INTRODUCTION

 1. This is the judgment  of  the  Tribunal,  primarily  written  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Canavan,  but  to  which  the  other  two  members  have
    contributed.  The applicants each seek judicial review of the decisions
    of the respondent to certify  their  human  rights  claims  as  clearly
    unfounded.  Pursuant to  Part  2  of  Schedule  3  to  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004,  the  respondent
    certified the applicants' claims on the basis that each of them  is  to
    be returned to Italy.  Part 2 applies, inter alia, to Italy since  that
    State is listed in paragraph 2.  Paragraph 5(4) requires the respondent
    to certify such a claim unless satisfied that the claim is not  clearly
    unfounded.


 2. Each of the applicants contends that he or she has a well-founded  fear
    of persecution or other serious ill-treatment,  if  returned  to  their
    respective country of nationality.


LEGAL FRAMEWORK

 3. The respondent contends that since the applicants  travelled  to  Italy
    from their home countries,  before  making  their  way  to  the  United
    Kingdom, Italy is the EU state that is responsible for determining  the
    applicants'  claims  to  international  protection.   The   respondent,
    accordingly, intends to return the applicants to Italy by means of  the
    process  contained  in  Council  Regulation   604/2103   ("the   Dublin
    Regulation").


 4. Article 3 of the Dublin Regulation provides as follows:

         "1.       Member  States  shall   examine   any   application   for
             international protection by  a  third-country  national  or  a
             stateless person who applies on the territory of  any  one  of
             them, including at the border or in  the  transit  zone.   The
             application shall be examined by a single Member State,  which
             shall be the one which the  criteria  set  out  in  Chapter  3
             indicate is responsible.


         2. ...  Where it is impossible to  transfer  an  applicant  to  the
             Member State primarily designated as responsible because there
             are substantial grounds for believing that there are  systemic
             flaws in the asylum procedure and in the reception  conditions
             for applicants in that Member State, resulting in  a  risk  of
             inhuman or degrading treatment within the meaning of Article 4
             of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of  the  European  Union,
             the determining Member State shall  continue  to  examine  the
             criteria set out in Chapter III in order to establish  whether
             another Member State can be designated as responsible."


 5. Unless some other Member State can be so designated, if  the  criterion
    of Article 3(2) is satisfied, it  is  common  ground  that  the  United
    Kingdom  would  need  to  determine   the   applicants'   international
    protection claims.  Even if that were not so,  Article  17(1)  provides
    for a residual discretion in this regard.


 6. Both Article 4 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and  Article  3  of
    the European Convention of Human Rights proscribe subjecting  a  person
    to torture or inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment.



 7. SOM  and  RK  are  asylum  seekers.   They  submit  that  the  evidence
    concerning the position of asylum seekers in Italy is such  that  their
    claims should not have been certified  by  the  respondent  as  clearly
    unfounded.

 8. Unlike SOM and RK, SM engaged with the Italian asylum system whilst  he
    was in that  country.   He  was  given  a  residence  permit.   He  is,
    accordingly, a Beneficiary  of  International  Protection  (BIP).   The
    significance of this status will be addressed later.  It  is,  however,
    necessary at this point to observe that, as a BIP, SM falls outside the
    Dublin III regime and  is  being  returned  pursuant  to  an  agreement
    between the Italian authorities and the British authorities to re-admit
    individuals that Italy has recognised to be in  need  of  international
    protection.  Nothing material turns on this difference, so far  as  the
    judicial review applications are concerned.

 9. Each of the applicants' human rights claims, which were certified under
    Part 2 of Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act, involve the contention  that,  if
    returned to Italy as asylum seekers or BIPs, they face a real  risk  of
    treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.  Each  of  the  applicants
    submits that the state of the evidence is such that, if they  had  been
    allowed to bring their appeals before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (which
    they would have been, but for certification),  there  was  a  realistic
    prospect that a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  might  have  allowed  their
    appeals (ZT (Kosovo) v SSHD [2009] UKHL 6).

10. The applicants do not suggest that, if they were returned to Italy, the
    authorities  there  would  physically  ill-treat  them.   Rather,   the
    applicants contend, in essence, that those authorities would  not  make
    sufficient provision for their  accommodation  and  welfare,  with  the
    result that  they  would  face  a  real  risk  of  being  homeless  and
    destitute.

11. Ordinarily, a person advancing this type of Article 3 claim would  need
    to meet a very high threshold: N v United Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 885.

12. Insofar as asylum  seekers  are  concerned,  the  very  high  threshold
    described in N does not apply.  The judgment of Laws LJ in GS (India) v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 explains why:

         "54.     In MSS v Belgium and Greece 53 EHRR 28 the  applicant  was
             an Afghani asylum seeker whom the Belgian authorities  desired
             to return to Greece under the Dublin Convention.  He had  been
             detained for a week in Greece before arriving in Belgium.   At
             length he was returned from Belgium to Greece where he claimed
             asylum.  There was much evidence before the  Strasbourg  court
             of  the  extremely  deleterious  conditions  in  which  asylum
             seekers in Greece might be detained or had to live.  The court
             concluded as follows:


                  "249.      The court has already  reiterated  the  general
                      principles found in the case law on article 3 of  the
                      Convention and applicable in the  instant  case.   It
                      also considers it necessary to point out that article
                      3  cannot  be  interpreted  as  obliging   the   high
                      contracting parties to provide everyone within  their
                      jurisdiction with a home.  Nor does article 3  entail
                      any general obligation  to  give  refugees  financial
                      assistance to  enable  them  to  maintain  a  certain
                      standard of living.


                  250. The court is of the opinion, however, that what is at
                      issue in the instant case  cannot  be  considered  in
                      those   terms.    {The]   obligation    to    provide
                      accommodation  and  decent  material  conditions   to
                      impoverished asylum  seekers  has  now  entered  into
                      positive law and the Greek authorities are  bound  to
                      comply with their own legislation,  which  transposes
                      Community law, namely Directive  2003/9  laying  down
                      minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers
                      in the member  states  ('the  Reception  Directive").
                      What  the   applicant   holds   against   the   Greek
                      authorities in this case is that,  because  of  their
                      deliberate  actions  or  omissions,   it   has   been
                      impossible in practice for him to  avail  himself  of
                      their rights and provide for his essential needs.


                  251. The court attaches  considerable  importance  to  the
                      applicant's status as any asylum seeker and, as such,
                      a  member  of  a  particularly  underprivileged   and
                      vulnerable  population  group  in  need  of   special
                      protection.   It  notes  the  existence  of  a  broad
                      consensus at the  international  and  European  level
                      concerning  this  need  for  special  protection,  as
                      evidenced by the Geneva Convention, the remit and the
                      activities of the UNHCR and the standards set out  in
                      the EU Reception Directive.


                  252.  That  said,  the  court  must  determine  whether  a
                      situation of extreme material poverty  can  raise  an
                      issue under article 3.


                  253. The court reiterates that it has  not  excluded  'The
                      possibility that the responsibility of the state  may
                      be engaged [under article 3] in respect of  treatment
                      where an applicant, who was wholly dependent on state
                      support,   found   herself   faced   with    official
                      indifference in a situation of serious deprivation or
                      want incompatible with human dignity'.


                  254. It observes that the situation in which the applicant
                      has  found  himself  is  particularly  serious.    He
                      allegedly spent months living in a state of the  most
                      extreme poverty, unable to cater for his  most  basic
                      needs: food, hygiene and a place to live.   Added  to
                      that was the ever-present fear of being attacked  and
                      robbed and the total lack of any  likelihood  of  his
                      situation improving.  It  was  to  escape  from  that
                      situation  of  insecurity   and   of   material   and
                      psychological want that he  tried  several  times  to
                      leave Greece ..."
                  ...
                  263. In the  light  of  the  above  and  in  view  of  the
                      obligations incumbent on the Greek authorities  under
                      the European Reception Directive, the court considers
                      that the Greek authorities have not had due regard to
                      the applicant's vulnerability as an asylum seeker and
                      must be held responsible, because of their  inaction,
                      for the situation in which he has found  himself  for
                      several  months,  living  in  the  street,  with   no
                      resources  or  access  to  sanitary  facilities,  and
                      without any means  of  providing  for  his  essential
                      needs.  The court considers that  the  applicant  has
                      been the victim of humiliating  treatment  showing  a
                      lack  of  respect  for  his  dignity  and  that  this
                      situation has, without doubt, aroused in him feelings
                      of fear, anguish or inferiority capable  of  inducing
                      desperation.    It   considers   that   such   living
                      conditions, combined with the  prolonged  uncertainty
                      in which he has remained and the total  lack  of  any
                      prospects of his situation improving,  have  attained
                      the level of severity required  to  fall  within  the
                      scope of article 3 of the Convention."
                  ...
           57.   There appears to be a fork in the road, on the court's own
                 reckoning, between the approach in N v  United  Kingdom  47
                 EHRR 885 on the one hand and the MSS case 53 EHRR 28 on the
                 other.  It is on the face  of  it  difficult  to  find  any
                 governing principle, applied  across  the  learning,  which
                 provides  a  rationale  for  departures  from  the  article
                 paradigm.   There  are,   however,   certain   strands   of
                 reasoning.  In the MSS case it is to be noted  that  Greece
                 (unlike Belgium) was not impugned for breach of  article  3
                 on account of anything that would happen to  the  applicant
                 in a third country to which Greece proposed to remove  him,
                 but by reason of his plight  in  Greece  itself.   One  may
                 compare R (Limbuela) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                 Department [2006] 1 AC 396, in which the House of Lords was
                 concerned with the dire straits  to  which  certain  asylum
                 seekers in this country were reduced for want of access  to
                 public funds, and  held  that  there  was  a  violation  of
                 article 3.  In the MSS  case  a  critical  factor  was  the
                 existence of legal duties owed by Greece under its own  law
                 implementing EU obligations: paras 250 and 263 which I have
                 cited; and it is clear that the court  attached  particular
                 importance to the fact that the  applicant  was  an  asylum
                 seeker.
                  ...
          59.    This in the  MSS  ...  the  court  looked  for  particular
                 features which might bring the case within article  3,  and
                 found them - in Greece's legal duties and  the  applicant's
                 status as an asylum seeker ..."


13. At [250] of MSS the ECtHR made reference  to  the  Reception  Directive
    (2003/9/EC), as bearing upon the Article  3  ECHR  position  of  asylum
    seekers in Greece.  The significance of the Reception Directive in  the
    context of "Dublin certifications" was examined in detail by  Sales  LJ
    in R (HK Iraq) & Others v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1871:


         "41.      ...  counsel  for  the  appellants  accept   that   their
             circumstances do not meet the usual stringent test  laid  down
             in N v United Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 885, GC, and discussed by
             this court in GS (India) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40; [2015] 1 WLR 3312  in  relation
             to return to a country which will not meet their medical needs
             with treatment to the same standard as is available in the UK.
               However,  they  contend  that  asylum  seekers  are  in   an
             especially vulnerable category of person and that the case-law
             shows that a higher standard of appropriate medical  or  other
             care may be required under Article 3 in  the  state  to  which
             they are returned than under the  usual  N  v  United  Kingdom
             approach.


         42.      In that regard they pointed to Article  13(2)  of  Council
             Directive 2003/9/EC of 27 January  2003  laying  down  minimum
             standards for the reception of asylum seekers ("the  Reception
             Directive").  I note that there is a recast  version  of  this
             Directive, 2013/33/EU, promulgated in 2013 - see NA (Sudan)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
             1060, [40].  We were not taken to this but I do not understand
             that there is any material difference  between  them  in  this
             respect. Article 13(2) of the Reception Directive provides:


                  "Member States shall make provisions on material reception
                  conditions to ensure a standard of living adequate for the
                  health  of  applicants  and  capable  of  ensuring   their
                  subsistence."


         43.      This suggests that a Member State has a heightened set  of
             obligations in relation to treatment of asylum  seekers  which
             is capable of informing the standard of care required for  the
             purposes of Article 3 of the  ECHR  if  an  asylum  seeker  is
             returned there.  However, counsel also explained  that  it  is
             not  part  of  the  appellants'  case  that  the  standard  of
             treatment laid down in Article 13(2) is simply to be  regarded
             as establishing the relevant test for violation of  Article  3
             of the ECHR.


         44.      In my view, there is force in the  appellants'  contention
             that the test under Article  3  for  proper  treatment  of  an
             asylum seeker in relation to  medical  needs  they  may  have,
             including  in  relation  to  any  mental  illness  they  have,
             involves a heightened set  of  obligations  on  the  receiving
             state, beyond those laid down in N v United Kingdom.






         45.      In the  MSS  judgment  at  paras.  [250]-[254]  the  ECtHR
             referred  to  the  obligations  on  Member  States  under  the
             Reception Directive and to an international consensus  on  the
             need  for  special  protection  of   asylum   seekers   as   a
             particularly underprivileged and vulnerable  population  group
             ([251]).  Its focus in that case was on whether a situation of
             extreme material poverty could raise an issue under Article  3
             ([252]) in relation to an asylum-seeker who was left  to  live
             on the streets for months, "unable to cater for his most basic
             needs: food, hygiene and a place to live" ([254]).  But  I  do
             not think that the  reasoning  in  the  case  in  relation  to
             Article 3 is necessarily restricted to these matters.


         46.      Although counsel for the appellants did not refer  to  it,
             it is noteworthy that Chapter IV of  the  Reception  Directive
             sets out "Provisions for  Persons  with  Special  Needs",  and
             Article 17(1) in that Chapter states this general principle:


                  "Member  States  shall  take  into  account  the  specific
                  situation  of   vulnerable   persons   such   as   minors,
                  unaccompanied minors,  disabled  people,  elderly  people,
                  pregnant women, single parents  with  minor  children  and
                  persons who have been subjected to torture, rape or  other
                  serious  forms  of  psychological,  physical   or   sexual
                  violence, in the  national  legislation  implementing  the
                  provisions of Chapter II relating  to  material  reception
                  conditions  and  health  care  [i.e.   including   Article
                  13(2)]."


         47.      The corresponding  Article  21  in  the  recast  Directive
             expands this list to include "victims  of  human  trafficking,
             persons with serious illnesses, persons with mental  disorders
             ...": the provision is set out in NA (Sudan) at [44].   In  my
             view,  these  provisions  are   capable   of   informing   the
             application of Article 3 of the ECHR in terms  of  helping  to
             identify the categories of asylum-seekers who may be  regarded
             as having special vulnerabilities which  potentially  heighten
             the standards of treatment to be expected in respect  of  them
             in the state to which they are returned.


         48.      In the Tarakhel judgment at  paras.  [94]  and  [118]  the
             ECtHR re-affirmed previous case-law to  the  effect  that  the
             assessment of the minimum level of severity at which Article 3
             is engaged is relative, and "depends on all the  circumstances
             of the case, such as the duration of  the  treatment  and  its
             physical or mental effects and, in some  instances,  the  sex,
             age and state of health of the victim."  At  para.  [118]  the
             Court reiterated the need referred to in MSS  at  para.  [251]
             for special protection of  asylum-seekers  as  a  particularly
             under-privileged and vulnerable  group,  and  at  para.  [119]
             stated:


                  "This  requirement  of  'special  protection'  of   asylum
                  seekers  is  particularly  important  when   the   persons
                  concerned are children, in view of  their  specific  needs
                  and their extreme vulnerability.  This applies even  when,
                  as in the present case, the children  seeking  asylum  are
                  accompanied  by  their  parents   ...   Accordingly,   the
                  reception conditions for children seeking asylum  must  be
                  adapted to their age, to ensure that those  conditions  do
                  not 'create  ...  for  them  a  situation  of  stress  and
                  anxiety, with  particularly  traumatic  consequences'  ...
                  Otherwise, the conditions in  question  would  attain  the
                  threshold of severity required to come within the scope of
                  the prohibition under Article 3 of the Convention."


         49.      Counsel for the appellants submitted that  this  reasoning
             also extends to cover asylum seekers who suffer from a  mental
             illness who, like children, may also have heightened needs and
             increased vulnerability.  In my view, even though we were  not
             shown a judgment which has gone this far, there  is  force  in
             this submission as well.  If it could be shown that there  was
             a significant risk that an asylum  seeker  with  a  recognised
             mental  illness  would  be  subjected  to  such  poor   living
             conditions in the state to which he was to be returned that he
             would suffer a marked deterioration in that illness or that he
             would receive no treatment in that  state  to  cope  with  its
             effects,  I  consider  that  it  is  well  arguable  that  the
             principles for application of Article 3 laid down in  MSS  and
             Tarakhel would be engaged.


         50.      Laws LJ at paras. [54]-[63] in his judgment in GS  (India)
             highlighted the different approach to Article 3  standards  in
             relation to asylum-seekers pursuant to the  MSS  and  Tarakhel
             judgments, as contrasted with the usual  position  under  N  v
             United Kingdom.  Underhill and Sullivan LJJ agreed  with  this
             part of his judgment: see [105] and [116], respectively.  That
             the discussion took place in the context of a comparison of  N
             v United Kingdom, a case concerning standards  of  health-care
             which  would  be  encountered  in  the  state  to  which   the
             individual was returned, and the MSS  and  Tarakhel  judgments
             suggests that the members of the court contemplated that  poor
             standards of health-care which would be received by an  asylum
             seeker in the state  of  return  could  in  principle,  in  an
             appropriate case, give rise to an issue  under  Article  3  on
             application of the heightened standard  of  care  for  asylum-
             seekers referred to in those judgments.


         51.      The same point  can  be  made  still  more  strongly  with
             reference  to  the  judgment  of  Underhill  LJ  (with   which
             McFarlane and Simon LJJ agreed) in NA (Sudan) v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1060.  That case
             concerned the return of asylum  seekers  to  Italy  under  the
             Dublin Regulation arrangements.  Underhill LJ  again  referred
             to the guidance in the MSS and Tarkhel judgments  in  relation
             to the treatment of asylum seekers. As he put it at  [159]  in
             relation to NA's case:


                  "The essential issue for the judge was ... simply  whether
                  there was a serious risk that  if  she  were  returned  NA
                  would not be accommodated in a SPRAR [a  special  type  of
                  reception centre]: this subsumes the question whether  she
                  would  receive   proper   healthcare,   and   specifically
                  psychiatric care, since it is not argued that even if  she
                  were in a SPRAR her needs would not be attended to".


             The judge at first instance had found that there was  no  real
             risk that NA would not be placed in a SPRAR in Italy and hence
             no real risk she would suffer ill-treatment  in  violation  of
             Article 3, and this court upheld that assessment. Nonetheless,
             in his formulation of the issue  I  think  it  is  clear  that
             Underhill LJ considered that it was at least arguable that  NA
             would have been able to complain of a violation of  Article  3
             if the evidence showed that  her  need  for  psychiatric  care
             would not be accommodated in Italy. "


14. The United Kingdom has  not  adopted  the  recast  Reception  Directive
    (2013/33/EU).  Italy has  done  so.   Both  Directives,  however,  make
    provision  for  healthcare;  the  needs  of  vulnerable  persons;   the
    desirability  of  preserving  family  unity;  and  the  schooling   and
    education of minors.


15. As  is  plain  from  the  judgment  of  Sales  LJ  in  HK  (Iraq),  the
    significance of the Reception Directive, for our purposes, is  that  it
    helps to explain why the very high threshold of N v UK need not be  met
    by asylum seekers and BIPs in cases of this kind. But  HK  (Iraq)  also
    makes it plain (at paragraph 43) that the Reception Directive is not to
    be treated as a verbal extension of Article 3 of the ECHR.


16. In the present cases, the respondent sought  to  rely  on  the  ECtHR's
    judgment in AS v Switzerland 920170 65  EHRR  12,  in  support  of  the
    proposition that Laws LJ had, in fact, been wrong in GS (India) to find
    that a "fork in the road" had occurred with MSS, pursuant to the Dublin
    Regulation. The applicant,  AS,  suffered  from  severe  post-traumatic
    stress disorder, for which he was receiving treatment  in  Switzerland.
    He relied on Tarakhel v Switzerland (2015) 60 EHRR

17.

18. 28, in which the Court held that specific assurances were required from
    the Italian authorities that family members would not be separated,  if
    returned to Italy in order for their asylum claims to be dealt with.

19. The ECtHR refused to extend Tarakhel to include  persons  in  the  same
    position as AS.  Furthermore, having noted the very high threshold in N
    v United Kingdom and D v United Kingdom (1997)  24  EHRR  CD  145,  the
    Court held as follows:

             "37. In the Court's  view,  the  applicant's  case  cannot  be
             distinguished from those cited in [32] and [33] above. It does
             not disclose very exceptional circumstances, such as  in  D  v
             United Kingdom, where the applicant was in the final stages of
             a terminal illness, AIDS, and had no prospect of medical  care
             or  family  support.  Accordingly,   the   Court   finds   the
             implementation of the decision  to  remove  the  applicant  to
             Italy would not give rise to a violation  of  art.  3  of  the
             Convention".


20. We do not consider that AS enables us to depart from  the  approach  of
    the Court of Appeal in GS (India) and subsequent cases.  Even  if  that
    approach were not binding on us (which we consider it is), it is  still
    high authority, from which the  Tribunal  might  deviate  only  if  the
    Strasbourg jurisprudence consistently pointed in a different direction.
    As matters stand, it does not.


21. Our conclusion on this issue means it is  unnecessary  to  examine  the
    effect on the D and N line of cases of the ECtHR judgment in Paposhvili
    v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867.


22. Two crucial points need, however, to be made clear. First, even  though
    the very high threshold set by D and N need not be met, the  applicants
    are still faced with the fact that the threshold for finding Article  3
    harm is in any event high. Conditions  that  are  unpleasant  and  even
    harsh are by no means  necessarily  ones  that  amount  to  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment.


23. Secondly, those seeking to show that their return from one EU State  to
    another may entail a violation of Article  3  start  at  a  significant
    disadvantage, in  evidential  terms.  This  is  because  they  have  an
    evidential presumption to displace.

24. The way in which a real risk of Article 3 violation is proved, in cases
    of this kind, is described by the Supreme Court in EM (Eritrea) v  SSHD
    [2014] UKSC 12:

         "63.     Where, therefore, it can be shown that the  conditions  in
             which an asylum seeker will be required to  live  if  returned
             under Dublin II are such that there is a  real  risk  that  he
             will be subjected  to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment,  his
             removal to that state is forbidden. When one is in  the  realm
             of positive obligations (which is  what  is  involved  in  the
             claim that the state has not ensured that satisfactory  living
             conditions are available to the asylum seeker) the evidence is
             more likely to partake of systemic failings but the search for
             such failings is by way of a route to establish that there  is
             a real risk of article 3 breach, rather than a  hurdle  to  be
             surmounted.


         64.       There  is,  however,  what  Sales  J   described   in   R
             (Elayathamby) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2011] EWHC 2182 (Admin), at  para  42(i)  as  "a  significant
             evidential presumption" that listed states  will  comply  with
             their Convention obligations in relation to asylum  procedures
             and reception  conditions  for  asylum  seekers  within  their
             territory.  It is against the  backdrop  of  that  presumption
             that any claim that there is a real risk of breach of  article
             3 rights falls to be addressed.
         ....
         68.      .... I consider that a more  open-ended  approach  to  the
             question of the risk of  breach  of  article  3  is  required.
             Although one starts with a significant evidential  presumption
             that  listed  states  will  comply  with  their  international
             obligations, a claim that such a risk is present is not to  be
             halted in limine solely  because  it  does  not  constitute  a
             systemic or systematic breach of the  rights  of  refugees  or
             asylum seekers. Moreover, practical realities lie at the heart
             of the inquiry; evidence of what happens on the ground must be
             capable of rebutting the presumption if it shows  sufficiently
             clearly that there is a real risk of article 3  ill  treatment
             if there is an enforced return."


25. We need now to describe  how  the  Article  3  legal/evidential  issues
    operate in  the  present  proceedings,  insofar  as  those  proceedings
    involve a challenge to the respondent's decisions under paragraph  5(4)
    of Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act to  certify  the  applicants'  claims  as
    clearly unfounded.


26. The applicants submit that:

         "When reviewing a "clearly unfounded"  certificate  on  public  law
         grounds, the reviewing Tribunal or Court  must  take  a  claimant's
         case at its reasonable highest, proceeding on the  basis  that  any
         legitimate conflicts in evidence or disputes about the evidence may
         be  resolved  in  favour  of  the  claimant."  (skeleton   argument
         paragraph 60).


27.  In certification cases under section 94 of the 2002 Act, taking a case
    at its "reasonable highest" will often involve an  acceptance  that  an
    individual's account of his or her experiences in a foreign country  is
    reasonably likely to be true.  Only if the account of those experiences
    is so problematic as to be incapable of belief by any rational judicial
    fact-finder will the position be otherwise. By the same token, we  have
    approached the evidence of the individual applicants on the basis  that
    what those individuals say they have  experienced  outside  the  United
    Kingdom is reasonably likely to represent the truth. In the case of the
    witnesses, we have no reason to doubt the truth of what they have  seen
    and heard.


28. None of this is, however, determinative. In cases of the present  kind,
    the task of the Court or  Tribunal  is  to  analyse  a  wide  range  of
    evidential  material,  emanating  from  different  sources,   including
    organisations of varying reputation and status, as well as the accounts
    of individuals, in order to arrive at a holistic conclusion of  whether
    the "significant evidential presumption" that an EU State  will  comply
    with its obligations under Article 3 ECHR has been displaced.

29. We agree with Mr Payne that this evidential presumption is integral  to
    the analysis of the evidence.

30.  The  approach  mandated  by  EM  (Eritrea)  is  also  crucial  to  the
    "certification" question. Laing J articulated this point at  paragraphs
    165 and 166 of her judgment in Tabrizagh and others v SSHD [2014]  EWHC
    1914:

         "165.    The  question  in  these  cases  is  whether  any  of  the
             Claimants might arguably satisfy the FTT that return to  Italy
             would expose him to an article 3 risk. There are  two  generic
             issues here: whether
               i) the argument, by those Claimants who  are,  or  might  be,
                  asylum  seekers  on  their  return,  that  the  evidential
                  presumption is displaced, is bound to fail before the FTT;
                  and
             ii) the argument by those Claimants who are, or would  on  any
                  view, very shortly after their return home,  become  BIPs,
                  or receive humanitarian protection, that they are at  real
                  risk of article 3 ill treatment is bound  to  fail  before
                  the FTT.


               (a)     Asylum claimants: the evidential presumption


         166.     Mr Knafler QC accepted that the approach of Kenneth Parker
             J, as described by Lord Kerr in EM, is the  correct  approach.
             Could the FTT, applying the approach to the relevant evidence,
             arguably find that the evidential  presumption  of  compliance
             has been displaced? I consider  that  it  could  not.  I  have
             already summarised the evidence at some length, so I can  give
             my reasons briefly. I agree that the  presumption  is,  as  Mr
             Payne put it for the Secretary of State, not a hurdle; but  it
             is a very important part of the inquiry when the allegation is
             that there is a generalised risk of article 3 ill treatment in
             Italy which arises regardless of the returnee's profile."


31. Laing J then went on to give her reasons. She observed that the  UNHCR,
    "while making robust  and  objective  criticisms,  has  not  painted  a
    picture which begins to meet the relevant  test"  (paragraph  167).  In
    this regard, she had already noted  at  paragraph  87  that  the  UNHCR
    report did not call for any Member State to suspend Dublin  returns  to
    Italy. By contrast, the applicants in the cases before her  had  relied
    upon a report known  as  the  Braunschweig  Report,  which  painted  "a
    gloomier  picture  of  reception  conditions   for   asylum   seekers".
    Nevertheless, Laing J held that "If and to the extent that [the Report]
    differs from the UNHCR reports, the FTT would be bound to prefer those"
    (paragraph 89).


32. Laing J returned to the Braunschweig Report  at  paragraph  169,  which
    also merits setting out in  full  because  it  bears  directly  on  the
    submission on behalf of the present applicants that we have set out  at
    above (paragraph 24):

               "169.   The issue is not, contrary to the  submission  of  Mr
                 Knafler QC, whether the SRC  [Swiss  Refugee  Council]  and
                 Braunschweig reports are "capable of belief" such that,  if
                 they are, the evidential presumption  is  displaced.  There
                 are  two  questions.  First,  what  weight  could  the  FTT
                 rationally give those reports, if and to  the  extent  that
                 they differ from  the  UNHCR's  'pre-eminent  and  possibly
                 decisive' assessment? The answer to that question is  "Very
                 little". Second, could the FTT find that (where they do not
                 differ from the UNHCR report) they  show  'omissions  on  a
                 widespread   and   substantial   scale'   or   'substantial
                 operational   problems'   sufficient   to   displace    the
                 significant evidential presumption of compliance? That  is,
                 substantial operational  problems  with  the  whole  asylum
                 acquis, not just operational problems with some aspects  of
                 it. The answer to that question is, 'No'".


33. Beginning at paragraph 170 of her judgment, Laing J undertook a similar
    exercise in respect of BIPs.


34. We have dwelt on Tabrizagh at some length because it  demonstrates  how
    the certification issue must be resolved in  cases  of  this  kind.  In
    particular, it shows the evidential presumption in action, by reference
    to the various strands of evidential material, including the  views  of
    UNHCR, which carry significant weight. We shall have more to say  about
    this later.

35. Mr Chirico criticised paragraph 169 on the basis that Laing J was wrong
    to hold that a report that departed from the UNHCR's  assessment  could
    not have weight. There are  two  points  to  make  about  this.  First,
    paragraph 169 is on any view correct, as regards  the  questions  there
    posed. Those questions were the right ones for  a  reviewing  court  or
    tribunal to ask, in a certification case of this kind; not whether  the
    reports themselves were "capable of belief".

36. Secondly, we do not read  paragraph  169  as  saying  that  no  report,
    regardless of what it said, could  ever  have  weight.  In  giving  her
    answers to her self-posed questions, Laing J  was  merely  saying  that
    these particular reports could rationally be given only little  weight.
    Her reasons are to be found at paragraph s 89 et seq.

37. Important though the evidential presumption is, it does not absolve the
    respondent or the Tribunal from the  task  of  assessing  the  evidence
    before him or it. In this regard, we note that in R (Ibrahimi)  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWHC 2049 (Admin), Green J, (as he then  was),  summarising  the
    position regarding returns to Hungary, criticised  the  respondent  for
    relying "simply on sweeping generalisations  about  presumptions"  when
    what "was required when the decisions were taken given  that  even  the
    UNHCR was beginning to express serious concerns  about  Hungary  was  a
    detailed analysis of the actual facts" (paragraph 178).  With  that  in
    mind, it is necessary to embark on our task.


THE EVIDENCE

Introduction to the evidence

The scope of the assessment

38. The Upper Tribunal has considered a large volume  of  evidence  in  the
    context of these judicial review proceedings.  In  NA  (Sudan)  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ  1060,  Underhill  LJ  observed  that  the  process  of
    considering how a fact-finding tribunal might approach the evidence was
    an "inherently awkward exercise". He noted  that  the  judicial  review
    procedure is less well-adapted to deciding disputed issues  of  primary
    fact and suggested that the  issues  raised  in  that  case  "would  be
    peculiarly suitable for the employment of a  version  of  the  'country
    guidance' procedure of the Upper Tribunal." [242].


39. The Upper Tribunal has original jurisdiction to decide judicial  review
    claims specified in the Lord  Chief  Justice's  Consolidated  Direction
    dated 21 August 2013 (amended 17 October 2014).  Most  cases  involving
    removal under the Dublin Regulation come before the Upper  Tribunal  by
    way of challenges to the certification of  human  rights  claims  under
    section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  Few
    cases involving removal under the Dublin Regulation  pass  through  the
    statutory appeal procedure to the Upper Tribunal. As  such,  the  Upper
    Tribunal has little opportunity to consider evidence  relating  to  the
    consequences  of  removal  to  European  countries  under  the   Dublin
    Regulation in a fact-finding appeal.

40. The Upper Tribunal has expertise in assessing large volumes of evidence
    relating to the situation in proposed countries of removal in statutory
    appeals  involving  protection  and  human  rights  claims.  The  Upper
    Tribunal periodically  issues  'country  guidance'  decisions  where  a
    detailed assessment of the conditions in a country might identify broad
    risk categories. The First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper  Tribunal  are
    required to follow a 'country guidance' case, insofar as the case  they
    are deciding involves the same or similar evidence (Practice  Direction
    12).


41. In judicial review proceedings the assessment normally takes place with
    reference to the evidence before the Secretary of State at the date  of
    the decision. However,  in  several  judicial  review  cases  involving
    removals under the Dublin Regulation a large body of evidence has  been
    considered at the date of the hearing.


42. In NA (Sudan) Underhill LJ noted that the appeal proceeded on the basis
    that the first instance courts "were entitled, if not  indeed  obliged,
    to judge the issue on the basis of the evidence before them rather than
    on the basis of the evidence before the respondent" [35]. This flexible
    approach is consistent with the need for anxious scrutiny of protection
    and human rights claims and the higher intensity of review required  in
    such cases. This case proceeds on the same basis.

43. The assessment of whether a human rights claim is  'clearly  unfounded'
    requires the Upper Tribunal to consider what weight might be placed  on
    the evidence in a  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal.  In  order  to  assess
    whether a claim  could  on  any  legitimate  view  succeed,  the  Upper
    Tribunal considers the individual facts of a claim in  the  context  of
    the background or expert evidence relating to  the  conditions  in  the
    proposed country of removal.  In  cases  involving  removal  under  the
    Dublin Regulation, the question of whether the removal of an  applicant
    would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  is
    assessed through the lens of a slightly different legal and  evidential
    framework, but the  underlying  process  of  evaluating  the  potential
    merits of a human rights claim remains the same.

44. This is not a 'country guidance' decision, but having  devoted  similar
    time and resources to this case, our detailed consideration of the most
    up to date evidence relating to Dublin returns to Italy is likely to be
    of assistance in deciding similar cases.

Summary of the evidence

45. The European and domestic courts have considered the situation in Italy
    on several  occasions  in  recent  years.  The  courts  recognised  the
    pressures on the Italian asylum system  and  acknowledged  evidence  of
    shortcomings. The courts consistently concluded that the  evidence  did
    not disclose deficiencies or serious operational  problems  of  such  a
    nature as to displace the evidential  presumption  that  an  EU  Member
    State will not violate Article 3 of the European Convention.  The  only
    exception was the narrow category  of  cases  involving  families  with
    children identified by the European Court of Human Rights in  Tarakhel.
    In JA v Netherlands [2015] ECHR 1124 the Strasbourg court was satisfied
    that a general assurance given by the Italian authorities in June  2015
    regarding provision of  appropriate  accommodation  for  families  with
    children was sufficient to address any concerns. The findings  made  in
    those cases form part of the background to our assessment.


46. It is trite to say that the conditions  in  a  country  do  not  remain
    static and are  subject  to  ever  -  changing  social,  political  and
    economic forces. The introduction of  national  and  European  policies
    seeking to respond to recent  flows  of  migrants  entering  Europe  by
    various (often perilous) routes affect the numbers  of  asylum  seekers
    entering or remaining in a country and thereby the pressures placed  on
    its asylum system. The evidence makes clear that Italy has  received  a
    particularly high level of asylum claims in recent years,  due  to  its
    geographical position in Europe.

47. It is appropriate for the courts to periodically review the  conditions
    in a country as and when new evidence is put  forward.  Our  assessment
    focuses on the situation since Lewis J considered a tranche of evidence
    in MS & NA v SSHD [2015] EWHC 1095 in April 2015.  We are conscious  of
    the fact that political changes were taking place in Italy at the  time
    of our hearing the present cases,  which  might,  in  time,  alter  the
    picture. However, we can only base our assessment on the evidence  that
    was placed before the Tribunal.

48. That evidence is broad in scope. Evidence from the UNHCR and the Asylum
    Information Database (AIDA) is acknowledged to be reliable  and  should
    be given  weight.  Other  reliable  evidence  comes  from  the  Italian
    government, including agencies who run aspects  of  the  asylum  system
    e.g. SPRAR and Caritas. The evidence  also  includes  reports  from  an
    Italian Parliamentary Committee, the Council of Europe and  various  UN
    bodies.  Then  there  are  reports   from   credible   non-governmental
    humanitarian organisations operating in Italy, such  as  Medecins  Sans
    Frontieres (MSF). Other evidence comes from Italian organisations  with
    relevant experience such as MEDU (Doctors for  Human  Rights)  and  the
    Association for Juridical Studies on Immigration (ASGI), which  we  are
    told is similar  to  the  Immigration  Law  Practitioners'  Association
    (ILPA) in the UK. A schedule of the evidence considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal is annexed to this decision.

49. The applicants produced several statements from witnesses working for a
    range of different  organisations  in  Italy.  None  of  the  witnesses
    purports to give evidence as an expert; they make their  statements  as
    witnesses of fact. The respondent also relies on  a  witness  statement
    from the Asylum Liaison Officer for the Third  Country  Unit  based  in
    Rome. In principle, we see no reason why such evidence  should  not  be
    given weight if a witness has relevant experience and the statement  is
    sufficiently well prepared to understand the source and the reliability
    of the information the witness provides. The  fact  that  some  of  the
    witnesses work in NGOs, and may  give  evidence  relating  to  a  local
    sphere of knowledge, does not necessarily detract from the weight to be
    given to it. NGOs and humanitarian organisations  are  likely  to  have
    experience assisting those who do not have a  place  in  the  reception
    system and might sometimes be in a better position than the  government
    to identify potential problems. Even if a witness cannot speak  to  the
    national situation, their evidence might  be  relevant  to  a  specific
    issue. Such evidence forms part of a holistic assessment.  More  weight
    may be placed on some reports than others.  If  we  have  any  concerns
    about the reliability or limitations of some aspects of the evidence we
    will explain why during our assessment.


Comments on the 'Fact-finding Mission Report'

50. The last basic  strand  of  evidence  requires  separate  comment.  The
    respondent produced a report entitled  "Third  Country  National/Dublin
    Returns to Italy" ("the Fact-finding Mission Report"). The  report  was
    filed on 16 March 2018 but is undated.


51. At an initial case  management  hearing  in  October  2017,  the  Upper
    Tribunal was told that Home Office officials had  recently  been  on  a
    fact-finding mission to Italy and were in the process  of  preparing  a
    report. After discussion with counsel it was agreed that  a  period  of
    two months was likely to be a realistic timescale to complete and  file
    the  report  of  the  fact-finding  mission.  Having   suggested   this
    timetable, the respondent failed to comply with that deadline and  with
    both subsequent self-imposed deadlines and directions made by the Upper
    Tribunal. The delay had two effects. Firstly, it made it difficult  for
    the applicants to prepare their case. Secondly, a general stay in other
    judicial review claims involving removal to Italy meant that resolution
    of those claims has been delayed.

52. A document  entitled  "Respondent's  Report  of  Italian  Fact  Finding
    Mission" was  eventually  filed  on  12  February  2018.  The  document
    consisted of a summary of notes of meetings with various  agencies  and
    organisations in Italy including UNHCR,  Caritas,  SPRAR  and  the  Red
    Cross as well as with officials at the Ministry of the Interior and  at
    Rome and Milan airports. At a case management hearing  on  13  February
    2018 the Tribunal noted the reasons given for the delay in  filing  the
    evidence, which were explained in a statement prepared by Matthew  Shaw
    of  the  Government  Legal  Department  dated  09  February   2018   (a
    combination of delays in obtaining instructions, illness,  pressure  of
    work and a key staff member being absent due to a family  bereavement).
    The Upper Tribunal observed that the report was not in the usual format
    of other reports described as a 'fact-finding mission report'  and  did
    not disclose any of the underlying materials upon which the report  was
    based: see CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT
    00059. Further directions were made for the respondent to disclose  the
    source documents including any correspondence  relating  to  the  fact-
    finding mission and the notes of the interviews. There was no  evidence
    to suggest that the summaries of the interviews had  been  checked  and
    approved by the interviewees.


53. Despite having filed a document  purporting  to  be  the  'fact-finding
    mission report' the respondent informed the Upper Tribunal  at  a  case
    management hearing on 08 March 2018 that the document was not the final
    version of the report. Directions were made for a witness statement  to
    be prepared by the Home Office official responsible for finalising  the
    report. The final version was filed on  16  March  2018  (nearly  three
    months after the original deadline). The  report  was  filed  with  the
    witness statement of a senior civil servant at the Home Office,  Daniel
    Hobbs, who is the Head of the Asylum and Family Policy Unit.  Mr  Hobbs
    explained that, in light of the Tribunal's  observations  at  the  case
    management hearing on 13 February 2018, there was "some confusion as to
    precisely what needed to be filed."  Following  the  hearing  the  Home
    Office Country Policy Information Team (CPIT) was consulted.  The  team
    was "tasked to produce a report which incorporated  the  findings  from
    the October 2017 visit, together with any additional  information  from
    the public domain on conditions  in  Italy  that  they  could  identify
    relating to the period of the visit (and  post  visit)."  However,  the
    statement went on to suggest that the report filed on 12 February  2018
    was an 'interim report' and that the respondent should have made  clear
    that the report was an interim version  and  that  he  intended  to  do
    further work on the report with a view to assisting the Tribunal.


54. We note that in previous judicial review claims the respondent produced
    evidence by way of a statement from the Asylum Liaison Officer for  the
    Third Country Unit based in Rome. As far as we are aware, this  is  the
    first time that the respondent has conducted a fact-finding mission  in
    a European country to prepare a report for consideration by the courts.
    When fact-finding missions have taken place in the past,  they  usually
    explored the situation in refugee-producing countries.  To  the  extent
    that this was a novel use of the practice, we  accept  that  the  Third
    Country Unit at the Home Office may not have  the  same  experience  in
    preparing such reports as the Home Office  Country  Policy  Information
    Team. However, reference to a 'fact-finding mission report' is  a  term
    of art that is commonly used to  describe  a  certain  type  of  report
    prepared by the Home Office.  Having  been  told  that  the  respondent
    intended to prepare a  report  of  the  fact-finding  mission,  it  was
    reasonable to expect it to be of a certain quality.

55. The applicants carried out a detailed analysis  of  the  final  report,
    comparing it to what was said in the 'interim report'  and  an  earlier
    report prepared by the Home Office on 05 October 2017 entitled "Country
    information - Italy: Returns". The applicants argue that  the  evidence
    shows that the final report is biased and  'cherry-picked'  information
    to support a particular narrative. The Upper Tribunal was referred to a
    heavily redacted letter dated 21 September 2017 from Daniel Hobbs to an
    official in the Italian authorities (described in his statement as  his
    "Italian counterpart"). The applicants rely on the following passage to
    argue that the visit had one intended purpose:

           "Further, as raised informally with your officials, you may wish
           to note the UK is facing increasing  litigation  in  respect  of
           third country returns to Italy. We are disappointed that we  are
           facing litigation in this area, given Italy's  clear  compliance
           with the EU asylum acquis for  asylum  seekers  and  those  with
           protection in Italy. However, we now have to submit evidence  to
           the UK courts imminently and are in  the  process  of  gathering
           evidence. I would be grateful for views on any support  you  may
           be able to provide.  For  example,  a  visit  from  Home  Office
           officials to Italy may provide us with the necessary evidence to
           present to the courts. Such a  visit  could  include  visits  to
           reception centres near Rome and Milan,  a  visit  to  any  other
           facilities relevant to the return procedure, and a  conversation
           with Italian officials on the process for returnees. I hope  you
           will agree on the importance of ensuring we robustly defend  any
           challenge that the Italian systems are insufficient. I would  be
           grateful if you could confirm if a UK visit during the week of 9
           October would be possible."


56. The applicants argue that a comparison with the  "interim  report"  and
    the "Notes of Meetings" included in  the  final  "Fact-finding  Mission
    Report", which were checked by some but not all of  those  interviewed,
    indicated that  the  'interim  report'  omitted  information  that  was
    subsequently amended by interviewees when they were asked to comment on
    the summary of the meeting. The most important  was  the  meeting  with
    UNHCR. The 'interim report' omitted several important comments made  by
    UNHCR, which included the following recommendation:


           "At no stage did the UNHCR suggest to us that the United Kingdom
           should not be returning persons to  Italy  of  any  category  [,
           recommending, in any case, a proactive and flexible use  of  the
           discretionary clauses, in particular article 17(2) of the Dublin
           III regulation in a flexible manner in order to  ensure  maximum
           protection of the asylum-seeker and  full  respect  for  his/her
           human rights, in particular as regards vulnerable applicants and
           applicants with relatives  in  the  United  Kingdom.]"  [section
           amended by UNHCR]

57. The  applicants  argue  that  the  summary  of  background  reports  is
    selective and does not reflect the full picture. It contrasts with  the
    more comprehensive analysis of the evidence contained  in  the  Country
    Information report prepared in October 2017. The applicants assert that
    the source notes were incomplete and difficult to understand  and  that
    there  are  other  inaccuracies  in  the  report  that  point  to  poor
    methodology and preparation.


58. We do not consider it necessary to make detailed findings on the points
    made by the applicants because it was notable that  Mr  Payne  did  not
    seek to defend the report from these criticisms. He  referred  directly
    to the "Notes of Meetings". These are not  source  materials,  but  the
    Home Office summary of the meetings. In so far as the summaries of  the
    meetings with UNHCR, Caritas and the Red Cross are said  to  have  been
    approved by those organisations, we are satisfied  that  we  can  place
    weight on the information contained in the notes. In view of the  other
    criticisms of the report, we must view the summary of the meetings that
    have not been approved with some  caution.  In  so  far  as  the  final
    version of the  'Fact-finding  Mission  Report'  quotes  from  existing
    background reports, we have considered the reports directly to put  the
    evidence in context.



Overview of the situation in Italy

59. The evidence contains statistics  relating  to  the  operation  of  the
    Italian asylum system. Although some reference  needs  to  be  made  to
    those figures, we echo the note of caution sounded by Lewis J in  MS  &
    NA, who concluded that it  was  not  possible  to  derive  an  accurate
    picture from statistical analysis because key figures were missing. The
    numbers entering Italy by sea routes do  not  necessarily  reflect  the
    numbers who claim asylum. Many migrants see Italy as a transit  country
    on a route to countries in  northern  Europe.  A  proportion  may  pass
    through Italy without  encountering  the  authorities.  Many  of  those
    stopped and fingerprinted by the authorities in  Italy  may  not  claim
    asylum, or if they do, might still attempt onward travel.


60. The UNHCR "Recommendations on Important Aspects of  Refugee  Protection
    in Italy" made in 2012 and 2013 were considered in previous  cases.  In
    the July 2013 report UNHCR says that  most  asylum  seekers  arrive  in
    Italy by  sea.  Since  2008  the  number  of  arrivals  by  sea,  while
    fluctuating over time, averaged 25,000 people a year. There was a sharp
    increase in numbers in 2011, with 63,000 people arriving  in  Italy  by
    sea. This decreased by 80% in 2012 when only 13,267 people  arrived  by
    sea. The total number of international protection claims made in  Italy
    in 2012 was 17,352.

61. Figures provided by  UNHCR  in  the  "Italy:  Sea  arrivals  dashboard"
    document ("the UNHCR dashboard") record the statistics for  yearly  sea
    arrivals. 170,100 arrivals were recorded in 2014. 153,842 arrivals were
    recorded in 2015. A report published in  December  2015  by  AIDA  (see
    paragraph 62 below) stated that the Ministry of the  Interior  reported
    that 61,545 applications for international protection had been made  in
    the period from 01 January 2015 to 10 October 2015.  The  final  figure
    for claims made in 2015 is not stated.

62. The "Report on International Protection in Italy  2017"  ("the  Caritas
    report") was prepared by a group of Italian NGOs in collaboration  with
    UNHCR. The report says that 181,436 migrants landed in Italy by sea  in
    2016, which represented an 18% increase from  the  previous  year.  The
    UNHCR dashboard  records  that  there  were  123,600  applications  for
    international protection in 2016  suggesting  a  massive  rise  in  the
    number of applications in 2016.

63. The UNHCR dashboard states that the first half of  2017  showed  a  20%
    increase in arrivals from the same period  in  2016.  However,  arrival
    numbers decreased in the second half of the year. By December 2017, the
    lowest number of monthly sea arrivals was recorded, with  2,327  people
    registered at disembarkation sites. The overall number of sea  arrivals
    reduced by 34% in 2017 to 119,369.

64. The official statistics from the  Department  of  Civil  Liberties  and
    Immigration are recorded  in  the  AIDA  report  for  2017  ("the  AIDA
    report"). 130,119 applications for international protection  were  made
    in 2017. 145,906 claims were pending at the end of  2017.  The  refugee
    recognition rate was 8.4%, while 33.4% of applicants were  given  other
    forms of subsidiary and humanitarian protection. The rejection rate was
    58.2%. Despite the drop in numbers arriving by sea in the  second  half
    of  2017,  the  overall  number  of  applications   for   international
    protection increased in 2017. To put these  figures  in  some  context,
    publicly available Home Office statistics state that  the  UK  received
    26,350 applications for international protection (from main applicants)
    in 2017.

65. Several weekly emails from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) in
    Rome include a report described  as:  "Italy:  Migration  update".  The
    nature and purpose of the document are unclear, but in so  far  as  the
    figures are said to come from the Italian Ministry of the  Interior  we
    find that they are likely to be reliable.  The  most  recent  migration
    update is attached to an email dated 15 May 2018.  The  number  of  sea
    arrivals recorded by that date was 10,660. The arrival rate is said  to
    be 76% lower than the same period in 2017. The number of  international
    protection claims made in the first three months of 2018 was 19,953.

66. The evidence indicates that several factors are likely to underpin  the
    reduction in numbers arriving in Italy by sea since the middle of 2017,
    but other developments indicate that different  policies  may  lead  to
    additional pressures on the Italian asylum system.

67. The AIDA report  states  that  2017  was  characterised  by  a  "media,
    political and judicial crackdown" on NGOs saving lives at sea,  and  by
    the implementation of cooperation agreements  with  African  countries,
    notably Libya.  Following  a  European  Commission  plan,  the  Italian
    Government adopted a Code of Conduct for NGOs  engaged  in  search  and
    rescue activity in the Central Mediterranean at the end of  July  2017.
    In the Europe Monthly Report for August 2017 UNHCR reports that  on  10
    August 2017 Libya announced that foreign vessels  would  be  prohibited
    from operating in its search and rescue zone without authorisation. The
    combination of these measures discouraged NGOs from  conducting  search
    and rescue operations and some NGOs announced the suspension  of  their
    operations. The same UNHCR report for August 2017 indicates that  there
    was an increase in numbers of sea arrivals on the Western Mediterranean
    route to Spain.

68. The  AIDA  report  says  that  a  letter  to  the  Italian  and  Libyan
    governments dated 28 November 2017 from the UN  Special  Rapporteur  on
    trafficking in persons expressed serious concern about critical aspects
    of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  signed  by  the  Italian
    government with Libya. The Special  Rapporteur  observed  that  Italian
    cooperation in the creation of Libyan reception  centres  for  migrants
    under the exclusive control of the  Libyan  authorities  was  de  facto
    preventing asylum seekers from accessing international protection.  The
    Special Rapporteur also observed that the MoU aimed to  stop  migratory
    movements towards Europe and to externalise borders without taking into
    account the violations of human rights and abuses suffered by  migrants
    in Libya. Concern was also expressed about the destination  of  Italian
    funds to support the Libyan authorities in border  control  activities,
    declaring concerns about the interception of migrants at sea and  their
    unlawful return to Libya.

69. These measures have reduced the numbers of migrants making the perilous
    crossing from Libya to Italy. In effect, it is a 'push back' policy  to
    Libya. In ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017]  UKUT  00263,  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that the violence in Libya had reached such a high level
    that there  were  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  a  person
    returning to that country would, solely on account  of  their  presence
    there, face a real risk of a threat to their life or person.  The  AIDA
    report says that ASGI is seeking to challenge the lawfulness of aspects
    of the policy in the Italian courts, but at the time of  this  hearing,
    there appears to be no evidence of an outcome to the proceedings.

70. The twin purpose of the 'push back' policy to Libya is likely to be  to
    prevent the large numbers of deaths associated with  the  sea  crossing
    from Libya as well as to reduce  the  numbers  of  migrants  coming  to
    Italy. However, the consequence is that many migrants are being  forced
    to return  to  a  country  where  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that they will face  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm.  Other
    evidence suggests that the policy is creating alternative pressures  on
    the Western Mediterranean route to Spain.

71. Although concerns have been  expressed  about  the  lawfulness  of  the
    policy in international law, other  evidence  shows  that  the  Italian
    government is willing to receive refugees  through  legal  resettlement
    programmes. Caritas reports  that  the  Italian  authorities  signed  a
    protocol in the spring of 2016 to  enable  safe  legal  entry  for  500
    refugees from Ethiopian refugee camps. Caritas was also involved  in  a
    programme to resettle Syrian families from Jordan.

72. The AIDA  report  contains  evidence  of  other  'push  back'  policies
    operating on the northern  borders  of  Italy.  The  effect  of  border
    policies put in place by other European countries bordering Italy is to
    reduce the flow of  migrants  travelling  onwards  from  Italy.  It  is
    reasonable to infer that the operation of these policies is  likely  to
    increase the numbers of migrants remaining  in  Italy  although  it  is
    difficult to draw any conclusions as to how many  people  are  involved
    and whether they subsequently enter the Italian asylum system.

73. The AIDA report states that  many  migrants  attempting  to  cross  the
    borders with France, Austria and Switzerland have been rejected at  the
    border. As many as 50,000 people were reported to have been arrested by
    the French authorities at the border in 2017, of whom 97% were  "pushed
    back to Italy". According to a Senate  report,  from  January  to  mid-
    October  2017,  this   included   approximately   8,000   people   with
    authorisation to stay in Italy and 15,000 undocumented people.

74. The evidence relating to what happens at the border between Austria and
    Italy is mixed. AIDA reports  that  since  the  end  of  February  2017
    readmission measures have been initiated  against  people  arriving  in
    Italy from Austria via train. Controls have reportedly  been  based  on
    racial profiling, intercepting mostly Afghan and  Pakistani  nationals.
    On some trains, those apprehended without documentation are sent to the
    Questura of Bolzano, but others are held at the police station and then
    returned to Austria by train. Some of the migrants who were returned to
    Italy said that the Austrian police carried out checks and then ordered
    them to return to Italy.

75. Similar evidence is found  in  an  earlier  report  of  a  fact-finding
    mission to Italy by the Special Representative of the Secretary General
    on migration and refugees for the Council  of  Europe.  The  report  is
    dated 02 March 2017, but the fact-finding mission took place in October
    2016. The Special  Representative  notes  that  migrants  travel  north
    towards France, Switzerland and Austria. The procedures  at  all  three
    borders have been tightened. Since improvement in the fingerprint  rate
    of new arrivals in Italy, those who succeed in crossing the border  are
    liable to be returned under the Dublin Regulation. Italy concluded a bi-
    lateral agreement with Switzerland, which enables the Swiss authorities
    to return people to Italy under a simplified  procedure.  In  practice,
    all those who cross the Swiss border  are  returned  within  around  24
    hours. The agreement does not prohibit the return of children.  At  the
    time of the Special Representative's visit, around 70-100 refugees  and
    migrants a day were being returned to Italy via the border crossing  at
    Como-Ponte Chiasso under the simplified procedure, many for the  second
    or third time.

76. The Special Representative  notes  that  the  Italian  authorities  are
    equally entitled to return any migrants or refugees first registered in
    another EU country.  In  practice,  few  returns  take  place  in  that
    direction, which contributes to the "bottleneck in Italy". The  Special
    Representative says that it is important that the negotiations  on  the
    reform of the Dublin  Regulation  result  in  a  workable  solution  to
    increase burden sharing among participating states.

77.  The  Special  Representative  observed  that  the  number  of   asylum
    applications in Italy was  increasing  but  noted  that  a  significant
    proportion of those arriving in Italy by sea intended to make their way
    northwards to other European countries. Some were adults  who  had  not
    lodged asylum applications and others were unaccompanied  children  and
    asylum seekers who  had  left  reception  facilities  in  the  hope  of
    reuniting with friends and family more quickly by bypassing the  formal
    system. There is no formal provision of accommodation for this group of
    people, who are reliant on ad hoc arrangements for food and shelter  on
    their journeys. He said that there were large communities  of  migrants
    in transit in the big cities and at the border towns.

78. The relocation programme,  provided  for  in  the  European  Agenda  on
    Migration, was designed to alleviate the  pressure  on  the  Greek  and
    Italian asylum systems given the disproportionate numbers  of  migrants
    arriving in those countries. The Caritas report states that the  policy
    is a failure. Compared to the 160,000 relocations planned by  September
    2017, when the programme came to an end, there  had  only  been  29,134
    relocations of which only 9,078 were from Italy. Information  contained
    in the migration update in the FCO email dated 15  May  2018  indicates
    that the European Commission's figure for relocations from Italy  since
    September 2015 was 12,690. The number of relocations is low compared to
    the high levels of applications for international  protection  made  in
    Italy  during  the  same  period.  The  evidence  indicates  that   the
    relocation programme is unlikely to have alleviated much pressure  from
    the Italian asylum system.

79. The Special Representative of the Secretary General  on  migration  and
    refugees for the Council of Europe says that the system  of  relocation
    "currently takes too  long".  This  creates  further  pressure  on  the
    Italian reception  system  and  undermines  confidence  in  the  scheme
    thereby encouraging people to seek entry to other countries by unlawful
    means. The staff at the Red Cross shelter in Rome, which  hosts  mainly
    Eritreans  seeking  to  access   relocation,   informed   the   Special
    Representative that access to relocation was relatively  quick  in  the
    early part of 2016. An  asylum  seeker  might  wait  3-4  days  for  an
    appointment at the  police  station  and  would  be  transferred  to  a
    relocation reception  centre  within  7-10  days.  The  waiting  period
    lengthened significantly from July 2016. Now residents at  the  shelter
    stayed for two months before even beginning the process.

80. The evidence contained in the MSF "Out of Sight" report dated  February
    2018 ("the MSF report") is consistent with this picture. The report  is
    a follow up to an earlier report in March 2016, which considered social
    marginalisation and monitored the conditions in unofficial settlements.
    The report notes that after the peaks of  2016  there  was  an  overall
    decrease  in  the  number  of  landings,   predominantly   because   of
    containment measures implemented following the agreement between  Italy
    and Libya. The full implementation of the 'hotspot  approach'  resulted
    in the forced registration of almost all migrants  arriving  in  Italy.
    This contained secondary movements towards countries further north. The
    report notes that the increase in numbers, and  slow  turnover  in  the
    reception system due to delays in deciding applications,  put  pressure
    on  the  reception  system.  Other  factors  putting  pressure  on  the
    reception system include the increasing number of asylum seekers  being
    sent back to Italy under the Dublin Regulation. Another  issue  is  the
    failure of the relocation procedure decided by the European Council  in
    September 2015.


81. The AIDA report states that the Dublin Unit did not provide  statistics
    on the operation of the Dublin system in 2017, despite being  asked  to
    do so. According to Eurostat statistics for 2016, Italy received 64,844
    incoming requests, by far the largest  number  compared  to  any  other
    country. The number of  incoming  transfers  implemented  in  2016  was
    4,061.  Although  the  statistics  for   2017   were   not   available,
    organisations providing legal assistance in Rome reported  an  increase
    in Dublin returnees. The Caritas  report  states  that  the  number  of
    Dublin  requests  made  in  2016  exceeded  141,000,  of  which,  45.8%
    concerned Italy, which is the "main  gateway  to  Europe".  Over  4,000
    transfers came mainly from Switzerland, Germany and  Austria.  We  note
    that these figures do not appear to include transfers  made  under  bi-
    lateral agreements with bordering countries. The numbers reported to be
    'pushed back' from France and Switzerland under  bi-lateral  agreements
    far exceed the official  statistics  for  Dublin  transfers.  For  this
    reason, it seems likely that a large proportion of  those  returns  are
    not made under the Dublin Regulation procedure.


82. The evidence discloses a picture of increasing pressures on the Italian
    asylum system. The exceptionally high numbers arriving by sea  in  2016
    and the early part of 2017 reduced from the middle of 2017 as a  result
    of agreements made by Italy with North African countries.  Despite  the
    reduction in  arrivals  by  sea,  the  applications  for  international
    protection in 2017 increased by over  6,000  from  the  previous  year.
    Because of its position as a "gateway to Europe", Italy already had  by
    far  the  highest  number  of  take  back  requests  under  the  Dublin
    Regulation. Previously, many migrants might have passed  through  Italy
    without being registered on EURODAC. The fingerprinting of migrants  in
    'hotspots' is likely to lead to an increase in transfer requests  under
    the Dublin Regulation. Tighter controls on the  northern  borders  with
    France, Switzerland and Austria appear to be resulting in large numbers
    of migrants being returned to Italy under the  Dublin  Regulation,  bi-
    lateral agreements or  simply  being  'pushed  back'  into  Italy.  The
    evidence indicates that the reduction in the number of arrivals in  the
    south of the country  is  likely  to  be  counteracted  by  containment
    policies operating on the northern borders. Given the small  proportion
    of people transferred under the relocation  programme,  the  scheme  is
    unlikely to have alleviated the pressures on the Italian asylum system.



Overview of the asylum procedure

83. The AIDA report  provides  a  useful  summary  of  the  Italian  asylum
    procedure.

Initial registration ('fotosegnalamento')

84. There is no formal time frame for making an  asylum  claim.  Applicants
    are expected to present their case as soon as possible, and as a  rule,
    within eight days of their arrival in Italy. An  asylum  claim  can  be
    made at the border police office or  at  a  provincial  police  station
    (Questura), where the person will be  fingerprinted  and  a  photograph
    will  be   taken.   This   initial   registration   stage   is   called
    'fotosegnalamento'. If an asylum claim  is  made  at  the  border,  the
    police invite the asylum seeker  to  go  to  the  Questura  for  formal
    registration.

Formal registration ('verbalizzazione' and C3 form)

85. The formal registration of an asylum claim takes place at the  relevant
    Questura. The police at the Questura will ask questions relating to the
    Dublin Regulation during the formal registration stage and then contact
    the Dublin Unit of the Ministry of the Interior,  which  then  verifies
    whether Italy is the Member State responsible for  the  examination  of
    the asylum claim.


86. The 'Modello C3' form must be completed to formally register the claim.
    The form includes basic information regarding the applicant's  personal
    history, the journey he or she has taken to Italy and their reasons for
    fleeing from their country of origin. The asylum seeker  signs  the  C3
    form.  The  police  send  the  registration  form  and  the   documents
    concerning the asylum application to the Territorial Commissions or Sub-
    commissions  for  International   Protection   (CTRPI   -   Commissioni
    territoriali per il riconoscimento  della  protezione  internazionale),
    which are located throughout the country.

Interview and decision by the Territorial Commission (CTRPI)

87. The Territorial Commissions are the only authorities competent to carry
    out a substantive asylum interview. The Questura will notify the asylum
    seeker of the date of the interview with  the  Territorial  Commission.
    Managers of reception centres used to be able to notify an applicant of
    the interview date. However, a circular from  the  National  Commission
    for the Right of Asylum (CNDA - Commissione nazionale per il diritto di
    asilo) dated 10 August 2017 (CNDA Circular No.6300)  now  requires  the
    Questura to notify interview dates.  The  CNDA  coordinates  and  gives
    guidance to the Territorial Commissions in carrying  out  their  tasks,
    but  is  also  responsible  for  the  revocation   and   cessation   of
    international protection. These bodies  belong  to  the  Department  of
    Civil  Liberties  and  Immigration  of  the  Italian  Ministry  of  the
    Interior. They make independent decisions on asylum applications and do
    not follow instructions from the Ministry of the Interior.


88. According to the 'Procedure Decree'  (LD  25/2008),  the  CTRPI  should
    interview the applicant  within  30  days  after  having  received  the
    application and should decide the application within three working days
    thereafter. When the CTRPI is unable to take a decision  in  this  time
    limit and needs to "acquire new elements", the examination procedure is
    concluded within six months of the  lodging  of  the  application.  The
    CTRPI may extend the time limit for a period not  exceeding  a  further
    nine months when (i) there  are  complex  issues  of  fact  and/or  law
    involved;  (ii)  a  large  number  of  asylum  applications  are   made
    simultaneously; or (iii) the delay can clearly  be  attributed  to  the
    failure of the applicant to  comply  with  his  or  her  obligation  to
    cooperate. The time limit may be extended for a further three months in
    certain circumstances. The asylum procedure might last  for  a  maximum
    period of 18 months.

89. The 'Procedure Decree' allows for an accelerated procedure  in  certain
    categories of cases. The procedure applies where (i) the application is
    likely to  be  well-founded;  (ii)  the  applicant  is  vulnerable,  in
    particular, an unaccompanied child or  a  person  in  need  of  special
    procedural guarantees;  (iii)  when  the  application  is  made  by  an
    applicant placed in an administrative detention centre (CPR - Centri di
    permanenza per il rimpatro); and (iv) if the applicant comes  from  one
    of the countries identified by the CNDA that provides for  no  personal
    interview  when  there  are  sufficient  grounds  to  grant  subsidiary
    protection status. The competent CTRPI must inform the  applicant  that
    they have three days from the date of the communication to  ask  for  a
    personal interview. In the absence of such a request,  the  CTRPI  will
    take a  decision.  The  AIDA  report  states  that,  in  practice,  the
    prioritised procedure is applied to those held in CPR and rarely to the
    other categories of cases.

90. It is not necessary for us to consider the  evidence  relating  to  the
    onward appeal procedure because the way the case has been  put  focuses
    on the initial procedures for registering a protection  claim,  and  in
    the case of Beneficiaries of International Protection (those  who  have
    been granted protection status) (BIPs), what happens after a person has
    been granted protection status.

Suspension of the procedure

91. If an applicant leaves the reception centre  without  justification  or
    absconds from detention without having been interviewed, the  CTRPI  is
    empowered to suspend the examination  of  the  asylum  application  (LD
    142/2015). The applicant can ask, only once, for the  procedure  to  be
    reopened within  12  months  of  the  suspended  decision.  After  this
    deadline the CTRPI declares an end to the  procedure.  Any  application
    made after a  declaration  has  been  made  to  end  the  procedure  is
    submitted for preliminary examination as  a  "subsequent  application".
    During the preliminary examination the reasons for moving away from the
    centre are considered. From 01 January 2017 to  29  December  2017  the
    Territorial Commissions issued 4,292 suspension decisions.

Access to reception and accommodation

92. As we have already  stated,  Italy  is  a  signatory  to  the  'recast'
    Reception Directive (2013/33/EU).  Article  17(2)  states  that  Member
    States shall "ensure that  material  reception  conditions  provide  an
    adequate standard of living  for  applicants,  which  guarantees  their
    subsistence and protects their physical and  mental  health."  The  MSF
    report states that Italian legislation (LD  142/2015)  ("the  Reception
    and Procedure Decree") envisages that a  person  gains  access  to  the
    reception system as soon  as  they  apply  for  asylum.  However,  AIDA
    reports that in practice access to the system is  postponed  until  the
    asylum seeker has formalised their application  by  completing  the  C3
    form. We consider the evidence relating  to  the  delays  in  accessing
    support and accommodation in more detail below.


Reception and accommodation

93. The AIDA report summarises the structure of  the  reception  system  in
    Italy. The 'Reception and Procedures Decree' (LD 142/2015) envisages  a
    phased reception system. The Decree came into  force  on  15  September
    2015 and is intended to  implement  the  'recast'  Reception  Directive
    (2013/33/EU) and the 'recast' Procedures Directive (2013/32/EU).


94. The reception system is  divided  into  emergency  facilities  (CPSA  /
    Hotspots), temporary facilities run by the Prefecture (CAS), government
    first-line reception (former CARA or CDA)  and  government  second-line
    reception facilities (SPRAR). Within these broad categories  there  are
    various types of accommodation and  reception  facilities.  The  system
    envisages temporary accommodation in  first-line  reception  facilities
    while a claim is registered before transfer  to  second-line  reception
    facilities.

95. The decentralised nature of the Italian  asylum  and  reception  system
    means that figures relating to the capacity  of  the  reception  system
    vary and are subject to changes over time. The  AIDA  report  for  2017
    states that there are no comprehensive statistics on the  capacity  and
    occupancy of the entire reception system, given the different types  of
    accommodation facilities existing  in  Italy.  The  AIDA  report  dated
    December 2015 outlined data from the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  from
    October 2015. At that time there were reported to be  7,290  people  in
    emergency and first-line reception places (CPSA, CDA and CARA),  70,918
    in CAS and 21,914 in SPRAR.

96. The Special Representative of the Secretary General  on  migration  and
    refugees noted the following figures  at  the  time  of  his  visit  in
    October 2016. He said that at  that  time  there  were  around  162,000
    reception places in Italy. About 10,000 were  in  first-line  reception
    facilities  (CARA  or  CDA),  26,000  were  in  second-line   reception
    facilities (SPRAR) and the  remaining  126,000  were  in  extraordinary
    reception facilities (CAS). He observed that because it may take  years
    for an asylum application to be processed and for an asylum  seeker  to
    leave the reception system, places were not  being  freed  up  for  new
    arrivals. As a result, the number of people in reception  continued  to
    grow.

97. The Caritas report states that there were around  188,000  migrants  in
    various reception facilities at the end of 2016. As  at  15  July  2017
    there were 205,000 migrants in reception facilities. The  extraordinary
    reception  centres  (CAS)  were   used   most   with   158,607   people
    accommodated. The SPRAR system had 31,313  admissions.  The  first-line
    reception centres accommodated 15,000 people.  In the period from  2014
    to 2016 the number of applicants  in  extraordinary  reception  centres
    increased by 286.5%, while the SPRAR "registered an increase of  around
    50%". The base line figure for the 50% increase is unknown. As we  will
    see, the figures vary as to exactly how many SPRAR places are likely to
    be available. We will consider the evidence relating to the capacity of
    the second-line reception system in more detail below.

98. Other figures show that a proportion  of  people  leave  the  reception
    system for different reasons.  The  Caritas  report  says  that  12,171
    people left reception  facilities  in  2016.  41.3%  left  for  "socio-
    economic integration" and 29.5% left reception  facilities  voluntarily
    before the end of their allotted time.  It  is  unclear  whether  these
    figures relate to the whole reception system  including  emergency  and
    extraordinary reception facilities or to SPRAR, which is the only  type
    of accommodation with an 'allotted time'. Nevertheless, it  is  broadly
    consistent with other evidence, which indicates that  a  proportion  of
    people do not want to stay in Italy and may attempt to  continue  their
    journey to other countries further north.

Emergency facilities - CPSA / Hotspots

99. The first aid and reception centres (CPSA - Centro di Primo soccorso  e
    accoglienza) are designed to provide initial first aid and reception to
    those arriving by sea. The AIDA report states  that,  during  2017,  in
    addition to the existing hotspots in Lampedusa, Pozzallo,  Taranto  and
    Trapani, another hotspot was set up in  Messina.  In  March  2018,  the
    hotspots in Lampedusa and Taranto were  closed  temporarily.  The  AIDA
    report states that the hotspot in Lampedusa was closed due to an  arson
    incident and  a  visit  by  several  organisations,  which  highlighted
    "degrading conditions of detention". The hotspot in Taranto was  closed
    after the  National  Anti-Corruption  Authority  detected  "procurement
    irregularities".

 100. There is no legal framework for the  operations  carried  out  in  the
      CPSA. According to the Standard Operating Procedures a  person  should
      stay in the centre for the  shortest  possible  period  of  time.  The
      Special Representative of  the  Secretary  General  on  migration  and
      refugees says that, in principle, no one should  spend  more  than  72
      hours in a hotspot. The AIDA report says that, in practice, people are
      accommodated for days or weeks. The centres constantly face  emergency
      situations as a result of the number of arrivals. Reception conditions
      are reported to be poor.

Temporary reception facilities - CAS

 101. The AIDA report states that CAS (Centri di accoglienza  straordinaria)
      facilities were designed as an emergency measure to provide  temporary
      accommodation when there was no availability  in  the  main  reception
      system. Elsewhere in the evidence they are described as 'extraordinary
      reception centres'. The AIDA report goes on to say that  the  law  (LD
      142/2015) provides for CAS to  be  identified  and  activated  by  the
      relevant Prefecture in cooperation with the Ministry of the  Interior.
      Activation is reserved for emergency situations involving  substantial
      arrivals, but in practice, applies when places in  ordinary  reception
      centres are not sufficient to meet reception  demand.  CAS  facilities
      are designed for the first accommodation phase, but as an  exceptional
      measure,  provide  second-line  reception  for  the   time   "strictly
      necessary" until the transfer of asylum seekers to a SPRAR project. As
      in the first-line  reception  centres,  only  essential  services  are
      guaranteed.


 102. The AIDA report states that the CAS system has expanded to  the  point
      of being absorbed into the ordinary reception system.  The  number  of
      CAS in Italy reached 9,150 by the end of August 2017. Figures from the
      Chamber of Deputies showed on 01 December 2017 that CAS hosted 151,239
      people, which was 81% of the capacity of the whole  reception  system.
      The AIDA report goes on to say that  "insufficient  expansion  of  the
      SPRAR has been at the origin of the creation of a permanent  state  of
      emergency and of  the  proliferation  of  temporary  structures  where
      asylum seekers can spend all of the asylum  procedure."  The  "chronic
      emergency" has forced improvisation and encouraged bodies to enter the
      accommodation network, which lack the necessary skills. AIDA  outlines
      concerns about the CAS system raised by a variety of NGOs  working  in
      the sector. AIDA observes that the  quality  of  reception  facilities
      depends very much on the agreements by the managing  bodies  with  the
      Prefecture and on the professionalism of the  bodies  involved.  There
      were some notable cases,  such  as  the  CAS  in  Trieste,  where  the
      reception conditions were equal to those of SPRAR.


 103. The Special Representative of the Secretary General on  migration  and
      refugees says that because of the intended  temporary  nature  of  CAS
      facilities the focus is on emergency accommodation and  not  long-term
      integration. However, many asylum-seekers stay in a CAS throughout the
      determination of their  asylum  applications.  He  observes  that  CAS
      facilities have become "an important feature of the Italian  reception
      system" because of the shortage of places in the  SPRAR  network.  The
      Special Representative recognises that the Italian authorities made  a
      huge effort to increase their  reception  capacity  in  recent  years,
      largely by making more places available in CAS. All those  who  arrive
      by sea are accommodated even if this pushes  facilities  beyond  their
      official capacity. But the numbers involved have had an impact on  the
      nature of the accommodation and services  provided,  as  well  as  the
      conditions in reception facilities. He says that this raises potential
      issues under Articles 3 and 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights.

 104.  The  Swiss  Refugee  Council  Report  ("the  SRC  report")   entitled
      "Reception conditions in Italy" (August 2016) set out the findings  of
      a fact-finding mission to Rome and Milan in February and  March  2016.
      The SRC report gave details of  those  interviewed  during  the  fact-
      finding mission, including ASGI, Caritas,  MEDU,  Lucia  Iuzzolini  at
      SPRAR, UNHCR, officials at the Ministry of the Interior and the police
      as well as representatives of the Italian Red Cross and staff at  GUS.
      The SRC report states that there is  no  publicly  available  list  of
      centres. Their funding and mandates are not transparent. CAS  are  run
      by   various   institutions    including    municipalities,    private
      organisations and NGOs. Management often lacks experience  in  dealing
      with asylum  seekers.  Many  centres  are  in  remote  locations,  are
      operating above capacity and are unsuitable. There are reports of poor
      hygiene standards. Due to the  dramatic  increase  in  the  number  of
      centres and the  constant  changes  to  management,  staff  are  often
      unqualified and/or overworked.

 105. A UN Human Rights Committee sixth periodic report on  Italy  dated  01
      May 2017 acknowledges the efforts made by Italy to  receive  and  host
      "exceptional numbers of persons fleeing armed conflict or persecution"
      but expresses concerns about insufficient numbers of places in  first-
      line and second-line reception centres  and  the  "substandard  living
      conditions" in several reception centres. The report does not  provide
      any detail, but the concerns are expressed by a credible international
      body and are broadly consistent with the other  evidence  relating  to
      the capacity of the  reception  system  and  the  conditions  in  some
      extraordinary and first-line reception centres.

 106. Francesca Grisot's evidence is consistent with this  overall  picture.
      Ms Grisot says that she has worked with asylum  seekers  and  BIPs  in
      Venice since 2006. From 2013-2015 she worked on  two  European  funded
      projects  assisting  people  being  transferred   under   the   Dublin
      Regulation (known as "dublinati di rientro"). She currently  works  as
      the head of planning, service organisation and staff training for  the
      opening of new reception centres within  the  EDECO  Cooperative.  The
      EDECO Cooperative manages the largest CAS centres in Veneto as well as
      various smaller CAS and the Padua SPRAR, with more than  11,000  cases
      being managed. Given her position working for a cooperative which runs
      reception facilities in the Veneto region we  are  satisfied  that  Ms
      Grisot gives reliable evidence regarding the reception  facilities  in
      her region.

 107. Ms Grisot refers to the relevant legislative decree and notes that the
      intention was for CAS facilities to be provided as a temporary measure
      prior to transfer to other reception facilities.  In  fact,  she  says
      that CAS have become centres for long-term stay, sometimes for an even
      longer period than the second-line  reception  period  of  six  months
      provided by SPRAR. In the summer of 2017 the CAS in Cona housed  1,470
      people compared with 942 planned places. The  CAS  in  Bagnoli  housed
      1,050 people compared with 850 planned places.  The average  stay  was
      more than one year.  She  says  that  in  many  cases  asylum  seekers
      obtained humanitarian protection after three years in a  CAS.  Once  a
      positive ruling has been recorded  and  a  person  can  apply  for  an
      electronic permit and a request is sent to the Prefecture of Venice or
      Padua for the person to enter a SPRAR. Reception measures  cease  when
      the person is issued with an electronic permit. She  states  that  the
      possibility of inclusion in SPRAR after being discharged from  CAS  is
      minimal. The waiting list is  on  average  4-5  months  long  with  no
      accommodation provided between the extraordinary reception centre  and
      ordinary reception services in SPRAR.


 108. Ms Grisot describes the accommodation in the  CAS  facilities  in  her
      region as of a "minimum standard,  sometimes  in  dormitories  of  100
      people in tensile structures, bathrooms in containers and with a  two-
      week rotating menu of simple, repetitive food". At  the  CAS  in  Cona
      asylum seekers were originally housed in the mud in tents belonging to
      the civil protection corps. EDECO  Cooperative  invested  one  million
      Euros in the former military camp, which now has  "tensile  structures
      containing a sea of bunk beds". Privacy  is  minimal.  Asylum  seekers
      hang blankets and sheets by their beds in an attempt  to  create  some
      privacy. Each  tensile  structure  can  hold  up  to  76  people.  The
      emergency concept of the accommodation does not provide furniture  for
      storing personal items or any possibility of personalising the  space.
      Ms Grisot says that she has visited the camp in Cona and  can  confirm
      that it is overcrowded and does not comply with  the  regulations  for
      residential conditions. She also noted that there were  people  housed
      at the CAS with "significant physical or mental health problems",  but
      she  provides  no  further  detail  as  to  the   numbers   or   their
      circumstances. In Ms Grisot's opinion it is  "a  wholly  inappropriate
      reception   structure   for    asylum    seekers    with    additional
      vulnerabilities" and such  accommodation  is  inappropriate  to  house
      asylum seekers for an extended period.


 109. The Home Office interviewed a representative from Caritas  during  the
      fact-finding mission in October 2017. The Home Office summary  of  the
      meeting states that Caritas is the biggest NGO in Italy  dealing  with
      reception services and protection of asylum seekers and  BIPs.  Around
      28,000-30,000  asylum  seekers   are   supported   by   Caritas.   The
      representative from Caritas says that the largest reception  provision
      is the emergency system provided by CAS, which is implemented  by  the
      local Prefectures. Caritas says that the CAS system is "very mixed and
      a little confused" due to the numbers  of  organisations  involved  in
      providing services. The Ministry of the Interior provides the funding,
      but expects a solution to  be  delivered  at  a  local  level  by  the
      Prefecture.

 110. The UNHCR representative in Rome  who  was  interviewed  by  the  Home
      Office during the fact-finding mission said that reception  facilities
      are not standardised. There are thousands of units in a wide range  of
      accommodation e.g. in hotels, former barracks and former  schools  run
      by NGOs under contracts which  are  funded  by  the  Ministry  of  the
      Interior with agreement from local Prefectures.

First-line reception facilities - Regional Hubs (former CARA / CDA)


 111. The AIDA  report  states  that  the  government  first-line  reception
      facilities are collective centres previously known as Centres for  the
      Reception  of  Asylum  Seekers  (CARA  -  Centro  di  accoglienza  per
      richiedenti asilo) or Accommodation Centres for Migrants (CDA - Centro
      di accoglienza). The 'Reception and Procedures Decree'  (LD  142/2015)
      provides for first-reception centres to  be  managed  by  a  range  of
      public and private bodies following public tender.


 112. Information from the  Chamber  of  Deputies  dated  24  November  2017
      indicated that there were 15 first-line  reception  centres  in  seven
      regions of Italy. At that date the first-line reception centres hosted
      10,738 asylum seekers. The  AIDA  report  goes  on  to  say  that  the
      situation at some of these centres is critical  due  to  overcrowding.
      The centre in Bari is designed  to  accommodate  a  maximum  of  1,216
      people, but hosted 1,233. The centre in Gorizia had a maximum capacity
      of 138, but hosted 663 asylum seekers.

 113. The AIDA report says that the purpose of first-reception centres is to
      offer initial support to asylum seekers so that medical tests  can  be
      carried out and their needs and vulnerabilities can be identified. The
      purpose is to identify a suitable onward placement. The law  does  not
      specify a maximum length of stay in these  centres.  The  AIDA  report
      says that the mechanism for the reception phases is  bypassed  through
      the ambiguous wording of the law, which says  that  applicants  should
      stay in first-reception facilities for the time  "strictly  necessary"
      before transfer into SPRAR structures.

 114. The collective reception  centres  are  usually  large  structures  in
      isolated areas away from urban centres, which makes  it  difficult  to
      contact  the  "external   world".   Government   centres   are   often
      overcrowded. The quality of accommodation services is  not  equivalent
      to the SPRAR centres  or  other  smaller  reception  facilities.  AIDA
      reports that regular concerns have  been  raised  about  the  variable
      standards of reception centres. The material conditions vary from  one
      centre to another depending on the size, the number of asylum  seekers
      hosted and the level and quality  of  the  services  provided  by  the
      organisation managing each centre. The report goes on to give examples
      of  concerns  raised  about  the  conditions  in  several   first-line
      reception centres.

 115. The Special Representative of the Secretary General on  migration  and
      refugees notes that CARA and CDA are first-line  reception  facilities
      established by the Ministry of  the  Interior.  It  is  intended  that
      asylum seekers spend a few weeks  or  months  there  to  complete  the
      administrative formalities of lodging an asylum claim while awaiting a
      place in a second-line reception facility. However, lack of places  in
      second-line reception facilities means that in practice asylum seekers
      spend between 6-18 months in first reception and often only leave once
      protection status  has  been  granted  or  the  application  has  been
      refused. The Special Representative says that the  conditions  in  the
      first reception centres he visited were reasonable. The  main  problem
      was the delay in accessing the asylum procedures and the length of the
      procedures themselves, which prevents a turnover of residents.


Second-line reception facilities - SPRAR

 116. The second-line reception is  the  System  of  Protection  for  Asylum
      Seekers and Refugees (SPRAR - Sistema di  protezione  per  richiedenti
      asilo e rifugiati).


 117. An undated document from the Servizio Centrale  (Central  Service)  of
      the  SPRAR  explains  that  SPRAR  consists  of  a  network  of  local
      authorities, which set up and run reception projects for  "people  who
      are forced to migrate". It draws upon the  National  Fund  for  asylum
      policies and services managed by the Ministry of the Interior  and  is
      "included in State Budget legislation". SPRAR is co-ordinated  by  the
      Servizio Centrale, which is an organisation set up by the Ministry  of
      the Interior  with  operational  aspects  entrusted  to  the  National
      Association of Italian Municipalities (ANCI -  Associazione  Nazionale
      Comuni Italiani). The document goes on to outline the role  played  by
      the Servizio Centrale and the main objectives of the SPRAR:

           "The Central Service has the task of coordinating the System for
           the Protection of Asylum Seekers and Refugees (SPRAR)  in  Italy
           providing information,  consultancy,  technical  assistance  and
           training  to  local  authorities  and  operators  of  the  SPRAR
           network, as well as for monitoring the presence of refugees  and
           asylum seekers in Italy. At a  local  level  local  authorities,
           with the valued  support  of  the  third  sector,  guarantee  an
           "integrated reception" that goes well beyond the mere  provision
           of board and lodging, but includes orientation  measures,  legal
           and social assistance as well as the development of personalized
           programmes for the social-economic integration of individuals.


           SPRAR's MAIN OBJECTIVE  is  to  take  responsibility  for  those
           individuals accepted into the scheme and to  provide  them  with
           personalised programmes to help them (re)aquire  self  autonomy,
           and to take part  in  and  integrate  effectively  into  Italian
           society, in terms of finding employment and housing,  of  access
           to local services, or social life and of child education.
           .....
           Local authorities and bodies,  in  partnership  with  the  third
           sector, set up and operate reception projects  in  their  areas,
           applying SPRAR  guidelines  and  standards  while  taking  local
           factors and conditions  into  account.  Local  authorities  can,
           depending on the type, capability and  level  of  competence  of
           local  actors  as  well  as  on  the  resources   (professional,
           organizational or economic) available to them, choose  the  type
           of reception facilities they can offer and the sort  of  persons
           they can best take responsibility for. For this reason  projects
           can be aimed at individual adults and two parent  families  (the
           so-called "ordinary category"), or at  single  parent  families,
           unaccompanied minors seeking  asylum,  victims  of  torture  and
           those persons in need of  constant  care  or  with  physical  or
           psychological problems (classified as "vulnerable  categories").
           Special  projects  are   provided   for   those   people   whose
           vulnerability results from problems of  mental  health.  In  any
           case, all those being cared for under the scheme are accepted on
           a temporary basis,  and  this  is  fundamental  given  that  the
           ultimate objective is to give them self-autonomy  and  integrate
           them in society. Facilities offered by SPRAR - which tend to  be
           either  apartments  or  small  to  medium  sized   accommodation
           centres, have a social-educational  nature  and  must  never  be
           considered as part of the health service facilities. ..."

118. The AIDA report says that this is a publicly funded  network  of  local
    authorities and NGOs, which accommodates asylum seekers and  BIPs.  The
    SPRAR are small reception  centres  where  assistance  and  integration
    services are provided. In contrast  to  the  large-scale  buildings  of
    extraordinary and first-line reception facilities SPRAR  has  over  876
    smaller  decentralised  projects  (as  of  February  2018).  SPRAR  may
    accommodate  destitute  asylum  seekers  who  have   formalised   their
    applications. Applicants who are already in the territory may apply  to
    enter SPRAR centres directly.


119. The AIDA report states that  conditions  in  the  SPRAR  system  differ
    considerably from those in the first reception centres. In bigger SPRAR
    facilities rooms might accommodate up to four people, while  in  flats,
    rooms might accommodate 2-3 people. On average  SPRAR  facilities  host
    about nine people. A common space for recreational activities should be
    guaranteed. SPRAR projects have adequate  hygiene  facilities  for  the
    number of asylum seekers hosted. In the  case  of  projects  that  host
    people with special needs, such as unaccompanied children, the services
    are widened. The quality of SPRAR services  differs  depending  on  the
    service provider, but minimum standards should  be  guaranteed  in  all
    centres.

120. The AIDA report states that the  SPRAR  reception  capacity  has  grown
    exponentially in the last seven years: from 3,979  financed  places  in
    2011 to 9,356 places in 2012-2013. There were  20,965  financed  places
    for the period 2014-2016. An additional 4,077 places were activated  in
    July 2016 and another "969 seats" related to the new 2017-2019 projects
    have been activated since February 2017. As of February 2018, SPRAR ran
    876 reception projects, with a  total  of  35,869  funded  places.  The
    source of this figure is attributed to SPRAR. The AIDA report  observes
    that,  despite  the  considerable  growth   in   SPRAR,   capacity   is
    insufficient to meet accommodation needs. SPRAR places cover less  than
    20% of the reception demand in Italy.

121. The Special Representative of the Secretary General  on  migration  and
    refugees explains that SPRAR facilities are the  second-line  reception
    facilities where asylum-seekers should be transferred  once  they  have
    made an asylum application.  The  SPRAR  budget  includes  a  mandatory
    percentage for integration activities. SPRAR facilities are an  example
    of best practice. The goal  should  be  the  continued  growth  of  the
    network. At  the  date  of  his  visit  in  October  2016  the  Special
    Representative  recorded  that  there  were  26,000  people  in   SPRAR
    facilities. He noted that there was resistance from  local  populations
    to  opening  SPRAR  facilities  in  their  areas  and   concerns   from
    municipalities regarding funding. As a result, there  are  insufficient
    SPRAR facilities.

122. The Caritas report notes that the ordinary reception  system  is  still
    undersized for the number of refugees. The ANCI and the Ministry of the
    Interior were taking steps to promote the SPRAR system to  the  regions
    with encouraging results. Although the objective of a single system was
    still "a long way off", work was being done to reach this  goal.  There
    had been a significant increase in the  number  of  SPRAR  places  from
    26,000 to 30,000 in "absolute terms". The source  of  the  figures  for
    SPRAR places provided in the  translation  of  the  Caritas  report  is
    unclear.

123. A report of  a  Parliamentary  Committee  inquiry  into  the  reception
    conditions of migrants  dated  20  December  2017  ("the  Parliamentary
    Committee report") says that there was a gap between the theory of  the
    'Reception and Procedures Decree' (LD 142/2015) and the reality of  the
    present  reception  system.  The  report  says   that   the   continued
    accommodation of migrants in extraordinary centres could no  longer  be
    tolerated. There has been a "massive and pathological" use of temporary
    facilities (CAS). The report refers to statistics from  the  Department
    of Civil Liberties and Immigration, which recorded  that  24,573  SPRAR
    places had been "taken up" as of 18  November  2017.  The  report  also
    refers to data from the SPRAR Servizio Centrale dated 30 November 2017,
    which shows that although funding was provided for 31,270 places,  only
    661 local authorities have signed up  to  SPRAR  offering  a  total  of
    24,972 places. This led to a shortfall of 6,302 funded places that  had
    not been taken up by local authorities despite legal and administrative
    measures designed to give  municipalities  incentives  to  support  the
    SPRAR network.


124. The figures from the undated document from the Servizio Centrale  state
    that the SPRAR network comprised of 771 projects including 604 standard
    projects, 117 projects for unaccompanied minors  and  50  projects  for
    people with "mental vulnerability or disability". The number of  people
    'accepted'  in  SPRAR  was   26,480   standard   beneficiaries,   2,332
    unaccompanied  minors  and  632  places   for   people   with   "mental
    vulnerability or disability". Unhelpfully,  the  document  is  undated.
    However, it is reasonable to infer  that  the  figures  are  likely  to
    relate to a  period  after  the  official  figures  for  November  2017
    considered in the Parliamentary Committee report given the increase  in
    the number of local authorities involved in SPRAR from 661  to  666  at
    the date of this document. It is also  reasonable  to  infer  that  the
    figures are likely to relate to  a  period  after  November  2017,  but
    before February 2018, when a senior official in  the  SPRAR  office  in
    Rome confirmed to Ms Leo that 734 places were available  in  SPRAR  for
    people with mental health issues and physical disabilities, given  that
    only 632 places were available when this  document  was  prepared  (see
    more detailed consideration of the provisions  for  vulnerable  persons
    below). The evidence indicates that the actual capacity  of  the  SPRAR
    system sometime in the period between November 2017 and  February  2018
    was likely to be around 29,000 places, which would appear to be broadly
    consistent with the observations made by  the  Parliamentary  Committee
    about the gap between funded places and actual places provided by local
    municipalities.


125. In contrast to previous cases, both those representing  the  applicants
    and the respondent have had direct contact with senior officials in the
    SPRAR network. The Home  Office  note  of  the  meeting  with  a  SPRAR
    official in October 2017 has not been  approved  by  SPRAR.  Given  the
    criticisms of the way in which  the  Fact-finding  Mission  Report  was
    prepared, we approach the note of the meeting with  some  caution.  The
    official is not named, but is said to be a senior manager at the  SPRAR
    Management and Legal Support  Office  (Ufficio  Supporto  Gestionale  e
    Legale) in Rome.

126. It is unclear whether the person interviewed by Home  Office  officials
    during the fact-finding mission is the same person  interviewed  by  Ms
    Leo (the applicants' agent) on 26 February 2018.  Ms Leo  conducted  an
    interview  with  Lucia  Iuzzolini.  Ms  Leo's  statement  describes  Ms
    Iuzzolini as the Head of  Legal  Office,  SPRAR  Management  and  Legal
    Support Office. If  Home  Office  officials  interviewed  Ms  Iuzzolini
    during the fact-finding mission it is likely that  Ms  Leo's  statement
    would have mentioned the fact, but it does not. However, the  statement
    of Rachel Davis, the Asylum Liaison Officer for the  UK  Third  Country
    Unit based in Rome, shows that she had email contact with Ms  Iuzzolini
    in early May 2018 to clarify a specific point relating to services  for
    vulnerable people with mental health issues.

127. The unapproved notes of the Home Office meeting with the  senior  SPRAR
    official in Rome say that when a migrant arrives  in  Italy  the  first
    step is to meet the applicant and  establish  whether  he  or  she  has
    claimed asylum or intends to do so. Identity checks are carried out and
    the person is assessed for vulnerability, disability and special needs.
    Most migrants arrived by sea. It is unclear who the SPRAR official says
    is responsible  for  carrying  out  an  initial  assessment.  It  seems
    unlikely that  SPRAR  officials  would  carry  out  initial  checks  in
    hotspots in the manner described. The official  says  that  the  second
    stage would be to make a referral to SPRAR. Again, it is  unclear  what
    body would make the initial assessment and referral. The SPRAR official
    says that there are not enough places in SPRAR due to the  recent  mass
    influx of migrants. Where a place in a SPRAR is not  available,  asylum
    seekers will remain in the CAS system or accommodation will be  sourced
    from local authorities or NGOs.  The  official  says  that  there  were
    35,869 SPRAR places at that time (October 2017). This figure is broadly
    consistent with the number of  funded  places  mentioned  in  the  AIDA
    report, but neither piece of  evidence  clarifies  the  source  of  the
    information.

128. We find that the information contained in the interview notes  and  the
    report of Ms Leo's interview with Ms Iuzzolini  is  reliable.  Although
    previous 'expert' reports prepared by Ms Leo in other cases  were  said
    to have the "flavour of advocacy", she does not seek to  give  evidence
    in this case. Her statement is confined to outlining the methodology of
    the  interviews  she  was  asked  to  undertake  by   the   applicants'
    representatives. The methodology is clear. The questions she was  asked
    to put to SPRAR and Caritas are set out in full. A  copy  of  Ms  Leo's
    contemporaneous notes in Italian are provided as  well  as  an  English
    translation. Ms Leo then prepared a short report summarising  the  main
    points drawn from the interview, which was approved by Ms Iuzzolini. Ms
    Leo's notes of some follow up questions have also been approved.

129. Ms Iuzzolini is a senior official in SPRAR and is therefore in  a  good
    position to provide reliable information about the SPRAR  system.  Much
    of her evidence relates to access to  the  system  and  provisions  for
    vulnerable people,  which  we  set  out  below.  In  terms  of  general
    information about SPRAR,  she  says  that  an  applicant  cannot  apply
    directly to SPRAR. There must be an official referral. Self-referral is
    possible, but the person must go to the responsible local body in order
    for that body to make the official  referral.  She  says  that  it  was
    "totally impossible" to give  waiting  times  for  a  SPRAR  place.  It
    depends on the availability of places. The focus is  to  find  a  SPRAR
    place close to the referring authority to ensure continuity. If that is
    not possible SPRAR may look for another centre, but it depends  on  the
    availability of places. When asked if additional SPRAR places could  be
    created if  the  demand  is  greater  than  the  available  places,  Ms
    Iuzzolini said that additional places could not be created from outside
    the  system.  It  was  possible  to  increase  the  number  of   places
    immediately after the 'North Africa emergency', but this ended with the
    2015-2016 invitation to tender.  In  subsequent  SPRAR  invitations  to
    tender there was no mention of funding for additional places.


130. The Home Office note of the meeting with a UNHCR official  in  Rome  in
    October 2017 says that Italy had received approximately 100,000  asylum
    seekers by October 2017. There were not enough SPRAR resources  because
    of the high influx of migrants. UNHCR is reported to have said that the
    situation in Italy was not the same as in Greece.

131. UNHCR says that  reception  centres  have  been  given  new  guidelines
    (dated 03 July 2017)  by  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior,  which  are
    intended to improve reception  services,  including  the  provision  of
    social and psychological  support.  The  new  guidelines  set  out  how
    provisions should be delivered at a local level. The Italian government
    has been  consulting  with  the  UNHCR  on  a  project  to  standardise
    monitoring methods. The expectation is that  guidelines  for  reception
    centres will be standardised by  2018  to  prevent  variations  in  the
    quality of services. The Ministry of the Interior is investing more  in
    external monitoring and auditing. Currently, reception  facilities  are
    not standardised. UNHCR noted that there are thousands of  units  in  a
    wide range of  accommodation  including  hotels,  former  barracks  and
    former schools.  UNHCR conducted a programme  of  visits  to  reception
    facilities to check conditions. Between July  2015  and  December  2016
    UNHCR made 115 visits to places that accommodate asylum  seekers.  Some
    facilities were good, others revealed some weaknesses and in some cases
    the facilities had "serious flaws". As result of  support  from  UNHCR,
    the situation has improved in terms of oversight and monitoring.


132. UNHCR says that there are still shortcomings and issues of capacity  in
    the local and national system for reception  services,  especially  for
    vulnerable cases. However, the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  had  taken
    significant steps to set up  an  administrative  and  legal  framework,
    which aims to guarantee minimum standards to asylum seekers.

133. Ilaria Sommaruga and Anna Brambilla prepared a joint  statement,  which
    summarises their knowledge and experiences of the asylum and  reception
    system in the Milan area. Both women work at the office of a  community
    centre called CSD Diaconia Valdese in Milan. Ms Brambilla says that she
    is a lawyer who specialises in immigration law. She  is  also  a  board
    member of ASGI and is responsible for ASGI training. Ms Sommaruga  does
    not appear to be a qualified lawyer but outlines her experience working
    in immigration law. She describes her position at CSD Diaconia  Valdese
    as "national legal counsel". The role of the CSD  Diaconia  Valdese  is
    not explained, but it is reasonable to infer from what is said in their
    report that it is a community  organisation  which  offers  advice  and
    support to asylum seekers and refugees. To this extent,  the  witnesses
    can describe their experiences of the  system  within  the  context  of
    their role assisting asylum seekers and refugees in the Milan area. The
    evidence concentrates on their knowledge of Dublin returns to the Milan
    area, which we consider in more detail below. For the purpose  of  this
    section, we note what they  say  about  the  guidelines  for  reception
    centres published in July 2017.


134. It is clear from their report that CSD  Diaconia  Valdese  has  contact
    with the local authorities and reception services in  the  Milan  area.
    They say that the new tender specifications adopted by the  Prefectures
    tend  to  harmonise  the  reception  conditions  downwards   (this   is
    consistent with other evidence relating to the tendering process). They
    note what UNHCR says about the guidelines published in July 2017.  They
    say that their local CAS and SPRAR centres have not  received  the  new
    guidelines yet. It is unclear whether  Ms  Sommaruga  or  Ms  Brambilla
    contacted  the  local  reception  centres  to  find  out  whether   the
    guidelines had been sent to them or whether they are simply unaware  of
    the guidelines being implemented.  They  point  out  that  there  is  a
    difference  between  publishing  guidelines  and   whether   they   are
    implemented in practice. Ms Sommaruga and Ms  Brambilla  observed  that
    the monitoring mentioned by UNHCR took place  in  2015  and  2016,  but
    there had been a large increase in people claiming asylum  and  seeking
    access to the reception system since then.

135. Due to the decentralised nature of the SPRAR network, it  is  difficult
    to establish the actual number of places in the  system.  The  evidence
    shows that there has been a massive expansion in SPRAR facilities since
    2011, but it is hard to ascertain whether some of the figures translate
    into reality. For example, the  Parliamentary  Committee  report  makes
    clear that there is a difference between funded places and  the  places
    taken up by the municipalities. The Special Representative  points  out
    the reluctance of some local communities and municipalities to  develop
    SPRAR facilities. Although the Caritas  report  makes  clear  that  the
    government is trying to provide incentives to municipalities to take up
    funded SPRAR places, the evidence indicates that there is likely to  be
    a shortfall between the number of  funded  places  in  theory  and  the
    actual capacity on the ground. The Parliamentary Committee report noted
    that the official figures from November 2017 indicated that only 24,573
    SPRAR places had been "taken up" although there was  funding,  at  that
    time, for 31,270 places.

136. In light of that evidence, it seems unlikely that the upper  figure  of
    35,000 SPRAR places reflects the  actual  number  of  places  currently
    available. The figure mentioned by the SPRAR official in  October  2017
    appears to conflict with the official statistics from the Department of
    Civil Liberties and  Immigration,  which  indicated  that  only  24,573
    places had been taken up as of 18 November 2017. There might have  been
    plans to increase the number of funded  places,  but  there  is  little
    evidence to indicate that the number of actual places  is  as  much  as
    35,000. The number of places in the system might  well  have  increased
    above 24,573 SPRAR places in the last six months given  the  continuing
    efforts to expand the SPRAR system.  The  extent  of  any  increase  is
    unclear from the evidence currently  before  us  although  the  undated
    document providing figures of just over 29,000 places might  be  closer
    to the actual number of places actually available within the system.

137. A range  of  different  organisations,  including  UNHCR,  clearly  and
    consistently state that there are not enough SPRAR places to cope  with
    the demand. The evidence shows that the SPRAR  network  forms  a  small
    proportion of the reception system. According to the  legal  framework,
    SPRAR should be the norm for  reception  of  asylum  seekers,  but  the
    reality is that the vast majority of asylum seekers spend  their  time,
    often many months or  years,  housed  in  basic  and,  in  some  cases,
    intensely unsatisfactory conditions in extraordinary reception  centres
    (CAS). The emergency situation prompted by the arrival  of  such  large
    numbers of people required a massive expansion of CAS  facilities.  The
    situation continues. As a  result  basic  emergency  accommodation  has
    become the norm for reception in Italy despite the  continuing  efforts
    of the Italian government to expand the SPRAR system.

Other sources of support and accommodation

138. When interviewed by the Home Office during  the  fact-finding  mission,
    UNHCR noted an impressive level of charitable activity in Italy.


139. The Caritas  report  states  that  the  Italian  Church  has  played  a
    significant role in the reception system. In 2016 almost 25,000  places
    were available. This figure included reception places in SPRAR  and  in
    extraordinary reception centres, so it is unclear how  many  additional
    places are made available through the Church and charitable action. The
    Caritas report goes on to say that other innovative projects have  seen
    families and parishes welcome migrants to their regions.

140. The AIDA report says that there is a network of  private  accommodation
    that does not form part of the national reception system. The  Catholic
    Church and voluntary associations provide some accommodation.  However,
    it is difficult to ascertain the number of places  available  in  these
    forms of accommodation. The report outlines some statistics relating to
    refugees hosted in families, but the numbers indicate  that  relatively
    few of the refugees and asylum seekers present in Italy are  likely  to
    be accommodated in this way. We find that this  form  of  accommodation
    and reception  provides  some,  albeit  modest  support  for  the  main
    reception system.  As we shall see when we come to look at the work  of
    the Baobab Experience in Rome, religious charity has its counterpart in
    the secular sphere.

Vulnerable persons

141. Recital 11 of the 'recast' Reception  Directive  (2013/33/EU)  confirms
    that standards of reception  should  suffice  to  ensure  applicants  a
    dignified standard of living. Recital 14 states that  it  should  be  a
    primary concern for national authorities to ensure  that  reception  is
    specifically designed to meet any special reception needs.  Article  17
    requires a Member State to ensure that  material  reception  conditions
    provide an adequate standard of living for applicants, which guarantees
    their subsistence  and  protects  their  physical  and  mental  health.
    Article 21 states:


           "Member States shall take into account the specific situation of
           vulnerable  persons  such  as  minors,   unaccompanied   minors,
           disabled people, elderly people, pregnant women, single  parents
           with minor children, victims of human trafficking, persons  with
           serious illnesses, persons with mental disorders and persons who
           have been subjected to torture, rape or other serious  forms  of
           psychological, physical or sexual violence, such as  victims  of
           female genital mutilation, in the national law implementing this
           Directive."

142. Article 22 of the 'recast' Reception  Directive  makes  clear  that  to
    implement Article 21 effectively Member States shall assess whether  an
    applicant has special reception needs. The assessment must  take  place
    within  "a  reasonable  period  of  time"  after  the  application  for
    international protection is made and may be  integrated  into  existing
    national procedures.  Member  States  shall  ensure  that  the  support
    provided to applicants takes into account their special reception needs
    throughout the asylum procedure. Only vulnerable  persons  outlined  in
    Article 21 may be considered to have special reception needs  and  thus
    benefit from the specific  support  provided  in  accordance  with  the
    'recast' Reception Directive.


143. The 'recast' Reception Directive is  said  to  have  been  incorporated
    into Italian law through the  'Reception  and  Procedures  Decree'  (LD
    142/2015).  The  AIDA  report  states  that  the   'Procedure   Decree'
    (LD/25/2008) defines vulnerable persons. The  list  contains  the  same
    categories of  vulnerable  people  identified  in  Article  21  of  the
    'recast' Reception Directive. The AIDA report goes on to say that there
    is no legally  defined  procedure  for  identifying  vulnerable  people
    although the  Ministry  of  Health  has  published  guidelines  on  the
    assistance,  rehabilitation   and   treatment   of   Beneficiaries   of
    International Protection (BIPs) and victims of torture (set out in more
    detail below).

144. The AIDA report says that identification  of  victims  of  torture  may
    occur at any stage  of  the  asylum  procedure  by  lawyers,  competent
    authorities or professional staff  working  in  reception  centres  and
    specialised NGOs. The Territorial Commission can also request a medical
    examination.  Vulnerable  applicants  should   be   admitted   to   the
    prioritised procedure. If  the  applicant  is  deemed  vulnerable,  the
    Territorial Commission should schedule the  applicant's  interview  "in
    the first available seat". In practice, when the police have  cause  to
    believe that they are dealing with a vulnerable case, they  inform  the
    Territorial Commission, which should prioritise  the  case  over  other
    asylum seekers in the regular procedure. However, an earlier section of
    the AIDA report relating to the accelerated procedure, states that  the
    prioritised procedure is rarely  applied  to  asylum  seekers  who  are
    victims of torture and extreme violence because they are not identified
    at an early stage by the police. The report says that torture survivors
    are usually recognised at a later stage of  the  process  by  NGOs  who
    provide legal or social assistance or  during  the  personal  interview
    with the Territorial Commission.


145. We observe that it may be easier for the police who register the  early
    stages of an asylum claim to identify obvious vulnerabilities such as a
    person's age  or  a  physical  disability,  but  other  vulnerabilities
    arising from a person's history, which might affect their  physical  or
    mental health, might not be so easy to identify in the absence of  more
    detail  about  the  underlying  circumstances  of  the   claim   or   a
    professional  health  assessment.  To  this  extent,  the   information
    contained in AIDA report is not inconsistent. The police might identify
    and refer people with obvious  vulnerabilities,  but  may  be  slow  to
    identify vulnerabilities  arising  from  past  torture  or  persecution
    during the early stages of a claim.

146.  In  another  section  relating  to  the  special  reception  needs  of
    vulnerable groups,  the  AIDA  report  says  that  the  'Reception  and
    Procedures Decree' (LD  142/2015)  requires  applicants  to  undergo  a
    health check when they enter first reception centres  to  assess  their
    health condition and special reception needs. The Decree  provides  for
    special services for vulnerable people with special needs in first-line
    reception centres and  SPRAR  facilities.  Where  possible,  vulnerable
    adults are placed with other adult family members  already  present  in
    reception centres. The manager of reception centres  shall  inform  the
    Prefecture of  the  presence  of  vulnerable  applicants  in  order  to
    activate procedural  safeguards  during  the  personal  interview.  The
    Decree also states that  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  shall  issue
    guidelines for the implementation of services, including those designed
    for people with special needs. The AIDA report goes on to say that  the
    assessment of special needs is  conducted  when  an  asylum  seeker  is
    placed in a  reception  centre.  The  assessment  is  not  carried  out
    systematically and may depend upon the existence  and  the  quality  of
    services provided by the reception centre, the  availability  of  funds
    and the managers of the centres.


147. The MEDU report dated 16 September 2014, which was considered by  Lewis
    J in MS & NA contained official figures from the SPRAR  annual  reports
    for 2010-2013, which indicated that 500 places were made available  for
    vulnerable persons in the context of 3,000 SPRAR  places  available  at
    the time: i.e. 16% of SPRAR places. These figures pre-dated the massive
    increase in  migrants  arriving  by  sea  from  2014  onwards  and  the
    subsequent expansion of SPRAR.

148. The evidence before the Tribunal from officials in the SPRAR office  in
    Rome indicates that the  number  of  places  allocated  for  vulnerable
    people include around 80-100 places for families with children,  around
    3,488 places for unaccompanied minors and 734 places  for  people  with
    mental health issues and other disabilities. The total number of places
    allocated for vulnerable people in SPRAR represents around 12%  of  the
    upper estimate of SPRAR places (35,000) or  around  17%  of  the  lower
    figure identified in the Parliamentary Committee report  (24,573).  The
    proportion of places suitable for individuals with mental health issues
    or disabilities only represents around 2-3% of potential SPRAR  places.
    In the context of  the  figure  indicating  that  205,000  people  were
    accommodated in the reception system  by  July  2017,  the  734  places
    allocated  for  vulnerable  people  with  mental   health   issues   or
    disabilities represents about 0.36% of  the  overall  capacity  of  the
    reception system.

149. AIDA reports that in 2017 the Ministry of the Interior asked  SPRAR  to
    guarantee 70 places  for  vulnerable  Dublin  returnees.  Unlike  other
    references to circulars and letters in the report, an  exact  reference
    to the source of this information is not included in the footnotes. The
    evidence is limited to a  bare  statement.  There  is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the request was actioned, in fact, evidence from the SPRAR
    office in Rome suggests that  no  specific  places  are  allocated  for
    Dublin returnees.

150. Ms Leo's interview with Ms Iuzzolini, the Head of Legal Office  at  the
    SPRAR Management and Legal Support Office in  Rome,  provides  reliable
    information about the number of  places  likely  to  be  available  for
    vulnerable people in the  SPRAR  network.  Following  the  decision  in
    Tarakhel, SPRAR created a pool of around 80-100  places  for  families.
    These are not permanent places, but priority places allocated according
    to availability. There is a  dedicated  email  with  the  Dublin  Unit.
    Returnees are usually reported to SPRAR about one week before transfer,
    but occasionally a family might be referred to SPRAR  after  they  have
    arrived in Italy. About seven in ten people who are scheduled to return
    to a SPRAR centre do not arrive. She cannot say with any certainty  why
    this happens, but  she  thinks  it  is  that  people  never  leave  the
    "destination countries". Given  that  the  interview  concerned  Dublin
    returnees, we read this to mean the countries from which the person  is
    being transferred. An additional reason may, of course,  be  that  many
    Dublin returnees prefer to live in the migrant community,  rather  than
    in a SPRAR.

151. In contrast to  the  information  contained  in  the  AIDA  report,  Ms
    Iuzzolini, who was interviewed in February 2018, says that no  specific
    places are reserved in  SPRAR  for  individual  Dublin  returnees.  The
    priority pool of places is only reserved for families. Other  returnees
    will be processed through the standard procedure. Waiting times are the
    same as for any other person applying to enter SPRAR. Ms Iuzzolini says
    that SPRAR does not operate a waiting list. People  can  wait  days  or
    longer for place in SPRAR. Waiting times vary considerably  and  depend
    on  many  factors.  She  emphasised  that  SPRARs  are  not   emergency
    accommodation centres and as a result places will  not  necessarily  be
    allocated immediately.

152. Ms Iuzzolini notes that Article 17 of  the  'Reception  and  Procedures
    Decree' (LD 142/2015) outlines a list of vulnerable  persons.  However,
    SPRAR has identified only two types of vulnerable people  for  whom  it
    provides special reception facilities (i) unaccompanied  children;  and
    (ii) people with mental health issues or physical disabilities. We note
    that in addition to those two categories it is  clear  that  the  third
    category of vulnerable cases SPRAR also caters  for  is  families  with
    children.

153. Ms Iuzzolini says that there are 734  places  currently  allocated  for
    people with psychological problems and physical disabilities.  A  place
    must be requested on a specific form. 'Form  F'  is  available  on  the
    Servizio  Centrale  website  and  should  be  supported  by  a  medical
    diagnosis. Reports  need  not  be  translated  into  Italian,  although
    elsewhere in the evidence airport officials suggest that it is  helpful
    if reports are translated. There is  no  definition  of  "psychological
    problems" for the purpose of allocating these places. No minimum  level
    of severity is required to access these places. An  applicant  must  be
    able to live independently and present with no  "psychiatric  problems"
    because SPRAR staff are not  trained  to  deal  with  people  who  have
    "psychiatric problems".

154.  On the face of the evidence produced by Ms Leo,  it  is  unclear  what
    the difference is between those deemed to have "psychological problems"
    and those with "psychiatric problems". Ms Iuzzolini clarified the issue
    in email correspondence with Rachel Davis, the Asylum  Liaison  Officer
    for the Third Country Unit based in Rome, at the beginning of May 2018.
    Ms Iuzzolini confirms that  SPRAR  can  provide  reception  places  for
    people with serious vulnerabilities, but people with acute  or  chronic
    problems that may require hospitalisation will not be  accommodated  in
    SPRAR.

155. Ms Iuzzolini told Ms Leo that the assessment of vulnerability  must  be
    made by the official or organisation which makes the referral to SPRAR.
    The more detailed the report is about a  person's  vulnerabilities  and
    needs, the more likely it is  that  SPRAR  will  be  able  to  find  an
    appropriate place. It was not possible to give an average waiting  time
    for a place. If a person has  not  been  found  a  place  they  can  be
    "reported again later". Places are usually allocated  by  the  Servizio
    Centrale. Local authorities retain the right to assign a proportion  of
    places subject to the approval of the Servizio Centrale.

156. Ms Iuzzolini was asked whether SPRAR encounters many vulnerable  cases.
    She confirms that there has been a recent increase  in  the  number  of
    vulnerable cases referred to the Servizio Centrale, but no figures  are
    given. Ms Iuzzolini's  evidence  is  consistent  with  the  information
    obtained during the Home  Office  fact-finding  mission.  A  Red  Cross
    official in Rome  confirmed  that  the  vulnerability  of  migrants  is
    becoming a priority for the Red Cross. That  official  also  said  that
    there were now "significant numbers" of migrants landing  with  special
    needs compared to a few years ago.

157. In contrast, the unapproved summary of the Home Office meeting  with  a
    SPRAR official in Rome states that special needs  or  vulnerable  cases
    are not frequent, but will be dealt with carefully on  the  information
    that has been made available to  SPRAR.  The  starting  point  is  that
    vulnerable cases should not be without support. The unapproved notes of
    the meeting with the SPRAR official also state:

         "36. The delegation was told that it is the Dublin  Unit  that  has
         responsibility for Dublin cases and that the system is flexible  so
         that where spaces within the SPRAR which were allocated  to  Dublin
         returnees were not available other places are needed they are  made
         available (sic). The Dublin Unit also stated that vulnerable  cases
         sent back from another member state go into a SPRAR."

158. We place little weight on the information provided in  the  summary  of
    this meeting. The notes are unapproved and clearly include observations
    made by the Home Office official who drafted the notes. It is difficult
    to tell what information was given  by  the  SPRAR  official  and  what
    aspects are the views of  the  Home  Office  official.  It  is  unclear
    whether the information contained in the paragraph  quoted  above  came
    from the Italian Dublin Unit or the  SPRAR  official.  Given  that  the
    notes purport to summarise information obtained during a  meeting  with
    SPRAR the reference to the Dublin Unit  is  particularly  unclear.  The
    reference to places being allocated in SPRAR for  Dublin  returnees  is
    broadly consistent with the vague reference made in the AIDA report  to
    the Ministry of the Interior asking for 70 places to be guaranteed  for
    vulnerable  Dublin  returnees,  but  neither  piece  of   evidence   is
    particularly clear.


159. The clearest and most up  to  date  evidence  is  the  evidence  of  Ms
    Iuzzolini, who confirms that no  specific  spaces  are  identified  for
    individual Dublin returnees. Her evidence is  broadly  consistent  with
    information contained in  the  unapproved  notes  of  the  Home  Office
    meeting with an unidentified official at the Ministry of the  Interior,
    who is also recorded as having said that there are no  reserved  places
    for Dublin returnees. The official from the Ministry of the Interior is
    recorded to have said that the system is "adequate  and  flexible".  If
    the border police are informed of special needs or vulnerabilities then
    it "is dealt with", but  there  is  no  elaboration  as  to  the  exact
    procedure.


160. The UNHCR approved the notes of the meeting with Home Office  officials
    in Rome. We note that UNHCR expresses concern about  vulnerable  people
    on more than one occasion during the meeting. UNHCR says that there are
    still shortcomings and issues relating to capacity  in  the  local  and
    national reception services, "especially for vulnerable cases",  whilst
    recognising that steps had been taken to improve the legal framework.

161. Although UNHCR is concerned about the capacity of the reception  system
    to deal with vulnerable cases, it  falls  short  of  recommending  that
    vulnerable people should not be returned to Italy. However, that is not
    to say that UNCHR makes no recommendations. The recommendation that was
    notably omitted from the initial version of  the  Fact-finding  Mission
    Report was for the UK to  make  "proactive  and  flexible  use  of  the
    discretionary clauses" to ensure maximum protection for asylum  seekers
    and to ensure full respect for human rights. In particular, UNHCR urged
    for the discretionary clauses  to  be  considered  in  cases  involving
    vulnerable applicants and those with relatives in the UK. We note  that
    UNHCR made a similar recommendation in  a  report  entitled  "Desperate
    Journeys" (August 2017):

         "More solidarity is needed within the EU to ensure  protection  and
         assistance to those  arriving  in  Europe,  including  through  the
         speeding up, and extension of the relocation  scheme,  as  well  as
         efficient and speedy  family  reunion  and  implementation  of  the
         humanitarian and discretionary clauses under Dublin."

162. The evidence shows  that  enormous  pressures  have  been  put  on  the
    Italian asylum system in recent years. Although the Italian authorities
    have sought to expand and develop the system, there is still  an  acute
    lack of capacity in the SPRAR  system,  which  only  includes  a  small
    proportion  of  places  suitable  for  vulnerable  people  and  a  tiny
    proportion of places for those with mental health  issues  or  physical
    disabilities. Given the particularly high numbers of  people  who  have
    claimed asylum in Italy  in  the  last  2-3  years,  and  the  evidence
    indicating an increase in people with special needs, it  is  reasonable
    to infer from the figures that there is  likely  to  be  a  significant
    number  of  vulnerable  people  with  special  needs  accommodated   in
    emergency reception facilities. Having regard to the combination of the
    basic nature of many of those facilities and the vulnerabilities of the
    individuals, this state of affairs may be incompatible with Article 3.


163. Francesca Grisot says that she is aware  of  people  with  "significant
    physical or mental health problems" being accommodated in the emergency
    reception facilities her organisation runs in the Veneto region.  Elisa
    Morellini, who is the Legal Affairs  Coordinator  for  an  organisation
    that supports asylum seekers and refugees in the Milan area says  that,
    in her experience, many people in the CAS  centres  suffer  from  post-
    traumatic stress disorder and  chronic  mental  illness,  but  are  not
    guaranteed immediate access  to  SPRAR  or  to  specialist  psychiatric
    treatment. While their evidence is general in  nature,  it  is  broadly
    consistent with the wider picture, which indicates that there is likely
    to be  an  acute  shortage  of  suitable  SPRAR  places  available  for
    vulnerable people in the context of the  particularly  high  number  of
    asylum claims made in recent years.

164. It is in the context of this evidence that UNHCR  urges  Member  States
    to be proactive in applying the humanitarian and discretionary clauses.
    The Dublin Regulation is not confined to  the  primary  mechanisms  for
    establishing the Member State responsible  for  an  asylum  claim.  The
    recitals set out the principle  of  solidarity  towards  Member  States
    "facing particular pressures on their asylum  systems".  Solidarity  is
    said to be a "pivotal element" in the Common  European  Asylum  System,
    which goes "hand in hand  with  mutual  trust".  The  humanitarian  and
    discretionary clauses are  built-in  safeguards  to  ensure  sufficient
    flexibility in the Dublin system. UNHCR does not recommend  a  halt  on
    returns, but clearly has serious concerns as  to  whether  the  Italian
    asylum system has the capacity to  deal  with  significant  numbers  of
    vulnerable people.

165. The Special Representative of the Secretary General  on  migration  and
    refugees also notes the "enormous challenges" faced by Italy because of
    "the sheer number of people". He urges Member States of the Council  of
    Europe to show solidarity "to ensure a fairer  distribution  of  asylum
    seekers  across  the  continent  and  alleviate  the  burden  currently
    shouldered by Italy."

Transfers under the Dublin Regulation

Overview of the procedures

166. We begin by noting that returns to Italy under  the  Dublin  Regulation
    are of a qualitatively different nature to the way in which the Italian
    authorities might deal with the large  number  of  arrivals  of  asylum
    seekers who enter the  country  by  sea  or  those  arriving  overland.
    Removal under the Dublin  Regulation  is  a  government  to  government
    transfer.


167. In cases where Italy expressly accepts a take back request  made  under
    the Dublin Regulation, the Italian authorities will  normally  indicate
    the airport nearest  to  the  appropriate  Questura.  If  the  relevant
    airport is not indicated, return is  likely  to  take  place  to  major
    airports such as Rome or Milan. It is not  disputed  that  the  Italian
    authorities ask the UK authorities to inform them of any special  needs
    at least 10  days  in  advance  of  the  transfer.  This  procedure  is
    consistent with Articles 31 and 32 of the Dublin Regulation, which make
    provision for exchange of relevant information and health data before a
    transfer is carried out.

168. Dublin returnees might fall into one of four categories (i) people  who
    have not made an international protection claim in Italy;  (ii)  people
    who have made an international protection claim in Italy; (iii)  people
    whose international protection claim has been refused; and (iv)  people
    who have been granted protection status in Italy (BIPs).

169. AIDA reports  that  Dublin  returnees  may  face  different  situations
    depending on whether they have  applied  for  asylum  in  Italy  before
    moving to another European country. Where the person did not apply  for
    asylum during his or her initial transit or stay in Italy before moving
    on to another European country, he or  she  can  lodge  an  application
    under the regular procedure.  If  the  person  previously  applied  for
    asylum there may be different scenarios:

      i) The Territorial Commission may have taken a positive  decision  and
         issued a permit to stay.
     ii) The Territorial Commission may have refused the application. If the
         applicant has been notified of the decision but has not  lodged  an
         appeal, he or she may be issued with  an  expulsion  order  and  be
         placed in a CPR (pre-removal centre). If not, he or she  can  lodge
         an appeal when notified of the decision.
    iii) The Territorial  Commission  has  not  taken  a  decision  and  the
         procedure continues.
     iv) The person has not presented for a personal interview and  will  be
         issued a negative decision, but may ask the Territorial  Commission
         for a new interview.

170. The evidence relating to the procedures on arrival in Italy before  the
    court in MS & NA, included statements dated 06 March 2015 and 30  March
    2015, from the then Asylum and Immigration Liaison  Officer  in  Italy,
    Carl Dangerfield. At that time, Mr Dangerfield confirmed that,  in  his
    experience, Dublin returnees would be identified and medically assessed
    at the airport. An individual who had  not  previously  claimed  asylum
    would be entitled to first-line reception  accommodation  (CARA)  until
    his or her asylum claim was decided, at which point the person would be
    entitled to a place in  SPRAR.  People  with  medical  needs  would  be
    medically assessed on arrival at  the  airport  and  at  the  reception
    centre. Individuals who had previously applied for asylum and had  been
    refused status would be subject to removal and were likely to  be  held
    in an immigration  removal  centre  where  healthcare  facilities  were
    available. BIPs  were  entitled  to  accommodation  in  SPRAR.  In  his
    experience, returnees with refugee status were usually accommodated "in
    some form, usually in a SPRAR". Individuals whose  refugee  permit  had
    expired  would  be  invited  to  renew  the  permit.  Entitlements   to
    accommodation would be the same as for an individual with  an  existing
    permit.


171. Mr Dangerfield went on to outline his understanding  of  the  procedure
    when vulnerable people were returned with a medical escort or where the
    Italian authorities have been notified  that  the  person  has  serious
    medical needs. On arrival the person would be identified by the police.
    Once the police have carried out ID checks,  the  individual  would  be
    passed  to  'reception  services',  which  will  usually  be   a   non-
    governmental body selected to provide immigration reception services at
    a particular airport. Medical  staff  provided  by  reception  services
    would carry out a  medical  assessment.  The  reception  service  would
    arrange a transfer to hospital or arrange a transfer to an  appropriate
    accommodation centre. The individual would be reassessed on arrival  at
    the accommodation centre. Medical care is provided  to  asylum  seekers
    and BIPs. Reception services, SPRAR and the local government  authority
    "will endeavour" to arrange for individuals to  be  placed  in  centres
    with facilities that provide for their specific needs.

172. The AIDA report  says  that  the  staff  of  the  Italian  Dublin  Unit
    increased significantly in 2017 and benefited from the support of  EASO
    (European Asylum Support Office) personnel,  but  this  support  mainly
    related to outgoing requests, family reunification and cases  involving
    children.  As  a  result,  outgoing  requests  are  issued  within  the
    deadlines set by the Dublin Regulation. The AIDA report provides  scant
    information about the administration of incoming requests. We note that
    when UNHCR met with Home Office officials in October 2017 it noted that
    the Dublin Unit's work is affected by "capacity challenges".

173. Rachel Davis, the current Asylum Liaison Officer for the Third  Country
    Unit based in Rome, met with Simona Spinelli, the Head of  the  Italian
    Dublin Unit, on 11 May 2018.  The  information  she  obtained  from  Ms
    Spinelli was approved in an  email  exchange  dated  14  May  2018.  Ms
    Spinelli confirms that the Dublin Unit is not responsible for arranging
    reception  for  individuals  returned  to  Italy   under   the   Dublin
    Regulation. The Dublin Unit will contact the  relevant  Prefecture  and
    provide a copy of the arrival notice, including any  information  about
    vulnerabilities and any health notices. Because there is no backlog  of
    cases from the United Kingdom, the Dublin Unit can manage  those  cases
    better. They  will  notify  the  relevant  Prefecture  of  arrivals  in
    advance. The Prefecture of Varese will be notified of those arriving at
    Milan Malpensa Airport. The Prefecture of Milan  will  be  notified  of
    those arriving at Milan Linate  Airport.  The  only  exception  is  the
    procedure for return of families under the Dublin Regulation. In family
    cases,  the  Dublin  Unit  will  contact  SPRAR  directly  to   arrange
    accommodation. Ms Spinelli's evidence about the  procedure  for  making
    reception  arrangements  in  the  case  of  Dublin  family  returns  is
    consistent with Ms Iuzzolini's evidence about  direct  contact  between
    the Dublin Unit and SPRAR in that limited category of cases.


174. We have already  outlined  the  somewhat  conflicting  evidence  as  to
    whether places are reserved in  the  reception  system  for  vulnerable
    Dublin returnees. We conclude that the more reliable  and  up  to  date
    evidence from Ms Iuzzolini, which is supported by the evidence from the
    unidentified official at the Ministry of the Interior,  is  that  there
    are no reserved places. The only places identified in the SPRAR network
    for Dublin returnees are the places for families with children.

175. The information confirmed by Ms Spinelli  is  broadly  consistent  with
    the relevant legal and procedural framework we have outlined above save
    for some qualifications. The decentralised nature of the Italian asylum
    system apportions responsibility for considering asylum claims  to  the
    relevant Prefecture. If a person has been fingerprinted or has  already
    registered a claim, they will be required to  return  to  the  relevant
    Questura. To this extent, not all asylum seekers returned to  Rome  and
    Milan will necessarily be referred to the nearest Prefecture as  stated
    by Ms Spinelli. Her statement is likely to be correct  in  relation  to
    those who have not been fingerprinted or have not registered an  asylum
    claim in Italy. In such cases the relevant Prefecture in Milan will  be
    responsible for registering the claim.  The  relevant  Prefecture  will
    depend on the facts of each case.  The Dublin Unit has made clear  that
    it is not responsible for arranging accommodation. The  only  exception
    is the special procedure for families with  children  when  the  Dublin
    Unit will liaise directly with SPRAR. In other cases, the  Dublin  Unit
    will notify the relevant Prefecture of the Dublin  returnee's  arrival.
    The relevant Questura and local Territorial Commission  would  then  be
    responsible for the claim. The  local  Prefecture  is  responsible  for
    extraordinary reception facilities in its area, but is not  responsible
    for government first-line  or  second-line  reception  facilities.  The
    evidence from SPRAR indicates that a referral would need to be made  by
    the relevant body for a place in the local SPRAR network.


176. Mr Dangerfield's evidence  in  early  2015  was  that  non-governmental
    'reception services' are available at the  airports  to  assist  asylum
    seekers who are returned to  Italy.  The  Fact-finding  Mission  Report
    cites a UNHCR report entitled  "Left  in  Limbo:  UNHCR  study  on  the
    implementation of the Dublin III Regulation" (August  2017).  NGOs  are
    contracted to provide "information and advice" at certain airports. The
    list obtained from the UNHCR report states that Milan Malpensa, Venice,
    Ancona, Bari, Brindisi, Bologna and Rome Fiumicino airports are said to
    have advice services.  We  consider  the  evidence  relating  to  those
    services in more detail below.

Issues relating to registration and access to reception

177. We have already set out the legal procedure for  the  registration  and
    consideration of asylum claims in Italy. The applicants do not  dispute
    that Italy has an adequate legal and procedural framework in place, but
    argue that the way in which the system works in practice indicates that
    there are operational failings of a systemic nature that are likely  to
    give rise to a breach of Article 3 rights for some or all returnees  to
    Italy depending on the facts of individual cases.


178. It is argued that  one  of  the  widespread  operational  problems  are
    barriers and delays to the formal registration of  asylum  claims.  The
    applicants argue that without the C3 form an applicant cannot apply  to
    access the reception system and may be at real  risk  of  a  period  of
    homelessness and destitution. The problem has been highlighted by UNHCR
    in the past and has been considered by the courts in previous cases.

179. The Special Representative of the Secretary General  on  migration  and
    refugees observes that areas which host a high number of asylum seekers
    are finding it difficult to cope with demand. In  those  areas,  asylum
    seekers may have to wait several months for the initial appointment  to
    formally register an application and obtain the C3 form. He  says  that
    the difficulties in accessing the asylum procedure, when  coupled  with
    inadequate reception conditions, raise potential issues under Article 3
    of the ECHR.

180. AIDA says that  "severe  obstacles"  to  access  the  asylum  procedure
    continue to be reported. Questura in Naples, Rome, Bari and Foggia were
    reported to have set specific days for seeking asylum and have  limited
    the number of people allowed to seek  asylum  on  a  given  day,  while
    others imposed barriers on specific nationalities being able  to  claim
    asylum. In Rome and Bari nationals of certain counties without a  valid
    passport were prevented from applying for asylum.  Questura  in  Milan,
    Rome, Naples, Pordenone and Ventimiglia were reported  to  have  denied
    access to asylum to people who did not have  a  registered  residential
    address (residenza), contrary to the law. There were  also  reports  of
    obstacles to the formal registration of applications (verbalizzazione).
    Several Questura, including Milan and Potenza refused to  complete  the
    lodging  of  applications  for  applicants  they  deemed  not  to  need
    international protection.

181. The AIDA  report  states  that  Article  5(1)  of  the  'Reception  and
    Procedures Decree' (LD 142/2015) makes clear  that  an  applicant  need
    only make a declaration of his or her place of residence  in  order  to
    register an asylum application. Article 4(4) states that access to  the
    reception system and the issue of a residence permit are not subject to
    additional requirements except those expressly set out in  the  Decree.
    The AIDA report asserts that these two provisions make clear  that  the
    failure to provide a registered residential address  should  not  be  a
    barrier to accessing  international  protection.  Nevertheless,  during
    2016 and 2017 a number of Questura still denied access to the procedure
    for "lack of domicile".

182. The MSF report states that there is a  chronic  shortage  of  reception
    places due to the increasing number of asylum applications and the  low
    level of turnover in the centres due to delays in assessing the claims.
    This observation is consistent with the findings made  by  the  Special
    Representative of the Secretary General on migration and refugees  when
    he visited Italy  in  October  2016.  MSF  reports  that,  despite  the
    increase in Territorial Commissions in recent years, the time  elapsing
    between first applying for asylum and  being  notified  of  the  result
    averages 307 days.

183. The AIDA report states that  the  time  limits  for  processing  asylum
    applications set out in  the  'Reception  and  Procedures  Decree'  (LD
    142/2015) are not complied with in practice. The "competent determining
    authorities", which we read to mean the Territorial Commissions do  not
    receive the application until after the formal registration  has  taken
    place, and even  then,  the  first  instance  procedure  usually  lasts
    several months and the delays between different Territorial Commissions
    vary. For example, the procedure in Rome is generally longer and  takes
    from 6-12 months. AIDA reports that, according to the President of  the
    CNDA, the average processing time in the period 2014-2016 was 260  days
    from the lodging of the application until a decision.

Rome

184. The evidence contained in a previous report prepared  by  Loredana  Leo
    for the ASGI in March 2015 (supported by the Open Society  Foundations)
    entitled "The Dublin System and Italy:  A  relationship  on  the  Edge"
    outlined, among other issues, the outcome of her research  relating  to
    the procedures for Dublin returns  to  Rome.  The  report  provides  an
    insight into the services provided at Rome  Fiumicino  airport  at  the
    time. The advice and assistance service was managed by Badia Grande co-
    operative until January 2015, but at the date of  the  report,  an  NGO
    called Gruppo Umana Solidariet� (GUS) managed the service.


185. The SRC report says that around half of all asylum seekers returned  to
    Italy under the Dublin Regulation are returned  from  Switzerland.  The
    SRC report notes that the NGO at Fiumicino airport  offered  advice  to
    asylum seekers transferred to Italy under  the  Dublin  Regulation  and
    referred people to reception services. This was only  possible  if  the
    Prefecture of Rome was already responsible for the asylum procedure  or
    was responsible because the  person  had  not  previously  applied  for
    asylum. At the date of the SCR fact-finding mission in March  2016  the
    SRC understood that Dublin returnees whose asylum applications were the
    responsibility of the Rome Questura would  usually  be  placed  in  CAS
    accommodation. The NGO at the  airport  had  a  list  of  accommodation
    centres that they would work through to try  to  find  a  place.  If  a
    suitable  place  could  not  be  found  the  NGO  had  to  contact  the
    Prefecture. If a different Prefecture was responsible  for  the  claim,
    the person would be given a train ticket  to  travel  to  the  relevant
    region. In those cases, the NGO  at  the  airport  would  not  organise
    accommodation in the region responsible for the claim.


186. The SRC report says that  the  FER  projects  funded  by  the  European
    Refugee  Fund,  which  were  designed  to  provide  shelter  to  Dublin
    returnees, expired in the summer of 2015  without,  at  that  stage,  a
    follow-on project having  been  established.   According  to  GUS,  new
    projects were planned from August 2016,  which  were  set  to  last  24
    months. It is unclear whether those  projects  were  put  in  place  as
    planned. There does not appear to be any current evidence to show  that
    specific projects are in  place  for  the  temporary  accommodation  of
    Dublin returnees of the kind noted by UNHCR in the recommendations made
    in 2013.

187. The SRC report says that the NGO in Rome  airport  has  changed  almost
    every year in recent years due  to  the  way  in  which  contracts  are
    awarded. The report notes that GUS was replaced by a  new  organisation
    called ITC shortly before the fact-finding  mission.  ITC  is  said  to
    offer "translation and interpreting services.".

188. The SRC description of ITC is consistent with a printout from  the  ITC
    website,  which  describes  the  organisation  as  an  "association  of
    interpreters,  translators  and  cultural/language  mediators",   which
    provides "translation and interpreting services". Ms Leo contacted  ITC
    to arrange an interview to discuss  reception  services.  In  an  email
    dated 06 February 2018, the ITC office in  Rome  says  that  ITC  "only
    manages language and cultural services at Fiumicino Airport, having won
    a competition to provide language services issued by  Rome  Prefecture.
    In order to obtain the information you seek, you  should  contact  Rome
    Prefecture directly." At first blush this evidence appears to  indicate
    that ITC may have a  more  limited  role  than  previous  NGO  services
    provided at the  airport.  However,  we  note  that  elsewhere  in  the
    evidence the reference to 'cultural  mediators'  is  used  to  describe
    services where asylum seekers are  given  advice  about  registering  a
    claim at the relevant Questura and may also be contracted by the  local
    Prefecture to provide advice and  assistance  with  accommodation.  The
    exact role ITC plays at Rome airport is simply unclear. The  fact  that
    the organisation referred Ms Leo to the local Prefecture is only likely
    to reflect the responsibility that the Prefecture  plays  in  providing
    reception services.

189. The Home Office fact-finding  mission  met  with  an  official  of  the
    Border Police at Fiumicino airport in Rome in October 2017.  The  notes
    of the meeting have not been approved by the officer. No information is
    provided about the officer, their rank, their level  of  experience  or
    how long they have worked at the airport in Rome. For these reasons  we
    are circumspect about the evidence.

190. The officer is reported to have said that they deal  with  about  25-30
    Dublin Regulation returns a day compared to around four returns  a  day
    in 2006.  The  officer  confirmed  that  the  NGO  contracted  to  give
    assistance at the airport is called "ITC". The  notes  of  the  meeting
    state that the Home Office official spoke with two "cultural mediators"
    who worked for ITC, but it is not clear what information came from  the
    police officer or  the  cultural  mediators.  The  notes  also  contain
    observations made by the Home Office official.

191. The Home Office official is reported to  have  been  told  that  Dublin
    cases "usually go into the SPRAR  structure"  and  that  there  is  "an
    emphasis on flexibility in rectifying problems arising with  applicants
    or returnees. Special needs or vulnerable cases usually go to  SPRARs."
    If special needs have not been notified before  arrival,  the  cultural
    mediators will identify special  needs  and  "will  inform  the  Border
    Police who liaise with SPRARs to assign [a place]". The  delegation  is
    reported to have been told (by whom is  unclear)  that  applicants  are
    currently placed in a SPRAR within hours. The team prefers  to  receive
    arrivals between 08.00-14.00 to facilitate a  same  day  placement.  In
    cases where a person suffers from an acute psychiatric condition, there
    will be an immediate referral to health services. If the Rome  Questura
    is responsible for the case the person will be taken  directly  to  the
    Questura. If a different Questura is  responsible  for  the  case,  the
    cultural mediation team will give the person a train  ticket  and  will
    explain how to get on the train and where they should report.

192. In non-Dublin cases (BIPs) there  is  a  different  process.  When  the
    Border Police have completed their procedures, the  person  "can  leave
    and approach the authorities for assistance."  If  a  BIP  has  special
    needs, "the preference is to contact the Department of Civil  Liberties
    to check whether they  have  suitable  accommodation."  It  is  unclear
    whether this is intended to  be  a  reference  to  the  SPRAR  Servizio
    Centrale. An example was given of a family with two  children  who  had
    severe mental health issues, where a request was made  for  exceptional
    support. The delegation is reported to have  been  told  that  in  such
    cases "a flexible solution will be found because one must be found...".



193. The evidence regarding the Rome Border Police, contained  in  the  Fact
    Finding Mission Report is of poor quality. It is not clear who provided
    the information and how qualified they were to comment. The exact  role
    of the Border Police and the extent of the services provided by ITC  is
    not made clear from the summary of the meeting. It  is  not  clear  who
    makes the assessment of vulnerability or referral for accommodation.

194. In contrast, the evidence contained in the SRC report  is  well-sourced
    and much clearer albeit less recent.  Consistent  with  other  evidence
    before us,  it  makes  clear  that  the  responsibility  for  arranging
    accommodation in the reception system falls  to  the  Questura  in  the
    local Prefecture responsible for the asylum claim. In the past, the NGO
    at Fiumicino airport was contracted to assist with reception  services,
    but only in cases that could be referred to  the  local  Prefecture  in
    Rome. In cases where a person made a previous application elsewhere  in
    Italy, the NGO was not responsible for arranging reception services and
    could only provide limited advice and assistance to enable the returnee
    to travel to the relevant Questura, which could be some  distance  away
    depending on the circumstances  of  the  case.  The  most  up  to  date
    evidence indicates that ITC is the current NGO  providing  services  at
    Rome Fiumicino airport, but contrary to the  position  outlined  by  Mr
    Dangerfield in the past, and the evidence relating to services provided
    by GUS until around August 2016, the role of  ITC  now  appears  to  be
    largely confined to interpreting and translation services.


195.  Further  evidence  of  the  possible  lack  of  advice  and  reception
    information for Dublin returnees at Rome Fiumicino airport comes from a
    statement prepared by an NGO called  the  Baobab  Experience  based  in
    Rome. The organisation states that it formed through  direct  voluntary
    action of a group of ordinary Italians and  European  humanitarian  aid
    activists. The organisation was formed at  the  beginning  of  2016  in
    response to the large numbers of "transitory  migrants"  in  the  local
    area. It states that over 70,000 people have passed through its  camps,
    which the organisation set up from public donations.  The  organisation
    provides medical care, food,  a  bed  for  the  night  and  some  legal
    assistance. The Baobab Experience states that it  assisted  around  900
    people between September 2017 and April 2018. Of those, 71 people  were
    returned to Italy under the Dublin Regulation. The organisation  claims
    that none of them received advice or assistance from the border  police
    at Fiumicino airport. They were not given information on how  to  apply
    or resume their applications for asylum. Under 10% of Dublin  returnees
    they assisted had a residence permit. 99% arrived at Fiumicino  airport
    and a few at Milan airport.


196. In the experience of the Baobab Experience, many returnees arriving  at
    Fiumicino airport say that they were given  no  advice  or  information
    about reception arrangements there.  Some  were  asked  to  go  to  the
    Questura in another Prefecture but were often not told how or  when  to
    do so.  Some had to renew the procedure through the  Questura  in  Rome
    and were forced to queue in front  of  the  Rome  Questura,  often  for
    several days, because they had been denied  access  several  times  and
    there  was  no  certainty  that  they  would  be  able  to  "begin  the
    procedure". The organisation gave  specific  details  of  23  cases  of
    Dublin returnees interviewed in the period between March 2017 and March
    2018 who were all said to have been given little or no  advice  at  the
    airport and who had to turn to the Baobab Experience for assistance.

197. It should become apparent from the summary of the evidence relating  to
    Fiumicino airport that the exact nature of the  current  procedure  for
    processing Dublin arrivals is unclear. The Border  Police  should  have
    advance information about the return of a person from the UK under  the
    Dublin Regulation, including any information  about  special  needs  or
    health issues. The Border Police are likely to identify those returnees
    on arrival, but thereafter it is somewhat unclear as to  how  a  person
    might be referred to reception services.

198. The evidence from  Ms  Iuzzolini  at  SPRAR  indicates  that  the  only
    category of cases where there is direct contact between the Dublin Unit
    and SPRAR is in cases  involving  families  with  children.  Otherwise,
    individual cases must  go  through  the  usual  procedure  of  referral
    through the Prefecture responsible for the asylum claim. In the  recent
    past,  the  NGO  contracted  to  provide  advice  and  assistance   was
    responsible for referral to reception services if the  Rome  Prefecture
    was responsible for the asylum claim. This would  include  cases  where
    (i) a person has already made an asylum claim in  the  Rome  Prefecture
    and would need to apply to reopen the claim;  (ii)  a  person  who  had
    never made an asylum claim in Italy; and possibly (iii) BIPs  who  have
    not completed their allocated allowance in  SPRAR  reception  services.
    However, the evidence indicates that the services currently offered  by
    ITC  at  Fiumicino  airport  might  be  limited  to  interpreting   and
    translation.  The  apparent  reduction  in  the  level  of  advice  and
    information services since ITC  took  over  the  service  at  Fiumicino
    airport corresponds  with  the  difficulties  reported  by  the  Baobab
    Experience in the period from March 2017 to March 2018, when  a  number
    of Dublin returnees reported that they were given little or  no  advice
    or assistance after initial checks were made at the airport.


199. Ms Iuzzolini confirmed that SPRAR does not have an office at  Fiumicino
    airport. Contrary to the assertions made in the notes  of  the  meeting
    with the police there, Ms Iuzzolini's evidence suggests that  referrals
    are not routinely made  to  SPRAR  from  the  airport.  She  says  that
    referrals are "sometimes" received from the airport.  Referral to SPRAR
    can only be done by the relevant local body  or  social  services.  The
    SPRAR system is not sensitive  to  emergencies  and  places  cannot  be
    allocated immediately. It is  difficult  to  ascertain  any  meaningful
    information from the Home Office  Fact-finding  Mission  Report,  which
    does not make clear how an individual Dublin returnee might be referred
    into the SPRAR network from Rome Fiumicino airport.  A  person  may  be
    referred directly to the local Questura. The airport NGO is, in theory,
    supposed to give advice and assistance in  helping  returnees  identify
    and travel to the relevant Questura. However, if the Rome  Questura  is
    not responsible for a claim, the  current  evidence  suggests  that  an
    advice and assistance service might not be offered by ITC, which, as we
    have noted, is primarily an interpreting and translation service.


200. The SRC report sets out information obtained from GUS, the  former  NGO
    provider at Fiumicino airport. A representative from GUS  explained  to
    the SRC delegation that the NGO had not seen  a  single  case  where  a
    person or family was sent directly to a SPRAR centre from the  airport.
    SPRAR is run by the Ministry of the Interior and  not  the  Prefecture.
    The CAS manager would be responsible for transferring a case to  SPRAR.
    It is unclear what level of experience the GUS representative had,  but
    the evidence is broadly consistent with the way in which the  reception
    and accommodation system is structured, which places responsibility  on
    the  local  Prefecture  for  providing  accommodation  and  for  making
    referrals into the SPRAR system.

201. As an NGO contracted by the local Prefecture, it  would  be  consistent
    with the other evidence that the only referral the 'advice and cultural
    mediation' service could make  would  be  to  the  local  CAS.  If  the
    Prefecture of Rome is not  the  responsible  Prefecture,  the  evidence
    shows that the NGO would make no referral, but would  give  advice  and
    perhaps a train ticket  for  the  person  to  travel  to  the  relevant
    Questura, which might be some distance away. The only category of cases
    where the Dublin Unit might have made a direct  referral  to  SPRAR  is
    families with children.

202. We note that the Fact-finding Mission Report also claims  that  Caritas
    provides services at airports.  Manuela  De  Marco,  from  the  Caritas
    Immigration  Office  in  Rome   provided   further   information   when
    interviewed by Ms Leo on 21 March 2018. She confirms that Caritas  only
    provides support at ports when people land by sea. Although Caritas has
    provided some emergency ad hoc humanitarian aid at the borders, and did
    do some work at Pratica di Mare Airport during a recent  evacuation  of
    refugees from Libya, in general,  the  organisation  does  not  provide
    advice or reception services at airports.

203. Ms De Marco says that  most  people  arriving  by  sea  eventually  get
    placed. Greater problems are faced by people who  arrive  in  Italy  by
    land. Access to the reception system is much harder in big cities  like
    Rome or Milan. The position of Dublin returnees depends on the place of
    return. According to information she had received, there had been major
    problems in Bari. Ms Leo's notes do not go into any detail  as  to  the
    nature of the problems.

204. The SRC fact-finding mission report from 2016 states that  proof  of  a
    registered residential address is no longer a prerequisite to apply for
    asylum in Rome but is demanded at a later stage.

205. AIDA says that in 2017 ASGI  reported  limited  access  to  the  asylum
    procedure at the Questura in Rome. In some cases,  access  for  certain
    nationalities was prevented due to a large number of  people  from  the
    same region present in the Questura on the same day. In addition  to  a
    reported practice of allowing only around 20 asylum applications a  day
    based on nationality, the Questura in Rome has also asked applicants to
    produce  a  national  passport  in  order  "to  be  admitted".  Such  a
    requirement would restrict access to the  procedure  given  that  large
    numbers of people arrive in Italy by irregular means and are not likely
    to have valid passports. However, the  extent  of  the  restriction  is
    unclear. We would expect the evidence to say if the restriction was  so
    severe that it prevented the registration of large numbers  of  claims,
    but it does not. We therefore consider that the Questura in Rome  will,
    in practice, be the one to which most Dublin returnees,  who  have  not
    previously claimed asylum in Italy, will go to register their claims.

Milan

206. The ASGI report prepared by Ms Leo in March 2015  said  that,  at  that
    time, the advice service at Malpensa airport was managed by the Sociale
    Integra co-operative.  The  SRC  fact-finding  mission  in  early  2016
    interviewed a number of local officials and NGOs operating in the Milan
    area. The report says that there  are  still  shortcomings  in  gaining
    access to the asylum procedure. In Milan, a dichiarazione di ospitalit�
    (declaration of hospitality) is  required  to  claim  asylum.  The  SRC
    report goes on to confirm that the relevant Prefecture for arrivals  at
    Malpensa airport is Varese. The advice service at Malpensa  is  run  by
    "Cooperativa Integra". It is unclear  whether  this  is  the  same  co-
    operative mentioned in the ASGI report. The SRC report  concluded  that
    people who were transferred to Rome, Milan or Bologna  have  access  to
    the "responsible NGO". However, the NGOs can only support people  whose
    asylum procedure is ongoing or who  have  not  applied  for  asylum  in
    Italy. People whose asylum request is linked to another  Questura  will
    normally be given a train  ticket  so  that  they  can  travel  to  the
    responsible region, but this did not always seem to work in practice.


207. The AIDA report outlines information sourced from Diaconia  Valdese  in
    January 2018. From January to October 2017  an  average  of  90  Dublin
    returnees arrived every month at Milan Malpensa airport  totalling  702
    transfers of which 80% were assigned to the  Prefecture  of  Varese  in
    Lombardia. The source of the statistics provided by Diaconia Valdese is
    unclear.

208. Again, we approach the summary of the Home Office fact-finding  mission
    meeting with the Border Police at Milan Malpensa airport with  caution.
    The notes have not been approved by the person who was interviewed. The
    delegation is said to have been told that the Border Police were facing
    "enormous difficulties" because of the recent increase  in  applicants.
    They do their best to identify returnees with special needs, but  often
    they are returned to  Italy  at  short  notice  and  with  insufficient
    information. Ideally the Border Police would like to have  three  days'
    notice of the arrival of a person with special needs. It is  preferable
    that a person arrives with a medical escort and that any documents  are
    translated into Italian.

209. The notes from the  fact-finding  mission  state  that  the  contractor
    which provides the 'advice and cultural mediation' service at  Malpensa
    airport is called "ONLUS". This  conflicts  with  the  recent  evidence
    given by Ms Sommoruga and Ms Brambilla,  who  confirmed  that  the  NGO
    responsible for the service is the Ballafon co-operative. Reference  to
    the word 'onlus' elsewhere in the evidence indicates that it is  likely
    to be a generic Italian word used to  describe  an  NGO  or  non-profit
    organisation. In other words, there is no discrepancy in  the  evidence
    and it is just another example of an  inaccuracy  in  the  Fact-finding
    Mission Report. The notes of the meeting state that the airport NGO  is
    responsible  for  providing  tickets  to  the  relevant  Questura.  The
    Questura in Varese is about 40km from the airport.

210. The Border Police told the  Home  Office  delegation  that  they  would
    attempt to find a place in the SPRAR network for returnees with special
    needs,  but  this  is  difficult  to  do  when  there  is  no  advanced
    information. The lack of advanced information  is  not  said  to  be  a
    problem in relation to returns from the UK.

211. The joint statement prepared by Ilaria Sommaruga and Anna Brambilla  of
    CSD - Diaconia Valdese outlines their experience and knowledge  of  the
    situation in the Milan area. We accept that they  are  likely  to  have
    knowledge of the procedures and practices in so far as  they  have  had
    experience of them while assisting their  clients.  Specifically,  they
    say that the organisation was involved in a pilot project dedicated  to
    Dublin returnees from July 2017. The aim of the project was to  support
    integration into the reception system and to provide legal  assistance.
    The organisation developed a network of contacts  with  Italian,  Swiss
    and German churches. Upon  referral,  the  Diaconia  Valdese  community
    centre in Milan (run in collaboration with Oxfam Italia)  contacts  the
    relevant governmental and non-governmental offices such as  the  Dublin
    Unit, SPRAR Servizio Centrale, the local Prefecture  and  Questura  and
    ASGI. In cases of extreme  vulnerability  temporary  shelter  might  be
    found in Turin but it is financed by "the association or private entity
    who initially reported the case". It is unclear whether this means that
    the church organisations or other NGOs are forced to step in to provide
    emergency accommodation when the authorities are unable to do so.


212.  On behalf of Diaconia Valdese, Ms Sommaruga and Ms Brambilla say  that
    they are aware of the procedure at Malpensa airport since October  2017
    because a direct channel of communication was opened between  them  and
    the information desk run by the Ballafon co-operative on behalf of  the
    Prefecture of Valdese as well as with the Prefecture itself. In October
    2017, they also met  with  "the  operators"  in  the  transit  area  of
    Malpensa airport (it is unclear whether this included the Border Police
    as well as staff  from  the  Ballafon  co-operative).  If  there  is  a
    referral, the community centre  can  inform  the  "Ballafon  operators"
    several days in advance about incoming  applicants  reported  to  them.
    However, due to the high number of arrivals in the Province of  Varese,
    it is not always possible to find the best solution, even for the small
    proportion of arrivals reported to Diaconia Valdese.


213. Ms Sommaruga and Ms Brambilla say that the procedure is for the  Border
    Police to carry out  identity  and  background  checks  on  the  Dublin
    returnee before referring them to the  "asylum  seekers  and  refugees"
    information desk for the Prefecture of Varese, which  is  next  to  the
    Border Police office in Malpensa airport. The joint statement says that
    there is only a small number of staff at the information  desk  managed
    by Ballafon co-operative. Except for a couple of cases, the people  who
    landed at Malpensa whom they followed told Diaconia Valdese that  there
    was no interpreter or cultural mediator. In  general,  information  was
    not translated. The Prefecture of  Valdese  is  responsible  for  cases
    where a person has not previously made an asylum claim  in  Italy.  The
    Prefecture of Milan is responsible for people arriving at Milan  Linate
    airport. This is consistent with the information provided by  the  Head
    of the Dublin Unit, Ms Spinelli.

214. The joint statement states  that  the  information  desk  should  "take
    care" of accommodation, but often the Dublin Unit does not send through
    the list of people who are about to arrive at the airport until  a  few
    hours before they land. Varese is a relatively small  province  with  a
    high quota of returns under the Dublin Regulation due to  the  location
    of Malpensa airport. This means that there are limited  places  in  the
    reception system. In the experience of Ms Sommaruga and  Ms  Brambilla,
    asylum seekers are not accommodated immediately  after  arrival.  After
    accessing the first appointment in the  Varese  Questura,  the  waiting
    time for the verbalizzazione is variable. In  the  Province  of  Varese
    asylum seekers can only access  accommodation  after  they  attend  the
    second appointment. This information is  broadly  consistent  with  the
    evidence relating to the formal asylum procedures outlined above.

215. Their experience of referrals to SPRAR  is  also  consistent  with  the
    other evidence. They say that the Ballafon staff do  not  refer  Dublin
    returnees to SPRAR.  The  Dublin  Unit  notifies  the  police  and  the
    Prefecture about  the  arrival  of  returnees.  The  Dublin  Unit  only
    contacts SPRAR in cases involving families. Vulnerable individuals  are
    not referred to SPRAR either by the  Dublin  Unit,  the  police  or  by
    Ballafon. They are given a written invitation to present themselves  at
    the local Questura, normally within three days  of  arrival  in  Italy.
    Contrary to what is stated in  the  Home  Office  Fact-finding  Mission
    Report, in their experience the Border Police at  Malpensa  airport  do
    not make telephone calls to CAS or SPRAR centres in the region  to  try
    to  find  a  place  for  Dublin  returnees  with  special  needs.  This
    information is consistent with Ms Iuzzolini's evidence that SPRAR  only
    receives occasional referrals directly from the airport.

216. The joint statement says that there are only two operators employed  by
    Ballafon. The office is open Monday to Friday from  8.30am  to  5.30pm.
    Meals and a ticket to the relevant Questura are  provided.  The  people
    they have worked with told them that no  interpreters  were  booked  to
    assist them. In a few cases the Border Police  attempted  to  translate
    information, but only into  English.  The  joint  statement  says  that
    Ballafon operations should assist the person into the reception  system
    once they have informed the Border Police of their intention  to  claim
    asylum. The joint statement quotes the words of a Ballafon operator who
    they spoke to on 27 February 2018, who told them:  "referrals  are  not
    made by us because the asylum seekers transferred should  have  already
    been referred by the Dublin Unit." In their experience the Dublin  Unit
    did not refer individual returnees to SPRAR; it only referred families.
    Even if information has been sent to the Dublin Unit in  advance  of  a
    person's  arrival,  the  Border  Police  often  do  not   receive   the
    information until shortly before they arrive or on  arrival.  In  their
    experience, even with advanced notice, little is done to prepare for  a
    returnee's arrival.


217. The joint statement goes on to say that Diaconia Valdese tries to  fill
    the gap in the provisions  that  should  be  provided  by  the  Italian
    authorities where possible. They are only  able  to  assist  in  a  few
    cases. Most Dublin returnees are provided with little  information  and
    advice and are told to leave the  airport  and  report  to  the  Varese
    Questura within three days. Although legislation confirms that a person
    has a right to accommodation as  soon  as  they  have  "manifested"  an
    asylum claim (LD 142/2015),  the  systematic  practice  is  to  provide
    access to the reception system after the formal verbalizzazione,  which
    leaves asylum seekers without accommodation for weeks or months.


218. Ms Sommaruga and Ms Brambilla say that it might be possible  to  access
    emergency shelters for homeless people  during  the  winter  months  in
    Milan. The CASC (Centro Aiuto Stazione Centrale) co-ordinates  shelters
    for Italian and foreign people who are destitute. Subject to  capacity,
    it might be possible for an asylum seeker to access an emergency  night
    shelter, but only during the winter  months.  However,  access  to  the
    Milan CASC is still dependent upon the asylum seeker having obtained  a
    receipt (cedolino) following a first appointment at the Milan Questura.



219. It seems clear that the Diaconia Valdese in  Milan  has  established  a
    channel of  communication  and  co-operation  with  the  staff  at  the
    Ballafon co-operative at Milan Malpensa airport as well as a network of
    communication with local government and non-governmental organisations.
    The focus of their work appears to be  on  Malpensa  airport.  Although
    they make general assertions about Dublin returnees not being  provided
    with advice and assistance at Milan Linate airport, their evidence,  in
    relation to that airport, is far less detailed. There is  no  reference
    to whether an 'advice and cultural mediation service', similar  to  the
    Ballafon co-operative, operates at Linate  airport  on  behalf  of  the
    Prefecture of Milan.  However, we note that Milan Linate airport is not
    mentioned in the list of airports outlined in the Fact-finding  Mission
    Report, which are said to have NGO advice services.

220. The joint statement goes on to outline  several  cases  encountered  by
    Diaconia Valdese where Dublin returnees faced periods  of  homelessness
    because of difficulties registering a claim and accessing reception and
    accommodation. The number of examples  is  quite  small,  and  may  not
    reflect the experience of most Dublin returnees, but they are at  least
    consistent with some of the broader procedural problems  identified  by
    Ms Sommaruga and Ms Brambilla in the Milan area.

221. The final point from their joint statement worthy of mention  is  their
    response to the summary of the notes of the meeting with UNHCR  in  the
    Fact-finding Mission Report. The note of the meeting states:

         "In respect of Dublin  Regulation  transfer  cases  to  Italy  with
         vulnerabilities or disabilities decision are made on a case by case
         basis,  with  capacity  in  reception  centres  determining   where
         returnees are sent. If a particular case has already been  notified
         or reported to a particular location, i.e. prior to their departure
         from Italy to the State now making the transfer back to Italy, then
         usually access to that facility is  provided  on  return.  That  is
         generally easier in Rome, Bologna or Milan."

222. In so far as Ms Sommaruga and Ms Brambilla read this  to  suggest  that
    places might be found from across the  national  reception  system  for
    vulnerable Dublin returnees, they disagree that this is  the  case.  In
    their experience, people are not transferred to another area  of  Italy
    to access available places elsewhere.  Ms Sommaruga  and  Ms  Brambilla
    can only speak from their personal experience.  However, their evidence
    is broadly consistent with the decentralised and regional nature of the
    asylum and reception system in Italy.


223. Consistent with other evidence relating to the decentralised nature  of
    the reception system, Ms Iuzzolini's evidence suggests that SPRAR tends
    to focus the search for places in the same or  a  nearby  area  to  the
    responsible authority. We note that the evidence from SPRAR does not go
    into sufficient detail to ascertain whether places might be  found  for
    vulnerable people from across the national SPRAR network. The fact that
    there is a central office indicates some possibility of a wider  search
    for suitable places, but there is little evidence to  indicate  regular
    'cross-pollination' of  resources  and  reception  places  between  the
    different Prefectures.

Venice

224. Prior to her current role working for the  EDECO  Co-operative  in  the
    Veneto region, Francesca Grisot says that she worked  on  two  projects
    funded by the European Fund for Asylum  Seekers  and  Beneficiaries  of
    International Protection from 2013-2015. The projects were set up for a
    limited period to  assist  Dublin  returnees  arriving  at  Marco  Polo
    airport in Venice. As far as she was aware, no  similar  projects  have
    been in place since 2015. It is unclear whether these projects took the
    same role as the "advice and cultural mediation" services  provided  by
    the local  Prefecture  at  other  airports  or  provided  a  separation
    service. Her statement does not contain much  detail  about  the  exact
    work of the projects or  her  role.  She  describes  her  role  as  "an
    interpreter and worker".


225. During this time she says that she came "into direct contact  with  the
    reports sent by the Ministry,  and  with  the  users  arriving  at  the
    airport." In her opinion it was clear that there was little  management
    of the cases by the Dublin Unit. Vulnerable cases might be allocated to
    a generic project without the necessary resources. She gives an example
    of a project managed by Consiglio Italiano per i Rifugiati Onlus called
    "Locanda Dublino".

226. Ms Grisot outlines an example of an  Iranian  woman  with  'psychiatric
    vulnerability' who was removed to Venice following  a  suicide  attempt
    and several episodes of self-harming (including cutting the  words  "No
    Italy" on her stomach). When she arrived in Italy in early October 2013
    there were places available in the Locanda Dublino project. The project
    did not have a doctor or psychiatrist as part of the team  and  had  no
    particular agreement with mental health services.  She  says  that  the
    project staff were unprepared to manage such a  vulnerable  case.  They
    only had two mediators, a coordinator and an  administrative  clerk  to
    manage around 50 users of the project. The asylum seeker  was  reported
    to the emergency medical team, but did not receive regular support. She
    was found a place in an ordinary SPRAR project in  Venice  in  December
    2013, which did not have services  for  vulnerable  people.  Ms  Grisot
    provides other examples of vulnerable people she assisted in  her  role
    as an interpreter at the airport in Venice during that time. While  she
    can describe her knowledge of what happened to them,  there  is  little
    detail to understand the full background  to  the  cases.  Despite  the
    limitations we have  pointed  out,  Ms  Grisot's  evidence  is  broadly
    consistent with other evidence, which shows  that  the  Italian  asylum
    system lacks capacity to provide  specialised  support  for  vulnerable
    asylum seekers due to the high numbers of asylum claims made in  recent
    years.


227. The final piece of evidence relating to the procedures  on  arrival  in
    Venice, relates to the provision of  'advice  and  cultural  mediation'
    services at the airport. Ms Grisot was not aware of any project at  the
    airport at the current time. She tried to contact an  official  at  the
    Prefecture who previously managed the reception procedures  for  people
    transferred under the Dublin Regulation,  but  the  official  had  been
    transferred. None of her colleagues could tell her what procedures  are
    in place for the reception of Dublin returnees. As far as she is aware,
    there are still no places reserved for vulnerable persons in the  SPRAR
    projects in the Veneto region.

228. Ms Davis, the Asylum Liaison Officer for the Third Country  Unit  based
    in Rome, provided up to date information on the services offered at the
    airport in Venice. She exhibits an email from Emanuela Milan,  who  she
    describes as the "Head of Immigration Services  in  the  Prefecture  of
    Venice". Ms Milan confirms that there is a  reception  service  at  the
    ports (at the Terminal in Fusina, Malcontenta  and  the  Border  Police
    post in Marghera) and at the airport (Marco Polo airport, Tessera). The
    service provides interpreting and mediation services, coordination with
    the Prefecture and the SPRAR Central Service for the handling of  cases
    reported by the Dublin Unit. It also provides information  leaflets  in
    several languages. The service is  normally  provided  from  Monday  to
    Sunday from 12.00 to 19.00hrs, unless there are "exceptional needs" for
    a "service extension." The activation of what appears to be an  out  of
    hours reception service is at the request of the Border Police  or  the
    Prefecture, with an obligation to provide personnel within one hour  of
    the request.

Bari, Brindisi and Lecce

229. Erminia Rizzi has produced a statement outlining her knowledge  of  the
    situation in Bari and the surrounding areas.  She  works  as  a  "legal
    operator"  in  immigration  and  asylum  law  at   a   non-governmental
    organisation called Associazione Gruppo Lavoro Rifugiati onlus  -  Bari
    (GLR). She says that GLR promotes and protects the rights of  migrants,
    particularly asylum seekers and BIPs. The  organisation  works  closely
    with other government and non-governmental organisations in  the  area.
    GLR is a member of the Territorial Council for Immigration  established
    by the local Government Office in Bari.  She is not a qualified lawyer,
    but she says that the role  of  legal  operator  is  to  provide  legal
    information and to assist asylum seekers in the asylum  procedure.  She
    has 20 years' experience working in the area and is therefore likely to
    be familiar with the situation in Bari.


230. Ms Rizzi assists Dublin returnees when they  come  to  her  office  for
    advice or assistance in registering  or  re-activating  asylum  claims.
    Part of her role is to attend the Bari Questura  with  clients  and  to
    help them to access accommodation. In theory, asylum seekers should  be
    able to access the reception system at an early stage, but in  practice
    this is often not the case because of lack of capacity in the reception
    system. She assists about 20 people a week. In January 2018 she had six
    new clients who were Dublin returnees, one in February, none  in  March
    and three by the date she prepared the statement in April 2018.

231. Ms Rizzi says that asylum seekers  that  have  not  yet  registered  an
    asylum  claim  must  go  to  the  Questura  in  Bari  to  complete  the
    fotosegnalamento. Two months previously the waiting time for an initial
    appointment for the fotosegnalmento was around 4-5 months, but  at  the
    date she prepared her statement, this had been reduced  to  around  one
    month. Although the waiting time had improved, she was doubtful  as  to
    whether the authorities would be able to keep up this standard. In  her
    experience, the waiting  time  between  the  fotosegnalamento  and  the
    verbalizzazione is around 6-8 months or even up to  a  year.  She  says
    that during that time those asylum seekers who were not rescued at sea,
    who went to the Questura independently, are  mostly  left  homeless  or
    have to rely on emergency shelters which only provide accommodation  at
    night.

232. She says that there is one CARA centre in Bari and at  least  six  CAS.
    The reception accommodation is full of those who  arrive  by  sea,  who
    keep arriving, so the reception centres are always full. Ms Rizzi  says
    that there is an NGO approved by the Prefecture at Bari  airport  which
    might be able to organise accommodation for Dublin returnees for one or
    two nights in a hotel. The funding is only for one or two days and then
    the person has to move on, which in most cases, means that  people  are
    left on the street.

233. As far as Ms Rizzi is aware, the  waiting  times  at  the  Questura  in
    Lecce are less than in Bari and it takes around two months to  complete
    the formal asylum application. There is no CARA in Lecce, but many  CAS
    and SPRAR projects.

234. Contrary to the list of airports  said  to  have  NGO  advice  services
    outlined in the Fact-finding Mission report (sourced  from  UNHCR),  Ms
    Rizzi says that there is no airport NGO service at Brindisi airport  to
    assist Dublin returnees with advice or accommodation.

235. The AIDA report states that the Questura in Bari and Foggia only  allow
    people to make asylum applications twice a week.  In  early  2018  ASGI
    recorded specific obstacles to the procedure  for  Iraqi  nationals  in
    Bari, who were only allowed to  make  an  asylum  application  if  they
    produced a passport to certify their identity.

236. The evidence that arose from Ms Leo's interview with Manuela  De  Marco
    of Caritas is broadly consistent  with  the  picture  described  by  Ms
    Rizzi. The representative from Caritas said that everyone  arriving  by
    sea is eventually found a place, but the biggest problem is  for  those
    who come to Italy by land or internal frontiers. Ms De Marco understood
    that there were major problems in Bari for  Dublin  returnees  and  for
    BIPs although no detail is provided beyond this general statement.

Naples

237. We were not referred to any evidence relating to the procedures at  the
    airport in Naples but the AIDA report states that there are  delays  in
    the initial fotosegnalamento process at the Questura in Naples.  During
    2017 the Questura only allowed asylum applications  on  Monday  morning
    for a limited number of applicants. In September 2017, ASGI  urged  the
    Questura not to prevent access to asylum  seekers  and  their  lawyers.
    Although there was no response to the letter, the  Questura  introduced
    an  online  appointment  procedure  in  January  2018.   However,   the
    appointment procedure is only available once a week and  allows  around
    40-45 people to apply. The places are gone within a few minutes.  In  a
    later section of the report, AIDA  reports  that  the  average  waiting
    period for completion of the C3 form was six months, but following  the
    introduction of the  online  procedure  in  January  2018  the  average
    waiting period is now only ten days.

Living conditions

238. The evidence shows that a significant number of migrants, who  are  not
    in the reception system, live in difficult conditions. It is  difficult
    to ascertain the  background  and  situation  of  those  migrants.  The
    figures could include (i) asylum seekers awaiting reception; (ii)  BIPs
    who have fallen outside the reception system due to lack of capacity in
    SPRAR or difficulties integrating after a period in SPRAR; (iii) failed
    asylum seekers who have no right to remain in  Italy;  (iv)  transitory
    migrants; (v) migrants who are seasonal workers and (vi)  some  Italian
    citizens.


239. The evidence is consistent in saying that those who arrive by  sea  are
    usually found some form of initial accommodation, normally  in  CAS  or
    first-line  accommodation  centres.  In   respect   of   other   asylum
    applicants, the AIDA report states that, in practice, people  can  only
    access reception  accommodation  after  formal  registration  of  their
    asylum claim. Since the verbalizzazione  can  take  place  some  months
    after the  fotosegnalamento,  asylum  seekers  can  face  obstacles  to
    finding temporary accommodation.  Those  who  lack  economic  resources
    resort to friends, emergency facilities or must sleep on  the  streets.
    The AIDA report refers to a figure of  10,000  people  reported  to  be
    excluded from the reception system in Italy. The source of this  figure
    is the MSF report, which we consider in more  detail  below.  The  AIDA
    report says that the full extent of the phenomenon is not known because
    there are no statistics on the number of asylum  seekers  who  have  no
    immediate access  to  reception  accommodation  immediately  after  the
    fotosegnalamento. The waiting times between  the  fotosegnalamento  and
    the verbalizzazione differ between Questura.


240. MSF is involved in supporting migrants  in  unofficial  settlements  in
    Italy. The MSF report is a follow up to research conducted in 2016  and
    is said to be the result of constant monitoring activities carried  out
    during 2016 and 2017 by way of repeated field visits  in  collaboration
    with an extensive network of  local  associations.  The  report  states
    that, due to administrative barriers, and despite the law, migrants and
    refugees in informal settlements, regardless  of  their  legal  status,
    have diminishing opportunities to access medical  treatment.  MSF  also
    notes  that  Italian  citizens  are  among  those  living  in  informal
    settlements, whom it describes are just as marginalised.

241. MSF estimates that there are at least 10,000 people excluded  from  the
    reception system, including asylum seekers and BIPs, who had limited or
    no access to basic needs and medical  care.  The  distribution  of  the
    informal  settlements  is  fragmented  and  widespread  throughout  the
    country. The respondent sought to argue that the source of the repeated
    figure of 10,000 people excluded from the reception system was unclear.
    However, the first reference to the figure in the report is  footnoted.
    The MSF report says that the number refers to the  sites  monitored  in
    the survey and is not a census of the total number  of  asylum  seekers
    and refugees living in informal settlements throughout Italy. Later  in
    the report, MSF provides  a  detailed  list  of  informal  settlements,
    including the location, the nature of the settlement and the  estimated
    minimum and maximum number of residence in the settlement, as  well  as
    some information about the  conditions.  The  footnote  says  that  the
    figures were last updated on 30 September 2017. From those  figures  we
    can ascertain that  the  estimated  number  of  people  living  in  the
    settlements identified by MSF range from 7,000 to  11,000  people.  The
    figure of 10,000 people is, therefore, a reasonable estimate.


242. We have already considered aspects of the  MSF  report,  which  outline
    difficulties in accessing the reception system. The report says that in
    the last two years, the numbers of asylum applicants and BIPs living in
    occupied buildings has increased. Most people have  never  entered  the
    institutional  reception  system  or  have  been  expelled   from   it.
    Occupations are self-managed by the  migrants  and  refugees,  who  are
    mostly from the same country of origin. Other occupations  are  managed
    by housing movements and might include a mix of nationalities  as  well
    as Italian citizens. Many occupations that began outside the  law  have
    been  legalised.  The  law  (no.  80/2014  and  no.  48/2017)   imposes
    limitations on access to healthcare because people living  in  occupied
    buildings cannot demonstrate a formal residence to  register  with  the
    National Health services.

243. MSF outlines several cases of forced evictions, which push people  into
    increasingly peripheral situations. We note that UNHCR  criticised  the
    eviction of around 300 Eritrean and Ethiopian refugees from an occupied
    building in Rome on 24 August 2017.  UNHCR  referred  to  "big  refugee
    squats" in Rome, housing around  3,000  people,  and  urged  Rome  City
    Council to find urgent solutions for those who were evicted.

244. The MSF report goes on to describe the situations in different  regions
    of Italy, including the concerns it has at  the  borders  with  France,
    Switzerland and Austria. It is not necessary for  us  to  outline  that
    evidence in this decision, because it is  unlikely  to  affect  returns
    from the UK to Italy, which will be to airports in the main cities.

245. The report describes the activities of the Baobab Experience  in  Rome.
    This organisation set up an informal camp in  Rome  in  April  2017  to
    support migrants in transit. The report chimes with the observations of
    the Special Representative for the Secretary General on  migration  and
    refugees, who says that large numbers of people seek to travel  through
    Italy to other European countries further north, many of whom  stop  in
    informal settlements while in transit. However, he also found that  due
    to the increased restrictions on the northern borders,  the  nature  of
    the Red Cross shelter in Rome he visited had  changed.  Most  residents
    were Eritreans, who were  waiting  to  register  for  relocation.  Even
    though migrants in transit are a problem,  now  the  vast  majority  of
    people arriving in Italy are being fingerprinted, even if they  managed
    to cross the northern borders, in all likelihood they will be  returned
    to Italy under the Dublin Regulation. He says that the  "saturation  of
    the reception system has had significant  implications".  The  lack  of
    integration support in Italy means that refugees often find  themselves
    in  dire  circumstances  in  informal  settlements.  He   visited   one
    settlement in Rome housing around 1,200 people, the  majority  of  whom
    had some form of protection status. They were living in  a  dilapidated
    building in the most rudimentary conditions.


246. The MSF report says that the number of people who  have  been  returned
    to Italy under the Dublin Regulation and who are being helped in  camps
    in Rome is increasing and there is a rising number of refugees who have
    left reception centres at the end of their allocated time. The evidence
    from MSF is limited to this general observation.  It  is  difficult  to
    ascertain quite  how  many  'Dublinati'  or  BIPs  are  living  in  the
    marginalised conditions described by MSF in the report. MSF  says  that
    the chronic lack of places, and  the  absence  of  alternative  housing
    solutions,  are  resulting  in   the   multiplication   of   unofficial
    settlements  in  disused  buildings  far  from  city   centres,   where
    invisibility is accompanied by deplorable living conditions  and  where
    men, women and children cannot access their most basic needs.

247. The report describes unofficial settlements in  Tor  Cervara  in  Rome,
    where  hundreds  of  migrants  live  in  abandoned  buildings,  disused
    factories and warehouses, without water, electricity and gas, often  in
    rat-infested  buildings,  surrounded  by  illegal  landfill  sites.  In
    November 2017, MSF began an  operation  with  a  mobile  medical  unit.
    During the first six weeks of activity up  to  the  end  of  2017,  MSF
    conducted 194 consultations in four settlements.  Many  of  the  people
    treated were asylum seekers or BIPs,  although  Italian  citizens  were
    also found in one of the sites visited.  The  medical  issues  included
    respiratory,  dermatological,  musculoskeletal   and   gastrointestinal
    problems, which were linked to  the  deeply  unhealthy  and  insanitary
    living conditions. The incidence of mental health related  problems  is
    also said to be marked among the people living in informal settlements.
    These are said to result from traumatic experiences in their  countries
    of origin and during transit,  with  secondary  traumatisation  due  to
    their current living conditions and marginalisation from society.

248. In Rome, more than 100 occupations of  buildings  have  been  recorded,
    involving those who, in the  United  Kingdom,  would  be  described  as
    squatters. At least 600 asylum seekers and  BIPs  live  in  settlements
    linked to movements for the right to housing (about 20%  of  the  total
    number of occupants). In the last five  years  these  settlements  have
    mitigated the lack of places in the reception system for asylum seekers
    and refugees. MSF says that they also represent the only alternative to
    what  MSF  describes  as  shameful   conditions   of   the   unofficial
    settlements. MSF describes  one  occupation  where  activities  in  the
    building include a legal assistance desk, Italian courses for migrants,
    carpentry  and  screen  printing  workshops  and  theatre  courses   in
    collaboration with schools in the neighbourhood.

249. MSF describes similar conditions in other areas of its work  in  Italy.
    The fact that an international humanitarian organisation such as MSF is
    operating in Italy is an indication of the scale of the problem.

Access to healthcare

250. During its meeting with Home Office officials,  UNHCR  noted  that  the
    Italian  government  has  taken  significant  steps  to  establish   an
    administrative and legal  framework  that  aims  to  guarantee  minimum
    standards to asylum seekers. This included the adoption, in March 2017,
    of "guidelines for the assistance rehabilitation  of  refugee's  mental
    disorders and survivors of torture (sic)". The exact reference for  the
    guidelines is not provided in the Fact Finding Mission Report,  but  it
    seems likely that they are the same guidelines referred to in the  AIDA
    report, which were published by the Ministry  of  Health  on  22  March
    2017. The "Guidelines for the planning of assistance and rehabilitation
    as well as for treatment of psychological  disorders  of  refugees  and
    beneficiaries of international protection, victims of torture, rape  or
    other serious forms of psychological, physical or  sexual  violence"[1]
    are intended to implement Article 27 of the 'Qualification Decree'  (LD
    251/2007 amended  by  LD  18/2014).  The  AIDA  report  says  that  the
    guidelines seem to be applied in Rome and Parma. An operating  protocol
    is about to be signed in Trieste and Brescia.


251. The full extent of the implementation of the guidelines at  a  national
    level is somewhat unclear. The evidence does not include the content of
    the guidelines. Rachel Davis seeks  to  exhibit  an  extract  from  the
    Ministry of Health guidelines with her witness statement. In fact, what
    she exhibits is an extract from  a  SPRAR  report  dated  January  2018
    entitled "Protection of the Health of Migrants". The translated extract
    from the SPRAR report is limited  to  describing  the  purpose  of  the
    Ministry of Health guidelines. It suggests that the guidelines are  not
    mandatory but advisory.

         "3.2.2. ....The publication aims to ensure healthcare in line  with
         the need to protect  the  rights  of  holders  and  applicants  for
         international protection and of holders of humanitarian  protection
         in particularly vulnerable conditions, through paths  suitable  for
         the identification, taking charge, certification and  treatment  of
         victims  of  violence  and  torture,  in  continuity  between   the
         reception system for refugees and the system of social  and  health
         care. The target group is refugees, those  seeking  protection  and
         persons under humanitarian protection, as it was  not  possible  to
         consider  only  refugees  as  initially  foreseen.  Therefore,  the
         guidelines are applicable to anyone who has experienced intentional
         violence, torture, rape, etc.  including  those  under  the  Dublin
         regulation, those applying for protection, and those denied entry.


         Based on EU directives, which had to  be  transposed  into  Italian
         law, these are not guidelines but recommendations. They  represent,
         in fact, an orientation for the various regions in  the  activation
         of a certain number of services in their territory in order to take
         charge of the mental symptoms from which some  victims  of  torture
         and other intentional violence may suffer.


         The current distribution of  migrants  on  the  national  territory
         makes it even more necessary and current to publish and disseminate
         the Guidelines in order to effectively harmonize the paths for  the
         identification,  taking  charge  and  treatment  of   migrants   in
         particularly vulnerable conditions, both in the  initial  reception
         and in the SPRAR system.


         The guidelines are also a reference  document  for  ASLs,  as  they
         provide guidance with respect to a minimum standard that  each  ASL
         should implement, in order to use  multidisciplinary  pathways  for
         symptom treatment conducted,  first,  in  order  to  stabilize  and
         subsequently rehabilitate. (sic)"

252. The AIDA report goes on to  say  that  there  is  a  right  to  medical
    assistance as soon as an asylum  application  is  registered.  However,
    very often access to this fundamental service is "hindered and severely
    delayed", depending on whether a tax code is assigned when the relevant
    Questura  formalises  the  asylum  application.  Delays  in  access  to
    healthcare reflect the delays in completing the verbalizzazione,  which
    might be several months in certain regions. Pending enrollment,  asylum
    seekers only have access to basic  treatments  provided  for  irregular
    migrants and to emergency care. They might also benefit from preventive
    public health programmes.


253. Asylum seekers must register with the offices of  the  relevant  health
    board (ASL - Aziende Sanitarie Locali) where  they  have  a  registered
    address. Once registered, a person will be  issued  with  a  healthcare
    card (tessera sanitaria), which entitles the asylum seeker to a general
    doctor,  special  medical  assistance,  midwifery  and   gynaecological
    services, free hospitalisation in public  hospitals  and  some  private
    subsidised services. The right to medical assistance should not  expire
    in the process of renewing a residence permit, but in practice,  asylum
    seekers with an expired residence permit have no guaranteed  access  to
    non-urgent  treatment  for  a  significant  length  of  time   due   to
    bureaucratic delays in the renewal procedure.

254. The AIDA report says that there is a lack of information  and  training
    on international protection issues among "medical  operators".  One  of
    the main  obstacles  to  accessing  health  services  is  the  language
    barrier. Medical operators usually  speak  Italian  and  there  are  no
    cultural mediators or interpreters  to  assist.  As  a  result,  asylum
    seekers and refugees often do not consult their general doctor and only
    go to a hospital when their medical condition worsens.

255. The AIDA report goes on to say that asylum seekers  benefit  from  free
    health services following a "self-declaration of destitution  submitted
    to the competent ASL". Asylum seekers are treated under the same  rules
    as unemployed Italian citizens, but the practice differs throughout the
    country. The exemption from contributions to health costs only  relates
    to the first two months after registration of  an  asylum  application,
    when an asylum seeker is not permitted to work.  During  the  two-month
    period, asylum seekers are allocated the same exemption code issued  to
    unemployed people. After the two-month period, in some regions such  as
    Lazio, Veneto and  Toscana,  asylum  seekers  are  no  longer  exempted
    because they are not considered to be  unemployed.  In  other  regions,
    such as Piemonte and Lombardia, the exemption  is  extended  until  the
    asylum seeker finds a job. To maintain the exemption an  asylum  seeker
    needs to attest that they are unemployed to  the  relevant  job  centre
    (centri per l'impiego).

256. The MSF report says that residential registration continues to  be  the
    biggest administrative barrier to registering for the  National  Health
    Service for  asylum  seekers  and  BIPs.  Residential  registration  is
    revoked with immediate effect on leaving reception  centres.  Declaring
    residence at occupied premises is prohibited by law (LD  80/2014).  The
    result is growing recourse to the Temporarily Present  Foreigner  (STP)
    regime,  which  was  originally  set  up  for  undocumented   migrants.
    Increasingly, the most common way to access the National Health Service
    is via hospital emergency departments. Asylum seekers are using the STP
    code after filing  the  asylum  claim  (verbalizzazione).  This  mainly
    happens  to  people  hosted  in  first-line   reception   centres   and
    extraordinary reception  centres.  More  and  more  primary  healthcare
    services for migrants without  a  residence  permit  are  delegated  to
    private humanitarian organisations.  In  general,  those  organisations
    will not issue an STP code.

257.  MSF  says  that  translators  and  cultural   mediators,   with   rare
    exceptions, are not employed in the National Health Service, either  in
    administrative or medical services. The lack of translation services is
    particularly  serious  in  direct  access  services,  such  as  primary
    healthcare services, first aid, women's clinics, mental health  centres
    and addictions  centres.  MSF  states  that  there  are  "very  serious
    critical issues" concerning mental  health  services  where  there  are
    "significant shortcomings in the skills of ethno-psychiatry" and a lack
    of continuity of care for people with psychiatric disorders.

258. Anita Carriero is the project coordinator of the MEDU mobile clinic  in
    Rome. In a letter to the applicants' solicitors dated 20 April 2018 she
    says that the MEDU team saw 871 patients in three different  precarious
    settlements in Rome during 2017. She confirmed that MEDU  continued  to
    detect Dublin returnees among the homeless people they treat  in  Rome.
    Consistent with other evidence, she says  that  migrants  applying  for
    asylum at the Rome Questura were having  to  wait  several  months  for
    verbalizzazione,  during  which  time  they  did  not  have  access  to
    reception facilities or to medical and social aid  because  the  asylum
    application was not formalised. Some BIPs faced problems renewing their
    residence  permits,  mostly  due  to  difficulties  in  registering   a
    residential  address.  The  Rome   Questura   requires   a   registered
    residential address  to  renew  the  permit,  which  is  difficult  for
    migrants living in a precarious settlement  to  provide.  The  lack  of
    registered address also prevents access to social and  health  services
    because a person needs a registered residential address before they can
    be issued with a tessera sanitaria,  which  they  need  to  access  the
    National Health Service (apart from emergency services).

Beneficiaries of International Protection (BIPs)

259. The Supreme Court in EM (Eritrea) (see paragraph 22  above)  considered
    whether there was any justification  to  treat  BIPs  differently  from
    asylum seekers. Lord Kerr made the following findings:

         "78.     It seems to me that the relevant  matter  is  not  whether
             Dublin II treats refugees and asylum  seekers  differently  or
             the same, but that it relates to anyone who  has  applied  for
             asylum in the country from  which  he  might  be  transferred,
             whether or not he has previously been recognised as a  refugee
             in the country to which it is proposed he be transferred. This
             reflects the nature of  Dublin  II  as  a  chiefly  procedural
             instrument. 'Refugee' is defined, but referred to  only  once,
             obliquely, in article 7:


                 "Where the asylum seeker has a family member, regardless of
                 whether the family was previously formed in the country  of
                 origin, who has been allowed to reside as a  refugee  in  a
                 Member State, that Member State shall  be  responsible  for
                 examining the application for  asylum,  provided  that  the
                 persons concerned so desire."


         79.      An applicant or asylum seeker is defined in  article  2(d)
             of Dublin II as "a third country  national  who  has  made  an
             application for asylum in respect of which  a  final  decision
             has not yet been taken". A third country national  is  defined
             in para (a) of the same  article  as  "anyone  who  is  not  a
             citizen of the Union within the meaning of  article  17(1)  of
             the  Treaty  establishing   the   European   Community".   The
             appellants meet these criteria and all are subject, therefore,
             to the provisions  of  Dublin  II.  Whether  their  respective
             positions as asylum seekers who have previously  been  granted
             refugee status and asylum seekers who have  not  been  granted
             that status will make it more or less likely that they will be
             at risk of violation of their article 3 rights if returned  to
             a  listed  country  will  depend  on  an  examination  of  the
             particular circumstances of their individual  cases.  One  can
             anticipate an argument that those who have refugee  status  in
             Italy are less likely to suffer such a violation because  they
             can assert their rights under the Qualification Directive  but
             whether such an argument would  prevail  must  depend  on  the
             evaluation of the evidence which is presented on that issue."

260. The legal status of BIPs might give  rise  to  a  different  evidential
    matrix in terms of the assessment of risk under  Article  3.   Laing  J
    emphasised the point in Tabrizagh:

         "172.    It is clear that the ECtHR does  regard  asylum  claimants
             and BIPs differently, if, as in the case of  Italy,  BIPs  are
             entitled to work and are on a par with Italian citizens.  BIPs
             are not vulnerable to the same degree as asylum claimants, and
             are owed different obligations under the  relevant  Directive.
             ..."

261. In NA (Sudan) the Court of Appeal noted that BIPs might be in a  better
    legal position, but emphasised that refugees might have  special  needs
    and that it is necessary to consider the circumstances on the ground.:


         "109.    .....The special needs of refugees do not necessarily
             disappear at the moment that they are granted asylum, and
             those who were peculiarly vulnerable before the grant of
             asylum may remain peculiarly vulnerable thereafter.  Access to
             integration facilities of the kind required by article 25 of
             the Qualification Directive, including a limited period of
             free accommodation, may - depending on the circumstances of
             the case - be essential if they are to avoid falling into
             circumstances sufficiently degrading to constitute a breach of
             article 3.  I must emphasise that I am referring only to the
             question of principle - that is, whether it is open to a BIP
             to advance an "MSS-type" claim at all.  I am not saying that
             the actual situations of asylum-seekers and BIPs are
             identical.  On the contrary, it is clear that they are not,
             which is the point being made by the ECtHR at para. 179 of its
             judgment in Hassan (para. 80 above).  On the whole, because of
             the more extensive rights enjoyed by BIPs it may be reasonable
             to regard them as being at lesser risk of suffering inhumane
             or degrading treatment than asylum-seekers; but that may not
             always be so, and it is necessary to look at the actual
             circumstances on the ground in each case."

Assistance on return

262. The AIDA report says that it is  a  legal  requirement  for  those  who
    intend to lodge an asylum application, or foreigners who intend to stay
    in Italy for over three months, to be informed  of  the  provisions  of
    immigration and asylum law by the NGO services provided at the borders.




263. The unapproved  notes  of  the  Home  Office  meeting  with  a  Caritas
    official state that if a BIP with special needs arrives at the airport,
    then the Border Police can call Caritas for assistance. The Home Office
    delegation was given an example of a  diocese  near  Fiumicino  airport
    which provided an apartment to receive returnees. Caritas was  reported
    to want to extend this approach more widely. However, we are unable  to
    give this rather vague and  limited  assertion  much  weight.  We  have
    already noted the inaccurate assertion made in the Fact Finding Mission
    Report about Caritas providing support at airports. The suggestion that
    BIPs with special needs might be provided with support by Caritas on  a
    routine basis contradicts the other evidence.

264. The more reliable evidence obtained by Ms Leo from her  interview  with
    Ms De Marco of Caritas indicates that such interventions by Caritas are
    the exception rather than the norm. She provided only two  examples  of
    cases where Caritas was asked to take  "extraordinary  and  exceptional
    action" funded by Caritas itself to assist  vulnerable  returnees.  The
    requests were ad hoc and did not form part of the government  reception
    system.

265. The SRC report says that  BIPs  are  viewed  as  people  with  a  valid
    residence permit. As such, they  can  enter  Italy  and  travel  freely
    throughout the country. However, this also means that they  receive  no
    assistance  at  the  airport.  Some  BIPs  might  be  able  to   obtain
    information from the airport NGO if they can gain access to the office.
    The NGOs at the airports are in the non-Schengen zone. This means  that
    returnees from other European countries, who generally  arrive  in  the
    Schengen zone, cannot reach  the  NGOs  for  advice  without  a  police
    escort.

266. The evidence suggests that the advice services offered by NGOs  at  the
    airport are confined to asylum  seekers  rather  than  those  who  have
    already been granted protection status. BIPs might receive some  advice
    if they are able to access the relevant NGO  office,  but  the  service
    offered will be limited to advice.

Renewal of permits

267. The  AIDA  report  says  that  international  protection  permits  (for
    refugee and subsidiary protection status) are granted for a  period  of
    five years. Humanitarian protection permits are granted for two  years.
    The main problem faced in issuing permits is the lack of  a  registered
    residential address. A residence  permit  is  renewed  by  sending  the
    appropriate form through the post. There is a long wait, often  several
    months, before a person can obtain a new permit. The  residence  permit
    for subsidiary protection can  be  renewed  after  verifying  that  the
    conditions are still satisfied. The application is  sent  back  to  the
    relevant Territorial  Commission.  A  criminal  record  check  will  be
    carried out. The  permit  might  not  be  renewed  if  the  person  has
    committed a serious crime.


268. The letter from Anita Carriero of MEDU dated 20 April 2018 states  that
    there are problems for some BIPs in renewing expired permits.  This  is
    in part because of a  lack  of  information  about  the  procedure  for
    renewal, but mostly due to the difficulties in obtaining  a  registered
    residential  address.  The  Rome   Questura   requires   a   registered
    residential address in Rome  to  renew  a  residence  permit.  This  is
    difficult for those migrants who live in precarious settlements.

269. The MSF report is consistent in saying that  an  increasing  number  of
    migrants do not manage to renew their residence permits because they do
    not have a document confirming a registered residential address. It  is
    necessary  to  show  a  valid  residency  permit  to  obtain  residence
    registration. The police in Rome require proof  of  residence  for  the
    renewal of a residency permit, which generates  a  situation  in  which
    migrants bounce between the  Town  Hall  and  the  Police  Headquarters
    without being able to obtain either document.

270. The SRC report says that  a  person's  residence  permit  (permesso  di
    soggiorno) is often taken away from them when they  arrive  in  another
    European country. The person will need to reapply  for  a  permit  when
    they return to Italy. If a person loses the residence permit, the  loss
    must be declared. If a person applies to extend the residence permit it
    should be issued within 60 days, but delays are possible. Some Questura
    demand proof of a registered residential address (residenza)  to  renew
    the permit, which  is  distinct  from  a  current  place  of  residence
    (domicilio) that is not necessarily a permanent address.  Although  the
    Ministry of the Interior sent a circular  to  all  Questura  making  it
    clear that proof of a registered residential address is not required to
    renew a permit, some Questura, such  as  Rome  and  Bologna,  have  not
    changed their practice. Because a residence permit is required to apply
    for a residenza, the administrative  process  is  often  difficult  and
    prolonged.  Some  people  have  considerable  problems  renewing  their
    residence permit. Although it is possible to give the address of an NGO
    as a residenza, the NGO must vouch for the person and  regularly  check
    that they are still in the region, making the process more complex  and
    time-consuming.


271. The SRC report goes on to  say  that  the  administrative  barriers  to
    extending the residence permit also mean that the process can be  time-
    consuming and expensive. In Rome, it takes  eight  to  nine  months  on
    average. This is problematic for people who need to extend their permit
    at the Rome Questura,  who  do  not  live  in  Rome  e.g.  agricultural
    workers. They do not have a place to stay while extending their permit.
    In an interview with MEDU in February 2016, the  organisation  reported
    that they had talked to several people who were sleeping on the  street
    at the railway station who had come to Rome to extend  their  residence
    permits. Many people  do  not  have  enough  money  for  the  fees  for
    extending a permit and for other official documents.

Accommodation & integration

272. The AIDA report states that BIPs face  a  "severe  lack  of  protection
    concerning accommodation".  The  law  provides  for  accommodation  for
    asylum seekers during  the  asylum  procedure,  but  does  not  contain
    express rules for the accommodation of BIPs (LD 142/2015). Some offices
    cease reception  provisions  in  government  centres  or  in  emergency
    reception  centres  immediately  after  recognition  of  status.   BIPs
    accommodated in SPRAR, or those who can obtain a place in  SPRAR  after
    being notified of protection status, can  benefit  from  an  additional
    period of accommodation.


273. According to the SPRAR guidelines, as amended by the  Ministry  of  the
    Interior Decree of 10 August 2016,  BIPS  accommodated  in  SPRAR  keep
    their right to accommodation for an additional six-month  period  after
    being notified of protection status. If they  move  to  a  SPRAR  after
    being notified of protection status, they can be accommodated  for  six
    months  after  entry  into  the  SPRAR.  A  further  extension  can  be
    authorised by the Ministry of the Interior for a period of  six  months
    or  more  "based  on  duly  motivated  health  problems   or   specific
    integration targets". We infer from this that  it  is  a  discretionary
    power to extend the time spent in SPRAR in compelling or  compassionate
    circumstances. However, the AIDA report goes  on  to  note  that  SPRAR
    represents only a small part of the accommodation system. In  practice,
    BIPs notified of protection status in a CAS are disadvantaged  compared
    to those who obtain a place in SPRAR. A person could be allowed to stay
    in a reception centre a few months, a few days or just a day, depending
    on the discretion of the responsible  Prefecture.  Divergent  practices
    have been reported across the  regions.  This  means  that  BIPs  might
    experience destitution and homelessness. To  offer  some  prospects  to
    BIPs the Ministry of the Interior issued a  circular  on  05  May  2016
    stating that SPRAR should give priority to the admission of BIPs rather
    than asylum seekers. Given the limited number of places in  SPRAR,  the
    measure is unlikely to solve the problem for BIPs.


274. Ms Iuzzolini's evidence makes it difficult to assess  how  long  a  BIP
    might have to wait for a place in SPRAR, if one  becomes  available  at
    all. She says that it is impossible to giving waiting times for  SPRAR.
    It depends on the availability of places. BIPs can only be accepted  in
    SPRAR accommodation. If a BIP cannot obtain a place  in  SPRAR,  it  is
    unlikely that he or she  will  find  government-provided  accommodation
    elsewhere. There must still be an official referral into SPRAR.  A  BIP
    can self-certify his or her status and  does  not  need  to  present  a
    residence permit. If the BIP has already been in SPRAR, there  will  be
    records. A person can ask to be readmitted to SPRAR  and  can  complete
    the procedure. Once a person has  received  services  in  SPRAR  it  is
    unlikely  that  they  will  be  readmitted,  but  each  application  is
    considered on a case by case basis. The rule is that once  someone  has
    received the allocated period of SPRAR  services,  no  further  service
    will be provided.

275. BIPs are entitled to equal treatment with Italian citizens in  relation
    to healthcare and social security. We have already dealt with access to
    healthcare. The AIDA report says that the provision of  social  welfare
    is not conditional on residence in a specific region, but in some cases
    is subject to a minimum residence requirement in  the  country.  Income
    support (Reddito di inclusione) is subject to a condition that a person
    has continuous residence for at least two years. In practice, this  can
    give rise to serious obstacles for BIPs. Some social welfare provisions
    are conditional upon civil registration. Asylum  seekers  in  reception
    facilities must be  registered.  However,  when  the  accommodation  is
    revoked, or the person is asked to leave the reception centre, the  BIP
    will be deleted from the registry after notification from  the  manager
    of the centre.

276.  The  AIDA  report  says  that  SPRAR  has   standardised   integration
    programmes. Asylum seekers and BIPs accommodated in SPRAR are generally
    supported  by  way  of  individualised  projects  including  vocational
    training and internships. Vocational  training  and  other  integration
    programmes can be provided by means of national  public  funds  or  the
    Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund  (AMIF).  The  Ministry  of  the
    Interior can finance specific NGO projects relating to integration  and
    social inclusion. The projects financed under AMIF are limited in terms
    of  the  period  of  activity  and   the   number   of   beneficiaries.
    Municipalities can also finance vocational  training,  internships  and
    specific employment bursaries (borse lavoro). The fund is available  to
    Italians  and  foreigners.  However,  asylum  seekers  accommodated  in
    government reception centres have limited opportunities to attend  such
    training.

277. The Special Representative of the Secretary General  on  migration  and
    refugees made the following observations about the integration of  BIPs
    following his fact-finding mission in October 2016.


           "Recognised refugees are  entitled  to  reception  for  a  short
           period following recognition of their refugee  status.  However,
           the saturation of  the  reception  system  has  had  significant
           implications. As noted above,  asylum-seekers  are  supposed  to
           transition to a SPRAR facility early on in the  asylum  process.
           There they should receive a number  of  services  to  help  them
           develop the necessary skills and  knowledge  to  integrate  into
           Italian  society  once  they  leave  the  reception  system.  In
           practice, the shortage of SPRAR places  means  that  many  spend
           their entire time in CAS,  where  these  services  are  lacking.
           While EU funds are available to support  integration  activities
           more generally, in  practice,  they  are  linked  to  activities
           involving SPRAR beneficiaries because these people are easier to
           identify. Informal integration projects exist  in  some  places.
           However, they are very much ad hoc and  on  a  relatively  small
           scale,  and  Government  funding  is   not   available.   As   a
           consequence, once their entitlement to reception ends, those who
           have not gone through the SPRAR system  have  not  acquired  the
           competences needed to  integrate  successfully.  There  is  very
           little general welfare support in Italy; so refugees are left to
           make their own way. Unable to speak the  language  and  with  no
           prospect of finding a job, they often find  themselves  in  dire
           circumstances in informal settlements.


           We visited one such settlement - the Palazzo Selam  -  in  Rome.
           There, around 1,200 Eritrean,  Sudanese,  Somali  and  Ethiopian
           nationals, the majority of whom have  some  form  of  protection
           status, live in a dilapidated building in the  most  rudimentary
           conditions. The building is at full occupancy.  Members  of  the
           four national groups newly arrived in Rome who have nowhere else
           to stay are forced to  sleep  in  atrocious  conditions  in  the
           basement of the Palazzo Selam,  which  was  never  intended  for
           human  occupation.  The  anger  of  the  residents  -  who  feel
           abandoned  by  the  authorities  -  is  manifest.  Many  of  the
           residents do not speak Italian and are unable  to  access  local
           services; few have legitimate employment. Some have been  living
           there since the establishment opened in 2006.


           There is a need for  a  comprehensive  approach  to  integration
           which  is  not  linked  exclusively  to  the  SPRAR  network.  I
           understand from my interlocutors that there is a draft  National
           Integration Plan, but the document has not been made public."

278. The Parliamentary Committee report says  that,  despite  the  undoubted
    progress that has been made in developing the reception, protection and
    integration system for asylum seekers  and  refugees  in  the  last  15
    years,  the  system  is  still  far  from  operating  effectively.  The
    significant growth in migration means that more reception  capacity  is
    needed as well as "an overhaul and improvement of  reception  measures,
    which fail too often because they do not lead to the  true  integration
    of the people in the centres, despite the application  of  considerable
    public resources." The Parliamentary Committee report goes  on  to  say
    that reception is not designed to promote and support integration,  but
    only to provide  emergency  help  and  primary  reception.  The  report
    states:

           "The problem of  effective  management  of  discharge  form  the
           reception system must also be faced. We are increasingly  seeing
           cases of holders of international  protection  being  discharged
           from the reception network with a  multi-year  residence  permit
           but who, because there is no structured  system  providing  them
           with access to employment  policies  and  services,  slide  into
           social marginalization, particularly in  the  big  cities  where
           they frequently take over empty buildings in  order  to  resolve
           chronic  homelessness.  Furthermore,   the   real   numbers   of
           applications for international protection and the  forecasts  we
           can currently make tell us that even though secondary  reception
           may be increased and improved, its  ability  to  cope  with  the
           rising  numbers  of  applicants  and  holders  of  international
           protection will remain very limited."

279. UNHCR has highlighted problems relating to the integration of BIPs  for
    some time. The recommendations made  in  July  2012  expressed  concern
    about shortcomings in  Italian  legislation  and  practice  that  might
    hinder  refugees  from  becoming  self-reliant.  Existing   integration
    policies did not take into account the initial disadvantage of refugees
    in the labour market compared to Italian nationals.  Measures  offering
    support to refugees to access the labour market needed  to  be  "rolled
    out". Refugees granted some form of  international  protection  may  no
    longer benefit from assistance offered to asylum seekers and  therefore
    struggle to access housing. The low capacity of the SPRAR system at the
    time limited  its  capacity  to  assist  refugees  to  secure  adequate
    housing. As a result, there was a risk that  destitute  refugees  might
    become homeless.


280. The recommendations made in July  2013  said  that  UNHCR  published  a
    document  entitled  "Italia  paese  di  protezione?",  which   outlined
    "persisting gaps in the asylum system in Italy, in particular on asylum-
    seeker and refugee reception and integration..". The  report  does  not
    appear to be included in the evidence. The  July  2013  recommendations
    acknowledged that there had been significant improvements, but a number
    of gaps remained, resulting in a  situation  in  which  "a  significant
    number of beneficiaries of international protection lead  deprived  and
    marginalized lives." At that time, Dublin returnees who had  registered
    an asylum claim generally had access to transit  accommodation  centres
    on return to Italy available in Milan (35 places), Rome  (150  places),
    Venice (40) and Bari (20). We have not seen  any  current  evidence  to
    suggest that temporary accommodation centres  of  a  similar  kind  are
    reserved for Dublin returnees. Even then, BIPs  granted  protection  in
    Italy before their departure did not have access to those centres  when
    returned under the Dublin Regulation.

281. The notes of the Home Office meeting with UNHCR  in  October  2017  say
    that UNHCR noted that Italy is  facing  economic  challenges  and  that
    there are inequalities in Italian society. Integration of migrants is a
    general problem. However, there is no discrimination in  law  and  BIPs
    are treated like Italian citizens.

282. We have already outlined a press release issued on 24  August  2017  in
    which UNHCR called for an urgent  solution  to  be  found  for  evicted
    refugees in Rome and for a national commitment  to  integration.  UNHCR
    says that refugee integration is a structural problem throughout  Italy
    and called on the government to approve the National  Integration  Plan
    and for the competent authorities to implement the plan in "a spirit of
    true collaboration". UNHCR is prepared to provide  active  co-operation
    to support the Italian authorities.

283. The AIDA report says that the Ministry of the  Interior  published  the
    National Integration Plan for BIPs in September  2017.  The  plan  says
    that, pending the SPRAR system becoming the only second-line  reception
    system, CAS must adjust their services to  offer  similar  services  to
    those offered in the SPRAR system, such as language training  and  work
    services to offer better opportunities for integration. However, in the
    same section of the report AIDA points out that  the  Ministry  of  the
    Interior adopted tender specifications as recently as  March  2017  for
    the supply of goods and services relating to CPSA, first-line reception
    centres, CAS and CPR, which only foresaw a "basic level  of  services".
    The AIDA  report  concludes  that  this  indicates  that  the  National
    Integration Plan is far from being implemented in practice.

284. The National Integration Plan makes clear that it  represents  a  first
    step towards building a  well-coordinated  system  for  integration  in
    Italy, while identifying the most urgent priorities. It is intended  to
    show a "clear policy direction", which will  be  developed  further  in
    future. In order to  develop  the  work  represented  in  the  plan,  a
    National Integration Council (Tavolo Integrazione) will be  established
    to  coordinate  the  implementation  as  well  as  the  monitoring  and
    evaluation of the interventions proposed.  The  plan  suggests  interim
    measures for  first-line  reception  centres  to  provide  first  steps
    towards integration, but clearly envisages a continued expansion of the
    SPRAR  system  as  the  standard  model.  The  plan  acknowledges  that
    integration is a complex process, which should  start  from  the  first
    reception stage. Integration requires the engagement and  awareness  of
    the host population and must therefore be based in  local  communities.
    Specific attention will be given to vulnerable people such  as  refugee
    women, victims of trafficking and unaccompanied minors.  We  find  that
    the plan represents an important first step in  developing  coordinated
    policies regarding integration of BIPs, but at the date of the hearing,
    there is no evidence to show that the aspirations outlined in the  plan
    are being implemented in practice.


285. The only other point that might be useful to  note  from  the  National
    Integration Plan concerns the figures relating to BIPs. The  plan  says
    that there were 65,765 holders of a residence permit for  international
    protection (including refugees and grants of subsidiary protection). By
    31 August 2017 the number of BIPs had increased to 74,853.

The Tribunal's observations on the evidence

286. We make the following observations on the evidence.


287. The  legal  and  administrative  framework  for  the  consideration  of
    protection  claims  and  the  reception  of  asylum  seekers  in  Italy
    continues to develop and improve. The 'Reception and Procedures Decree'
    (LD 142/2015) came into force on 15 September 2015 and is  intended  to
    transpose  the  'recast'  Reception  Directive  (2013/33/EU)  and   the
    'recast'  Procedures  Directive  (2013/32/EU)  into  Italian  law.  The
    Italian government has developed several sets of  guidelines  with  the
    intention of improving  reception  services  and  health  services  for
    victims of torture and has taken an initial step towards  developing  a
    National Integration Plan.

288. Despite these positive  developments,  the  shortcomings  and  capacity
    issues identified in earlier cases continue to be apparent but must  be
    considered  in  the  context  of  the  massive   increase   in   asylum
    applications made in Italy since 2015.

289. Large numbers of migrants continued to arrive in Italy  by  sea  during
    2014 (170,100), 2015  (153,842)  and  2016  (181,436).  The  number  of
    arrivals in the early part of 2017 indicated a 20%  increase  from  the
    same period in 2016. The number  of  arrivals  by  sea  began  to  drop
    sharply in the second half of 2017 as a result of a series of measures,
    including a co-operation agreement with the Libyan  authorities,  which
    is in effect a 'push back' policy.  Despite  the  marked  reduction  of
    arrivals by sea, the number of asylum applications  made  in  Italy  in
    2017 (130,119) still exceeded 2016 (123,600). This is likely to be  due
    to the tighter controls we have described.

290. Other policies continue to put pressure on the Italian  asylum  system.
    The increase in fingerprinting of arrivals by sea in 'hotspots' has led
    to a high number of incoming 'take  back'  requests  under  the  Dublin
    Regulation. In 2016 Italy received 64,844 requests although only  4,061
    transfers were recorded. Tighter controls on the northern borders  with
    France, Switzerland and Austria appear to be resulting in large numbers
    of migrants being returned  under  the  Dublin  Regulation,  bi-lateral
    agreements or simply being 'pushed back' to Italy.

291. The fact of the marked reduction in arrivals from outside the EU  means
    that the evidence as a whole,  much  of  which  involves  the  position
    before the downturn, needs to be assessed in that light.  The AIDA  and
    MSF evidence does, however, engage  with  the  position  following  the
    reduction. The UNHCR, speaking in 2017, does not consider the situation
    in Italy to be comparable with that in Greece

292. An EU relocation programme was set up as part of  the  European  Agenda
    on Migration with the intention of  alleviating  the  pressure  on  the
    Italian and Greek asylum systems. The programme fell far short  of  the
    planned target of 160,000 relocations. When the programme  came  to  an
    end in September 2017 only 12,690 people had been relocated from Italy.
    In the context of the large number of asylum applications made in Italy
    in the same period, it is  unlikely  that  the  scheme  alleviated  any
    pressure on the Italian asylum system.

293. The  Italian  government  continues  to  make  significant  efforts  to
    increase the capacity of the  reception  and  accommodation  system  in
    response to the large number of arrivals. There  are  no  comprehensive
    statistics on the capacity of the reception system.  The  decentralised
    nature of the system means that the  quality  of  reception  conditions
    might vary from region to region.

294. The reception system does not function  in  the  way  intended  by  the
    legislation.  First-line   reception   facilities   are   intended   to
    accommodate asylum seekers  for  a  short  period  during  the  initial
    registration  of  a  claim  before  being  transferred  to  second-line
    reception facilities (SPRAR),  which  should  represent  the  norm  for
    reception of asylum seekers. In reality, the vast  majority  of  asylum
    seekers spend their time, often many months or years, housed  in  basic
    (or very basic) conditions in extraordinary  reception  centres  (CAS).
    The emergency situation prompted by the arrival of such  large  numbers
    of people required a massive expansion of CAS facilities. In July 2017,
    205,000 migrants were accommodated in the  reception  system,  of  whom
    158,607 were accommodated in CAS.  Basic  emergency  accommodation  has
    become the norm for reception in Italy, despite the continuing  efforts
    of the Italian government to expand the capacity of the SPRAR  network.
    Although CAS facilities are, in many cases, far from ideal, there is no
    evidence from those well-placed to  opine,  that  the  facilities  risk
    Article 3 violations in respect of those who  do  not  have  particular
    vulnerabilities.

295.  The  SPRAR  network  provides  a   higher   level   of   support   and
    accommodation. The evidence clearly and consistently states that  there
    are not enough SPRAR places to cope with the demand. The SPRAR  network
    forms a small part of the reception system. There is no clear  evidence
    showing the actual capacity of the system,  but  it  is  likely  to  be
    around 30,000 places. Funding is available for more places, but further
    work needs to be done to encourage local authorities  to  take  up  the
    funding to increase the number of SPRAR facilities.

296. The SPRAR network provides places  for  'ordinary'  cases  as  well  as
    facilities  that  are  suitable  for  'vulnerable  persons'   including
    families with children (around  80-100  places),  unaccompanied  minors
    (3,488 places) and  people  with  mental  health  issues  and  physical
    disabilities (734 places).  The  SPRAR  reception  capacity  has  grown
    exponentially since 2011; although the evidence is inconsistent, it may
    have increased from 9,356 places to 35,869 places.  Even so,  there  is
    still an acute lack of  capacity  in  the  SPRAR  network,  which  only
    includes a small proportion of places suitable  for  vulnerable  people
    and a tiny proportion of places suitable for people with mental  health
    issues or physical disabilities.  It is  reasonable  to  infer  that  a
    significant number of those who may be vulnerable and/or  have  special
    needs are likely to be accommodated in emergency reception  facilities,
    given the high numbers of asylum seekers housed in such facilities  and
    the evidence indicating an increasing number  of  people  with  special
    needs.

297. UNHCR has  not  recommended  a  halt  on  returns  to  Italy  but  does
    recommend a "proactive and flexible use of the  discretionary  clauses,
    in particular article 17(2) of the Dublin III regulation in a  flexible
    manner in order to ensure maximum protection of the  asylum-seeker  and
    full respect  for  his/her  human  rights,  in  particular  as  regards
    vulnerable applicants and  applicants  with  relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom." The UNHCR view is to be given very significant weight.

298. Removal under the Dublin  Regulation  is  a  government  to  government
    transfer. As we noted in paragraph 164 above, these transfers are of  a
    qualitatively  different  nature  to  the  way  in  which  the  Italian
    authorities might deal with the large  number  of  arrivals  of  asylum
    seekers who enter the country by sea or those arriving  overland.  That
    is of significance, when assessing the evidence overall.  It means that
    caution must be employed when looking at the evidence about migrants in
    general in Italy.


299. The Italian authorities normally  indicate  the  relevant  airport  for
    return and ask to be informed of any special needs at least 10 days  in
    advance of the transfer. The procedure on  return  may  depend  on  the
    circumstances of the individual  case.  A  person  who  has  previously
    claimed asylum in Italy will be required  to  return  to  the  relevant
    Questura where the claim is registered. If the relevant Questura is  in
    the Prefecture where the airport is situated, a Dublin  returnee  might
    be able to access advice services at the airport, which may be able  to
    assist in arranging accommodation. However, the nature  and  extent  of
    those services may vary depending on the airport. If the  asylum  claim
    is not registered in the Prefecture  where  the  airport  is  situated,
    assistance is limited to providing advice and a  train  ticket  to  the
    relevant Questura, which might be some distance from the airport. If  a
    person has not claimed asylum the relevant  Questura  will  be  in  the
    Prefecture where the airport is situated.

300.  The  Italian  Dublin   Unit   is   not   responsible   for   arranging
    accommodation. The only exception is a special procedure  for  families
    with children where the Dublin Unit will liaise directly with the SPRAR
    Servizio Centrale. The Dublin Unit will notify the relevant  Prefecture
    of the Dublin returnee's arrival. The relevant Questura and  the  local
    Territorial Commission would then be responsible for the claim.

301. Delays and obstacles to registering an  asylum  claim  continue  to  be
    reported. The extent of the problem appears  to  vary  from  region  to
    region. A possible consequence of such delay is that a person might  be
    left without accommodation  until  formal  registration  of  the  claim
    (verbalizzazione). Delays in formal registration of a claim might  also
    affect access to healthcare, although emergency healthcare would  still
    be available.

302. The evidence indicates that a significant number of  migrants  live  in
    marginalised conditions  outside  the  main  reception  system.  It  is
    difficult to ascertain  the  backgrounds  of  people  living  in  these
    informal settlements and occupied buildings; but it would appear that a
    significant number may be transitory migrants who have  chosen  not  to
    access the reception system in Italy.

303. In law, Beneficiaries of International Protection have  similar  rights
    to Italian citizens. They are entitled  to  work  and  have  access  to
    healthcare. In practice, the  evidence  suggests  that  BIPs  may  only
    receive limited assistance from advice services at the airport and  may
    face obstacles and delays in renewing a residence  permit.  A  BIP  may
    have an entitlement to enter the SPRAR network  for  a  period  of  six
    months, but access to accommodation will depend on availability.  SPRAR
    is unable to provide an indication of waiting times. A BIP is  unlikely
    to receive assistance with integration unless admitted to a SPRAR.

GENERAL CONCLUSIONS

A.      'Ordinary  cases'  (not  exhibiting  particular  vulnerabilities  or
      disabilities)

304. The evidence before the Upper Tribunal shows that the system  in  Italy
    for dealing with migrants continues to be under intense pressure.  Many
    of the concerns about the functioning  of  the  Italian  asylum  system
    highlighted in previous Higher Court cases continue  to  be  raised  by
    international organisations and NGOs working on the ground in Italy. In
    previous cases, the courts considered evidence showing high numbers  of
    arrivals in Italy, delays in registering asylum  claims  and  accessing
    accommodation, the nature of the accommodation and the limited capacity
    of SPRAR. The courts also  considered  evidence  about  integration  of
    BIPs. Despite the difficulties faced by the Italian authorities due  to
    pressure of numbers,  the  courts  have  consistently  found  that  the
    evidence  did  not  show  sufficiently   widespread   and   substantial
    operational problems to give rise to a general risk of Article  3  ill-
    treatment, sufficient to rebut the presumption that Italy  will  comply
    with its international obligations.


305. We accept  that  the  Italian  asylum  system  is  under  more  intense
    pressure than when the High Court  last  comprehensively  reviewed  the
    position. It  is  however,  still  the  case  that  the  UNHCR  is  not
    recommending that third country signatories to  the  Dublin  Regulation
    should suspend  removals  to  Italy.  In  the  context  of  the  Dublin
    Regulation,  the  recommendations  made  by  UNHCR  have   been   given
    considerable weight. In EM (Eritrea) the Supreme Court acknowledged the
    "unique and unrivalled expertise of UNHCR". As in this case, the  UNHCR
    recommendations on Italy in July 2012 and July 2013 were more muted and
    did "not partake of the "pre-eminent and possibly decisive" quality  of
    the  reports  on  Greece".  The  Supreme  Court  emphasised  that   the
    recommendations on Italy contained useful information that  the  courts
    should consider carefully and went on to say:

           "74. ...Assumptions  should  not  be  made  about  any  lack  of
           recommendations concerning general suspension of  returns  under
           Dublin II to Italy but it is of obvious significance that  UNHCR
           did not make any such proposal. The UNHCR material  should  form
           part of the overall examination of the particular  circumstances
           of each of the appellant's cases, no more and no less."

306. We conclude that  despite  the  increasing  pressures  on  the  Italian
    asylum system, the fact that UNHCR has not recommended a  general  halt
    on returns to Italy under the Dublin Regulation is significant and is a
    matter that a First-tier Tribunal judge would be bound to give weight.


307. We acknowledge that asylum  seekers  in  general  are  a  "particularly
    underprivileged  and  vulnerable  population   group".   However,   the
    Reception Directive makes a distinction between what  could  be  termed
    'ordinary' asylum seekers and certain categories of people deemed to be
    'vulnerable persons', who have certain characteristics  which  indicate
    that they are particularly vulnerable.

308. In an 'ordinary case' of an  asylum  seeker  who  is  not  particularly
    vulnerable we conclude that the evidence is not sufficiently consistent
    or cogent to show a general risk of Article 3 ill-treatment  sufficient
    to rebut the presumption of compliance.

309. An 'ordinary' asylum seeker would be returned  to  Italy  with  advance
    notice to the Italian authorities. Any other information that might  be
    relevant to that person, including health  information,  will  also  be
    sent. The Italian Dublin Unit will notify the  relevant  Prefecture  of
    the person's arrival. In most cases the person will be returned to  one
    of the main airports, where NGO advice services are  available,  albeit
    the evidence shows that the  level  of  service  might  vary  from  one
    airport to another. Some NGO advice  services  will  assist  an  asylum
    applicant to find accommodation; but the core function is to refer  the
    applicant to the relevant Questura to  register  or  resume  an  asylum
    claim. The fact that some services  may  not  be  as  comprehensive  as
    others is insufficient reason to rebut the presumption that the Italian
    authorities will comply with their obligations.

310. We do not accept that anything turns on the  fact  that  an  'ordinary'
    asylum seeker might be required to make a journey from the  airport  to
    the relevant Questura where the asylum claim should  be  registered  or
    resumed. Leaving aside 'vulnerable  persons'  (see  below),  it  cannot
    seriously be contended that a person who has been  able  to  travel  to
    Italy and who then chooses to travel to the United Kingdom is likely to
    face inhuman or degrading treatment by reason of having to make such  a
    journey to the Questura.

311. We  accept  the  evidence  continues  to  show  that  delays  occur  in
    registering asylum claims in some Questura and  recognise  that  formal
    registration by way of verbalizzazione (C3 form) usually is a necessary
    step to access the reception system.  The  problem  was  identified  by
    UNHCR in 2012 and 2013  and  has  been  considered  by  the  courts  on
    previous occasions. The evidence does not indicate that the periods  of
    delay in registering an asylum claim and accessing the reception system
    have increased to such a significant extent that an  'ordinary'  asylum
    seeker would face long periods of homelessness of the kind  that  would
    engage the threshold required to show a breach  of  Article  3.  In  NA
    (Sudan) the court accepted that long-term homelessness in conditions of
    the kind  described  in  MSS  may  constitute  inhumane  and  degrading
    treatment but short-term homelessness need not [160]. We recognise that
    it is not ideal for anyone to be temporarily homeless while waiting  to
    register an asylum claim, but the evidence shows that interim  services
    provided by NGOs, church and civil society groups are available in  the
    main cities, which can help to ameliorate the worst  effects  of  being
    left without reception services for a temporary period.

312. As we have noted, although the MSF report says  that  Dublin  returnees
    are amongst those being helped in camps in Rome, we  do  not  know  how
    many of these there are and therefore the evidence does not  provide  a
    sufficient  case  for  concluding  that  this  might  be  a   realistic
    possibility for someone who is returned from the United  Kingdom  under
    the Dublin Regulation. In particular, the MSF report says that most  of
    those  living  in  occupied   buildings   have   never   accessed   the
    institutional reception system or have been expelled  from  it  in  the
    absence of proper social inclusion i.e. BIPs.

313. The evidence shows that the Italian authorities  have  taken  steps  to
    increase the capacity of the reception system in order  to  respond  to
    the large numbers of asylum seekers  entering  Italy.  The  efforts  to
    rapidly increase the capacity of the SPRAR system have  been  overtaken
    by the year on year increase in the number of asylum claims (until  the
    recent drop in arrivals).  As  a  result,  there  has  been  a  massive
    increase in the use of basic  emergency  accommodation  (CAS).  Despite
    improvements to the legal framework, basic emergency accommodation  has
    become the norm for the reception of asylum seekers in Italy.  Although
    there are reports of poor conditions  in  certain  CAS  and  first-line
    reception centres, there is no authoritative finding by an NGO or other
    body to suggest that the  general  conditions  in  CAS  and  first-line
    reception centres fall below Article 3 standards for 'ordinary'  asylum
    seekers without particular vulnerabilities.

314. SPRAR reception services are described as  "a  clear  example  of  best
    practice". It is not suggested  that  the  conditions  in  SPRAR  would
    breach Article 3.

315. The evidence  on  access  to  healthcare  likewise  does  not  disclose
    anything that could lead to the conclusion that Dublin returnees face a
    real risk of inhuman or degrading  treatment,  as  a  result  of  being
    unable to get urgent medical assistance. Problems arise  from  time  to
    time as a result of lack of interpreters and  cultural  mediators;  but
    that may be said of other countries, including the United Kingdom.  The
    ability to access health care  may  be  more  difficult  for  those  in
    unofficial accommodation. Even here, however, there is no  evidence  to
    show that someone who urgently requires medical assistance would be  at
    real risk of serious harm because he or she will not be able to  access
    urgent treatment.

316. In conclusion, we find that the evidence is not such as  would  entitle
    a First-tier Tribunal, properly directed, to find that there is a  real
    risk of an 'ordinary' asylum seeker suffering Article  3  ill-treatment
    if returned to Italy pursuant to the Dublin  Regulation.  The  evidence
    does not rebut the general presumption that Italy will comply with  its
    international obligations in such cases.


B.      Vulnerable persons (including asylum seekers and BIPs)

317. As a general matter, we find that the  threshold  for  Article  3  ill-
    treatment may be met in cases involving demonstrably vulnerable  asylum
    seekers and BIPs. We shall explain why.


318. In Tarakhel, the ECtHR reiterated the general principles formulated  in
    Soering v UK [1989] 11 EHRR 439. To fall within the scope of Article 3,
    the  ill-treatment  must  attain  a  minimum  level  of  severity.  The
    assessment  of  the  minimum  is  relative;  it  depends  on  all   the
    circumstances of the case, such as the duration of  the  treatment  and
    its physical or mental effects and, in some instances, the sex, age and
    state of health of the victim.


319. In previous cases, the courts have found that there would be no  breach
    of Article 3 even if particularly vulnerable asylum  seekers  and  BIPs
    were returned to Italy.   However,  in  respect  of  this  category  of
    people, we have considered  significant  new  evidence  which,  in  our
    assessment, alters the picture.

320. The first significant difference between this case and  previous  cases
    is the nature and extent of the evidence produced by  the  parties.  In
    the earlier cases, the courts considered evidence from a  small  number
    of lawyers and NGOs working in Italy and from the  British  Asylum  and
    Immigration  Liaison  Officer  in  Rome.  In  the  present  case,   the
    respondent conducted a Fact-finding Mission to Italy where a number  of
    Italian officials, including officials at the Ministry of the Interior,
    the Border Police and at SPRAR were interviewed.  The  respondent  also
    met with relevant organisations such as  UNHCR,  Caritas  and  the  Red
    Cross. The fact that a  number  of  justifiable  criticisms  have  been
    levelled at the resulting 'Fact-finding Mission  Report'  goes  to  the
    weight that can be attributed to  certain  aspects  of  that  evidence.
    Where the summary of the meeting has been approved by the  interviewee,
    weight can be placed on the evidence, but a First-tier judge  would  be
    bound to approach other aspects of the evidence with  some  caution  if
    the summary has not been approved. In turn, the  applicants  have  also
    compiled a large amount of evidence  from  lawyers  and  civil  society
    groups  working  in  Italy.  Some  of  the  evidence  compiled  by  the
    applicants comes from witnesses whose evidence is  bound  to  be  given
    weight. For example, the applicants also contacted senior officials  in
    SPRAR and the Italian Dublin Unit in Rome.

321. The second significant difference is the position taken  by  UNHCR.  In
    previous cases, the  fact  that  UNHCR  did  not  make  an  unequivocal
    recommendation to halt returns to Italy of the kind made in relation to
    Greece was  a  significant  matter.  The  UNHCR's  concerns  about  the
    shortcomings in the Italian asylum system due to high numbers of claims
    were taken  into  account.  Ultimately,  they  were  found  not  to  be
    sufficient, taken with other evidence, to show a real risk of Article 3
    ill-treatment such that it would rebut the presumption that Italy would
    comply with its international obligations.

322. The up to date information  from  UNHCR  is  of  a  somewhat  different
    nature to the general recommendations made in public documents in  2012
    and 2013. In the present case, Home Office officials met with  a  UNHCR
    representative  in  Rome.  The  evidence  shows  that  UNHCR   conducts
    significant  operations  in  Italy.  It  monitors  the  conditions   in
    reception centres and provides advice and  assistance  to  the  Italian
    government on matters within its  remit.  We  are  satisfied  that  the
    "unique and unrivalled expertise" of UNHCR officials working  in  Italy
    would have to be given significant weight by a properly directed First-
    tier Tribunal judge. A First-tier Tribunal judge would be bound to give
    weight to the fact that UNHCR still does not make a  recommendation  to
    halt returns to Italy but would also have to give weight to  its  other
    recommendations.

323. UNHCR expressed particular concerns about vulnerable persons  and  made
    a direct recommendation to British  government  officials  to  use  the
    discretionary  clause  contained  in  Article  17(2)  of   the   Dublin
    Regulation in  a  "proactive  and  flexible"  way  in  cases  involving
    vulnerable people and those who have family members in the UK.

324.  We  have  considered  the  evidence  relating  to  the  treatment   of
    vulnerable persons in some detail above.  Although  we  recognise  that
    UNHCR did not go as far as to recommend  that  even  vulnerable  people
    should not be returned to Italy, the recommendation must be  considered
    in the context of the clear and consistent evidence  showing  an  acute
    lack of capacity in the SPRAR system and the  recent  evidence  from  a
    senior official at SPRAR, which indicates that only a small  proportion
    of places is likely to be suitable for people with significant physical
    and mental vulnerabilities.

323.  The recommendation made by UNHCR is underpinned by concerns about  the
    capacity  of  the  Italian  asylum  system  to   adequately   safeguard
    particularly vulnerable people returned under  the  Dublin  Regulation.
    This is borne out by the evidence before us. We are concerned that  the
    evidence  from  a  senior  official  at  SPRAR  indicates  that   other
    categories of vulnerable people (other  than  families  with  children)
    follow the same standard procedure as 'ordinary cases'. The requirement
    to travel  to  the  relevant  Questura,  the  risk  of  delay  and  the
    associated  possibility  of  a  temporary  period  of  homelessness  or
    accommodation in basic facilities such as a  CAS  does  not  reach  the
    relevant threshold in such 'ordinary  cases'.  But,  depending  on  the
    nature and extent of a person's vulnerability, those same obstacles and
    conditions might reach the  Article  3  threshold  in  cases  involving
    people who demonstrate particular vulnerabilities.

324.  The categories of "vulnerable persons"  identified  in  the  Reception
    Directive should be a starting point. However, the extent of a person's
    particular vulnerability must be  of  sufficient  severity  to  show  a
    potential breach of Article 3. It is  difficult  to  identify  in  what
    circumstances a particular vulnerability  might  cross  the  Article  3
    threshold. The individual circumstances of each case must be considered
    carefully. A person who makes general assertions  about  mental  health
    problems without independent evidence or who has  been  diagnosed  with
    mild depression or mild Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) may  well
    still have sufficient resilience to  cope  with  the  procedures  on  a
    Dublin return to Italy, even if this entails the possibility of  facing
    a difficult temporary period of homelessness  or  basic  conditions  in
    first-line reception facilities. Similarly, a person with a  relatively
    minor physical disability, such as loss of sight in  one  eye  or  some
    restriction in movement, is likely to be  able  to  face  the  possible
    challenges, without crossing the Article 3 threshold.

325. However, there will be cases where a person's particular  vulnerability
    is sufficiently serious that the risk of even  a  temporary  period  of
    homelessness or housing in the basic conditions of a  CAS  might  cross
    the threshold, for the  "certification"  purposes  with  which  we  are
    concerned.  Such cases are likely to  include  those  with  significant
    mental or physical health problems or disabilities.  Other  people  may
    have  inherent  characteristics  that  render  them   vulnerable   e.g.
    unaccompanied  children  or  the  elderly.  In  such  cases,  the  only
    appropriate accommodation is likely to be the supportive  accommodation
    in SPRAR. It is difficult to specify when  a  particular  vulnerability
    might require that level of safeguarding  in  order  to  protect  their
    rights under Article 3. The necessary level of support will  depend  on
    the circumstances of each case.

326. We are concerned that there  is  no  procedure  for  such  particularly
    vulnerable people to be referred  directly  to  SPRAR  by  the  Italian
    Dublin Unit. The evidence indicates that the  Border  Police  sometimes
    make direct referrals to SPRAR, but Ms Iuzzolini made clear that  there
    is no special procedure for vulnerable people to be referred  to  SPRAR
    except through the normal procedure used for 'ordinary cases',  whereby
    a  person  will  be  referred  by  the  relevant  authority  e.g.   the
    responsible Questura or Prefecture. The  only  exception  is  in  cases
    involving returns of families with children, where a special  procedure
    has been put in place for the Italian Dublin  Unit  to  refer  families
    directly to SPRAR following the ECtHR decision in Tarakhel.

327. Despite the fact that both parties spoke to senior officials  in  SPRAR
    and other government departments, no clear evidence has emerged  as  to
    how long it might take  to  find  a  suitable  place  in  SPRAR  for  a
    particularly vulnerable person. The evidence clearly  and  consistently
    states that there are not enough places to meet the demand. Neither  Ms
    Iuzzolini nor the SPRAR official interviewed by the Home  Office  could
    give any indication of the likely waiting time for a place to be  found
    in SPRAR. Ms Iuzzolini said SPRAR does  not  operate  a  waiting  list.
    Waiting times vary considerably. People might wait "days or longer" for
    a place in SPRAR.

328.  BIPs  who  can  demonstrate  significant  mental  or  physical  health
    problems or disabilities, as described above, are likely to be  in  the
    same position in terms of  access  to  SPRAR.  For  these  reasons,  we
    conclude that there is no  basis  upon  which  to  distinguish  between
    demonstrably vulnerable asylum seekers and BIPs.

329.  The Court of Appeal in NA (Sudan) rejected  the  contention  that  the
    decision in Tarakhel extended to requiring specific assurances in cases
    involving other categories of vulnerable persons. The  clear  focus  of
    the decision was on  the  particular  vulnerability  of  families  with
    children [112-120]. The Court of Appeal made clear that it  was  highly
    desirable that the ECtHR and  domestic  tribunals  adopt  a  consistent
    approach, provided that the approach "is founded on good  evidence  and
    .. that decision-makers recognise that the facts of a particular  case,
    or evidence of significant changes  in  the  situation  in  Italy,  may
    require a departure from it." [110].

330. In this case, we  conclude  that  there  is  significant  new  evidence
    before us to justify a departure from previous  cases  in  relation  to
    particularly vulnerable  asylum  seekers  and  BIPs.  We  come  to  the
    following conclusions in relation to this category of cases:

       i) The UNHCR recommendation to use the  discretionary  clause  in  a
          "proactive  and  flexible"  manner  was  made  directly  to   the
          respondent and should be given consideration by  the  respondent.
          The recommendation reflects general concerns,  supported  by  the
          evidence produced in this case, about the capacity of the Italian
          asylum system to provide  adequate  safeguards  for  particularly
          vulnerable  people.  Failure  to  consider  whether  to  exercise
          discretion in cases involving demonstrably vulnerable individuals
          is likely to render a decision unlawful.


      ii) If, in such a  case,  the  respondent  decides  not  to  exercise
          discretion, the return and reception of a particularly vulnerable
          asylum seeker or BIP would need to be well-planned.  We  have  no
          doubt that the Italian authorities would  not  want  to  leave  a
          vulnerable asylum seeker or BIP without support, but the evidence
          indicates that there is no process, similar to those for families
          with children, to  ensure  that  particularly  vulnerable  asylum
          seekers will be safeguarded while waiting  for  suitable  support
          and accommodation, of which there is an acute shortage. In  order
          fully to protect the rights of a particularly  vulnerable  person
          in accordance with the respondent's duties under  the  ECHR,  the
          respondent would need to  seek  an  assurance  from  the  Italian
          authorities that support and accommodation  is  in  place  before
          effecting a transfer.

     iii) It follows that a failure to obtain an  assurance  prior  to  the
          transfer of a particularly vulnerable asylum  seeker  or  BIP  is
          likely to  give  rise  to  a  human  rights  claim  that  is  not
          necessarily 'bound to fail' before the First-tier Tribunal.

C.    Beneficiaries of International Protection

331.  We have already examined the position of BIPs who  are  identified  as
    vulnerable. On the position of BIPs in general, Laing J held:

         "175. It is clear that the ECtHR has decided, in more than  one  of
         the admissibility decisions, that a BIP, who, once he  has  status,
         and can work, and is on a par with Italian citizens, cannot rely on
         article 3 to resist return to Italy. Any attempt, based on Limbuela
         [[2005] UKHL 66] to persuade the FTT that the approach of the ECtHR
         to such cases is wrong (as a matter of domestic law) and should not
         be followed by the FTT, is bound to fail".


332.  So far as the case law of the ECtHR is  concerned,  that  remains  the
    position, so far as  we  are  aware.  The  present  applicants  submit,
    however, that the evidence regarding BIPs shows that there are problems
    on a number of fronts.

333.  Although a BIP has access to  SPRAR  accommodation  for  6  months  or
    possibly longer, following notification of protection  status,  someone
    who is not resident in a SPRAR at  the  time  of  notification  may  in
    practice be unable to access SPRAR accommodation. Again,  however,  the
    evidence is, in our view, insufficiently clear to enable a hypothetical
    First-tier Tribunal to conclude that  the  evidential  presumption  has
    been overcome. There is evidence from SPRAR itself that a BIP  who  has
    not previously received SPRAR accommodation can be given it, on return,
    for 6 months.

334.  In the case of BIPs, the issue of integration looms large. Mr  Chirico
    accepted that the Reception Directive did not amount to an extension of
    the text of Article 3. He submitted, however, that Italy's  failure  to
    provide BIPs with language training and  other  integrative  facilities
    led to the real risk of homelessness and destitution. It was  therefore
    wrong to equate BIPs with native  Italian  citizens  whatever  the  law
    might say.

335.  Although we are conscious that past progress and good  intentions  are
    not to be equated with the position on the  ground,  where  a  judicial
    organ of an EU State is deciding whether another EU State is permitting
    Article 3 violations to  occur  on  its  territory,  evidence  of  past
    progress and present intentions are nevertheless of some relevance.  We
    therefore take account of what the Italian Parliamentary Committee  has
    said on the integration issue and of the National Integration Plan.

336.  We are, in any event, unimpressed by the submission that being  unable
    to speak Italian puts  BIPs  at  such  a  disadvantage,  compared  with
    Italian speakers, as to raise Article 3  issues.  So  far  as  concerns
    access to both employment opportunities and social security, compelling
    evidence would be needed that significant numbers of BIPs are suffering
    really serious harm in this regard. Such evidence as there is falls far
    short.

337.  It is in our view highly significant that the  UNHCR  has  since  2012
    had express regard to issues of integration. As can be  seen  from  our
    analysis, UNHCR has highlighted problems  in  this  area  in  its  2012
    recommendations and again in 2013,  whilst  acknowledging  "significant
    improvements". Again, if UNHCR had harboured concerns  that  equate  to
    those articulated by the applicants, they would have said so.

338.  There is also the following point. An assertion that  Article  3  will
    be violated following a Dublin  III  return  necessarily  becomes  more
    difficult to make good, the longer the passage of time  following  that
    return. If there is not shown to be a real  risk  of  breach  whilst  a
    returnee is in CAS or SPRAR accommodation, awaiting the judgment of the
    Italian authorities on his or her asylum claim, then what  may  or  may
    not happen thereafter belongs in the realm of speculation.  This  seems
    to us to be  the  position  with  much  of  the  evidence  relating  to
    integration.

339.  In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that, having regard to the  evidence
    as a whole, a hypothetical First-tier Tribunal could not, on the  basis
    of that evidence, rationally conclude that a BIP would be at real  risk
    of Article 3 treatment, if returned to Italy pursuant to Dublin III.


THE INDIVIDUAL CASES

340. In the case of each applicant, we repeat what we have set out above  at
    paragraphs 25, 324, 325, 326 and (with regard to SM) 328 and 330.  This
    can be summarised as follows:

      i) With regard to each of the applicants,  what  they  say  they  have
         experienced outside the UK is capable of being believed, such  that
         when considering whether or not any one of their claims is  clearly
         unfounded, we should consider their claims at their highest;

     ii) Notwithstanding the difficulties which any asylum seeker  (or  BIP)
         might experience on return to Italy, save insofar as  an  applicant
         might be able to demonstrate that  he  or  she  has  a  significant
         vulnerability, their return to Italy would not arguably  cross  the
         Article 3 threshold;

    iii)  However,  in  cases  where  an  applicant  is  arguably  able   to
         demonstrate significant mental and/or physical health  problems  or
         disabilities, such as might  be  found  to  constitute  significant
         vulnerability, a failure on the part of the respondent to  consider
         exercising discretion under Article 17, or  to  seek  an  assurance
         from  the  Italian  authorities  that   appropriate   support   and
         accommodation would be in place before effecting a transfer,  would
         be likely to render a decision to return that applicant unlawful.


    We accordingly now consider the position of each individual applicant.


SM


341.  SM is a national of Sudan who claims to have been born  on  1  January
    1977.  He claims (which claim is capable of belief)  to  have  suffered
    several years of persecution at the hands  of  the  Janjaweed,  in  the
    course of which he was beaten on occasion with weapons and  sticks  (he
    still bears the scars) and his father was murdered.  Following  several
    years of persecution, he left Darfur around July 2005 and travelled  to
    Libya, where he remained for some six years until, during the so-called
    Arab Spring, he decided that Libya was too dangerous a place  in  which
    to remain and so travelled by boat to Sicily,  arriving  there  in  May
    2011.


342.  SM was accommodated in basic conditions in Italy.  After  a  traumatic
    incident in which he witnessed another asylum seeker being stabbed with
    a bottle, and was himself injured during the incident, he travelled  to
    France in early October 2012. In December that year he travelled to the
    United Kingdom under  a  lorry.   His  asylum  claim  was  refused  and
    certified on third country grounds  on  31  January  2013.   His  human
    rights claim was certified as clearly unfounded a week later.


343.  Correspondence from the Italian Dublin Unit to  the  respondent  dated
    04 February 2013 confirmed that SM had been recognised  as  a  refugee.
    For this reason, the transfer request under the Dublin  Regulation  was
    refused. The parties have been unable to clarify the exact date that SM
    was granted status but agree that any five-year residence permit  would
    have expired.


344.  In a detailed and comprehensive psychological report  dated  18  March
    2015, Dr Andrew Hale found that SM  was  suffering  from  "chronic  and
    severe" Post-traumatic Stress  Disorder  (PTSD)  and  Major  Depression
    arising from traumatic experiences in Sudan, which were  compounded  by
    his experiences in Italy.  These  experiences  led  to  "impairment  in
    functioning across  all  areas  of  his  life".  He  reported  that  he
    frequently felt dissociated from what was  happening  around  him.  The
    possibility of removal to Italy, "a country where he  feels  his  human
    rights were violated", is likely to lead to increased anxiety and  lack
    of hope for the future. In Dr  Hale's  opinion,  return  to  Italy  was
    likely to exacerbate SM's depressive symptoms  and  would  add  to  his
    existing PTSD symptoms.


345.  The most recent report prepared by Dr  Melanie  Stevens  on  24  April
    2018 is less comprehensive, but it is clear she carried out a number of
    diagnostic assessments. Dr  Stevens'  assessment  indicates  that  SM's
    condition is likely to remain the same. She  also  diagnosed  him  with
    PTSD. Her record of the IES-R score (severity rating) indicates that SM
    is still likely to be suffering  from  symptoms  of  severe  PTSD.  Her
    assessment indicated that he suffers from high levels  of  anxiety  and
    negative thoughts. In her opinion return to Italy  would  increase  his
    clinical levels of anxiety and may result in continued  chronic  stress
    and trauma. She noted that SM is supported by his brother in the UK.


346.  SM is a recognised  refugee  who  has  experienced  serious  traumatic
    events in the past. Because  of  these  experiences,  SM  suffers  from
    severe mental health  issues.  In  our  assessment,  his  condition  is
    sufficiently serious to bring him within the category  of  demonstrably
    vulnerable individuals we have identified.


347.  It was  accordingly  incumbent  on  the  respondent  to  examine  SM's
    position, in order to determine,  on  an  informed  basis,  whether  to
    exercise discretion under Article 17 to examine SM's claim taking  into
    account his particular vulnerability and the fact that he has  a  close
    family member in the UK.  If  the  respondent  chose  not  to  exercise
    discretion, it would be necessary to seek appropriate  assurances  from
    the authorities in Italy  before  returning  SM  there  on  safe  third
    country grounds.  SM's  application  for  judicial  review  accordingly
    succeeds and the decision is quashed.


SOM


348.  SOM is a national of Somalia who was born  in  October  1988.   Having
    arrived in this country in June 2015 with a forged Dutch identity card,
    she was arrested and detained on  suspicion  of  attempting  to  enter,
    using a false document.  She claimed asylum.  It is common ground  that
    this applicant had previously been fingerprinted in Italy.  Her  asylum
    claim was  therefore  refused  and  certified  on  safe  third  country
    grounds.


349.  SOM is married with one child, born in 2012, but she claims  (and  her
    claim needs for present purposes to be treated as credible) not to have
    seen either her husband or her child since that child was  five  months
    old.  She would be returning to Italy as a lone female, which  is  said
    at paragraph 165 of the  applicants'  skeleton  argument  to  make  SOM
    vulnerable.


350.  Her other vulnerability is said to be that "she suffers from  Moderate
    Major  Depressive  Disorder  Anxiety".   It   is,   however,   accepted
    (paragraph 167 of the skeleton) that "any mental illness from which she
    suffers is unlikely to be considered of such severity  that  a  medical
    referral would take place at the border, even if any  medical  evidence
    is provided in advance".  Her claim is argued essentially on the  basis
    of the systemic failings within the support given to asylum seekers and
    BIPs within Italy  and  the  generic  difficulties  which  would  as  a
    consequence of such failings face any asylum seeker returning to Italy.


351.  Lone women are not amongst the "vulnerable persons" identified in  the
    'recast' Reception Directive although we recognise that  a  lone  woman
    may be more vulnerable than most if faced with a  temporary  period  of
    homelessness  while  registering  a  claim.  The  psychological  report
    prepared  by  Dr  Eileen  Walsh  indicates  that  SOM  may  face   some
    psychological challenges but does not indicate that  she  is  suffering
    from a serious psychiatric illness or a severe psychological  condition
    such that she could not cope with some of the potential  challenges  of
    registering a claim in  Italy.  SOM  showed  sufficient  resilience  to
    travel to Italy and then on to the UK.  We  accept  that  the  combined
    effect  of  SOM's  characteristics  demonstrate   some   vulnerability.
    However, based on the evidence before the Tribunal we do  not  consider
    that SOM's vulnerability is of sufficient severity as to have  required
    the respondent to consider the exercise of discretion under Article  17
    or to obtain appropriate  assurances.  Accordingly,  SOM's  application
    must be dismissed.


RK


352.  RK is an Eritrean national who was born in 1979.  His claim, which  we
    take at its highest, is that he was forced to serve for nearly 20 years
    in the Eritrean Army as a minesweeper but that he deserted in September
    2014, after having been arrested and detained following his  conversion
    to Pentecostalism.  His body displays significant  scarring,  which  is
    consistent with his account of torture.


353.  Having fled Eritrea, leaving illegally,  he  crossed  into  Sudan  and
    then into Libya in which country he was badly injured in a  crash  when
    the truck he was travelling in was ambushed by soldiers.  He was beaten
    by the soldiers and two women he was travelling with were killed.   One
    of his shoulders was pulled out of its socket.


354.  He travelled by boat to Italy from Libya around April 2015 but he  and
    the other passengers on the boat had  to  be  rescued  by  the  Italian
    coastguard when the boat broke down.


355.  RK has been diagnosed as having PTSD  and  major  depressive  episode,
    for which  he  has  received  psychotherapy  and  for  which  he  takes
    mirtazapine.  He also suffers from  musculoskeletal  pain  and  bladder
    incontinence, as well as pre-diabetes.


356.   In light of the nature  of  RK's  ill-treatment  within  Eritrea  and
    elsewhere, which have caused or at least contributed to what we  regard
    as serious mental and physical disabilities, we consider that RK  comes
    within the  category  of  vulnerable  persons,  which  we  identify  in
    paragraph 324 above. For the same reasons given in SM  (paragraph  347)
    this claim also succeeds and the decision is quashed.



Signed:     [pic]            Date:  04 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan













                       SCHEDULE OF BACKGROUND EVIDENCE

|Source                   |Document                    |Date         |
|Rachel Davis, Asylum     |Witness Statement and       |18 May 2018  |
|Liaison Officer for the  |Exhibits                    |             |
|Third Country Unit,      |                            |             |
|British Embassy, Italy   |                            |             |
|Italian Ministry of the  |Daily Report on the number  |16 May 2018  |
|Interior                 |of migrant arrivals         |             |
|National Social Security |Web page on types of income |3 May 2018   |
|Institution              |support services            |             |
|Elisa Morellini, Legal   |Witness Statement of Elisa  |26 April 2018|
|Affairs coordinator for  |Morellini                   |             |
|NAGA                     |                            |             |
|Francesca Grisot, head of|Witness Statement of        |26 April 2018|
|planning, service        |Francesca Grisot and Exhibit|             |
|organisation and staff   |                            |             |
|training for the opening |                            |             |
|of new reception centres |                            |             |
|within the EDECO         |                            |             |
|Cooperative.             |                            |             |
|Ilaria Sommaruga,        |Joint witness statement of  |26 April 2018|
|national legal adviser   |Ilaria Sommaruga and Anna   |             |
|for CSD Diaconia Valdese |Brambilla, and Exhibits     |             |
|and Anna Brambilla,      |                            |             |
|lawyer for CSD Diaconia  |                            |             |
|Valdese and board member |                            |             |
|of ASGI                  |                            |             |
|Loredana Leo, lawyer,    |Witness Statement of        |26 April 2018|
|member of the Rome Bar   |Loredana Leo and Exhibits   |             |
|and member and           |                            |             |
|coordinator for the Lazio|                            |             |
|region of ASGI           |                            |             |
|Erminia Sabrina Rizzi,   |Witness Statement of Erminia|25 April 2018|
|legal operator in        |Sabrina Rizzi               |             |
|immigration and asylum   |                            |             |
|law with GLR             |                            |             |
|InfoMigrants             |Migrants in Rome living in  |24 April 2018|
|                         |'inhumane conditions':      |             |
|                         |Report                      |             |
|Baobab Experience        |Report from the Baobab      |23 April 2018|
|                         |Experience, Rome            |             |
|Redattore Sociale        |'Migrants: from Via Vannina |21 April 2018|
|                         |to the Tiburtina ghetto: 2  |             |
|                         |Appalling conditions'       |             |
|                         |(Translation)               |             |
|MEDU                     |Letter from MEDU            |20 April 2018|
|Martin Stares, Head of   |Witness statement of Martin |19 April 2018|
|the Country Policy and   |Stares                      |             |
|Information Team in the  |                            |             |
|Home Office              |                            |             |
|AIDA                     |Report: The Dublin System in|27 March 2018|
|                         |2017: Overview of           |             |
|                         |developments from selected  |             |
|                         |European Countries          |             |
|Redattore Sociale        |'Rome: Spring arrives with a|22 March 2018|
|                         |new eviction: the house of  |             |
|                         |the 'invisibles' in Via     |             |
|                         |Vannina' (Translated)       |             |
|Daniel Hobbs, Senior     |Witness Statement of Daniel |16 March 2018|
|Civil Servant employed as|Hobbs and Exhibits          |             |
|Head of the Asylum and   |                            |             |
|Policy Unit in the Home  |                            |             |
|Office                   |                            |             |
|Qui Cosenza              |'Pig feed for migrants every|12 March 2018|
|                         |other day, the parish priest|             |
|                         |among the 108 suspects'     |             |
|                         |(Translated)                |             |
|Primo Tempo              |'Asylum Seekers: record     |March 2018   |
|                         |number of reception and     |             |
|                         |withdrawal orders'          |             |
|                         |(Translated)                |             |
|Redattore Sociale        |'Over 120 migrants in the   |14 February  |
|                         |tent like in summer at the  |2018         |
|                         |Baobab. Appeal to the       |             |
|                         |population' (Translated)    |             |
|Italian Ministry of the  |Article on the financing of |9 February   |
|Interior                 |new SPRAR projects          |2018         |
|Osservatorio Diritti     |'Migrants: this is how Italy|9 February   |
|                         |is receiving refugees'      |2018         |
|                         |(Translated)                |             |
|Swiss Refugee Council    |Letter from Swiss Refugee   |9 February   |
|                         |Council                     |2018         |
|Annalisa Camilli,        |'Fuori Campo, why migrants  |8 February   |
|Internazionale Journalist|end up in ghettos'          |2018         |
|                         |(Translated)                |             |
|M�decins Sans Fronti�res |'Out of Sight'              |February 2018|
|Human Rights Watch       |World Report 2018 - European|18 January   |
|                         |Union                       |2018         |
|AIDA                     |Country Report: Italy       |31 December  |
|                         |                            |2017         |
|Parliamentary Committee  |Extracts from the           |20 December  |
|of inquiry               |Parliamentary Committee of  |2017         |
|                         |inquiry into the reception, |             |
|                         |identification and expulsion|             |
|                         |system and into the         |             |
|                         |conditions of migrant       |             |
|                         |handling and into the use of|             |
|                         |public resources            |             |
|Baobab Experience Legal  |'Insufficient reception,    |6 December   |
|Network                  |here are the figures'       |2017         |
|                         |(Translated)                |             |
|Redattore Sociale        |'It is increasingly         |6 December   |
|                         |difficult to seek asylum in |2017         |
|                         |Rome. Dublin cases increase'|             |
|                         |(Translated)                |             |
|UNHCR                    |Italy Sea arrivals dashboard|January      |
|                         |                            |-December    |
|                         |                            |2017         |
|Amnesty International    |'Italy, Migrants and Asylum |24 November  |
|                         |Seekers: Inhuman policies in|2017         |
|                         |Pordenone and Gorizia'      |             |
|European Commission      |Report, 'Managing Migration:|November 2017|
|                         |EU Financial Support to     |             |
|                         |Italy - Long term funding   |             |
|                         |for Italy (allocations)     |             |
|                         |2014-2020                   |             |
|UNHCR                    |Italy weekly snapshot       |8 October    |
|                         |                            |2017         |
|Home Office              |Country Information Italy:  |05 October   |
|                         |Returns                     |2017         |
|Italian Ministry of the  |The National Integration    |October 2017 |
|Interior                 |Plan for Persons Entitled to|             |
|                         |International Protection    |             |
|Internazionale           |'Why refugees in Rome live  |8 September  |
|                         |in occupied homes'          |2017         |
|                         |(Translation)               |             |
|Il Sole 24 Ore           |'In Rome, 780 places for    |1 September  |
|                         |refugees are missing'       |2017         |
|                         |(Translated)                |             |
|UNHCR                    |Press release - UNHCR calls |24 August    |
|                         |for an urgent solution for  |2017         |
|                         |evicted refugees in Rome and|             |
|                         |a national commitment to    |             |
|                         |integration                 |             |
|UNHCR                    |Press release - Rome: UNHCR |21 August    |
|                         |expresses concern about the |2017         |
|                         |future of around 800        |             |
|                         |refugees and asylum seekers |             |
|                         |evicted from Via            |             |
|                         |Indipendenza                |             |
|UNHCR                    |Europe Monthly Report on    |August 2017  |
|                         |Italy                       |             |
|UNHCR                    |Italy Sea arrivals dashboard|January -    |
|                         |                            |August 2017  |
|UNHCR                    |Italy Unaccompanied and     |August 2017  |
|                         |Separated Children dashboard|             |
|Osservatorio Diritti     |'Milan: refugees' reception |21 July 2017 |
|                         |to the brink of collapse'   |             |
|                         |(Translated)                |             |
|UN Committee on the      |Concluding Observations on  |21 July 2017 |
|Elimination of           |the seventh periodic report |             |
|Discrimination Against   |of Italy                    |             |
|Women                    |                            |             |
|Osservatorio Diritti     |'Prato: 100 refugees left on|5 July 2017  |
|                         |the street' (Translated)    |             |
|Redattore Sociale        |'Refugee day: UNHCR- we are |20 June 2017 |
|                         |very concerned by the       |             |
|                         |situation in Rome'          |             |
|                         |(Translated)                |             |
|Integrated Regional      |'Italy's migrant reception  |15 June 2017 |
|Information Networks     |system is breaking'         |             |
|(IRIN)                   |                            |             |
|Globalist                |'Raggi turns her back on the|14 June 2017 |
|                         |refugees: on the streets    |             |
|                         |after being chased out of   |             |
|                         |Vannina' (Translated)       |             |
|Osservatorio Diritti     |'In Bolzano 200 refugees    |8 June 2017  |
|                         |live on the streets'        |             |
|                         |(Translation)               |             |
|Loredana Leo             |Statement of Loredana Leo   |2 June 2017  |
|                         |made in First-tier Tribunal |             |
|                         |proceedings in the case of  |             |
|                         |AMJ and ZT                  |             |
|UNHCR                    |'Desperate Journeys'        |January -June|
|                         |                            |2017         |
|Aisling N� Chuinn (Wilson|Statement of Aisling N�     |30 May 2017  |
|Solicitors)              |Chuinn made in First-tier   |             |
|                         |Tribunal proceedings in the |             |
|                         |case of AMJ and ZT          |             |
|Swiss Refugee Council    |Letter from Swiss Refugee   |25 May 2017  |
|                         |Council                     |             |
|MEDU                     |Letter from MEDU            |16 May 2017  |
|UN Human Rights Committee|Concluding observations on  |1 May 2017   |
|                         |the sixth periodic report of|             |
|                         |Italy                       |             |
|UNHCR                    |Article 'UNHCR urges        |10 April 2017|
|                         |suspension of transfers of  |             |
|                         |asylum seekers to Hungary   |             |
|                         |under Dublin'               |             |
|UNHCR                    |Europe Monthly Report on    |April 2017   |
|                         |Italy                       |             |
|Council of Europe        |Report of the fact-finding  |2 March 2017 |
|                         |mission to Italy by         |             |
|                         |Ambassador Tom�? Bo?ek,     |             |
|                         |Special Representative of   |             |
|                         |the Secretary General on    |             |
|                         |migration and refugees,     |             |
|                         |16-21 October 2016          |             |
|European Commission      |ESPN Flash Report 2017/16   |March 2017   |
|                         |'Asylum Seekers and Migrants|             |
|                         |in Italy: are the new       |             |
|                         |migration rules consistent  |             |
|                         |with integration            |             |
|                         |programmes?'                |             |
|Amnesty International    |Report 2016/17: The State of|22 February  |
|                         |the World's Human Rights    |2017         |
|                         |(Italy extracts)            |             |
|Danish Refugee Council   |'Is Mutual Trust Enough? -  |9 February   |
|and Swiss Refugee Council|The situation of persons    |2017         |
|                         |with special reception needs|             |
|                         |upon return to Italy'       |             |
|Asylum Information       |Country Report: Italy (2016 |February 2017|
|Database (AIDA)          |Update)                     |             |
|Anci, Caritas Italiana,  |Report on international     |2017         |
|Cittalia, Fondazione     |protection in Italy 2017    |             |
|Migrantes, Central       |(Translated)(summary)       |             |
|Service of the SPRAR - in|                            |             |
|collaboration with the   |                            |             |
|UNHCR                    |                            |             |
|UNHCR                    |'UNHCR asks Virginia Raggi, |29 November  |
|                         |the Mayor of Rome, for fast |2016         |
|                         |and proper assistance to    |             |
|                         |city refugees'              |             |
|Swiss Refugee Council    |Report, 'Reception          |August 2016  |
|                         |Conditions in Italy'        |             |
|Italian Ministry of the  |Webpage on health care for  |14 March 2016|
|Interior                 |foreign citizens in the     |(date last   |
|                         |Prefecture of Rome          |modified)    |
|M�decins Sans Fronti�res |'Out of Sight'              |March 2016   |
|M�decins Sans Fronti�res |'Out of Sight' report data  |March 2016   |
|Open Democracy           |'The EU hotspot approach at |26 February  |
|                         |Lampedusa'                  |2016         |
|Open Democracy           |'Hotspot system as a new    |25 February  |
|                         |device of clandestinisation:|2016         |
|                         |view from Sicily'           |             |
|ASGI Puglia              |'Denied rights - from deaths|22 January   |
|                         |at sea to hotspots'         |2016         |
|Interview with Stefano Di|'Di Carlo (MSF): A return to|7 January    |
|Carlo, head of MSF in    |Pozzallo? Only when         |2016         |
|Italy, by Daniela Biella |facilities are operating    |             |
|                         |properly' (Translated)      |             |
|SPRAR                    |Extract from SPRAR annual   |2016         |
|                         |report 2016 (page 52) and   |             |
|                         |English translation         |             |
|AIDA                     |Country Report: Italy       |22 December  |
|                         |                            |2015         |
|DPA International        |'Under EU pressure, Italy   |22 December  |
|                         |opens new migrant screening |2015         |
|                         |centre in Sicily'           |             |
|M�decins Sans Fronti�res |Report by MSF on conditions | 17 November |
|                         |at the Pozzallo reception   |2015         |
|                         |centre presented to the     |             |
|                         |Committee investigating the |             |
|                         |migrant reception,          |             |
|                         |identification and care     |             |
|                         |system.                     |             |
|Loredana Leo             |Statement of Loredana Leo in|31 July 2015 |
|                         |MS and Others v Secretary of|             |
|                         |State for the Home          |             |
|                         |Department                  |             |
|United Nations Human     |Report by the Special       |1 May 2015   |
|Rights Council           |Rapporteur on the human     |             |
|                         |rights of migrants, Francois|             |
|                         |Crepeau: Follow-up mission  |             |
|                         |to Italy 2-6 December 2014  |             |
|Carl Dangerfield, Asylum |Witness Statement of Carl   |30 March 2015|
|and Immigration Liaison  |Dangerfield                 |             |
|Officer in Italy for UKVI|                            |             |
|Loredana Leo and         |Report of Loredana Leo and  |30 March 2015|
|Salvatore Fachile        |Salvatore Fachile           |             |
|Loredana Leo             |Report of Loredana Leo      |18 March 2015|
|Carl Dangerfield, Asylum |Witness Statement of Carl   |6 March 2015 |
|and Immigration Liaison  |Dangerfield                 |             |
|Officer in Italy for UKVI|                            |             |
|ASGI                     |'The Dublin System and      |March 2015   |
|                         |Italy: A relationship on the|             |
|                         |edge'                       |             |
|MEDU (Doctors for Human  |Expert Report               |16 September |
|Rights - Italy)          |                            |2014         |
|Loredana Leo             |Report of Loredana Leo on   |15 September |
|                         |the Italian system of       |2014         |
|                         |International Protection    |             |
|Carl Dangerfield, Asylum |Witness Statement of Carl   |13 May 2014  |
|and Immigration Liaison  |Dangerfield                 |             |
|Officer in Italy for UKVI|                            |             |
|UNHCR                    |Case for the Intervener     |3 October    |
|                         |(UNHCR) in EM (Eritrea) and |2013         |
|                         |Others v Secretary of State |             |
|                         |for the Home Department     |             |
|                         |[2014] UKSC 12              |             |
|UNHCR                    |UNHCR Recommendations on    |July 2013    |
|                         |Important Aspects of Refugee|             |
|                         |Protection in Italy         |             |
|Commissioner for Human   |Report by Nils Muiznieks,   |18 September |
|Rights of the Council of |Commissioner for Human      |2012         |
|Europe                   |Rights of the Council of    |             |
|                         |Europe, Following his visit |             |
|                         |to Italy from 3 to 6 July   |             |
|                         |2012                        |             |
|UNHCR                    |Recommendations on Important|July 2012    |
|                         |Aspects of Refugee          |             |
|                         |Protection in Italy         |             |
|Carl Dangerfield, Asylum |Witness Statement of Carl   |5 September  |
|and Immigration Liaison  |Dangerfield                 |2011         |
|Officer in Italy for UKBA|                            |             |
|Carl Dangerfield, Asylum |Witness Statement of Carl   |31 March 2011|
|and Immigration Liaison  |Dangerfield                 |             |
|Officer in Italy for UKBA|                            |             |
|Pro Asyl                 |Report 'The Living          |27 February  |
|                         |Conditions of Refugees in   |2011         |
|                         |Italy'                      |             |
|Home Office              |Report on Third Country     |Undated      |
|                         |Nationals / Dublin Returns  |             |
|                         |to Italy                    |             |
|Italian Ministry of the  |Annual Report 2016-2017 on  |Undated      |
|Interior                 |the number of applications  |             |
|                         |for international protection|             |
|Italian Ministry of the  |Monthly Report (January     |Undated      |
|Interior                 |2018) on the number of      |             |
|                         |applications for            |             |
|                         |international protection    |             |
|Italian Ministry of the  |Monthly Report (February    |Undated      |
|Interior                 |2018) on the number of      |             |
|                         |applications for            |             |
|                         |international protection    |             |
|Italian Ministry of the  |Monthly Report (March 2018) |Undated      |
|Interior                 |on the number of            |             |
|                         |applications for            |             |
|                         |international protection    |             |
|SPRAR                    |Document regarding SPRAR    |Undated      |
|Secretary of State for   |Respondent's report of      |Undated      |
|the Home Department      |Italian Fact-Finding Mission|             |
|                         |on 9 October 2017           |             |


-----------------------
[1] Linee guida per la  programmazione  degli  interventi  di  assistenza  e
riabilitazione nonch� per il trattamento dei disturbi psichici dei  titolari
dello status di rifugiato e  dello  status  di  protezione  sussidiaria  che
hanno subito torture, stupri o altre forme gravi  di  violenza  psicologica,
fisica o sessuale - 22 March 2017.

