

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 RK (OFM - membership of household - dependency) India [2010] UKUT 421 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 November 2010                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       MR JUSTICE BLAKE, THE PRESIDENT
                               LORD BANNATYNE
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     rk
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer


Other family Member - Article  3(2)  of  the  Citizens  Directive  -  to  be
interpreted in the light of  Article 10(2) - distinction between  membership
of household and dependency - meaning of country from which they  have  come
- any requirement to have  resided  with  EEA  national  or  spouse  shortly
before the  application  doubted  -  case  remitted  for  re-examination  by
Secretary of State.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. There is before us the appeal of the appellant, RK, who applied in 2008
    for an EEA family permit to join her husband. Both husband and wife are
    Indian nationals.

 2. The appellant's mother in law is a Portuguese national,  by  reason  of
    connection with Goa. The appellant's mother and father in law moved  to
    the United Kingdom in 2003 exercising Treaty Rights of  free  movement.
    In 2005 their son, who was then over 21,  joined  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom, as a dependant family member within the definition of  "family
    members" in Article 2(2) of the  Citizens  Directive  2004/38/EC  ("the
    Directive").

 3. The appellant married in 2007. There was a civil ceremony in  India,  a
    religious one is to be celebrated if and when  she  ever  gets  to  the
    United Kingdom.  Following the civil ceremony the appellant moved  into
    the premises in India owned by her parents in law, where she  lives  to
    this day. Her brother in law also lives there.

 4. At the time  of  the  EEA  application,  the  appellant's  husband  was
    residing in the United Kingdom, in a common household with his parents,
    pursuant to an EEA Family Permit. He did not have indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  and  could  not  sponsor  his  wife  for
    permanent residence here under the ordinary Immigration Rules.

 5. In her application for an EEA permit the appellant stated that she  was
    dependant upon her parents in law and her husband.   She  identified  a
    sum of money that was remitted by them both  to  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom to support her in India. It is  an  undisputed  fact  that  she
    resides in the family property in India that her in-laws own.

 6. The Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") was not satisfied that  she  was  a
    family member or that she qualified  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  Regulations").   When  the  case
    came before the Immigration Judge (IJ), later in 2008, he also was  not
    satisfied  that  the  appellant  qualified  under  the  terms  of   the
    Regulations.

The legislation

 7. Regulation 8(2) requires that the relative of a EEA national:

                  i. is residing in an EEA State and
                 ii. the EEA national resides in the same state and
                iii. is dependent upon the EEA national or
                 iv. is a member of his household.

 8. If these words are to be applied literally to the appellant she clearly
    cannot comply with them. She is residing and has at  all  the  material
    time resided in India which is neither an EEA state nor the country  of
    residence of her husband or parents in law at the  time  she  became  a
    family member. She could not therefore meet i. and ii. above.

 9. However,  both  before  the  IJ  and  us,  it  is  contended  that  she
    nevertheless  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  "other  family  member"
    ("OFM") within the meaning of the Directive.

10.   The material part of Article 3(2) is as follows:

         "Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence  the
         person concerned may have in their own right, the host Member State
         shall, in accordance  with  its  national  legislation,  facilitate
         entry and residence for the following persons:


             a)    Any  other  family   members,   irrespective   of   their
               nationality, not falling  under the definition of point 2 of
               Article 2 who, in the country from which they have come, are
               dependants or members of the household of the Union  citizen
               having the primary right of residence"

11. In the case of SM (Metock: extended family members)  Sri  Lanka  [2008]
    UKAIT 75 the AIT concluded that "country  from  which  they  had  come"
    meant the country in which the EEA national had been residing prior  to
    exercising the Treaty rights in question.  The  AIT  had  reached  that
    conclusion  in  part  by  reference  to  the  guidance  given  to   the
    construction of Article 3(2) by Buxton LJ in the case of KG (Sri Lanka)
    and AK (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 13.

12. Shortly after the Court of Appeal had delivered its  judgment  the  ECJ
    handed down its judgment in Case C-127/08 Metock and others (2008)  ECR
    I 6241. The AIT concluded that Metock was concerned with family members
    and did not change the interpretation of Article 3(2).  In the case  of
    Bigia v ECO [2009] EWCA Civ 79, the Court of Appeal accepted  that  the
    clarification of the law  in  Metock  did  have  implications  for  the
    construction of Article  3(2)  of  the  Directive.  Article  3(1)  made
    reference to a relative who accompanies or joins a Union citizen  in  a
    host state.  It was accepted by counsel for the ECO that if  there  was
    no requirement of prior lawful residence in an  EEA  state  for  family
    members within Article 2 of  the  Directive,  there  was  no  case  for
    importing such a requirement for other  family  members  under  Article
    3(2). The Court accordingly concluded at [40] that there was  no  prior
    requirement for prior residence in an EEA state and regulation  8(2)(a)
    should be read as if that requirement was absent.

13. However, at [43] it concluded that Metock did not change other  aspects
    of the guidance in KG (Sri Lanka)  and noted:

          "Thus OFMs who seek to travel from a  different  country  to  that
         from which the Union citizen is moving or has recently moved cannot
         without more be said to be  members  of  his  household.  Similarly
         while an OFM in a non-Member State  may  be  financially  dependent
         upon a Union citizen because he is provided with  accommodation  or
         living expenses by the Union citizen, there is no  reason  why  the
         Union citizen would be  discouraged.  The  OFM  could  continue  to
         benefit from the  accommodation  or  the  income  after  the  Union
         citizen has exercised the rights in the host Member State."


14. In neither KG (Sri Lanka),  SM  or Bigia   was  judicial  consideration
    given  to Article 10 (2) of the Directive that states the following:

                 "For the residence card to be issued  Member  States  shall
require presentation `               of the following documents:


              d. In cases falling under points (c) and (d) of Article  2(2)
                 documentary evidence that the conditions laid down  therein
                 are met.


              e.  In cases falling under Article 3(2)(a) a document  issued
                 by the relevant authority  in  the  country  of  origin  or
                 country from which they are arriving certifying  that  they
                 are dependants or members of the  household  of  the  Union
                 citizen...."


15. In both the ECJ Case C/105 Jia [2007] QB 545 and the  subsequent  Court
    of Appeal case of Pedro v Secretary of  State  for  Work  and  Pensions
    [2009] EWCA Civ 1358 use has been made of the subordinate provisions of
    Community  legislation  (in  Pedro  Article  10   of   the   Directive)
    identifying the documents  that  should  be  presented  to  obtain  the
    residence card as a means  of  construction  of  the  requirements  for
    eligibility as a family member within Article 2 of  the  Directive.  In
    our judgment, Article 10  is  a  legitimate  source  of  assistance  in
    construing Article 3(2).

16. This does not mean that the provisions for family members are the  same
    for OFMs. The Court of Appeal made that clear in Pedro and so has  this
    Tribunal in VN (EEA rights -  Dependency)  Macedonia  [2010]  UKUT  380
    (IAC). But the  distinction  made  between  Article  10(2)(d)  and  (e)
    reflects the difference. Family members may now rely on  dependency  in
    the host state, whereas OFMs must show dependency or membership of  the
    household of the Union citizen "in the country of origin or the country
    from which they arriving".

Discussion

17. Before us Mr Jafferji focused his principal argument on the  submission
    that Metock and the subsequent case of C-162/09 Lassal demonstrate that
    a broad meaning has to be given to the word  'household'  and  applying
    that broad meaning the appellant could be said to have been residing in
    her in laws household in India.  He recognised that nothing in the case
    law he relied on was addressed  to  Article  3(2)  or  the  meaning  of
    household.

18. We do not consider that such an argument has any substance.  As  Buxton
    LJ pointed out in KG  (Sri  Lanka)  the  previous  expression  used  in
    Article 10(2) of Regulation 1612/68 was "under his roof". This suggests
    that not merely is a household a community that lives together  in  the
    same accommodation but the  household  should  be  that  of  the  Union
    citizen.  The  appellant  has  never  lived  in  her  mother  in  law's
    household. She lives in a house owned by her father in law in which the
    mother in law used to live, but ceased living there four  years  before
    she became a member of the mother in law's family.

19. He also indicated a secondary argument based on discrimination contrary
    to Article 24 of the Directive and Article  8  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  In the light of the conclusions to which we have come it
    is not necessary to say any more about those submissions.

20. In our judgment the AIT was wrong in SM to conclude that "country  from
    which they have come" refers only to  the  country  in  which  the  OFM
    resided with the EEA national before entry to the host state. The  term
    in Article 3(2) must cross-refer to the relevant provisions of  Article
    10(2)(e) and  enable the OFM to prove eligibility from documents either
    in his or her country of origin (in this case  India)  or  the  country
    from which the OFM has most recently been residing. For reasons already
    noted, when considering claims based on membership of the household  of
    the Union citizen, there will need to be relevant residence in the same
    country as the Union citizen. This will often  be  another  EEA  state.
    However a claim based on  dependency  is  a  separate  one  and  raises
    distinct issues.

21. We pointed out to the parties at the outset of this  hearing  that  the
    requirement of dependency  is  an  alternative  to  membership  of  the
    household.  For an OFM to fulfil the household requirement  he  or  she
    must have lived with the Union citizen in the same country at some time
    in the past, whilst  dependency  requires  no  such  link.  Further  as
    dependency can be on the non national spouse of a  Union  citizen  that
    opens up the reasonable possibility of continued residence outside  the
    EEA after such a non national spouse has married and moved to the EEA.

22.  In our judgment it is clear from Article 10(2)(e) that dependency  can
    be proved by documents in the OFM's country  of  origin.  We  note  the
    reference in Bigia to dependency of  an  OFM  living  outside  the  EEA
    having no impact on the willingness of the Union citizen to move to the
    United Kingdom or other host state to exercise Treaty rights.  However,
    that would be the same whether the dependant lived apart from the Union
    citizen in Sicily or in Sri Lanka, and it is doubtless  the  case  that
    the Directive requires states to facilitate the admission of dependants
    who do not live in the same premises or same city as the Union citizen.
    We rather doubt that the Court of Appeal in Bigia  would  have  reached
    the conclusions it  did  regarding  OFMs  if  its  attention  had  been
    directed to Article 10(2)(e).

23. We also note that in the case of  SM  (India)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1426,
    decided after Bigia, the facts have a certain similarity to the present
    case. One of the appellants was a cousin of the EEA  national  resident
    in the United Kingdom and the  question  was  whether  he  could  bring
    himself within the Directive by reason  of  dependency?   The  AIT  had
    concluded that a stricter definition of dependency  applies  under  the
    Directive than had previously been  applied  in  Community  law.    The
    Court of Appeal at paragraphs [19] - [25] held that was an error of law
    by the AIT and  dependency  had  the  broad  meaning  assigned  by  the
    European Court of Justice in the earlier case of Lebon [1987] ECR 2811.
    In a word, dependency did not have to be whole or main or necessary but
    there had merely to be economic dependency in fact.

24.  The Court of Appeal concluded that the case of the cousin (FM)  should
    be remitted for re-determination because  the  same  error  as  to  the
    meaning of the word dependency had been applied in that case as well as
    those of family members: see paragraphs [30] - [32]. There needed to be
    an assessment of  dependency  as  a  matter  of  fact.   There  was  no
    reference to a requirement for the cousin to have  lived  in  the  same
    country as the EEA national on which he claimed dependency.

25. As we have pointed out, the appellant claimed to have been a  dependant
    on her parents in law in her residence  permit  application.  There  is
    some evidence of reliance on her parents in law to meet  her  essential
    living requirements because she lives in their house, even if not their
    household. This case  has  never  been  considered,  by  the  ECO,  the
    Secretary of State or the IJ.  Mr Ouseley readily agreed that the  case
    of dependency should be reconsidered by the Secretary of State.

26. We conclude that the case law has moved on since the appeal was decided
    in 2008 and the IJ ought to have grappled with the  Directive  directly
    as well as the EEA Regulations 2006. To that extent  his  dismissal  of
    the appeal was based upon an error of law which is arguably material to
    the outcome since it is possible that the appellant could succeed as  a
    dependant.

27. Doubtless the resolution of all the problems  created  by  the  tension
    between the terms of Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations and the terms
    of Article 3(2) of the Directive will need further consideration  by  a
    court having power to re-examine the case law. The Upper  Tribunal  has
    no power to refer a case  direct  to  the  Supreme  Court  to  consider
    whether permission to appeal should be given (a  leapfrog  appeal).  We
    informed the parties at the hearing of this appeal that a fortnight ago
    the Tribunal had announced in the case of FB and MR that it proposed to
    make a reference to the Court of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  to
    resolve a number of issues as to the nature of the duty  to  facilitate
    and whose entry and residence should  be  facilitated  under  Community
    law.

28. We do not consider a reference is necessary in this case, or  that  the
    hearing of this appeal should be adjourned to await the outcome of  the
    reference. We conclude that there is a reasonable possibility  that  if
    the appellant's case is reconsidered by the Secretary of State applying
    the criteria set out in SM (India) and she is found to be dependent  on
    an EEA citizen, there is a case for the exercise of discretion  in  her
    favour under Regulation 17.

29. There is another reason why the case should be reconsidered. Before the
    IJ there had also been argument as to  whether  the  exclusion  of  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom was a violation of the Article 8 ECHR
    right to respect for family life of her husband and  herself.  In  that
    context, the IJ thought that the denial of the  residence  permit  only
    had limited impact on the family relationship because he was under  the
    impression that the husband would be eligible for  permanent  residence
    in 2008.  Mr Jafferji has pointed out that that was an error: he was in
    fact eligible for permanent residence under Regulation  15  in  January
    2010 after five years residence.

30. We were told that the husband has lodged an application  for  permanent
    residence which is now under consideration.  If the husband is  granted
    permanent residence and both the ECO and the  IJ  contemplate  that  he
    would be in due course, then the wife would be eligible to come  in  as
    his dependant under the ordinary Immigration Rules.  It would certainly
    be an odd situation if an adult over 21 years who was lawfully resident
    in the United Kingdom under an EEA permit and  entitled  to  work  here
    cannot be joined by a spouse who otherwise meets  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.

31. Despite his discrimination and human rights arguments Mr  Jafferji  was
    content for the case to be reconsidered by the respondent on these  two
    bases.

Conclusions

32. We therefore conclude:

          i) Applying the test in SM (India) the appellant  may  well  be  a
             dependant on her in-laws as well  as  being  supported  by  her
             husband.


         ii) If the husband is shortly to be given permanent residence  then
             the appellant's position fundamentally changes and she could be
             admitted as the spouse of a man with permanent residence in the
             United Kingdom and further consideration of both the  Directive
             and the discrimination argument would be unnecessary.

        iii) We are satisfied that a person may  be  an  OFM  by  reason  of
             dependency on an EEA national or  the  non-national  spouse  of
             such a person without having resided in  EEA  state.

         iv) We doubt whether properly construed in the light of Article  10
             there is any requirement for a dependent OFM to have  lived  in
             the same country as  the  Union  national  shortly  before  the
             latter exercised free movement rights, but this is one  of  the
             questions that will in due course be considered by the Court of
             Justice.

          v) We set aside the IJ's  decision  but  we  remit  the  case  for
             further consideration to the Secretary of  State.  We  indicate
             that we conclude it ought to be the Secretary of  State  rather
             than the ECO who reconsiders the  matter  because  of  the  two
             questions to be considered, and the  review  of  Community  law
             that would doubtless be needed in the light of the intention to
             make a reference in another case.

         vi) We are conscious that it is three years since  the  appellant's
             marriage and two years she  applied  for  a  residence  permit.
             Accordingly we invite the Secretary of State to reconsider this
             case with reasonable expedition.

    We are grateful that the parties have recognised that as  a  matter  of
    practicality this outcome is probably the most that could  be  achieved
    today having regard to the difficult issues in the appeal.






                               Signed


                                   [pic]




                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


