

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


OB (EEA Regulations 2006 - Article 9(2) - Surinder Singh spouse) Morocco
[2010] UKUT 420 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Laganside Combined Court Centre,     |Determination Promulgated    |
|Belfast                                       |                             |
|On 28 October 2010                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                       MR CMG OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     OB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B. Muldoon instructed by P Drinan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M. O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer


British citizen working and residing with Moroccan  spouse  in  Republic  of
Ireland ("RoI") -  13 month gap between end of employment in RoI and  return
to Belfast - the term "was so residing" does  not  have  to  be  immediately
before returning to the  United  Kingdom  -  there  was  a  sufficient  link
between the exercise of Treaty rights and the return in this case.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.    This is an appeal  from  a  decision  of  Immigration  Judge  Grace
      delivered on 8  March  2010  when  the  appellant's  appeal  from  the
      respondent's refusal of a residence card was dismissed.


   2.    The relevant facts are as follows. The appellant is a  national  of
      Morocco. In 2006 he was resident in Dublin in the Republic of Ireland.
       In August 2006 he married a  British  citizen  normally  resident  in
      Northern Ireland. The appellant and his wife lived together in  Dublin
      from November 2006 to July 2008, although we  understand  towards  the
      end of the period the appellant's wife made frequent return visits  to
      Northern Ireland where she had a child by  a  previous  marriage.  The
      appellant's wife was working in Dublin from  November  2006  to  April
      2007.  The appellant had a  resident  document  issued  by  the  Irish
      authorities as a family member of an EU worker.

   3.    In July 2008 the appellant's wife returned to Northern  Ireland  to
      live and work there permanently.  The  appellant  joined  her  and  in
      September 2008 applied for a residence card as the spouse of a British
      national who had exercised Treaty rights. This application was refused
      in October 2009 because the respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
      appellant's wife had worked in Dublin as claimed. At  the  hearing  of
      the appeal the IJ was satisfied that the appellant had established the
      facts set out above.   There  was  no  attendance  by  a  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer.

   4.     Regulation  9(1)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006   makes provision for  family  members  of  a  United
      Kingdom national to be treated as an EEA national within  the  meaning
      of Article 2(1) of the Regulations, if the  conditions  in  Regulation
      9(2) are made out.

   5.    The Regulation 9(2) conditions are that:-


        "a.   The United Kingdom national is residing in an EEA State as  a
        worker or
                self-employed person or was so residing before returning  to
         the United
                Kingdom; and

         b. If the family member of  the  United  Kingdom  national  is  his
            spouse........the parties had entered  into  the  marriage...and
            were living together in  that  (EEA)  State  before  the  United
            Kingdom national returned to the United Kingdom."

   6.    Despite finding in the appellant's favour on the sole factual issue
      in the case,  (whether  his  wife  had  worked  in  Dublin),   the  IJ
      dismissed the appeal on the basis that the wife was not so working  in
      the 13 months before she returned to Northern Ireland.  The Regulation
      does not specify when the United Kingdom national must be residing  in
      another EEA state as a worker before returning to the United  Kingdom.
      The  IJ  appears  to  have  concluded  that  the  Regulation  required
      employment immediately or very shortly before the return.


   7.    Regulation 9 was designed to give effect in the United  Kingdom  to
      the EU law right of a British national  and  her  spouse  of  whatever
      nationality to enter  the  United  Kingdom  on  return  from  economic
      activity in another EU state first identified in the case of R  v  IAT
      and Surinder Singh ex parte Secretary of State for the Home Department
      (Case C 370/90) 7 July 1992; [1992] Imm AR 565 (see  paragraphs  [21],
      [23], and [25]). The Court of Justice concluded at [23]:

         "when a Community national who availed himself or herself of  those
         (Treaty) rights returns to his or her country of origin, his or her
         spouse must enjoy at least the same rights of entry  and  residence
         as would be granted to him or her under Community law if his or her
         spouse chose to enter and reside in another Member State."


   8.    In the case of Eind (C-291/05) December 2007, the Court applied the
      same principles in concluding that a Dutch worker who had  resided  in
      the United Kingdom as a worker  and  had  there  been  joined  by  his
      daughter a national of Surinam, had the right to secure his daughter's
      admission to the Netherlands under the provisions  of  Community  law.
      The Dutch government had argued that  there  would  be  no  deterrence
      against the exercise of Treaty rights if the daughter  of  the  worker
      were to be denied residence in the Netherlands  because  she  had  not
      resided with the Dutch national there before he moved  to  the  United
      Kingdom. The Grand Chamber did not agree. It said at [35]-[37]:
         "A national of a Member State could be deterred from  leaving  that
         Member State in order to pursue gainful employment in the territory
         of another Member State if he does not have the certainty of  being
         able to return to his  Member  State  of  origin,  irrespective  of
         whether he is going to engage in economic activity  in  the  latter
         State.

         That deterrent effect would also derive simply from  the  prospect,
         for that same national, of not being  able,  on  returning  to  his
         Member State of origin, to  continue  living  together  with  close
         relatives, a way of life which may have come into being in the host
         Member State as a result of marriage or family reunification.

         Barriers to family reunification are therefore liable to  undermine
         the right to free movement which the nationals of the Member States
         have under Community law, as the right of  a  Community  worker  to
         return to the Member State of which he  is  a  national  cannot  be
         considered to be a purely internal matter."

   9.    The Court also rejected the submission of the Dutch government that
      the fact           that the Dutch national had not found employment on
      his return to the        Netherlands was determinative of whether  his
      daughter had a Community law            right  of  entry.  Equally  it
      concluded that the fact that the Dutch national  had  been  granted  a
      residence card in the United Kingdom was not conclusive in his  favour
      on return to the Netherlands. It said as follows:
         "43. First of all, the basis for requiring such  a  right  is  not
         laid down,  expressly  or  by  implication,  in  any  provision  of
         Community law relating to the right of residence in  the  Community
         of third-country nationals who  are  members  of  the  families  of
         Community workers. According to settled case-law of  the  Court  of
         Justice, secondary Community legislation on movement and  residence
         cannot be interpreted restrictively (see, inter alia, in respect of
         Regulation  No  1612/68,  Case  267/83  Diatta  [1985] ECR 567,
         paragraphs 16 and 17, and Case C-413/99 Baumbast and R [2002] ECR I-
         7091, paragraph 74).

         44.  Secondly,  such  a  requirement  would  run  counter  to   the
         objectives of the Community legislature, which has  recognised  the
         importance of ensuring protection for the family life of  nationals
         of the Member  States  in  order  to  eliminate  obstacles  to  the
         exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty (Case
         C-60/00 Carpenter [2002] ECR I-6279,  paragraph  38,  and  Case C-
         459/99 MRAX [2002] ECR I-6591, paragraph 53)."

10.   Although neither Surinder Singh nor Eind addresses the period of time
    (if any) between employment in the host state and  the  return  to  the
    state of origin of the EEA national, the case law  does  establish  the
    principle that the right of entry afforded to the  non-national  spouse
    cannot  be  restrictively  interpreted  and  Community  law   must   be
    interpreted sufficiently broadly to promote the objective  of  ensuring
    protection for the family life of nationals of the  Member  States.  In
    our judgment similar principles must apply to the interpretation  of  a
    national law measure designed to implement Community  law  rights  (see
    Case C-106/09 Marleasing [1990] ECR 1-4135).

11.     Before us the appellant contended:-

              i. The IJ was wrong to read Regulation 9(2)(a) to  mean  that
                 employment had to be immediately before the return to  the
                 state of origin;
             ii. Once an  EEA  national  has  exercised  Treaty  rights  by
                 working in another Member State no time period  is  to  be
                 imported into the exercise of the spouse's right to  enter
                 the  worker's state of origin for the  purpose  of  family
                 unification there;
            iii. In any event on the particular facts of the present  case,
                 the link between the employment and  the  return  was  not
                 broken.


  12.    Mrs  O'Brien  for  the  respondent  accepted  that  there  was   no
      requirement for the employment to have  been  engaged  in  immediately
      before the return to the state of origin.  She informed us that  there
      had been a Home Office policy that a gap of up to six months had  been
      considered acceptable but this had been withdrawn in the light of  the
      developing jurisprudence of the Court of Justice. Now an overall  case
      by case assessment was made whether the claim was a reasonable one  in
      all the circumstances. She had no submissions to make as to how such a
      test would apply on the present facts. We invited her to consider  the
      effect of a period of non-employment by  the  British  national  as  a
      result of child rearing, involuntary unemployment or  extended  visits
      to the non-national spouse's country of origin.

  13.   We conclude that the judge made a material error of law in  applying
      Regulation 9.  We propose to set aside the decision and remake  it  on
      the basis of the evidential findings made by  the  IJ  below  and  the
      uncontested evidence as to the wife's circumstances and employment.

Conclusions

  14.    We accept the first  and  third  of  the  appellant's  submissions.
      Applying a broad  approach  to  Regulation  9  in  the  light  of  the
      importance of the  protection  of  the  family  life  enjoyed  in  the
      Republic of Ireland when the wife was  exercising  Treaty  rights,  we
      conclude that the appellant  qualified  for  the  residence  card.  We
      assume that there has to be some link  between  the  exercise  of  the
      Treaty rights in the Republic of Ireland and the return of the  spouse
      to the United Kingdom, but that  link  has  not  been  broken  in  the
      present case.  In the circumstances it is not  necessary  to  reach  a
      decision on the appellant's second submission.

  15.    As to the nexus between the spouse's employment in Dublin  and  the
      return to Northern Ireland  we observe:

              i. At all material times the appellant was  lawfully  resident
                 in the Republic of Ireland with a residence permit and  was
                 entitled to work to support his family there.
             ii. There was genuine and effective employment by the spouse in
                 the Republic of Ireland.
            iii. There was family life established in  Republic  of  Ireland
                 that required  respect  in  the  United  Kingdom  when  the
                 appellant and his spouse relocated there.
             iv. The exercise of Treaty rights to  move  between  states  to
                 seek employment would be  impaired  if  she  could  not  be
                 accompanied by her spouse, when deciding to  relocate  from
                 the Republic of Ireland to Northern Ireland.
              v. Although the decision in Eind  establishes  that  obtaining
                 employment in the Member State of origin is not a necessary
                 condition  for the exercise of the  Treaty  right,  in  the
                 present case we are satisfied that the wife both sought and
                 obtained employment in Northern Ireland.
             vi. Although  there  was  a  thirteen  month  period  when  the
                 appellant was working in  Dublin  but  the  wife  was  not,
                 during  which  time  she  was  making  visits  to  Northern
                 Ireland, that period  of  time  has  not  broken  the  link
                 between the Community right to reside and work  in  Ireland
                 and the right to return to the United Kingdom in accordance
                 with Community law.
            vii. We conclude that a period of interruption of employment for
                 maternity and child rearing purposes or  temporary  illness
                 or involuntary unemployment would also not of itself  break
                 such a link having regard  to  the  general  principles  of
                 Community law reflected in Directive 2004/38/EC.

  16.    The appeal is allowed and we direct that the  respondent  do  issue
      the appellant with a residence card pursuant to Regulation 17  of  the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


                               Signed

                                  [pic]


                               President of the Upper Tribunal,
                               (Immigration and Asylum Chambers)

