





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of FB and another) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (removal window policy) [2018] UKUT 00428 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |                                |
|On 25 and 26 July 2018                      |                                |
|Further written submissions made on 9, 21,  |................................|
|and 31 August and 20 and 28 September 2018  |.......                         |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     Fb
                                     nr
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                           THE PUBLIC LAW PROJECT
                                                                  Intervener

Representation:

For the Applicants:    Ms S Naik QC and Mr A Bandegani,
     instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Kovats QC and Mr C Thomann,
     instructed by the Government Legal Department

For the Intervener:    Ms C Kilroy and Ms A Pickup, instructed by the
                    Public Law Project


The Secretary of State's "removal window" policy, as set out in  Chapter  60
of the General Instructions of 21  May  2018,  was,  as  a  general  matter,
compatible with access to justice but was legally  deficient,  both  in  its
treatment of cases where a removal window is deferred and  in  the  lack  of
information regarding place and route of removal.


                                  JUDGMENT


A. Introduction

 1. A nation state has a right to control who comes onto its territory.  In
    states that observe the rule of law,  the  right  is  to  be  exercised
    compatibly with that  rule.   A  state  may,  in  addition,  decide  to
    circumscribe its powers of control by means of domestic legislation  or
    as a result of obligations under international treaties, to  which  the
    state is a party.

 2. These "rolled-up" judicial reviews concern challenges  to  the  way  in
    which the respondent seeks  to  secure  the  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom of those whom he considers have no legal basis for entering  or
    remaining in this country. Specifically, the applicants, who were  each
    to be removed by the respondent  in  November  2017,  assert  that  the
    respondent cannot lawfully operate a "removal window"  policy,  as  set
    out in Chapter 60 of the General  Instructions  (Judicial  reviews  and
    injunctions), published by the respondent. In  both  cases,  the  Upper
    Tribunal granted a stay on removal, following  which  the  applications
    were directed to be dealt with on a  "rolled-up"  basis.  The  Tribunal
    also granted permission to the Public Law Project (PLP) to intervene in
    the proceedings.

 3. The present cases concern removal under section 10 of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999. Before looking at  that  power,  however,  mention
    needs to be made of sections 3 and 5 of the Immigration Act 1971  (read
    with section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007).  Section 3(5) of the  1971
    Act provides that a person who is not a British citizen  is  liable  to
    deportation if the respondent deems his deportation to be conducive  to
    the public good or another person to whose family he belongs is or  has
    been ordered to be deported.  A person liable to deportation may be the
    subject of a deportation order, made under section  5,  requiring  that
    person to leave and prohibiting him from entering the United Kingdom.

 4. Section 10 of the 1999 Act is  entitled  "Removal  of  certain  persons
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom".  So  far  as  relevant  for  present
    purposes, it provides as follows:-

         "(1) A person may be removed from  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
             authority of the Secretary of State or an immigration  officer
             if the person requires leave to enter or remain in the  United
             Kingdom but does not have it.

         ...

         (7)  For the purposes of removing a person from the United  Kingdom
             under  subsection  (1)  ...  the  Secretary  of  State  or  an
             immigration officer  may  give  any  such  direction  for  the
             removal of the person as may be given under paragraphs 8 to 10
             of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.

         ..."

 5. In substance, paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2 to the 1971  Act  enable
    an immigration officer to give directions to the captain of a  ship  or
    aircraft, requiring the captain to remove the person concerned from the
    United Kingdom in that ship or aircraft.  Directions may also be  given
    to the owners or agents of the ship  or  aircraft,  requiring  them  to
    remove the person from the United  Kingdom  in  any  ship  or  aircraft
    specified or indicated in the directions, being a ship or  aircraft  of
    which they are the owners  or  agents.   Such  owners  or  agents  may,
    additionally, be given directions requiring them to  make  arrangements
    for the person's removal to a country or  territory  specified  by  the
    Secretary of State, being either:-

         "(i) a country of which he is a national or citizen; or

         (ii) a country or territory in which he has obtained a passport  or
             other document of identity; or

         (iii)    a country or territory in which he embarks in  the  United
             Kingdom; or

         (iv) a country or territory to which there  is  reason  to  believe
             that he would be admitted." (paragraph 8(1)(c)).

 6. The challenges brought by the applicants, supported  by  the  PLP,  are
    directed at Chapter 60.  The relevant version of Chapter  60,  for  our
    purposes, is that published on 21 May 2018.  Although  this  was  after
    the date on which the current proceedings commenced, it was effectively
    common ground (and we consider) that this latest  version  is  the  one
    that requires to be substantively examined.



B. An overview of Chapter 60

 7. The 21 May 2018 version of Chapter 60 is set out in full in  the  Annex
    to this  decision.   It  is,  however,  convenient  at  this  point  to
    highlight its salient features, for the  purposes  of  this  case.   In
    doing so, we are not helped by the fact that this version,  unlike  its
    predecessor, is not numbered internally.

 8. The  guidance  begins  by  stating  that  the  "Version  includes  some
    additional interim clarification concerning Deferral of  Removal  ...".
    We accept the respondent's evidence that the provisions in question are
    "interim", only in the sense that the respondent  does  not  intend  to
    revert to the position where no such "clarification" is made.  Whether,
    in the circumstances, the term "interim" was helpful is, perhaps  moot.



 9. The guidance describes certain types of event that could be subject  to
    judicial review.  These comprise a  failure  to  act;  the  setting  of
    removal directions; the refusal  to  accept  that  further  submissions
    amount to a fresh claim; a decision  to  certify  a  claim  as  clearly
    unfounded; and detention.

10. Under the heading "Notice of removal"  it  is  stated  that  notice  of
    removal may be given in three different forms:-

         ".   Notice of a removal window - the person is given notice  of  a
             period, known as the removal window, during which they may  be
             removed.

           . Notice of removal directions - the person is given  notice  of
             removal directions and thus knows the exact date of departure.

           . Limited notice of removal - a more restricted version  of  the
             removal window form of notification."

11. A notice of removal window makes it plain that the "window" is a period
    "during which removal may proceed without further notice".  A notice of
    removal window is said to be suitable for persons being  removed  under
    section 10 of the 1999 Act and those being deported under section 3  of
    the 1971 Act.

12. A notice of a removal window will give a  "notice  period".   When  the
    notice period ends, the removal window begins  and  a  person  "may  be
    removed during the removal window".

13. The notice period begins  when  the  notice  is  given  to  the  person
    concerned, at the time the notice is given.  A notice of removal window
    is not to be given to a person who has leave to enter or remain or to a
    person who is able, within the relevant time  limit,  to  file  an  in-
    country notice of appeal or administrative review,  or  where  such  is
    pending.

14. As already stated, the removal window says when the notice period ends.
     The removal window "will run for a maximum of three months"  from  the
    time the notice of liability for removal or deportation decision letter
    is served.  If, however, a removal window has not expired,  it  can  be
    extended "by way of reminder for a further 28 days".

15. The guidance states that if a person "makes an asylum, human rights  or
    EU free movement claim, involving issues of  substance  which  had  not
    been previously raised and considered, or  a  further  application  for
    leave, the window ends".

16. Where a removal window has expired, or where removal is not via one  of
    the "safe countries" listed in section 3.2 and which was  not  notified
    in the original notice, then a fresh removal window has to be notified,
    with the result  that  a  new  notice  period  will  begin.   The  form
    concerned (RED.0004 (Fresh)) may specify a "range of potential  transit
    points".

17. The guidance then turns to the requirement for notice of liability  for
    removal to be accompanied by an "Immigration  Factual  Summary",  which
    must have a chronology of the case history  of  the  person  concerned,
    including details of whether any appeal rights were exercised  in  past
    applications for judicial review.  Both the  notice  of  liability  for
    removal or deportation decision letter must  be  copied  to  any  legal
    representative, where the respondent has details of such,  or  where  a
    person asks for a specified representative to be sent copies.

18. If a person is detained or arrested for removal later on the  same  day
    but states that their circumstances have changed or that they  wish  to
    access legal advice, the guidance states that they will not be  removed
    whilst  they  are  seeking  such  advice,   or   have   representations
    outstanding.  Where representations do not amount to a fresh protection
    or human rights claim and have either already been  considered  or  had
    not previously  been  considered  but  would  not  create  a  realistic
    prospect of success "in terms of  leading  to  an  outcome  other  than
    removal from the UK", the individual in question can be removed on  the
    same day "once we have considered the outstanding representations".

19. The guidance says that  certain  categories  are  not  suitable  for  a
    removal window.  These include  "family  cases"  (which  are  defined);
    cases where a person has made a protection or human  rights  claim,  or
    appeal, which is pending; and  where  the  Home  Office  has  evidence,
    beyond a self-declaration, that a person is suffering from a  condition
    listed as a risk factor in the adults at risk in immigration  detention
    policy, or some other condition that would result in the  person  being
    regarded as an adult at risk under that policy.

20. The guidance then deals with the requirements to be met  in  connection
    with giving a notice of removal directions.   These  include  the  fact
    that the person concerned "must be given adequate notice  that  removal
    has been scheduled".  In the case of a detainee, notice should  ideally
    be given as soon as removal directions have been set.

21. Reference has already been made to the  notice  period,  prior  to  the
    opening of  the  removal  window.   If  the  person  concerned  is  not
    detained, the notice period is seven calendar days.  Otherwise, subject
    to exceptions  described  in  the  section  of  the  guidance  entitled
    "Consideration of deferral of notice period", the period must be one of
    the following:-

         ".   normal enforcement cases -  minimum  72  hours  (including  at
             least two working days).

         .    third country cases and cases where the decision certified the
             claim ... minimum five  working  days  (unless  the  case  has
             already been reviewed by JR ...)".

22. The guidance then goes into detail, by reference to examples, regarding
    what is meant by a minimum of 72 hours with at least two working  days.
    We then reach the part  of  the  guidance  entitled  "Consideration  of
    deferral of notice period". This section is new, in that  it  does  not
    correspond to anything in existence before 21 May 2018.  The section is
    heavily relied on by the respondent in contending that  the  notice  of
    removal policy is lawful.  As we shall see, the primary position of the
    applicants and the PLP is that the policy is fundamentally unlawful and
    cannot be rescued by  this  section.   However,  if  contrary  to  that
    primary position, it is possible for the respondent to operate a notice
    of removal window policy, the applicants and the PLP contend  that  the
    section is, in any event, deficient.

          23. The section begins as follows:-

         "Whether or not they are detained, individuals must  be  allowed  a
         reasonable opportunity to access legal advice and have recourse  to
         the courts.   The  purpose  of  the  notice  period  is  to  enable
         individuals to seek legal advice.  If, during the notice period, an
         unrepresented person is yet to instruct a legal representative  you
         [the case worker] must always consider deferring the removal window
         for an additional period.


         It is reasonable to expect individuals who are aware that they have
         not been successful in an immigration claim  and/or  appeal  and/or
         that outstanding representations may be or have  been  rejected  to
         act promptly in seeking legal advice.  Each case for deferral  must
         be considered on its individual merits.  The key  consideration  is
         whether the person has had a reasonable opportunity to access legal
         advice and recourse to the courts."


24. The section then deals with three specific  matters:  Change  of  legal
    representatives; access to legal advice in detained cases;  and  access
    to relevant documentation.  So far as  concerns  the  change  of  legal
    representative, the guidance states that a delay caused by this may  be
    unavoidable and consideration should be given based on  the  merits  of
    the case, such that it may be  reasonable  to  defer  removal  "for  an
    additional period" where the person  concerned  has  "unavoidably  lost
    contact with previous representatives".   On  the  other  hand,  it  is
    stated that deferral should not normally be considered where  there  is
    no clear reason provided for the change  of  representatives  (and  the
    case worker has asked for reasons); or where there is cause to  believe
    that the motive for the change is to  bring  about  a  postponement  of
    removal: "For instance, multiple changes  in  representative  within  a
    short period".

25. Access to legal advice  for  detainees  is  provided  by  legal  advice
    "surgeries", held in Immigration Removal Centres  (IRC).   There  is  a
    requirement to inform detainees of the availability of these  surgeries
    during the induction process within the first 24 hours after arrival in
    the IRC.  Detainees also have the right to  be  informed  of  the  duty
    solicitor scheme that  operates  in  the  individual  IRC,  along  with
    relevant details.  IRC welfare officers direct detainees to information
    concerning how to find an alternative solicitor  or  other  immigration
    adviser; provide information about the Law Society and  Legal  Services
    Commission "in a language that  [the  detainee]  can  understand";  and
    provide copies of the Bail for Immigration Detainees (BID) notebook.

26. It is said that a request for an appointment with a surgery may be made
    at any time and that it is reasonable to expect an individual  to  make
    use of the 72 hour notice period at the  earliest  opportunity,  should
    they wish to use the services of the surgery.

27. The section acknowledges that the 72 hour notice period may not  always
    be sufficient:-

         "Generally speaking, if  an  unrepresented  person  (in  detention)
         wishes to obtain legal advice and cannot be given an appointment at
         an LAA advice surgery within the initial  72-hours  notice  period,
         the removal  window  should  normally  be  deferred  to  enable  an
         appointment  to  be  arranged.   However,  any   request   for   an
         appointment that  necessitates  deferral  and  continued  detention
         should be carefully considered on its merits.  Consideration should
         be given whether the individual:


         .    was properly notified of access to legal advice
         .    made their request at the earliest reasonable opportunity
         .    cooperated with any attempt to arrange a consultation
         .    delayed their request in order to thwart removal".



28.  The  final  part  of  the  section,  concerning  access  to   relevant
    documentation,  states  that  legal  representatives  "need  access  to
    relevant documents and case papers in order to  properly  advise  their
    client".  It is acknowledged that there may be circumstances  where  an
    individual does not readily have access to documents, such as when they
    have been detained at a reporting event or have been outside the UK for
    a significant period.

29. Any refusal decision, notice of liability to  removal  and  immigration
    factual summary "will be provided to the  representatives  on  request"
    either when the individual is detained or at the point that he  or  she
    seeks legal advice on a "same day  removal".   In  most  cases,  it  is
    considered that  the  Immigration  Factual  Summary  will  provide  the
    necessary key facts and case history.

30. The next section of the guidance concerns what are called third country
    and non-suspensive appeal cases.  As already observed, a  minimum  five
    working days' notice must be given here, on the  basis  that  "this  is
    likely to be their first opportunity  for  legal  redress".   The  case
    worker must "satisfy yourself that they have the opportunity to  access
    the courts before their departure is enforced".

31. Special arrangements  arise  in  particular  cases,  including  charter
    flights.  Here, the normal means of challenge is said to be "injunctive
    relief" and the person concerned  will  be  given  a  minimum  of  five
    working days' notice of removal "so they have the opportunity  to  take
    legal advice".  The purpose is to "minimise the number of  last  minute
    applications for injunctive relief to the High  Court  in  England  and
    Wales, the Court of Session in Scotland or the High Court  in  Northern
    Ireland and to encourage people  to  inform  the  Home  Office  at  the
    earliest opportunity of any further submissions they want to make".

32. Under the heading "Where a second period of notification is not needed"
    the guidance indicates that a person who is  given  notice  of  removal
    directions, where the removal fails or is deferred, may not have to  be
    given a further period of notice for removal "within ten  days  of  the
    failed or deferred  removal".   The  ten  day  provision  need  not  be
    operated in the case of those who are still  subject  to  a  notice  of
    removal window (although it may do so, such  as  where  the  originally
    scheduled removal was "towards the end of the removal window").

33. The guidance then deals with the circumstances in which the bringing of
    a judicial review will, and will  not,  result  in  the  suspension  of
    removal.



C. Form RED.0001

34. Although we have already  had  cause  to  mention  form  RED.0004,  the
    primary form of notice used by the respondent in  connection  with  the
    removal window process is RED.0001.  It is convenient to look  at  this
    form, as it was completed and served on the applicant FB on  1  October
    2017.

35. The form begins with the heading  "NOTICE  OF  IMMIGRATION  DECISION  -
    NOTICE OF REMOVAL".  It told FB that he was a person without  leave  to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom, who had not given reasons why he
    should be granted such leave, and that he  was  therefore  "liable  for
    removal".  The reasons for that decision were then given.

36. The form said:-

         "If you do not leave the United Kingdom as  required  you  will  be
         liable to enforced removal to Afghanistan.  We may remove you via a
         transit point in an EU Member State - Dubai, India, Turkey.

         You may be detained or placed on reporting conditions.

         If you wish to seek legal advice you must do so now."

37. It appears that the references to Dubai, India and Turkey were intended
    to be references to transit points outside EU  Member  States,  one  or
    more which the respondent intended to use in order to effect removal to
    Afghanistan.

38. RED.0001 contains a number of boxes, one of which is to be ticked.  The
    one marked in the case of FB was as follows:-

         "You will not be removed before 05.10.2017 15.45.  After this time,
         and for up to three months from the date of this notice, you may be
         removed without further notice."

39. The form continued by stating that FB had no lawful basis to remain  in
    the UK "and you should leave as soon as possible.   By  remaining  here
    without lawful basis you may be prosecuted for  an  offence  under  the
    Immigration Act 1971, the penalty for which is a fine and/or up to  six
    months' imprisonment".

40. Under the heading "IF YOU HAVE FURTHER REASONS FOR WANTING TO  STAY  IN
    THE UK" the form said "If you  have  reasons  to  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom, you must state them.  This requirement is  being  given  under
    Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   If
    you do not tell us as soon as reasonably practicable and  you  tell  us
    later without good reason, you will lose any right of  appeal  you  may
    have or otherwise qualify for if we refuse your claim".   Although  the
    form does not say so, this passage is plainly a reference to section 96
    (earlier right of appeal) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

41. RED.0001 continued, in FB's case, by stating that he must now tell  the
    respondent about any reasons or grounds he had for wishing to remain in
    the United Kingdom.

42.  It  appears  that  FB  was  also  given  a  sheet  headed  "Additional
    information", telling him that he was able to engage a solicitor;  that
    a list of solicitors was available from the library [at  the  Detention
    Centre]; and that "appointments to see legal advisers are available  in
    the centre.  Please speak  to  an  officer  if  you  wish  to  make  an
    appointment".  It was stated that solicitors attended Campsfield  House
    Immigration Detention Centre every  Tuesday,  Wednesday  and  Thursday.
    The document also said that FB "may use the internet to help you find a
    solicitor; the suggested starting point is  the  Law  Society  website:
    www.lawsociety.org.uk".

43. FB was also  given  Form  RED.0003,  headed  "STATEMENT  OF  ADDITIONAL
    GROUNDS under section 120 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002".  This form contained  information  on  what  to  do,  if  FB
    considered that he had reasons for remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    which  were  not  merely  a  repeat  of  those  already  given  to  the
    respondent.



D. An overview of the challenges to Chapter 60

44. Following that overview of Chapter 60 and the forms, it is necessary to
    return to the challenges of the applicants and the PLP.  Their  primary
    submission is that the respondent cannot  lawfully  operate  a  removal
    window policy, of the kind described in Chapter 60.

45. According to the applicants and the PLP, the  reason  for  this  is  as
    follows.   In  R  (Anufrijeva)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and Another [2003] UKHL 36, the House  of  Lords  held  that
    constitutional principle requires an administrative decision  which  is
    adverse to an individual, to be communicated to the  individual  before
    it can have the character of a  determination  with  legal  effect,  so
    enabling the individual to challenge the decision in the courts, if  so
    wished.  In the absence of express language or  necessary  implications
    to the  contrary,  general  statutory  words  cannot  override  such  a
    fundamental right but, rather, will  be  presumed  by  a  court  to  be
    subject to them.

46. In R (UNISON) v Lord Chancellor [2017] UKSC 51, the Supreme Court  held
    that the constitutional right of access to justice is inherent  in  the
    rule of law.  That right has long  been  recognised  and  can  only  be
    curtailed by clear and express  statutory  words.   Any  hinderance  or
    impediment by the executive with the right requires clear parliamentary
    authorisation and any statutory provision authorising such an intrusion
    would be  interpreted  as  doing  so  only  to  the  extent  reasonably
    necessary to fulfil a particular objective in question.

47. In R (Medical Justice) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2010] EWHC 1925 (Admin), Silber J held  that,  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him, the respondent's policy of  giving  less  than  72
    hours' notice of directions for the  removal  of  an  individual  at  a
    specific time, to a specific place, was unlawful, as being contrary  to
    the principle of access to justice.  Silber J's judgment was upheld  in
    the Court of Appeal.

48. According to the applicants and the PLP, this case law  is  dispositive
    of the matter, in their favour.   The  giving  of  removal  directions,
    following a notice of liability to removal under section 10 of the 1999
    Act, is a discrete administrative decision, of the  kind  described  in
    Anufrijeva.  The judgment of the Court of Appeal in the Medical Justice
    case binds the Upper Tribunal to find that the giving of less  than  72
    hours' notice of removal directions violates the principle of access to
    justice and is thus unlawful.  Given that the  respondent's  notice  of
    removal window policy is predicated  on  the  basis  that,  whilst  the
    window is open, as a general matter no notice at all needs to be  given
    of the removal directions, the  notice  of  removal  window  policy  in
    Chapter 60 must be unlawful.

49. The applicants and the PLP further contend  that  the  Medical  Justice
    cases did not include a finding that a  minimum  72  hours'  notice  of
    removal  directions  was  lawful.   They  say   this   issue   remained
    unresolved, following the Court of Appeal judgment.  In  the  light  of
    the contraction  in  the  availability  of  legal  aid,  in  the  years
    following the Medical Justice cases,  the  applicants  submit  that  72
    hours' notice is incompatible with access to justice.  In the course of
    oral submissions, a minimum period of five days  was  identified  as  a
    possibly suitable period.

50. Even if, contrary to the submissions of the applicants and the  PLP,  a
    notice of removal policy could be lawfully operated,  along  the  lines
    set out in Chapter 60, the applicants and the PLP contend that, even in
    its current form, Chapter 60  is  legally  defective.   In  particular,
    there is uncertainty as to when a removal  window  ends  and  there  is
    otherwise a material lack  of  clarity  in  the  section  dealing  with
    deferral of the removal window.  The  provisions  are  not  phrased  in
    "mandatory" language, which the applicants and the PLP consider  to  be
    vital.   Caseworkers  are  given  inappropriate  discretion  concerning
    deferral of  removal.   The  length  of  the  removal  window  and  the
    possibility of further such windows are capable of having  a  seriously
    adverse effect upon the individuals concerned.

51. We shall return to these challenges, and the respondent's  response  to
    them, in more detail.  First, it is necessary to look at  the  evidence
    that has been adduced by the parties, both as to the background to  the
    present position and as regards its practical effects "on the ground".



E. The evidence

Julia Dolby

52. The background to what is described as the development of the  72  hour
    policy is set out at paragraphs 7 to  17  of  Silber  J's  judgment  in
    Medical Justice.  It also features in the witness statement  of  Thakur
    Rakesh Singh of the PLP and in the statement of  Julia  Dolby,  of  the
    respondent's Removals, Enforcement and Detention Policy  Team;  Illegal
    Migration,  Identity,  Security  and   Enforcement   Policy,   Borders,
    Immigration and Citizenship Systems Policy and Strategy Group.

53. Ms Dolby's statement, however, deals both with this background and  the
    events  which  followed,  leading  to  the  current  policy.   It   is,
    therefore, convenient to draw upon Ms Dolby's statement.

54. Ms Dolby describes the respondent's enforcement policy as being founded
    on the expectation that those with no right to be in the United Kingdom
    should return home.  The  respondent  expects  such  persons  to  leave
    voluntarily but where they do not, Immigration Enforcement will seek to
    enforce their departure.  She says that such returns are only  enforced
    "where both the Home Office  and  the  courts  are  satisfied  that  an
    individual has no right to remain in the UK".

55. Before the changes  introduced  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014,  which
    amongst other things, re-cast section 10 of the 1999  Act,  individuals
    being removed were notified of their removal by way of  an  enforcement
    decision,  which  set  out  the  reasons  why  they  were  subject   to
    enforcement action, followed by a notice of removal directions  setting
    out the arrangements for their removal, including the date of  removal.
    That date "had to be set after a minimum of 72 hours ... or  unless  an
    asylum/human rights refusal had been certified, when five working  days
    must  be  given,  after  the  individual  was  notified  that   removal
    directions have been set,  in  order  to  allow  them  time  to  access
    justice".

56. The  72  hour  period  came  about  as  follows.   The  respondent  had
    previously entered into an arrangement with the High Court -  known  as
    the "Concordat" - which was intended to avoid the need for last  minute
    injunctions.  The respondent would agree to defer removal on threat  of
    a judicial review, working on the assumption that such challenges  were
    arguable ones that needed to be examined.   The  result,  however,  was
    that it was necessary  to  release  from  detention  those  threatening
    judicial review, since their claims took so long to resolve.  It became
    apparent  to  the  respondent  that  some  detainees  were  threatening
    judicial review "simply to get out of detention, and in most  instances
    the threatened JR was never lodged".

57. This led the respondent to develop an  approach  whereby  persons  were
    detained and removed very quickly; but that resulted in a reduction  of
    access to lawyers and legal remedy, with the result  that  the  "courts
    held that the practice was a denial of access to justice".

58. A new policy of providing 72 hours' notice before removal was discussed
    with the then President of the Queen's Bench Division and the  previous
    Chief Executive of what was then the UK  Border  Agency  in  2006/2007.
    The resulting policy  required  a  change  to  be  made  to  the  Civil
    Procedure Rules.  The change was aimed at reducing the impact  of  weak
    claims, designed to disrupt  detention  and  removal.   This  attracted
    criticism from stakeholders.

59. In the event, the policy reflected in the changed Civil Procedure Rules
    was for a minimum notice period of  72  hours,  rather  than  48  hours
    suggested by the respondent; but with the requirement that any judicial
    review lodged within that period must include the  full  grounds.   The
    thinking behind this was that the judicial review could be disposed  of
    "in a matter of days".  The policy came into effect in April 2007.

60. As originally framed, the policy contained certain exceptions to the 72
    hour notice period, such as where there were risks of an  unaccompanied
    asylum seeking minor absconding or a risk of self-harm.   Subsequently,
    further exceptions were added.  However, in 2010, the  Medical  Justice
    litigation concluded that  "a  reasonable  period  between  arrest  and
    removal was required for those  subject  to  removal  to  access  legal
    advice".  Following subsequent  discussions  with  the  judiciary,  the
    respondent amended the Operational Guidance "to say that 72 hours  must
    always be provided  between  an  individual  being  served  immigration
    papers and the actual removal of the  offender"  and  that  the  period
    started when "removal directions" were served.

61. Following the legislative changes introduced  in  the  Immigration  Act
    2014,  amendments  were  made  to   the   enforced   removal   process.
    Individuals who had no leave to enter or remain, would be  notified  of
    their liability to removal and told that if they had reasons to stay in
    the United Kingdom, they must state them at the  earliest  opportunity,
    pursuant to section 120 of the 2002 Act.

62. Ms Dolby says that:-

         "The minimum 72 hour notice period was brought forward to the  time
         when the individual was notified of their liability to  removal  in
         order to allow sufficient  time  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         consider any issues raised at an earlier point rather than  waiting
         until the actual removal directions ...  had  been  made  and  then
         potentially having to cancel the removal."

63. Ms Dolby said that the  thinking  behind  this  was  concern  that  the
    previous policy, where  an  individual  was  given  notice  of  removal
    directions, led to the submission of late claims that could  reasonably
    have been raised and considered earlier in the process and that in some
    cases this was being used as an attempt to frustrate or delay  removal.
    Thus:-

         "The aim was to make it clear at  the  refusal  stage  that  people
         should not be waiting until the last possible moment before removal
         before seeking  legal  advice  and  submitting  their  claims.   In
         addition, notifying the individual of the precise time and date  of
         their removal directions was on occasion leading to  disruption  on
         the part of some detainees in immigration removal centres ... or to
         information being circulated on social media by action  groups  who
         are seeking to disrupt the  removal,  for  example,  by  preventing
         access to or egress from the IRCs, contacting airlines, or  seeking
         to prevent flights from departing."

64. The three month removal window was introduced on 6  April  2015.   This
    followed a threat of challenge to an earlier version of the policy,  by
    the PLP on behalf  of  Medical  Justice,  who  objected  to  "having  a
    completely un-ending period from when a person was first  given  notice
    of their liability to removal".

65. In addition to introducing a three month removal  window,  the  minimum
    notice period was amended from being not within the first 72 hours  for
    all cases to being 72 hours if detained or seven calendar days, if  not
    detained.  The respondent's rationale was that the 72 hour  policy  was
    appropriate for the "detained environment where there is  access  to  a
    "legal surgery"".  By contrast, in the "non-detained  environment,  the
    Home Office accepted that we needed to give individuals  more  time  to
    seek legal advice".

66. The new removal policy included the practice of arresting a person  and
    removing him or her "without them always being detained overnight in an
    immigration removal centre, sometimes  called  ...same-day  removal  or
    Operation Perceptor cases after the initial pilot, which would not take
    place until after a person had been  notified  of  their  liability  to
    removal and the seven day non-detained (notice period) had expired".

67. Same-day removal is, Ms Dolby says, used only for those who are  deemed
    suitable for the three month removal window and  further  consideration
    must be given to any health conditions or vulnerabilities.  In same-day
    removal cases, the individual is always interviewed as to their current
    position, including health, domestic circumstances,  and  whether  they
    have representatives or solicitors  or  any  outstanding  applications.
    The response of the individual will inform whether the same-day removal
    will proceed.  Individuals concerned are  provided  with  access  to  a
    telephone, with available credit, for the purpose of consulting a legal
    representative.

68. Ms Dolby says:-

         "If the individual says that they intend  to  submit  a  protection
         claim  and  this  is  a  first-time  claim,   then   removal   will
         automatically be deferred until after the claim  has  been  decided
         and any appeal rights exhausted.  If the individual has  previously
         made a protection claim, this will be referred to  the  Operational
         Support and Certification Unit (OSCU) who will consider  the  claim
         and decide whether or not this amounts to a fresh protection  claim
         and if not, whether it has already been considered; or has not been
         previously considered but will not create a realistic  prospect  of
         success.

         If so, then the individual "can proceed to be removed on  the  same
         day once OSCU have considered the outstanding representations."

69. Ms Dolby reiterates that where an individual has signalled  a  wish  to
    make a first-time protection claim, or has  made  such  a  claim,  then
    removal "will be deferred to enable that claim to be  considered".   If
    the claim is refused with a right of appeal in the United Kingdom, then
    a fresh removal window  cannot  be  opened  until  the  individual  has
    exhausted his or her appeal rights.  If, on the other hand,  the  claim
    is certified under  section  94  or  96  of  the  2002  Act,  then  the
    individual will be given a notice period of at least five working days,
    for the purpose of deciding whether  to  bring  a  judicial  review  to
    challenge the certification decision.

70. Ms Dolby's statement ends by describing aspects of the new  section  of
    Chapter 60 concerning the "Consideration of deferral of notice period".
     We shall return to this later.

71. The applicants have submitted a number of witness statements,  together
    with exhibits, including a questionnaire prepared  in  connection  with
    these proceedings, and the responses to it.



Toufique Hossain (1)

72. Toufique Hossain, a partner and director of public law at Duncan  Lewis
    Solicitors, describes the relevant work that his firm provide  in  this
    area.  Duncan Lewis has contracts with the Legal Aid Agency to  provide
    advice and representation at legal advice  surgeries  in  a  number  of
    IRCs, including those at Campsfield, Harmondsworth and Yarl's Wood.

73. Mr Hossain points out that IRCs  do  not  have  an  out-of-hours  legal
    advice cover.  Detainees routinely wait for up to a week and may in the
    worst cases wait two to three weeks for  appointments  with  surgeries.
    Caseworkers operating at the surgeries "must be realistic  about  their
    ability to assist somebody in the timeframe available, with  regard  to
    their other commitments".  In fact, the SRAs code of conduct requires a
    solicitor to take on a case only where  the  firm  has  the  resources,
    skills and procedures available, such that it is possible to provide  a
    service that is competent, timely and relevant.

74. Notwithstanding these difficulties, Mr  Hossain's  team  is,  he  says,
    "capable of taking on and dealing with urgent cases where there  appear
    to be merits, even if it means working within a very  tight  and  until
    the last minute timeframe".  He goes on to say the following:-

         "Experienced practitioners in this area will  know  that  right  up
         until the client is on the runway on the plane, it is  possible  to
         be granted an injunction and prevent somebody from  being  refouled
         to their country of origin.  Indeed, recently we have  obtained  an
         injunction after a client was put on a flight for  Afghanistan  via
         Istanbul and the Home Office had to arrange for him to  be  brought
         back from Istanbul (see exhibit "TH1")".

75. As we shall see, a similar case (evidenced in the witness statement  of
    Jamie Bell) has been the subject of detailed analysis and criticism  by
    the Lord Chief Justice in SB (Afghanistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 215.

76. Mr Hossain describes  the  changed  legal  aid  landscape,  so  far  as
    immigration  is  concerned,  since  the  Medical  Justice  cases.    In
    particular, difficulties have  arisen  with  the  LAA,  concerning  the
    Chapter 60 policy.  Since the notice of  removal  window  stipulates  a
    three month period in  which  removal  can  take  place  "the  LAA  has
    mistakenly considered that an emergency application is not  appropriate
    in most circumstances.  This is based on the  misunderstanding  of  the
    new form of removal notice ...".

77. Since 2010, functions previously delegated to legal aid  practitioners,
    have been, in fact, taken back "in-house" by the LAA.  Accordingly,  an
    application to the LAA needs to be made for  funding  on  an  emergency
    basis.

78. Obtaining the relevant papers is also difficult and,  according  to  Mr
    Hossain, likely to take 24 to 48 hours at least.   In  some  cases  the
    client  may  be  able  to  provide  contact  details  of  the  previous
    representatives but, even then,  the  speed  with  which  the  previous
    solicitor processes the  request  "can  vary  greatly,  even  when  the
    urgency is explained".  Requests for documentation from the Home Office
    are often refused on the grounds that the  proper  means  of  obtaining
    disclosure is by making a  subject  access  request,  even  though  the
    current target for processing such requests is 40 days and a minimum of
    two weeks is usually expected.

79. Mr Hossain then describes the process of taking instructions,  reaching
    conclusions  that  enable  the  individual  "to  make   a   threat   of
    proceedings" and issuing proceedings.  As regards issuing  proceedings,
    Mr Hossain says that relevant members of the Bar "are in  high  demand"
    and also experience capacity  issues.   Finding  counsel  who  has  the
    required expertise to further the client's  interests  can  prove  very
    difficult for urgent matters.  This is compounded by legal aid cuts.

80. Misunderstandings regarding Chapter 60 are not confined to the LAA,  in
    Mr  Hossain's  view.   Difficulties  have  been  encountered  with  the
    Administrative Court Office:-

        "with court staff refusing to seal claim forms on the same day where
       a notice of removal window is provided.   Our  clerks  have  reported
       that the problem arises because the court  staff  do  not  appreciate
       that the notice of removal window is a form of removal directions and
       therefore such applications are urgent.  This confusion would  appear
       to be caused by the misleading language and the absence of a date and
       time of removal, without which our clerks have trouble explaining the
       urgency to court office staff."

81. Mr Hossain says that although "many legal representatives  are  by  now
    aware that as the client can be removed from the date the window opens,
    that date should effectively be treated as  the  date  of  removal  ...
    There are still likely to be others who do not appreciate this  urgency
    or who choose to delay because no confirmation of  a  scheduled  flight
    has been received".  Prioritising cases is, in any  event,  challenging
    and so, when presented  with  a  removal  window  case,  "even  a  non-
    negligent legal representative may choose to make a calculated decision
    to prioritise another urgent matter".

82. Mr Hossain is concerned by the uncertainty, stemming from  Chapter  60,
    as to when a removal window ends.  In a recent case, a client  made  an
    asylum claim, after being given a notice of  removal  window,  but  was
    then served with a further such notice, which  the  respondent  wrongly
    said "will sit alongside the claimant's asylum claim".

83. In general, Mr Hossain says that the Chapter 60  policy  "is  routinely
    misapplied", which suggests a number of things to him,  including  that
    the policy has inherent uncertainty and confusion contained in it.

84. Mr Hossain concludes his first statement by saying that it  is  clearly
    desirable and would assist individuals  if  the  "standard,  obligatory
    notification letters sent to both parties when the removal  window  has
    come to an end for a Chapter  60  reason".   That  would  permit  legal
    representatives to identify a breach or act  as  necessary  if  such  a
    letter is not received.




Pierre Makhlouf

85. Pierre Makhlouf, Assistant Director of Bail for  Immigration  Detainees
    (BID) describes his  charity  as  existing  "to  challenge  immigration
    detention in the UK".  Demand for BID's services has increased as legal
    aid has been "systematically  reduced  through  successive  cuts".   Mr
    Makhlouf describes a number of BID research papers.  For  instance,  in
    2017, 69% of those questioned had legal representation at the  time  of
    interview but 70% were not taken on as a legal aid  client.   49%  were
    said not to be able to access the 30 minutes of free legal advice  that
    they were entitled to in the detention centre, while 63% reported being
    blocked when accessing websites.  One in ten  had  never  had  a  legal
    representative throughout their period of detention.

86. Mr Makhlouf considers that Chapter 60 "is having an impact on the grant
    of bail and may be prolonging  detention".   Many  detainees  will,  he
    says, be removed  "without  ever  being  legally  represented  for  the
    purposes of challenging their removal, or at all,  despite  their  best
    efforts to obtain a representative".



Theresa Schleicher

87. Theresa Schleicher, a case work manager at Medical  Justice,  describes
    the background to the removal window policy.   Although  "appearing  on
    its face to be an improvement on the previous policy", which had no end
    point, "we were again concerned about  the  effects"  and  "have  since
    continued to monitor the effects of the policy through our case  work".



88. Medical Justice continues to be concerned that Chapter 60 significantly
    limits access to justice in that "even though detainees receive  notice
    of the start of their removal window,  reminding  them  to  submit  any
    challenge to the decision to remove them from the UK in the time before
    the beginning of the removal window, in practice  this  was  often  not
    possible, particularly in the large number of cases when only 72  hours
    is given".  Prioritising clients within removal windows is,  she  says,
    difficult: "We are simply not able to prioritise the most urgent  cases
    and in most cases are unable to secure legal representation before  the
    start of a removal window.  Many clients are not  then  removed  during
    the early part of their removal window or at all.  But some are removed
    before they are able to access legal advice".

89. Ms Schleicher says that issues  such  as  fitness  to  fly  and  mental
    illness fluctuate, so  that  an  up-to-date  assessment  is  important.
    Medical Justice's task is complicated by the lack of clarity about when
    a removal window ends.   There  are  inadequacies,  she  says,  in  the
    procedures for operating Rules 34 (Medical examination  upon  admission
    and thereafter) and 35 (Special  illnesses  and  conditions  (including
    torture claims)) of the Detention Centre Rules 2001.

90. Towards the end of her statement, Ms  Schleicher  notes  the  evidence,
    which we  shall  next  describe,  of  Professor  Katona  and  Dr  Bell,
    regarding the uncertainty that is  created  by  being  in  the  removal
    window. She  says:  "We  often  observe  an  increase  in  anxious  and
    distressed calls from our clients while they are on a  removal  window.
    Many of those with existing mental illness report an increase in  their
    psychological symptoms".

Professor Katona and Dr Bell

91. Professor Katona and Dr Bell have provided  a  joint  statement.   They
    gave evidence  in  the  Medical  Justice  case.   Professor  Katona  is
    Professor of Psychiatry at University College London, whilst Dr Bell is
    a Consultant Psychiatrist at the Tavistock Clinic.

92. Their clinical experience  indicates  that  it  is  "necessary  for  an
    individual served with a removal notice to have time to assimilate  the
    decision and to undertake any associated grieving process, supported by
    their family and treating clinical team, in order to reduce the risk of
    harm".  It is of particular concern that asylum  seekers  are  said  to
    have "increased levels of psychopathology and mental  illness  and  are
    about ten times more likely to have post-traumatic stress  disorder  in
    age matched general populations".

93. The statement has this to say:-

         "14. Those who have been served with removal windows live with  the
             day-to-day fear that they  will  suddenly  be  removed,  never
             knowing when the moment will arrive because of the  policy  of
             withholding the date and time of removal from them.  Those  in
             the community, live with a similar  fear  that  they  will  be
             detained to facilitate removal,  compounding  this  day-to-day
             fear.  An individual's ability to prepare mentally for removal
             will in our view be hampered significantly if they do not have
             a definite removal date to prepare for and work towards."

94. The situation for those in detention is said by the authors to be "more
    difficult still, due to the adverse  conditions  created  by  detention
    itself".  This  "daily  mental  duress  carries  a  risk  of  provoking
    overwhelming distress and psychological damage heightened by the  state
    of vigilance, which is greater the longer it continues".

95. The authors do not  consider  that  the  safeguards  contained  in  the
    current Chapter 60 policy are  sufficient.   They  echo  the  views  of
    others regarding the problems with the  Rule  34/35  procedures.   They
    complain about the levels of discretion left to the respondent's staff,
    in operating various of the safeguards.  They end by saying that  those
    subject to the removal window "face  the  uncertainty  of  not  knowing
    whether tomorrow will be the day they are to be  removed.   This  means
    that every day, because any day  might  be  the  day  of  removal,  the
    individual is faced with a very high degree of stress  which  would  be
    intolerable and harmful for most individuals let alone  those  who  are
    already suffering from mental disturbance".



Sian Evans

96. Sian Evans, co-ordinator of asylum  services  for  Women  Against  Rape
    (WAR), describes the work of WAR.  In her experience "Women  invariably
    did not understand that the opening of a window for removal meant  that
    they were in immediate danger from that date.  They saw it  more  as  a
    window in which they should try to get help before they  were  removed.
    This is as a result of the confusing form of the notice, as well as not
    having the implications of the window explained to  them  in  a  manner
    and/or language that they understand,  often  exacerbated  by  problems
    with concentration, anxiety and fear which may make it  more  difficult
    for them to take in information in stressful situations".



Elisabeth Walsh

97. Elisabeth Walsh,  a  case  worker  of  the  Unity  Centre  in  Glasgow,
    described a Nigerian woman, well-known to the centre as having suffered
    "increased panic attacks and episodes of anxiety or severe  depression,
    including suicidal thoughts" as a result of being  given  a  notice  of
    removal window.  Other clients have been confused  about  whether  they
    might be detained upon reporting and, if so, whether they would be  put
    on a plane the same or the next day.  Ms Walsh also gives  descriptions
    of persons whom, she says, were removed  whilst  they  had  outstanding
    claims for asylum.



Sheona York

98. Sheona York, Immigration and Asylum Solicitor and Reader in Law at Kent
    Law Clinic, says that, in her experience, it is extremely difficult for
    a person who is threatened with removal, and who does not already  have
    a competent immigration solicitor acting for them, to  gain  access  to
    adequate legal advice and collect the evidence they need to  prepare  a
    judicial review, which would not fall foul of criticisms  made  in  the
    "Hamid" cases.  She also describes the difficulties that  have  arisen,
    as a result of the contraction of legal aid provision.



Mariah Carey

99. Mariah Carey, Co-ordinator of the Verne Visitors Group,  describes,  in
    similar terms to those of other witnesses, difficulties encountered  by
    those in detention  at  the  Verne  in  obtaining  legal  advice.   One
    individual, who was the subject of two failed attempts to  remove  him,
    "has never found a lawyer to take his case, probably because  they  are
    unwilling and/or unable take on such a complex case knowing  that  they
    may be unable to obtain funding ...".  Another  person,  who  was  told
    that there was no legal aid available for EEA nationals, eventually was
    able, through the intervention of a visitor, to obtain exceptional case
    funding to enable a legal aid solicitor to act.

100. It should be  noted  that  the  Verne  has  subsequently  closed  as  a
    detention centre.

Jamie Bell

101. Jamie Bell, a solicitor with Duncan Lewis, produced in  September  2017
    a witness statement concerning his client, SB, the claimant in the case
    of SB (Afghanistan), to which we shall turn in due course.



Lisa Incledon

102. Lisa Incledon, of Medical Justice, states that  in  the  experience  of
    her organisation, "many detainees with removal windows  have  not  been
    able to obtain urgent  appointments  prior  to  the  beginning  of  the
    removal window, suggesting that even if a detainee is able to  approach
    a welfare officer to request a next day legal  advice  appointment  the
    reality is that one is unlikely to be available for days".



Nicola Burgess

103. Nicola Burgess, Legal Director of the Joint Council for the Welfare  of
    Immigrants, describes JCWI's activities.  She also sets out a number of
    examples of cases with which she has been concerned.  MA, a citizen  of
    Nigeria, was "evidently emotionally distressed from the time the notice
    [of removal window] was served.  MA  was  only  able  to  obtain  legal
    assistance after ten days of the window period had elapsed",  and  "was
    therefore at  real  risk  that  he  could  have  been  removed  without
    accessing legal help".

104. Another case involved a person who could not  be  removed  in  November
    2017, since he was assessed as unfit to fly due to  uncontrolled  blood
    pressure.  Although the medical team at the  detention  centre  advised
    that he needed a 24 hour assessment of blood pressure before  he  could
    be assessed as fit to fly, he was served in January 2018 with a further
    notice of removal window, which said that his removal  would  not  take
    place for at least five working days.  It is said that no end point for
    the removal window was provided.  He later was given  a  third  removal
    window and eventually an injunction to prevent his removal was  granted
    by the High Court.

105. A third example, regarding FN, led Ms Burgess to say this:-

         "34. Upon receipt of  the  fresh  claim,  the  respondent  did  not
             confirm that the removal window would be closed.  However,  it
             was apparent  that  he  was  considering  the  submissions  as
             further information was sought and so no steps  to  apply  for
             judicial review were taken.  For clarity and to avoid the need
             for recourse to the Tribunal, practitioners would be  assisted
             if the respondent did provide  express  confirmation  in  such
             circumstances.  In my view it  is  also  inappropriate  for  a
             removal window to be appended to a  section  120  notice.   It
             should be a standalone decision, served after an applicant has
             had an opportunity to respond to a section 120 notice and only
             once  any  representations  had   been   fully   and   finally
             considered."



Pierre Makhlouf (2)

106. The second statement of Pierre Makhlouf was filed in order  to  respond
    to provisions in the respondent's detailed grounds of  defence.   These
    stated that  case  workers  will  consider  requests  by  unrepresented
    applicants for deferral of removal in order to enable  them  to  obtain
    representation; that if  an  unrepresented  person  was  successful  in
    securing a legal surgery appointment, they will not  be  removed  until
    the appointment had taken  place;  that  requests  for  extra  time  by
    solicitors would be considered and removal deferred where there  was  a
    genuine need; and that the Home Office would provide  documentation  in
    urgent cases where it could not easily or  promptly  be  obtained  from
    other sources.

107. Mr Makhlouf was "not aware of any published policy  that  substantiates
    these claims, nor any existing  mechanism  for  detainees  or  a  legal
    representative to ensure that the approach described ... takes  place".
    It is noted that this statement was issued prior to the publication  of
    the current version of Chapter 60.



Sian Evans (2)

108. Sian Evans of WAR filed a second statement.  This  describes  the  case
    of Ms M who "as a result of inaction [of] her lawyer ...  was  detained
    in Yarl's Wood.  Duncan Lewis Solicitors stepped in at the last  minute
    to challenge her imminent removal but her previous lawyer withheld  her
    papers ...  She  was  unfairly  accused  by  the  judge  of  deliberate
    delaying tactics to try to bounce him into stopping her flight.  Bouyed
    by letters of support from over 100 people including Mariam  Margolyes,
    Ms  M  refused  to  go  with  the  guards  to  the  airport.   She  was
    subsequently released and made a fresh claim last August".

109. Eventually, Ms M was removed from the United Kingdom.   It  turned  out
    that she "had been asked by her solicitor to provide evidence from  her
    children that she found  too  embarrassing  and  difficult  to  obtain.
    Sadly the only barrister her solicitor had managed to reach ... was  of
    the view that nothing  more  could  be  done  because  of  the  missing
    evidence.   There  was  no  time  to  obtain  a  second  opinion   from
    alternative Counsel".

110. The statement goes on to say that  "Poor  or  no  legal  representation
    plays a part in nearly every failure of rape victims' claims" and  that
    it "is plainly  inadequate  to  rely  on  the  work  of  competent  and
    committed lawyers to say that justice can  still  be  obtained  in  the
    short timescales allowed by the policy.  Such lawyers are few  and  far
    between (in part because of legal aid cuts).  In addition, the  efforts
    of law firms such as Duncan Lewis to  act  swiftly  has  recently  been
    criticised in the courts which  complained  about  action  being  taken
    where there had  not  been  sufficient  time  to  prepare".   This  is,
    presumably,  a  reference  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  judgment  in  SB
    (Afghanistan).



Toufique Hossain (2)

111. Toufique Hossain's second statement deals with  the  questionnaire,  to
    which reference  has  been  made.   Practitioners  were  asked  various
    questions on matters germane to the removal window policy.   Those  who
    responded indicated that there was "considerable confusion"  caused  by
    the notice of removal window; that it was not  their  understanding  or
    experience that clients who requested a legal surgery appointment would
    not be removed until this had taken place; that, on average,  responses
    indicated that more than 72 hours' notice was required to "do  all  the
    necessary work to properly apply for an urgent injunction;  that  there
    were problems obtaining the central paperwork; and that there was often
    a cautious approach taken on cases where the removal window was already
    open and/or that the client had limited paperwork".   The  majority  of
    respondents  indicated  that  it  was  not  their  understanding   that
    unrepresented  individuals  could  make  requests  for  further   time,
    although some answered yes, indicating  in  their  comments  that  such
    requests would not in any event be heeded.  All respondents said  that,
    for clients within the removal window who were given a decision by  the
    respondent refusing to treat further submissions under paragraph 353 as
    a fresh claim, there was "generally insufficient" time between  service
    of the decision and actual removal to do anything of value.

112. Mr Hossain's statement describes further recent examples of  individual
    cases.  Overall, Mr Hossain considers that these  cases  "illustrate  a
    worrying tendency  to  maintain  a  removal  window  in  place  pending
    consideration of  an  outstanding  barrier".   In  one  case,  EM,  the
    respondent's decision was served on the same  morning  as  the  planned
    removal.  The decision was negative and EM was removed.  Conversely, in
    the case of LM, a decision was made in the evening before the  date  of
    planned removal.  The decision was positive and removal  was  deferred.
    In both cases, Mr Hossain says the individuals were  not  afforded  any
    additional time to access the courts  and  that  nothing  short  of  an
    injunction would convince the  respondent  to  defer  removal  in  such
    circumstances.



Thakur Rakesh Singh

113. Thakur Rakesh Singh of the PLP  describes  the  background  to  the  72
    hours' policy and the Medical Justice litigation.   He  also  describes
    the PLP's concerns regarding the original,  open-ended  removal  window
    and certain training slides produced by the respondent for the  use  of
    caseworkers.

114. Mr Singh's statement predates the publication of  the  current  version
    of Chapter 60. It ends with a description (together with  exhibits)  of
    four case studies. AT, a failed asylum seeker, had  married  a  Gambian
    national with ILR in the United Kingdom who was pregnant with his child
    when he was detained with a view to removal. He was  unable  to  secure
    legal advice prior to the opening of the removal window. He was  unable
    to secure legal advice prior to his removal to the Gambia.

115. MLF was detained for same day removal but was not  allowed  to  have  a
    telephone in order to contact a lawyer. Although he  tried  to  make  a
    protection claim, he was told this had to  be  done  by  attending  the
    Asylum Screening Unit.

116. A suffered from severe mental health problems and was given  a  limited
    notice of removal. He was detained but did not understand he was  about
    to be removed. He was subject to same day removal despite the fact that
    his condition precluded this.

117. Headley  was  unable  to  obtain  access  to  legal  advice  whilst  in
    detention with a view to removal. His wife, however, contacted the PLP,
    who secured an injunction on his behalf.



New evidence

118. At the hearing on 25 July 2018, the applicants and the  PLP  sought  to
    rely upon four items of new evidence: a new report by Stephen Shaw  CBE
    of  July  2018  entitled  "Assessment   of   government   progress   in
    implementing the report on  the  welfare  in  detention  of  vulnerable
    persons"; The Joint Committee [of the House of  Commons  and  House  of
    Lords]  on  Human  Rights  (JCHR)  10th  report  of  Session   2017-19,
    "Enforcing Human Rights" (19 July 2018); an undated report from Refugee
    Action entitled "Tipping the Scales - Access to Justice in  the  Asylum
    System"; and a report of July 2018 by BID entitled "Adults at Risk: The
    ongoing  struggle  for  vulnerable  adults  in  detention  -  and   the
    evaluation of the "Adults at Risk" Policy and Practice".

119. The Tribunal gave directions, at the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  for
    the filing of written submissions in respect of this new material.  The
    respondent's submissions are dated 9 August 2018; those of the PLP  are
    dated 21 August 2018; and those of the applicants are dated  31  August
    2018.  On 17 September 2018, the respondent submitted the  government's
    response to the JCHR report.  The applicants  and  the  PLP  have  made
    further written submissions on the Government's response.

120. The Shaw report recommends increasing internet access for detainees  to
    enable them to pursue and support their immigration claims as  well  as
    to prepare for  their  return  home.   Shaw  considers  that,  overall,
    conditions in the immigration detention estate have improved since  his
    earlier review.  Safeguarding  teams  do  not  have  specific  enforced
    removal targets and value involuntary  removals  as  much  as  enforced
    removals.

121. The JCHR report makes clear that there is concern about  the  scope  of
    legal aid, which is the subject of a review currently being  undertaken
    by government into the operation  of  the  Legal  Aid,  Sentencing  and
    Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (LASPO).  The JCHR  report  identifies
    what it considers to be a new need for a broader review into access  to
    justice, immigration advice and assistance "going beyond matters  which
    might  be  seen  as  purely  legal".   The  JCHR  report  examined  the
    Immigration Rules in the context of Article 8 ECHR  claims.   It  noted
    that non-asylum and immigration cases were taken out of  the  scope  of
    legal aid, subject  to  narrow  exceptions  for  some  applications  by
    victims  of  domestic  violence,  trafficking   and   modern   slavery.
    Applications for leave to enter or remain based  on  Article  8  claims
    were amongst those taken out of  scope.   The  report  noted  "striking
    examples of how migrant children are affected".   It  recommended  that
    the government consider whether immigration cases  engaging  Article  8
    should be brought back within the scope of civil legal aid.

122. The government's response was  that  on  12  July  2018,  the  Minister
    responsible for legal aid announced an intention to lay an amendment to
    the LASPO to bring immigration  matters  concerning  unaccompanied  and
    separated children within the scope of  legal  aid.   Otherwise,  under
    current legislation, legal aid is said to be available  in  all  asylum
    cases for all age groups and for immigration cases  "where  someone  is
    challenging a detention decision.   Legal  aid  for  other  immigration
    matters is available via the ECF Scheme, which is  intended  to  ensure
    legal aid is accessible in all cases where there is a breach  of  human
    rights".

123. The  Refugee  Action  report  found  that  organisations  working  with
    vulnerable people were facing "huge barriers to finding them government-
    funded legal assistance" and the "gaps in the legal aid provision exist
    across the country, undermining access to justice  for  those  claiming
    asylum".  No reference was made to Chapter 60.

124. The applicants point to passages in  the  report  recording  that  over
    half of legal aid providers in the areas of asylum and immigration were
    lost between 2005 and 2018 and  that  21  dispersal  areas  for  asylum
    seekers were described as "advice deserts".

125. The BID report, according to the respondent "makes  clear  that  it  is
    opposed to all immigration detention".  Criticisms are  made  regarding
    those being held in prisons, rather than IRCs (which is  not  the  case
    with either of the present applicants).

126. Overall, the stance of the applicants towards the  new  material,  upon
    which they seek to rely, is that this "should be viewed in  the  round"
    and is "probative of the genuine difficulties faced by those in need of
    legally aided advice and representation including those in  immigration
    detention".  The PLP's stance is, essentially, to the same effect.



F. Paragraph 353, SB (Afghanistan) and the "Hamid" jurisdiction

127. We have already encountered various references to paragraph 353 of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This provides as follows:-

         "Fresh Claims


         353. When a human rights or [protection] claim has been refused  or
             withdrawn or treated as  withdrawn  under  paragraph  333C  of
             these Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is no longer
             pending,  the  decision  maker  will  consider   any   further
             submissions and, if rejected, will then determine whether they
             amount to a fresh claim.  The submissions  will  amount  to  a
             fresh claim if  they  are  significantly  different  from  the
             material that has previously been considered.  The submissions
             will only be significantly different if the content:


                i) had not already been considered; and


              ii) taken together with the  previously  considered  material,
                  created a realistic prospect of  success,  notwithstanding
                  its rejection.


             This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas."

128. As established in the somewhat extensive case law (of which WM (DRC)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1495 remains
    the most useful guide), it is for the respondent to  determine  whether
    the requirements of a fresh claim had been made out,  applying  anxious
    scrutiny to the material, and asking himself  the  question  whether  a
    hypothetical First-tier Tribunal could realistically  allow  an  appeal
    brought by reference to it.

129.  Paragraph  353A  explains   the   consequences   of   making   further
    submissions:-

         "353A.   Consideration of further submissions shall be  subject  to
                the procedures set out in these Rules.  An applicant who has
                made further submissions shall not  be  removed  before  the
                Secretary of State  has  considered  the  submissions  under
                paragraph 353 or otherwise."

130. The significance of paragraph 353A, for our purposes, lies in the  fact
    that the respondent's policy is such that he will not remove  a  person
    who has made submissions said to come within  the  ambit  of  paragraph
    353, until those submissions have been considered.  There  is  no  "cut
    off" point in the Rules, beyond which the obligation in paragraph  353A
    ceases to apply.

131. We can now turn, as we said we would, to the case of SB  (Afghanistan).
     The judgment of the Court of Appeal, given by Lord Burnett  of  Maldon
    CJ, sets out the facts of SB's case, in considerable detail.

132. In essence, SB was detained and served with a notice of  removal  on  4
    July 2017, which told him that he would not be removed before 17.00  on
    10/07/17 but that after this time and for up to three months he may  be
    removed  without  further  notice.   Representations  by  a   firm   of
    solicitors, acting for SB, were made on his behalf on 19 July 2017  but
    the respondent on 25 July decided that these did not constitute a fresh
    claim within paragraph 353.  Removal directions were set for 26  August
    but the pilot of the aircraft due to fly to Istanbul refused  to  carry
    SB and removal was aborted.

133. There was then press coverage of SB's abortive removal, which was  said
    to have given rise to a sur place asylum claim by him.  On 7 September,
    the  Kent  Refugee  Asylum  Network  (KRAN)  contacted   Duncan   Lewis
    Solicitors and asked if they would act for SB.

134. In the morning of 12 September 2017, SB was notified that he was to  be
    removed by plane to Istanbul at 11.30am that day, for onward transit to
    Kabul.  Representations made on SB's behalf by the journalist  who  had
    been responsible for the press coverage were considered but rejected by
    the respondent in the morning of 12 September, with the decision letter
    being sent to Duncan Lewis.  Again, the respondent took the  view  that
    the submissions did not give rise to a fresh claim.

135. Just after mid-day on 12 September, the flight to Istanbul  closed  its
    doors, with SB on board.

136. Jamie Bell of Duncan Lewis and Mr  Knight  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
    Duncan Lewis, prepared a judicial review challenge in respect  of  SB's
    removal.  This was based on the assertion that section 77 of  the  2002
    Act  prohibited  SB's  removal  whilst  an  asylum  claim   was   under
    consideration; paragraph 353A had similar effect; and that  Chapter  60
    stated that SB's removal window had, in fact, ended because he had made
    an asylum claim that had been certified by the respondent.

137. As the Court of Appeal observed at paragraph 25 of  its  judgment,  the
    assertion regarding certification and the effect on the removal  window
    was untrue.  SB's Article  8  claim  had  not  been  certified  by  the
    respondent.  Rather, it had been rejected by the First-tier Tribunal on
    appeal.   The  grounds  of  claim  suggested  that  the  FtT  had  only
    considered SB's case by reference to Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR  and
    the Refugee Convention.

138. As a result, Morris J,  who  granted  an  interim  injunction  "out-of-
    hours" by reference to these grounds, did so as a result of a  mistaken
    representation on the part of those acting for SB.

139. Paragraphs 54 to 58 of the judgment needs to be set out in full:-

         "54. The making of last minute representations to the Secretary  of
             State, which are claimed to amount  to  a  "fresh  claim"  for
             asylum or leave to remain for the purposes of para. 353 of the
             Immigration  Rules,  and  the  making  in   parallel   of   an
             application for urgent interim relief to prevent  the  removal
             of   an   immigrant    pending    consideration    of    those
             representations, can be highly disruptive of attempts  by  the
             Secretary of State to remove individuals who in truth have  no
             right to be here.  Where a removal which  is  planned  and  in
             progress is stopped  at  the  last  moment,  there  may  be  a
             significant delay before the Secretary of  State  can  set  up
             suitable new arrangements for removal.   Also,  it  is  likely
             that the substantial cost  of  the  aborted  removal  will  be
             wasted.


         55.  The courts  have  had  experience  of  some  applications  for
             interim relief being made by legal advisers where there is  no
             real merit in them, but as an abuse of process to disrupt  the
             removal operations and to buy more time in the  UK  for  their
             clients.  The courts have therefore already  had  occasion  to
             give guidance  emphasising  the  professional  obligations  of
             legal advisers to make  applications  for  interim  relief  to
             prevent removal promptly and with a maximum of notice which is
             feasibly possible to be given to the Secretary of State:  see,
             in particular, R (Madan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department and  the  Hamid  case,  both  referred  to  in  the
             Administrative Court Guide.


         56.  It is unnecessary to  set  out  again  in  this  judgment  the
             guidance which has already been  given  so  clearly  in  those
             cases.  We take this opportunity, however,  to  reiterate  the
             importance of that guidance.  The basic principles are  clear:
             (i) steps to challenge removal should be  taken  as  early  as
             possible, and should be taken promptly after receipt of notice
             of a removal window of the kind which SB received  on  4  July
             2017 in this case; and (ii)  applications  to  the  court  for
             interim relief should be made  with  as  much  notice  to  the
             Secretary of State as is practicably feasible.


         57.   In  the  present  case,  the  Secretary  of  State  makes  no
             suggestion that Duncan Lewis, Mr  Bell  and  Mr  Knight  acted
             deliberately to manipulate the court process to try to  secure
             the non-removal of their client, SB, at the  last  minute  and
             then to secure his return to the UK.  It appears to  us  that,
             having been instructed by SB very late in the day, they  acted
             honestly and in good faith under pressure of time  to  try  to
             secure the non-removal of their client, in circumstances where
             it appeared to them there were good grounds to  seek  to  make
             "fresh  claim"  submissions  pursuant  to  para.  353  of  the
             Immigration Rules, by reason of the new documents and the  sur
             place press  coverage.   Nonetheless,  things  were  not  done
             properly and we find it necessary to make some  criticisms  to
             which  we  will  return.   But  this  case   illustrates   the
             particular difficulties which can arise  when  a  new  set  of
             legal advisers come on the scene at the last minute.  The duty
             of candour is directed in  the  most  part  to  ensuring  that
             matters  unfavourable  to  the  applicant  are  drawn  to  the
             attention of the judge.  There are many late applications  for
             injunctive relief which are  based  on  little  more  than  an
             assertion that something may turn up if the new  advisers  are
             given  time  to  investigate.  Such  applications  should  get
             nowhere.   Yet  there  is  a  strong  imperative   for   those
             instructed late in the  day  to  make  no  representations  or
             factual assertions which do not have a  proper  foundation  in
             the materials available to them.  Gaps in knowledge should not
             be filled by wishful thinking. In almost all such cases  there
             will have  been  extensive  engagement  between  the  putative
             applicant  and  the  immigration  authorities  and  often  the
             independent appellate authorities.  So too in many cases there
             will have been dialogue between the authorities  and  previous
             lawyers.  There will  be  a  large  reservoir  of  information
             available. Without access to that information it behoves those
             who come on to the scene at the last minute to  take  especial
             care in the factual assertions they make.


         58.  SB's position remains opaque. It is  true  that  he  has  been
             subject to the restrictions  inherent  in  being  detained  to
             await removal.  However,  at  no  time  has  he  provided  any
             witness statement to  explain  when  the  new  documents  were
             provided to KRAN and to him, how they  came  to  be  produced,
             when he was aware of the press coverage about his case, why an
             application for interim relief was not  made  immediately  the
             new documents and information about the  press  coverage  were
             available, and  why  he  did  not  provide  the  full  set  of
             immigration  decisions  about  his  case  and  copies  of  his
             judicial review application JR/7131/17 to Duncan Lewis when he
             instructed them in September 2017.  This  is  so  despite  the
             Secretary of State calling for an explanation  from  him.   SB
             has  offered  no  explanation  for  the  delay  in  making  an
             application for interim relief to prevent action  pursuant  to
             the removal notice of 4  July  2017,  after  he  had  the  new
             documents and the press coverage had occurred.  He has offered
             no explanation for failing to brief Duncan Lewis properly  and
             failing to provide them with all the relevant documents in his
             case.  Nor is there any description of his dealings  with  his
             previous solicitors.  The suspicion, at least, is  that  there
             is no good explanation and  that  he  deliberately  sought  to
             instruct Duncan  Lewis  late  in  the  day  and  with  minimal
             information in the hope that he would maximise his chances  of
             securing relief to prevent his removal."

140. The Court of Appeal had this to say about paragraph  353A  (section  77
    of the 2002 Act):-

         "70. The two other grounds for relief relied upon are, first,  that
             section 77 of the 2002 Act and para. 353A of  the  Immigration
             Rules prohibited removal by reason of the representations sent
             by Duncan Lewis to the Secretary of State by email at 11.19 am
             on 12 September and, secondly, the removal window had come  to
             an end by virtue of para. 2.1 of Chapter 60 of the EIG.


         71.  As to the first of these grounds, section 77  and  para.  353A
             impose obligations on the Secretary of State not to remove  an
             individual in certain circumstances.  They are both to be read
             in the public law context as obligations related to  fair  and
             proper administration of the regime of  immigration  controls,
             which depend upon the Secretary of State being given notice of
             an asylum claim at a time and in a manner  which  affords  her
             officials a reasonable opportunity to take  on  board  that  a
             claim for asylum has been made  and  to  appreciate  therefore
             that it is "pending" (section 77); or that further submissions
             amounting to a human rights or protection claim have been made
             that require consideration (para.  353A),  so  as  to  have  a
             viable  opportunity  to  take  steps  to   comply   with   the
             obligations so imposed.   The  obligations  imposed  by  these
             provisions are not in the nature of strict  obligations  which
             apply regardless of whether the Secretary of State has  had  a
             sufficient opportunity to examine a document received  from  a
             person  facing  removal.   It   is   only   following   proper
             consideration that the relevant  official  can  reasonably  be
             expected to appreciate that it constitutes what can fairly  be
             described as a claim for asylum; or can fairly be described as
             "further submissions" to assert a human rights  or  protection
             claim.  The nature of the task necessarily involves  the  need
             to compare the new submissions  with  what  has  gone  before.
             There needs to be time having done so, for  the  Secretary  of
             State of her own motion to stop a removal  which  was  in  the
             process  of  being  carried  out  in  the   event   that   the
             representations are accepted as satisfying criteria  necessary
             to halt removal.


         72.   It is not uncommon for voluminous late representations to  be
             emailed to the Secretary of State very shortly before  removal
             is scheduled to occur. It should not be thought that they will
             operate as an automatic bar on removal.


         73.  For present purposes,  it  is  not  necessary  to  examine  in
             further detail what might be the limits to the obligations  in
             section 77 and para. 353A, because in our  view  it  is  clear
             that  the   sending   by   Duncan   Lewis   of   the   written
             representations timed at 11.19 am on 12 September 2017 did not
             afford the Secretary of State a viable opportunity  to  digest
             what was in that communication and then to put in  motion  the
             necessary steps to abort SB's removal then in progress,  on  a
             flight scheduled to depart at 11.30 and in fact  departing  at
             12.04."

141. The Court of Appeal set aside the injunctive relief granted  to  SB  by
    the High Court.

142. SB (Afghanistan) refers to the  Administrative  Court  Judicial  Review
    Guide 2017 in connection with the "Hamid"  jurisdiction.  The  relevant
    passages of the Guide are as follows:

         "16.5    Abuse of the Procedures for Urgent Consideration

                16.5.1 Where an application for urgent consideration  or  an
                      out of hours  application  is  made  which  does  not
                      comply  with  this  Guide  and/or  it  is  manifestly
                      inappropriate, the Court  may  make  a  wasted  costs
                      order  or  some  other  adverse  costs   order   (see
                      paragraphs   23.1   and   23.13   of    this    Guide
                      respectively).

                16.5.2 In R. (Hamid) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                      Department [2012] EWHC 3070  (Admin)  (see  paragraph
                      16.1.4  above)  the  Court  held  that  where  urgent
                      applications are made improperly the Court may summon
                      the legal representative to Court to explain  his  or
                      her actions and would consider referring that person,
                      or their supervising partner (if  different)  to  the
                      relevant regulator.  Examples (but not an  exhaustive
                      list) of applications which  have  been  held  to  be
                      inappropriate under the Hamid rule are:

                      16.5.2.1 The claimant's solicitor had delayed  making
                             the urgent application until  the  last  minute
                             and had not disclosed the  full  facts  of  the
                             case in an attempt to use the urgent process to
                             prevent his client's removal from the UK.

                      16.5.2.2 The claimant's  solicitor  requested  urgent
                             interim relief against a decision that had been
                             made three years earlier.

                      16.5.2.3 A practitioner advanced arguments  that  his
                             client was suicidal  and  psychotic  when  they
                             knew or ought to have known were  false  and/or
                             inconsistent with their own medical evidence.

                      16.5.2.4 A practitioner lodged  an  application  with
                             grounds that were opaque and brief  and  failed
                             to set out any of  the  claimant's  history  of
                             criminality.

                16.5.3 Practitioners should be  aware  that  the  Court  can
                      identify those who are responsible  for  abusing  the
                      Court's processes by making adverse costs orders (see
                      paragraph 23.1 of this Guide) or  by  activating  the
                      Hamid procedure outlined  above  which  may  lead  to
                      those  practitioners  being  disciplined   by   their
                      Regulator. If the Hamid procedure  is  activated  any
                      orders made  in  relation  to  the  referral  may  be
                      published and placed in the  public  domain  and  any
                      such  publication  will   include   the   explanation
                      provided  by  the  legal  representative.  Also   see
                      paragraph 12.10 of this Guide on abuse of the Court's
                      process. "

143. In R (Sathivel) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    EWHC 913 (Admin) a Divisional Court (Sharp LJ, Green J)  gave  judgment
    in related cases arising from the "Hamid" jurisdiction.  The  following
    paragraphs are of particular relevance for our purposes:-

         "6.  In 2018 the present Lord Chief Justice has  expressed  concern
             at the lack of the exercise of the duty of candour on the part
             of practitioners in the context of  last  moment  applications
             for injunctions to restrain removals.  He also reiterated  the
             importance of  the  Hamid  jurisdiction.  See  paragraph  [20]
             below.

         7.   There are of course many highly professional practitioners  in
             this complex and difficult field  who  successfully  reconcile
             the need to act in their client's interests with their  duties
             to the Court.  However, there is also a substantial cohort  of
             lawyers who consider that litigation is a tactic  or  strategy
             that can be used to delay and deter removal proceedings.

         8.   We describe below some of the situations that  too  frequently
             confront the courts and tribunals.

         9.   First, most of the practitioners in  this  area  do  not  have
             legal aid franchises.  The clients are privately  funded,  and
             they  are  frequently  vulnerable  and  desperate.  We  sought
             information as to the level of fees demanded by the solicitors
             in the cases before us.  The sums vary;  but  they  invariably
             run into multiples of thousands of pounds.  To raise funds  to
             pay for legal assistance clients must often seek support  from
             family and friends.  The solicitors  will  not  generally  act
             unless they are placed  in  funds  beforehand.   Some  lawyers
             promise the highest quality of representation and we  have  no
             doubt that there are solicitors and other representatives  who
             do provide excellent services.  But there are other solicitors
             who having promised  high  quality  specialist  services  then
             instruct paralegals and  unqualified  persons  to  draft  what
             would  ordinarily  be  viewed  as  complex   and   specialised
             pleadings and court documents  (often  prepared  by  counsel).
             The cases that are then advanced  may  be  wholly  lacking  in
             merit. Judges are presented with  lengthy  pleadings  much  of
             which is irrelevant and has been cut and paste  from  template
             documents, often available on the internet.

         10.  Second, the incentive  of  some  practitioners  in  initiating
             court  or  tribunal  proceedings  is  simply  to   delay   the
             immigration  process.   They  do  this  by  exhausting   every
             judicial or tribunal opportunity, irrespective of  the  merits
             of the  case.  Buying  time  is  valuable.   Even  a  hopeless
             application or appeal takes time to determine and whilst  that
             is ongoing there is the possibility of lodging  repeat  "fresh
             material" applications to the  Home  Office  with  a  view  to
             generating new Home Office decisions (rejecting the contention
             that there is fresh material relevant to the applicants  case)
             which then generates even more (unmeritorious)  appeals  which
             take up even more time to resolve and allowing (yet again) yet
             more  fresh  material  applications,  and  so   on.    It   is
             commonplace for such cases to continue for many years, and  in
             extreme cases decades.   And the longer the case goes  on  the
             more scope there is for an applicant to begin  to  develop  an
             Article 8 "private life" claim, for example by getting married
             (sometimes through a sham process) or having (or  claiming  to
             have) children. Where an applicant is detained pending removal
             the longer that detention persists (which may be a consequence
             of  the  applications  and  appeals  being  pursued   on   the
             individual's behalf) the greater the scope  for  the  detained
             person to then argue on  well-known  "Hardial  Singh"  grounds
             that it is no longer lawful to maintain detention.  If a  bail
             application succeeds the applicant might  abscond.   Sometimes
             the applicant re-appears years later,  and  the  process  then
             starts again.

         11.  Third, when the Home Office sets a date and  arrangements  for
             removal a different dynamic sets in.  Last minute applications
             to restrain removal are made to the High Court, and  often  to
             the "out of hours" duty Judge literally hours or even  minutes
             before the removal flight departs the runway.  Frequently  the
             day before, or even the day of, removal lawyers  serve  a  new
             "fresh material" claim upon the Home  Office  and  then  argue
             before  the  duty  Judge  that  removal  is  unlawful  pending
             determination by the  Home  Office  of  that  new  application
             and/or an appeal therefrom.  It is  of  the  nature  of  these
             cases that the applicant may  have  been  engaged  in  a  Home
             Office and/or appeal process for some years. There is often  a
             lengthy history.  However, what happens is that  at  the  last
             moment the applicant changes solicitors.  The  new  solicitors
             draft the last-minute application seeking the  restraining  of
             removal and they explain to the  Judge  that  they  have  been
             instructed late on and that they have had no  time  to  obtain
             instructions (the client will be in  detention).   Frequently,
             the new lawyers do not have access to the prior  documentation
             and they have not (because of lack of time they argue)  sought
             or obtained the documentation from previous solicitors or  the
             Operational Support and Certification  Unit  ("OSCU")  of  the
             Home Office. For this reason, arguments advanced to the  Judge
             are based on details provided  by  the  client  who  being  in
             detention can give only the barest of  instructions  over  the
             phone. Judges complain that  all  too  often  the  version  of
             events  provided  to  them  is  materially  inaccurate  and/or
             incomplete.  It is almost unheard of for the Defendant  to  be
             notified of the application or to have  a  chance  to  advance
             submissions, even in writing.

         12.  All of the above scenarios are reflected in  various  ways  in
             the facts of the cases before us. In the midst of all of  this
             it is  crucial  that  the  courts  and  tribunals  retain  the
             integrity of their processes.  It is  unacceptable  that  they
             should be used as part of a  continuing  game  played  between
             applicants and the Home Office.  If the processes of the Court
             and tribunals are abused in this manner then those individuals
             who do, genuinely, have proper cases to advance (and there are
             many) find that they sit in a long queue waiting to be  heard.
             The judges who should be  devoting  their  time  to  resolving
             genuine and important disputes  are  distracted  dealing  with
             abusive cases. Justice is delayed and can be denied."




G. Discussion

   a) The primary position of the applicants and the PLP

144. Anufrijeva concerned the issue of whether income  support  should  have
    been paid to the appellant between  particular  dates.   That  depended
    upon whether, before the first of those dates, she had ceased to be  an
    asylum seeker.  That in turn involved the question whether on or before
    the earlier date her  claim  for  asylum  had  been  "recorded  by  the
    Secretary of State as having been determined (other  than  on  appeal)"
    within the meaning of particular regulations.  Lord  Steyn,  with  whom
    the majority of the House agreed, explained that the issue crystallised
    into how the relevant regulations should  be  interpreted  and  whether
    "Parliament intended to authorise the withdrawing of income support  by
    an internal note on a departmental file with legal effect from  a  date
    before notification of the decision" (paragraph 21).

145. At paragraph 25, Lord Steyn endorsed the observation of  the  Court  of
    Appeal, concerning the interpretation of the relevant regulation:-

         "Once an asylum seeker knows that her application has been refused,
         and that she is not to be given leave to enter the country  on  any
         other basis, and has the  reasons  for  those  decisions,  she  can
         reasonably be expected to make  a  choice:  either  to  accept  the
         decision and leave or to stay and fight  but  without  recourse  to
         state benefits.  But she cannot reasonably be expected to make that
         choice before she knows of the decisions and the reasons for  them.
         There is nothing in the material before us to suggest  that  it  is
         consistent with the declared purpose of the  regulation  to  expect
         her to do so."

146. This led Lord Steyn to hold as follows:-

         "26. The  arguments  for  the  Home  Secretary  ignore  fundamental
             principles of our law. Notice of a decision is required before
             it can have the character of a determination with legal effect
             because the individual concerned must  be  in  a  position  to
             challenge the decision in the courts if he or she wishes to do
             so.   This  is  not  a  technical  rule.   It  is  simply   an
             application of the right of  access  to  justice.  That  is  a
             fundamental and constitutional principle of our  legal  system
             ..."

147. The applicants and the PLP  contend  that  Anufrijeva  means  that  the
    applicants have a legal right to be notified of the removal  directions
    that must be made pursuant to section 10 and Schedule 2, in  order  for
    actual removal to be effected, and that  notification  of  the  removal
    window cannot constitute such notice.

148. One response that  might  be  made  to  this  submission  is  that  the
    decision to refuse asylum was one that affected the legal status of  Ms
    Anufrijeva. If she had succeeded in her asylum claim, she would,  as  a
    refugee, have had the rights that flow from the Refugee Convention.  In
    accordance with the respondent's policy,  she  would  have  been  given
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

149. The making of a decision under section 10 of the 1999  Act  is  not  of
    the same character. It can be made only where the individual  concerned
    has no leave to enter or remain. The decision does not, in short, alter
    an individual's status, either directly or indirectly.

150. Although Mr Kovats QC did not advance such a response  as  a  means  of
    distinguishing Anufrijeva, it touches on the following broader point. A
    person who receives an adverse decision from  the  respondent  and  who
    either does nothing about  it  or  appeals  it  unsuccessfully  to  the
    Tribunal, can in general be expected to know that he or she lacks leave
    to enter or remain and so needs to depart the United  Kingdom.  If  the
    person has been given a notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act, he or
    she will also have been informed of the  need  to  let  the  respondent
    know, as soon as reasonably practicable, if the person's  circumstances
    subsequently change, so as to give rise to additional grounds for being
    permitted to enter or remain and/or for resisting removal.

151. The legislative scheme does  not,  therefore,  confer  any  expectation
    that such grounds can be withheld until  steps  are  taken  to  remove;
    quite the opposite. This point needs to be kept in mind in  considering
    the operation of the principle of access to justice in the  context  of
    Chapter 60.

152.  Mr Kovats QC's response to Anufrijeva was that  the  circumstances  of
    the present cases and those of Anufrijeva are not  remotely  analogous.
    We agree. In order to be analogous,  the  respondent's  policy  in  the
    present cases would have to involve  putting  the  applicants  onto  an
    aircraft in order to remove them from the United Kingdom,  without  any
    prior notice that the respondent intended  to  remove  them.   That  is
    manifestly not the position.  The form  RED.0001  is,  as  its  heading
    explains, a notice of removal which can take place at any point  during
    the window.  A person who is  given  a  RED.0001  is,  accordingly,  in
    nothing like the position of the appellant in Anufrijeva.  That case is
    not authority for the proposition  that  notice  of  an  administrative
    decision has  to  be  made  in  a  particular  way;  or  in  particular
    circumstances, regardless of the nature of the decision.

153. In oral submissions, the applicants and  the  PLP  said  that,  if  one
    compares the present version of section 10 of the 1999  Act  with  that
    which existed prior to its replacement by the Immigration Act 2014, one
    sees that, for our purposes, nothing very much has  changed.   In  both
    the old and new versions of section 10(1), a power of removal is  given
    by the legislature.

154. In fact, that is not quite right.  The old section 10(1) provided  that
    "A person who is not a British citizen may be removed from  the  United
    Kingdom,  in  accordance  with  directions  given  by  an   immigration
    officer", if certain  circumstances  existed.   By  contrast,  the  new
    section 10(1) provides an  entirely  free-standing  power  of  removal,
    under the authority  of  the  Secretary  of  State  or  an  immigration
    officer, in respect of a person who requires leave to enter  or  remain
    but does not have it.  It is not until one reaches  subsection  (7)  of
    the section, in its new incarnation, that one  sees  the  Secretary  of
    State or an immigration officer being given the power to  make  removal
    directions "for the purposes of removing a person ... under  subsection
    (1) ...".

155. That said, we are doubtful  whether  anything  of  substance  turns  on
    these differences and we accordingly agree with the applicants and  the
    PLP that the respondent cannot derive  any  material  support  for  his
    removal window policy from the change in the  wording  of  section  10.
    Indeed, Mr Kovats QC did not seek to argue to the contrary.

156. The real point at  issue  is  whether  the  respondent  can  operate  a
    removal window policy, whereby a person is informed of  a  decision  to
    remove, to take place during a specified timeframe.  We have held  that
    Anufrijeva does not prevent this.  We must now look at the other  cases
    relied upon by the applicants and the PLP.

157. UNISON concerned the statutory instrument  which  imposed  requirements
    to pay significant fees in order to bring  and  conduct  claims  before
    Employment Tribunals and the Employment Appeal Tribunal.   Having  held
    that the "constitutional right of access to the courts was inherent  in
    the rule of law" (paragraph 66) and that "the value to society  of  the
    right of access to the courts is not confined to  cases  in  which  the
    courts decide questions of  general  importance"  (paragraph  71),  the
    Supreme Court noted "many examples ... of judicial recognition  of  the
    constitutional right of unimpeded access to the courts" (paragraph 76),
    before holding as follows:-

         "87. The Lord Chancellor cannot ... lawfully impose  whatever  fees
             he chooses ... .  It follows from the authorities  cited  that
             the Fees Order will be ultra vires if there  is  a  real  risk
             that persons will effectively be prevented from having  access
             to justice.  That will be so because section 42  of  the  2007
             Act contains no words authorising the prevention of access  to
             the relevant tribunals. That is indeed accepted  by  the  Lord
             Chancellor.

         88.   But  a  situation  in  which  some  persons  are  effectively
             prevented from having  access  to  justice  is  not  the  only
             situation in which the Fees Order might be regarded  as  ultra
             vires. As appears from such cases  as  Leech  and  Daly,  even
             where primary legislation  authorises  the  imposition  of  an
             intrusion on the right of access to justice, it is presumed to
             be subject to an implied limitation.  As it was  put  by  Lord
             Bingham in Daly, the degree of intrusion must not  be  greater
             than is justified by  the  objectives  which  the  measure  is
             intended to serve.

         89.  There is an analogy  between  the  latter  principle  and  the
             principle of proportionality, as developed in the case law  of
             the European Court of Human Rights.  These proceedings are not
             based on the Human Rights Act 1998, since the appellant is not
             a "victim" within the meaning of section  7(1)  of  that  Act.
             Nevertheless, the case law of the Strasbourg court  concerning
             the right of access to justice is relevant to the  development
             of the common law.  It will be considered in  the  context  of
             the case based on EU law, on which it also has a bearing.   To
             anticipate that discussion, however,  it  is  clear  that  the
             ability of litigants to pay a fee is not determinative of  its
             proportionality  under  the   Convention.    That   conclusion
             supports the view, already arrived at by the common law,  that
             even an interference with access to the courts  which  is  not
             insurmountable will be unlawful unless it can be justified  as
             reasonably necessary to meet a legitimate objective."

158. At paragraph 91, the Supreme Court  held  that  on  the  "evidence  now
    before the court, considered realistically and as a whole" the fees  in
    question had not been set at a level that  everyone  could  afford,  in
    order to access the tribunals, taking into account the availability  of
    full or partial remission.   "The  question  whether  fees  effectively
    prevent access to justice must  be  decided  according  to  the  likely
    impact of the fees on behaviour in the real world" (paragraph 93).

159. Looking at the matter in EU  terms,  a  reference  to  the  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights of the  European  Union,  the  Court  observed  "the
    emphasis placed by the Strasbourg Court on  the  protection  of  rights
    which are not theoretical and illusory, but  practical  and  effective.
    This is consistent with the recognition in domestic law that the impact
    of restrictions must be considered in the real world" (paragraph  109).



160. Before us, there was  considerable  dispute,  in  the  course  of  oral
    submissions, as to whether any interference with access to justice  had
    to be specifically authorised by primary legislation, in order  for  it
    to be lawful, or whether there is scope for saying  that  interferences
    which are not insurmountable may be lawful, without express wording, if
    these can be "justified as reasonably necessary to  meet  a  legitimate
    objective", in the words of paragraph 89 of  Lord  Reed's  judgment  in
    UNISON.   In  this  regard,  Ms  Kilroy  seized  upon  Mr  Kovats  QC's
    acceptance in the course  of  his  oral  submissions  that  Chapter  60
    constitutes a restriction of access to justice,  albeit  that  he  said
    this was proportionate.

161. It is, in our view, impossible to extrapolate from UNISON  a  universal
    proposition of what, precisely, access to justice  entails,  regardless
    of the particular circumstances.  Not only is there  no  suggestion  in
    the judgments that the Supreme Court embarked  upon  such  a  task;  it
    would have been doomed to failure.  This is  because  the  question  of
    what access to  justice  entails  depends  upon  the  circumstances  in
    question.

162. It is an  integral  feature  of  a  power  of  removal,  such  as  that
    conferred by section 10 of the 1999 Act (and the deportation powers  in
    the 1971 Act) that, if a person is to be removed under the  power,  the
    point must come when his or  her  ability  to  access  the  courts  and
    tribunals of the United Kingdom, in order to prevent the removal,  will
    disappear; and that, by the same token, during the period leading up to
    removal, that person's ability to access the courts and tribunals  will
    be progressively diminished.  It is quite manifest, in our  view,  that
    section 10 authorises such a state of affairs.  If it did not, then the
    power of removal would effectively become meaningless.

163. The correct approach, therefore, is to view  the  respondent's  policy,
    as contained in  Chapter  60,  as  an  attempt  by  the  respondent  to
    articulate an appropriate relationship between access  to  justice  and
    what are the inevitable consequences of the power to  remove  a  person
    from the United Kingdom.

164. Seen in this  light,  the  power  of  removal  is,  in  some  respects,
    analogous to the powers contained in the rule-making legislation of the
    courts and tribunals to impose time limits for bringing and progressing
    legal proceedings.  All such time limits are, obviously, a  restriction
    on access to courts and tribunals.  The question is whether  such  time
    limits (and  the  associated  relief  from  sanctions)  are  reasonably
    necessary, in the particular circumstances of each type of case.

165. For this reason,  we  reject  the  submission  that  UNISON  dooms  the
    respondent's case to failure.  We must, therefore, turn to the  Medical
    Justice cases.  We have referred to this litigation above.

166. We reject the submission of the applicants and the PLP that  the  Upper
    Tribunal is bound by the principle of stare decisis to  find  that  the
    removal window policy of the respondent is unlawful because it  enables
    removal directions to be given to a  person  on  less  than  72  hours'
    notice. Medical Justice held that, on the evidence before Silber J, the
    exceptions to the 72 hours' notice policy were unlawful.  The  position
    now is that the notification process, as set out in RED.0001,  provides
    at least 72 hours' notice of an intended  removal  during  the  removal
    window period.  Neither Silber J nor the Court of Appeal  was  required
    to consider the removal window  process  set  out  in  Chapter  60  and
    RED.0001, for the simple reason that it did not exist.   This  Tribunal
    is not, accordingly, bound in the way which the applicants and the  PLP
    contend.

167. The true effect of form RED.0001 is, we find,  properly  identified  in
    the first statement  of  Mr  Toufique  Hossain  of  Duncan  Lewis.   At
    paragraph 14(i), Mr Hossain describes the difficulties  that  his  firm
    has encountered in persuading the Administrative Court Office  to  seal
    claim forms on the same  day  where  a  notice  of  removal  window  is
    provided.  According to Mr Hossain, the clerks at  Duncan  Lewis  "have
    reported that the  problem  arises  because  the  court  staff  do  not
    appreciate that the notice of removal  window  is  a  form  of  removal
    directions and therefore such applications are  urgent".   As  will  be
    evident,  we  regard  that  description  as  entirely  accurate:   form
    RED.0001 is a notice of removal.

168. At paragraph 14(iv) of the same statement, Mr Hossain notes  that  many
    legal representatives "are by now aware  that  as  the  client  can  be
    removed from the date the window opens, that date should effectively be
    treated as the date of removal".  Again, that is exactly  how  everyone
    concerned should view the position.




 b) 72 hours' notice period preceding the opening of the removal window

169. The applicants and the PLP submit that Silber J in Medical Justice  did
    not make a finding that the 72 hour notice period in respect of removal
    directions was lawful; merely, that nothing in his judgment  should  be
    taken to suggest that it was not.  By the same token, they  say,  there
    is nothing in the judgment of the Court of Appeal that provides support
    for the respondent on this issue.

170. We have seen from the evidence of Ms  Dolby  how  the  72  hour  notice
    period came about.  Its pedigree is  by  now  a  long  one,  judged  by
    reference to the  dynamic  nature  of  immigration  law  and  practice.
    Whilst we agree with the  applicants  and  the  PLP  that  the  Medical
    Justice cases do not contain any actual approbation  of  the  72  hours
    policy, the fact that it was  not  challenged  in  that  litigation  or
    subsequently is, nevertheless, of some relevance.

171. The applicants and the PLP relied heavily upon the  changed  legal  aid
    landscape, compared with 2010, in order to advance the argument that 72
    hours is not, now, adequate.   As  we  have  seen  from  the  evidence,
    instances are given where  difficulties  have  been  encountered  in  a
    detainee being able to access legal advice, whether through  a  surgery
    in the IDC in which he or she is held, or otherwise.  The questionnaire
    answers  exhibited  to  Toufique  Hossain's  second  statement  provide
    additional support in this regard.  The applicants  and  the  PLP  also
    relied upon the new evidence, including that of the JCHR report.

172. We have considered all  the  evidence  carefully.   We  find  that  the
    respondent has demonstrated that the 72 hour  period,  as  set  out  in
    Chapter 60, and which is subject to the  exceptions  contained  therein
    for provision of additional time in certain circumstances,  constitutes
    a reasonable and proportionate response to the need to give  effect  to
    access to justice in cases of removal from the United Kingdom.

173. So far as concerns the position regarding legal aid, we agree  with  Mr
    Kovats QC that, to a very significant extent, this matter lies  outside
    the remit  of  the  present  proceedings.   The  reductions  that  have
    occurred in  the  availability  of  legal  aid  do  not  mean  that  an
    individual facing a removal is simply not able to engage a lawyer.

174. As we have seen from the "Hamid" cases and also  from  the  applicants'
    witnesses, many who face removal are, in fact,  able  to  secure  legal
    advice and assistance privately.  The  fact  that  some  of  those  who
    provide such services might  do  so  in  a  professionally  problematic
    manner does not mean that is true of the majority. The right of  access
    to justice does not include a right to see a lawyer who is the best  or
    amongst the best the legal profession has to offer. Still less does  it
    include a right to resist  removal  indefinitely  whilst  a  lawyer  is
    identified who is willing to take on the case, even though it may be an
    extremely weak one. That, however,  seems  to  be  the  implication  of
    Mariah Carey's  and  Sian  Evans'  evidence.  Sheona  York's  statement
    regarding the difficulty of finding a lawyer who will not fall foul  of
    the "Hamid" criticisms ignores the fact  that,  if  there  is  even  an
    arguable case to resist removal, any lawyer should be able to put  that
    case forward. What matters are the underlying merits (or lack of them).

175. There is no  correlation,  we  find,  between  the  criticisms  in  the
    witness evidence regarding the alleged adverse effects  of  a  lack  of
    legal aid, and the suggestion of the applicants that a five day, rather
    than 72 hour, notice period would be acceptable. Some of  the  evidence
    suggests that individuals have spent far longer than five days  seeking
    legally-aided assistance.

176. Mr  Kovats  QC  categorised  much  of  the  evidence  advanced  by  the
    applicants and the PLP as anecdotal.  The fact that this is so  is  not
    necessarily to be taken as a criticism of the witnesses  who  gave  it.
    Rather, it is a function of the  fact  that,  by  the  time  very  many
    individuals find themselves in receipt  of  form  RED.0001,  they  will
    already have had  legal  representatives  acting  for  them,  but  will
    nevertheless  have  failed  in  their  appeals  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and become "appeal rights exhausted". Many  of  the  witnesses
    encounter the individual only at this point.

177. As is strikingly borne out in the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in
    SB (Afghanistan) and  in  the  judgment  of  the  Divisional  Court  in
    Sathivel,  at  this  point,  individuals  who   have   previously   had
    professional   legal   assistance   frequently   switch   to   a    new
    representative.  The latter will  often  be  unaware  of  the  detailed
    immigration  history  of  the  individual   in   question,   including,
    importantly, the individual's interactions with courts  and  tribunals.
    That, however, is not in itself a good reason for extending the 72 hour
    period, across the board.

178. Much of the applicants' evidence suffers from this difficulty. It  pays
    no or insufficient regard to whether the individual  has  had  a  legal
    adviser in the past; if so,  when;  and  whether  there  has  been  any
    undisturbed judicial pronouncement about issues that the individual  is
    seeking to rely upon in order to defeat removal.

179. Nicola Burgess seems to propose  that  the  making  of  submissions  in
    terms of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules should have the  effect
    of closing the removal window. That, however, would render the policy a
    dead letter. As is  evident  from  what  we  have  said  regarding  the
    narrowing of access to lawyers, courts and tribunals as  removal  draws
    near, the respondent must be able, in certain circumstances, to  remove
    a person immediately after a decision is made on such  submissions  or,
    in certain cases, before very belated submissions are even  considered:
    see SB (Afghanistan).

180. Thakur Rakesh Singh's case studies do not demonstrate a need to  extend
    the period of 72 hours. As is plain from the  judgment  of  the  Deputy
    Judge in AT's case, there was a "straight conflict of fact with  regard
    to the issue of the removal and whether sufficient notice was given. It
    is not a conflict I am in a position to resolve"  (paragraph  95).  For
    the purposes of  her  judgment,  the  Deputy  Judge  found  it  neither
    necessary nor appropriate to determine the issue (paragraph 96). In the
    case of A, William Davis J found that, although he could understand why
    the respondent has the policy she does, it was at  least  arguable  she
    had failed to apply it properly in A's case, given that  A's  condition
    was such that he should not have been given a removal  window  decision
    (paragraphs 24 to 26). In the case of Headley,  which  was  settled  by
    consent, there was an unusual factual issue as to whether the  claimant
    had indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

181. The applicants and the PLP contend that all their evidence needs to  do
    is disclose some reliable instances where the relevant time limits have
    prevented an individual's access to a lawyer. Once this is done,  there
    will be a  real  risk  that  access  to  justice  is  being  unlawfully
    interfered with by Chapter 60. They rely  in  this  regard  on  Medical
    Justice and UNISON.

182. We do not accept this  submission.  If  it  were  correct,  then  rules
    prescribing time limits would be at risk if  it  could  be  shown  that
    relief from sanction was wrongly withheld in a particular case.  Unlike
    Medical Justice, in the present  cases  Mr  Kovats  QC  challenged  the
    witness evidence, albeit in the  broad  sense  of  categorising  it  as
    anecdotal. Having conducted our own analysis, we  have  concluded  that
    the evidence (including the responses to the questionnaire),  taken  in
    the round, does not show that the provisions in  Chapter  60  regarding
    time limits are operating in such a way as to  amount  to  an  unlawful
    restriction on access to justice.

183.  We  agree  with  Mr  Kovats  QC  that  neither  FB's  nor  NR's   case
    demonstrates that they were denied access to justice  by  reference  to
    operation of Chapter 60.  FB had lost  an  appeal  against  refusal  of
    international protection, as long ago as February 2011, following which
    he was removed to Afghanistan.  In October 2017, however,  he  appeared
    at Wembley Police Station.  On 5 October 2017 he was given more than 72
    hours' notice of the start of the removal window.  FB  had  attended  a
    legal surgery at Campsfield House  on  3  October.   We  are  not  told
    whether he showed the solicitor at the surgery the notices  with  which
    he had been served.  We agree with the respondent that  the  length  of
    time it took FB to put forward a fresh protection  claim  was,  in  the
    circumstances, excessive.

184. NR claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom in 2007 and  had  been
    through the Tribunal appeal process no fewer than three  times,  before
    he made further representations to the respondent.  By the time he  was
    detained for removal in January 2017 (after which he submitted yet more
    representations), NR had had the benefit of  legal  assistance  from  a
    number of different sets of representatives.  His apparent decision, in
    2015, to move from Duncan Lewis to another firm has not been explained.
     NR subsequently blamed that other firm for shoddy work on his  behalf.
    Such  an  allegation  is,  however,  easily  and  often  made  in  this
    jurisdiction and there is no evidence that the  firm  in  question  has
    been given an opportunity to respond.  The  same  is  true  of  another
    firm, about which NR also complains.  Overall, we find that NR has  not
    been denied access to justice, by reference to the operation of Chapter
    60.

185.  In  the  applicants'  evidence,  the  suggestion  is  made   that   SB
    (Afghanistan) is supportive of their case, in  that,  since  the  tight
    timescales are imposed on  representatives  by  the  respondent,  those
    representatives should not be criticised for what happens or  fails  to
    happen at the last minute.

186. We can find no merit in this suggestion. As  we  have  said,  with  any
    power of removal, there will inevitably come a time when an  individual
    is at the point of removal. Short of having a rule that  precludes  any
    submission being made by or on behalf of the individual at  that  point
    (which would be problematic, not least because  of  section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998), it must in theory be possible to assert, up  to
    the last minute, that removal should not go ahead. But  that  does  not
    mean the individual is entitled,  at  that  point,  to  have  a  lawyer
    advance any case the individual sees fit to put; nor  does  it  mean  a
    lawyer will avoid judicial or professional censure for advancing a case
    that is hopeless and/or in breach of the duty of candour.

187. On a related matter, the suggestion by the applicants and the PLP  that
    all these issues can be dealt with by means of professional  regulation
    ignores the fact that the respondent's policy must deal with those  who
    do not, for whatever reason, use a lawyer at this stage.

188. We reject the challenge brought to the so  called  "same  day  removal"
    policy, otherwise known as Operation Perceptor.  We are satisfied  from
    the evidence that this policy is, in fact, a justifiable aspect of  the
    overall  removal  window  regime.   The  safeguards  described  in  the
    respondent's evidence, including giving  the  individual  access  to  a
    telephone to contact legal  representatives,  etc  are,  in  our  view,
    reasonable and proportionate. We note  from  the  applicants'  evidence
    that there may have been some failures in this regard. Again,  however,
    the evidence does not begin to show a real risk to access to justice.



 c) Is Chapter 60 nevertheless deficient in any respect?

189. The fact that we have found in favour of the respondent in  respect  of
    (a) and (b) above does not dispose of the  challenges  brought  by  the
    applicants and the PLP.  We therefore turn to what Ms Naik  QC  and  Ms
    Kilroy had to say about specific aspects  of  the  current  version  of
    Chapter 60. In doing so, we have also had regard,  once  more,  to  the
    witness and report evidence.

190. As we have seen, Mr Hossain makes  reference  to  misunderstandings  on
    the  part  of  the  Administrative  Court  Office   and   other   legal
    representatives, concerning the nature and significance of the  opening
    of a removal window.  We do not consider that these matters demonstrate
    any legal deficiency in Chapter 60.  Rather, they are  to  be  seen  as
    demonstrating a likely need for relevant training in this area.

191. By the same token, the incidences given in the evidence of mistakes  on
    the part of the respondent's caseworkers in the operation of Chapter 60
    come nowhere near demonstrating that the system is  materially  flawed.
    Few if any systems work perfectly at all times and there is a dearth of
    evidence to show systematic failures are occurring. Thus, for  example,
    William Davis J, in holding that A should not have been given a  notice
    of removal window, given the  state  of  his  mental  health,  did  not
    question the underlying policy; what concerned him was the  failure  to
    apply it properly.

192. Ms Dolby's evidence explains the public benefits of the removal  window
    policy. The fact that using a removal window, rather than relying  upon
    removal directions, requires there to be certain  exceptions  does  not
    mean the policy is thereby flawed to the point of unlawfulness.

193. Criticism is made of the section headed "Consideration of  deferral  of
    notice period" on the ground  that  the  respondent's  caseworkers  are
    given what is said to be inappropriate discretion in a number of areas.



194. First, in the beginning of the section, the caseworker has to  consider
    each case for deferral on its individual merits by reference to whether
    the person concerned has had a reasonable opportunity to  access  legal
    advice and recourse to the courts.

195. A caseworker is also given the function of deciding whether  to  "defer
    removal"  on  the  basis  that  the  individual   has   changed   legal
    representative.  Factors are set out,  weighing  for  and  against  the
    exercise of discretion in the individual's favour in this matter.

196. On the  issue  of  access  to  legal  advice  in  detained  cases,  the
    caseworker  is,  again,  required  to  exercise   discretion,   on   an
    individualised basis, by reference to various matters, such as  whether
    the request for legal  advice  was  made  at  the  earliest  reasonable
    opportunity.

197.  Finally,  regarding  documentation  it  is  said  to  be  in   general
    reasonable  to  provide  all  relevant  documents  to   representatives
    although it is reasonably to be expected that, unless there has been  a
    change  of  representative,  documents  previously   provided   to   an
    individual and/or their representative should have been retained.  This
    means that the caseworker may "reasonably request representatives to be
    specific in their request".  A request  to  release  all  case  papers,
    whatever their relevance, is said not to be reasonable  and  should  be
    challenged.

198. There  is,  we  find,  nothing  unlawful  in  the  existence  of  these
    discretionary functions.  The existence and history  of  paragraph  353
    and 353A constitute a good illustration of the way in which, as removal
    draws near, the respondent's officers will be  taking  decisions  which
    there will (quite lawfully) be  little  or  no  time  to  challenge  or
    otherwise question, before removal takes place.  As we have said,  that
    is an essential element of the removal power.

199.  It is also noteworthy that similar discretionary decisions fall to  be
    made  in  the  part  of  Chapter  60  entitled  "When  judicial  review
    proceedings  will  not  suspend  removal".  This  part  has  not   been
    challenged by  the  applicants  or  the  PLP.  Here,  caseworkers  must
    determine whether a previous judicial review or statutory  appeal  "has
    been concluded on the same  or  similar  issues";  whether  a  previous
    judicial review or statutory appeal has been  concluded  "on  the  same
    evidence" even though the legal basis of the  challenge  is  "different
    from that previously brought"; and whether the current judicial  review
    raises issues that "could reasonably have been  raised  at  a  previous
    judicial review or statutory appeal".

200. Given the  point  in  the  process  that  the  decisions  described  in
    paragraphs 189 to 192 must be taken, they plainly need to be dealt with
    by caseworkers who are in  a  position  to  know  about  both  (a)  the
    individual's immigration  history,  including  judicial  decisions  and
    previous interactions with lawyers; and (b)  the  individual's  present
    circumstances. The nature of the power of removal is such that, at this
    point, rapid decisions may  need  to  be  made.  The  fact  that  these
    decisions touch upon access to justice issues does not mean they should
    be removed from the relevant caseworkers  or  set  in  terms  that  are
    likely to be difficult to understand or apply.

201. By the same  token,  we  are  not  persuaded  that  there  is  anything
    unlawful in the formulation of the third bullet point under the heading
    "Those not suitable for removal window",  which  relates  to  the  Home
    Office having evidence, beyond a self-declaration,  that  a  person  is
    suffering from a condition listed as a risk factor  in  the  Adults  at
    Risk in Immigration Detention  Policy  or  other  condition  that  will
    result in the person being regarded as an  adult  at  risk  under  that
    policy.   The  applicants'  witness  evidence   complains   that   this
    effectively puts the onus on the individual.   As  regards  individuals
    who are not in detention, that is entirely right. Unless  and  until  a
    caseworker has reasonable cause for concern (which may arise  from  his
    or her own observations of the individual), a  person  who  is  not  in
    detention will need to provide some evidence in this regard.  So far as
    concerns persons in detention, the position is somewhat different.  The
    respondent owes them a significant duty of care which may, depending on
    the facts, require a degree of proactivity on the respondent's part.

202. So far, we have not  accepted  the  challenges  made  to  the  detailed
    provisions of Chapter 60, relating to removal windows. We now  turn  to
    matters on which we agree with the applicants and the PLP.

203. Toufique Hossain, in his statements, criticises  the  terminology  used
    in the section entitled "Consideration of deferral of  notice  period".
    In the first paragraph, reference is made  to  "deferring  the  removal
    window for an additional period".  The second paragraph refers to  each
    "case  for   deferral".    Under   the   heading   "Change   of   legal
    representative" he said that it may be reasonable "to defer removal for
    an additional period".  Under the  heading  "Access  to  legal  advice:
    detained cases", it is said that "the removal window should normally be
    deferred".

204. We find that there is a serious issue with the  terminology  concerning
    deferral.  This goes beyond mere linguistic  quibbles  and  amounts  to
    arbitrariness.  There needs  to  be  precision  as  to  what  is  being
    deferred.  If, as we suspect is the intention, it is  the  commencement
    of the removal window, then that must be made  plain.   We  also  agree
    with the applicants and the PLP  (and  their  witnesses)  that  if  the
    commencement of the removal window is to be  deferred,  the  individual
    (and his or her legal adviser, if there is one) must be given a written
    notice, which must state when the removal window is to open and confirm
    that length of that window (lest there be any  misunderstanding  as  to
    whether the deferral "eats into" that period).  The period  before  the
    window opens is, as we have seen, a crucial one, since it is during  it
    that the individual is expected to seek legal advice,  if  wanted.  The
    period is also important to the High Court and the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    deciding whether a case  is  suitable  for  daytime  or  out  of  hours
    "immediate" consideration.

205. We also agree with the applicants and the PLP that there is a  material
    problem regarding the relationship between  the  information  regarding
    the place of removal, as set out in RED.0001, and what might feature in
    the removal directions issued to  a  carrier  etc  during  the  removal
    window.  Although RED.0001 will specify transit points outside the  EU,
    which are proposed  to  be  used  in  returning  the  individual  to  a
    particular country, the applicants and the PLP rightly point out  that,
    in a case involving removal to a "safe" part of a country to which  the
    individual may otherwise have justified concerns about returning, it is
    not appropriate for the individual only to learn precisely where he  or
    she is to  be  sent  within  that  country,  upon  receipt  of  removal
    directions, of which there will not necessarily be any advance notice.

206. In this regard, the respondent cannot, we find, have it both ways.  If,
    as we have found, the notice of removal window is a  sufficient  notice
    of removal to render it unnecessary, as a general matter, to  give  any
    further advance notice, then the relevant information about  place  and
    route needs to be given in RED.0001. We  are  not  satisfied  that,  as
    matters currently stand, the Chapter 60 policy deals lawfully with this
    issue.

207. The final matter with which we need  to  deal  is  the  length  of  the
    removal window. Paragraph 11 of  Ms  Kilroy's  written  submissions  on
    behalf of the PLP reads as follows:-

         "11. ... the provisions for extension of the removal window for  up
             to four months, and subsequent referral for further 3 - or 4 -
             month period, mean that a person subject to the removal window
             policy may be liable to the same-day,  no-notice  removal  for
             many months,  or  even  years,  with  only  short  periods  of
             immunity from removal for 72 hours/7 days every 3 or 4 months.
              In other words, the Policy envisages that in a period of four
             months and subsequently  for  a  further  three-or  four-month
             period the individual may be exposed to the risk of limited or
             same day removal for 119 days out of 122  days,  and  that  it
             would be possible in a period of a year to be exposed to  same
             day removal for 356 out of 365 days.  This could be  the  case
             even if the individual  last  had  access  to  a  court  years
             earlier,  and  their  circumstances  could  have   drastically
             changed."

208. Professor Katona, Dr Bell and Ms Schleicher all expressed concern  that
    the effects of being subject  to  a  removal  window  may  have  on  an
    individual; particularly someone  with  vulnerabilities.   As  we  have
    seen, the respondent's policy makes  provision  for  excluding  persons
    with vulnerabilities  from  the  removal  window  regime.  Despite  the
    criticism advanced, we find that provision to be a lawful response,  in
    that it provides an effective (albeit not perfect) mechanism for taking
    such cases out of the removal window process.

209. However, paragraph 11  of  Ms  Kilroy's  written  submissions  suggests
    that, as currently framed, Chapter 60  is  little  different  from  the
    entirely open-ended regime from which the respondent retreated in 2015,
    following receipt of a pre-action  protocol  letter  from  the  PLP  on
    behalf of Medical Justice.

210. The other point to note is that, the longer the removal  window  lasts,
    the greater will be the possibility of the  individual's  circumstances
    undergoing a material change, as  regards  his  or  her  Article  8  or
    international protection position.

211. On its face, therefore, paragraph 11 appears  to  identify  a  problem.
    Unfortunately, however, our attention was not drawn to the respondent's
    General Instructions  (Liability  to  administrative  removal  non-EEA:
    Consideration and notification (Version  3.0),  published  on  6  April
    2017. This describes RED.0004 (Fresh) as a form which is served when  a
    new three month removal window is being set and that it "must  only  be
    served where there is a realistic possibility of removal within the new
    period".

212. The same  document  gives  the  following  instruction  to  caseworkers
    regarding Form RED.0004 (Extension) which, as its name implies, is used
    to extend the window by 28 days: "When it  is  known  that  removal  is
    unlikely to take place within 28 days you must not  serve  a  RED.0004,
    instead allow the removal window to lapse.  When it then becomes  known
    that removal is likely within a three month period serve a new RED.0004
    (Fresh)".

213. It also appears from the document that RED.0004 (Fresh)  "must  not  be
    used to keep the window open ad  infinitum,  but  to  extend  it  where
    removal is expected within that period, for instance, where removal  is
    being re-arranged following a delay in receiving a travel document".

214. It is  regrettable  that  the  parties  did  not  draw  the  Tribunal's
    attention  to  these  general  instructions,  since   their   existence
    ameliorates the position described  in  paragraph  11  of  Ms  Kilroy's
    submissions; in particular, the statement that the window should not be
    kept open ad infinitum.

215. In these circumstances, we do not consider that it  is  appropriate  in
    these proceedings to grant any relief concerning the matters raised  in
    paragraph 11.  The Tribunal will, however,  expect  the  respondent  to
    have serious regard to whether a stronger test is necessary  than  that
    of a "realistic possibility of removal", within  the  new  or  extended
    period.

216. We grant permission to bring judicial review  proceedings.  We  do  not
    consider it necessary to quash any of the respondent's  decision-making
    in the case of FB or NR, whose challenges  thereto  are  academic.  The
    applicants succeeded in resisting removal and have obtained  access  to
    justice. We have,  however,  found  that  aspects  of  Chapter  60  are
    unlawful, for the reasons given in paragraphs 204 to 206 above. We will
    hear counsel on the issue of relief and the form of any order.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  applicants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their  families.   This  direction
applies both to the applicants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
                      Signed[pic]       Dated: 31 October 2018






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and
                      Asylum Chamber




Postscript

1) After the draft judgment was provided to the parties, on  a  confidential
basis, the applicants suggested that the procedural history of  the  Chapter
60 policy, as set out in the judgment, should be expanded  in  a  number  of
respects and that the applicants did not, in fact, accept that it  was  only
the latest form of the policy which required to  be  substantively  examined
in the proceedings (see paragraph 6 above).

2) We do not consider that it is appropriate at this point to accede to  the
applicants' suggestion. As the Tribunal's directions of 4 October 2018  made
plain,  the  purposes  of  circulating  the  draft  judgment  were  strictly
limited. Circulation was not intended as an opportunity for the  parties  to
suggest substantive re-writing.

3) Whether the previous version of the policy was unlawful may,  of  course,
be relevant to the issue of costs, as to which we shall hear submissions.

4) The PLP suggested  certain  changes  to  the  Tribunal's  description  of
Chapter 60 (which is, in any event, set out in full  in  the  Annex  to  the
judgment); and the  insertion  of  a  comment  regarding  the  quotation  in
paragraph 122 of the judgment. Again,  these  suggestions  went  beyond  the
purposes of circulating the draft.

5) The PLP also submitted a note regarding  the  fact  that  the  Tribunal's
attention was not drawn to the instructions described in  paragraph  211  of
the judgment. The  Tribunal  entirely  accepts  that  counsel  for  PLP  was
unaware of the instructions.

                                    ANNEX



Immigration returns, enforcement and detention
General Instructions




Judicial reviews and injunctions

Version v15.0


Contents

Contents 2
About this guidance    5
Contacts 5
Publication   5
Changes from last version of this guidance   5
Judicial reviews explained 6
Event types subject to JR  6
Pre-action protocol    6
Quick guide to Judicial Review process  8
Notice of removal 9
Notice of a removal window 9
Those not suitable for removal window   11
Notice of removal directions    11
Limited notice of removal  12
The notice period 12
Normal enforcement cases (administrative removal and deportation)  13
Consideration of deferral of notice period   14
Change of legal representative  14
Access to legal advice: detained cases  15
Access to relevant documentation    15
Deferral of removal    16
Claim form issued with detailed grounds 16
Claim form issued with statement of  reasons  for  non-compliance  with  the
Practice Direction     16
Out-of-hours claims prior to lodging with the court   16
Withdrawing an application for judicial review   17
Cases where the removal window should not be used     17
Removal window used but found to be inappropriate     17
Family cases  17
Third country and Non-suspensive appeal (NSA) cases   18
Special arrangements (including charter flights) 19
Where standard notification may  not  be  required  when  giving  notice  of
removal  20
Exceptions to standard notification of removal   20
Port cases    20
Third country and NSA family cases subject to Ensured Return   20
NSA cases already reviewed by JR or following a failed removal 20
Where a second period of notification is not needed   21
Threat of judicial review  23
Special arrangements (including charter flights) 23
Port cases    23
When judicial review proceedings will not suspend removal 24
The qualifying criteria    24
When JR proceedings will always suspend removal  24
The merits and barrier tests    25
Is the JR bound to fail (the "merits test")? 25
Are the issues raised in the JR a barrier to removal? ("the  barrier  test")
25
Summary of process     26
Family cases  27
Fresh claims and/or further submissions 28
Handling JRs involving simultaneous injunction applications    30
Action when suspending removal  30
Action following a decision not to suspend removal    30
Process map   31
Stayed cases  32
Lead case has been resolved     32
Judicial review challenges other than to removal 33
Removal directions deferred     34
Preparing the judicial review documentation  34
Permission to apply for judicial review granted  36
Expedited process 37
How to refer a case for expedition  37
Permission to apply for judicial review refused  39
Application to the Court of Appeal or Supreme Court   40
Injunctions in removal cases    41
Injunction confirmed   41
Out of hours and urgent injunctions 41
Injunction received, but it proves too late to halt the removal    42
Injunction received, but removal has already taken place  43
Information that must be recorded on file    43
Applications to the European Court of Human Rights    44
Rule 39 indications from the European Court of Human Rights    44
Judicial review in Scotland     45
Judicial review in Northern Ireland 47
Completing the Immigration Factual Summary   48
Immigration Factual Summary: functions  48
Immigration Factual Summary: completion 48
Basic data fields 48
Immigration history    49




About this guidance

This guidance is undergoing detailed review.  This version includes some
additional interim clarification concerning Deferral of removal and the
completion and service of the Immigration Factual Summary.


Contacts

If you have any questions about the guidance and your line manager or
senior caseworker cannot help you or you think that the guidance has
factual errors then email Enforcement Policy.


If you notice any formatting errors in this guidance (broken links,
spelling mistakes and so on) or have any comments about the layout or
navigability of the guidance then you can email the Guidance Rules and
Forms team.


Publication

Below is information on when this version of the guidance was published:


  . version 15.0
  . published for Home Office staff on 21 May 2018

Changes from last version of this guidance

Reformatted to latest format and style standards.

Updated guidance on Consideration of deferral of notice period.



Related content
Contents


Judicial reviews explained

This guidance sets out the Judicial Review process in enforcement cases.
There is also more general guidance in Judicial Review Guidance


Judicial review (JR) is the legal process that allows a person to challenge
the lawfulness of a decision, action or failure to act of a public body
such as a government department.


Immigration removal cases, where there has been an asylum or human rights
claim, should not usually reach the stage of JR until after they have had
access to the appeals system.


Event types subject to JR

Types of event that could be subject to JR are:


  . a failure to act - such as a delay in issuing a document or making a
    decision
  . the setting of removal directions - which usually means that the person
    believes their removal would infringe their rights (e.g. rights under
    the Refugee Convention, European Convention of Human Rights or European
    Community instruments)
  . a refusal to accept that further submissions amount to a fresh claim
  . a decision to certify a claim as clearly unfounded
  . detention

Pre-action protocol

The pre-action protocol sets out the steps that must be taken before
commencing an application for JR.  This procedure normally only applies
where removal directions have not been set or removal is not imminent.  A
template response for a letter sent in an urgent case, where the pre-

action protocol process is not appropriate can be found in section 2 of
Judicial Review Guidance.


In non-urgent cases, a pre-action protocol provides you with an opportunity
to consider these issues and to provide a response in the hope that this
will resolve any concerns and rectify any errors before the need to start
JR proceedings.


Where a claimant believes that a legal error has been made in the
consideration of their case the claimant will be able to make
representations in a standard format to the defendant.  If you receive
these representations, you must fully consider them and decide whether any
action can be taken.


  . if you decide the representations made have merit you must try to
    rectify the problem without the need of the JR process
  . if you decide the representations have no merit, you must use the
    opportunity to fully explain reasons for your decision and to answer
    any queries the claimant has made
  . if you decide that some of the claim has merit but others do not, your
    response must fully cover the reasons for this decision, with a full
    explanation of what you agree with and how you will rectify this and
    why you do not accept other claims o you will have 14 days to respond
    in full to the matters.

Related content
Contents

Quick guide to Judicial Review process

The below flow chart explains the JR process and the relevant timescales
involved. Including the involvement of Government Legal Department (GLD)
formerly known as Treasury Solicitors.  For further written detail on the
JR process please see Judicial Review Guidance .


[pic]


Notice of removal

Notice of removal may be given in three different forms:


  . Notice of a removal window - the person is given notice of a period,
    known as the removal window, during which they may be removed
  . Notice of removal directions - the person is given notice of removal
    directions and thus knows the exact date of departure
  . Limited notice of removal - a more restricted version of the removal
    window form of notification

Only one of the above forms is necessary in each case. In some cases, the
enforcement officer may have discretion as to which of the above forms of
notice is considered suitable, in other cases removal may only be possible
with one form of notice.


Notice of a removal window

Under this form of notice the person is given notice of a removal window
during which removal may proceed without further notice. This form of
notice is suitable for the following persons, subject to exceptions:


  . persons being removed under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum
    Act 1999 as amended by the Immigration Act 2014, the person will be
    given a "Notice of Liability for Removal"
  . persons being deported under sections 3(5) and (6) of the Immigration
    Act 1971 or section
32 UK Borders Act 2007, the person will be given a "Deportation Decision
Letter"


When "Notice of Liability for Removal" or "Deportation Decision Letter" is
given, it starts the notice period. The person may not be removed during
this period.


When the notice period ends, the removal window begins. A person may be
removed during the removal window.


|Notice period or       |Action                                                  |
|removal window         |                                                        |
|When does the notice   |When the notice is given in person, the period begins at|
|period begin?          |the time notice is given.                               |
|                       |When the notice is given by post, the period begins at  |
|                       |00:01h the day after it is received. Unless shown       |
|                       |otherwise, the date of receipt is two working days after|
|                       |the date on which the notice was posted.                |
|                       |The notice may not be given to a person with leave to   |
|                       |enter or remain, or during the period within which an in|
|                       |country appeal or an administrative review may be lodged|
|                       |in time or is pending.                                  |
|When does the notice   |. The notice will specify the length of the notice      |
|                       |period. The                                             |
|Notice period or       |Action                                                  |
|removal window         |                                                        |
|period end?            |minimum length of the notice period must comply with the|
|                       |policy at paragraph 2.4 below.                          |
|When does the removal  |. The removal window begins when the notice period ends.|
|window begin?          |                                                        |
|When does the removal  |The removal window will run for a maximum of three      |
|window end?            |months from the time the "Notice of Liability for       |
|                       |Removal" or                                             |
|                       |"Deportation Decision Letter" is served.                |
|                       |If a removal window has not yet expired, it can be      |
|                       |extended by way of reminder for a further 28 days. This |
|                       |can be done by way of a removal reminder (RED0004       |
|                       |extension) which will also remind the individual of     |
|                       |their obligation to raise any further issues with the   |
|                       |Home Office                                             |
|                       |If the person makes an asylum, human rights or EU free  |
|                       |movement claim, involving issues of substance which have|
|                       |not been previously raised and considered, or a further |
|                       |charged application for leave, the window ends.         |



The "Notice of Liability for Removal" or "Deportation Decision Letter" must
include:


  . the country of return
  . in relation to an asylum claim, details of the part of the country to
    which they will be removed

Where a removal window has expired, or removal will be via a third country
transit point which is not one of the safe countries listed in section 3.2
(Removal via a different route) and which was not notified in the original
notice, a fresh removal window should be notified using form

RED0004 (Fresh) and a new notice period will begin. A proposed third
country transit point (or a range of potential transit points) may be
notified using this form.


The "Notice of Liability for Removal" must be accompanied by the
Immigration Factual Summary (ICD. 2599):

  . This must include a chronology of the case history, including details
    of whether any appeal rights were exercised and past applications for
    JR, see also: Immigration Factual Summary
  . A RED0001 notice or other casework decision of the type outlined in
    Liability to administrative removal (non EEA) - consideration and
    notification

The "Notice of Liability for Removal" or "Deportation Decision Letter" must
be copied to any legal representative where the Home Office has details of
any representative actively involved in the case, or where a person asks
that a specified representative be sent copies.


If someone has been given notice of a removal window, they need not always
be taken into detention overnight before removal.


If someone is detained/ arrested for removal later on the same day but
states that their circumstances have changed or that they wish to access
legal advice, they will not be removed whilst they are seeking legal
advice, or they have representations outstanding. Where representations do
not amount to a fresh protection or human rights claim and have either:


  . already been considered
  . have not previously been considered but would not create a realistic
    prospect of success (in terms of leading to an outcome other than
    removal from the UK)

the individual can proceed to be removed on the same day once we have
considered the outstanding representations.  Where removal is deferred in
accordance with 'Arranging Removal', they will be taken to an IRC if
detention is appropriate (see Detention guidance).

Removal will not automatically be deferred if a claim is made by a third
party who is not an OISC accredited, or otherwise appropriately qualified,
representative or a Member of Parliament.


Those not suitable for removal window

The policy described in this section may not be used to give notice of
removal to:


  . family cases
  . where the person has no leave but has made a protection (asylum or
    humanitarian protections) or human rights claim, or appeal, pending
  . where the Home Office has evidence (beyond a self-declaration) that a
    person is suffering from a condition listed as a risk factor in the
    Adults at risk in immigration detention policy or other condition that
    would result in the person being regarded as an adult at risk under
    that policy

Notice of removal directions

Under this form of notice the person is given notice of removal directions
which will specify the date of departure. This form of notice is suitable
for the removal and deportation of all persons irrespective of the power
under which they are being removed.


In most cases notice will usually be by service of form IS151D (or IS92 in
port cases), with a copy of the removal directions in the case. The notice
period (see: notice period) runs from when notice is served up to the point
of departure.


Persons being removed must be given adequate notice that removal has been
scheduled.  Where the person is detained, notice should ideally be given as
soon as removal directions have been set.  Where the person being removed
is not detained but the removal is to be enforced and removal directions
have been set, they should ideally be given notice as soon as possible
after arrest.  Where removal directions are being served on a person in an
Immigration Removal Centre (IRC), you must ensure that a copy of the
removal directions and all other relevant paperwork is faxed promptly to
the IRC to serve on the individual.  Unless exceptionally agreed with the
Home Office manager at the IRC, the notice of removal will be served on the
person the same day only where it is received by the IRC before 3pm.


When notice is given to a person being removed, it must be copied to their
legal representatives where the Home Office has details of any
representative actively involved in the case, or where a person asks that a
specified representative be sent copies.



Limited notice of removal

Limited notice should not be used where a medical or social work
professional has advised that it may not be appropriate.

Limited notice can be utilised in all cases (subject to the safeguarding
exception detailed above) as an initial return option or as a contingency
where a return using alternative option has failed. It may be of particular
use where non-compliance or disruption by the family has led to a previous
failed return or where there is a reasonable likelihood of future
disruption or future noncompliance.


The exact details of the flight and time of departure may be withheld and
limited notice given using form IS151G. The individual or family should be
informed that they will not be removed during the notice period, and no
later than 21 days from when notice is given. In the absence of a copy of
the removal directions, they should also be told the country to which they
are being removed and the route. This may be notified as a range of
possible routes; for example, that the flight will either be direct, or via
a safe country, or any other named country you are considering as a transit
point. See Family Returns Process for further details regarding the
application of this policy in family cases. Family cases within this
section deals with its application in charter cases and where there are
other special arrangements (where the minimum notice would normally be 5
days).


When notice is given to a person being removed, it must be copied to their
legal representatives where the Home Office has details of any
representative actively involved in the case, or where a person asks that a
specified representative be sent copies.


Notice of removal must also be accompanied by the Immigration Factual
Summary (ICD. 2599).  This must include a chronology of the case history,
including details of whether any appeal rights were exercised and past
applications for JR.


See also: Immigration Factual Summary.

The notice period

Where notice is given of a removal window under this policy the notice
period is 7 calendar days if at the point notice is given the person is not
detained.


Otherwise, subject to certain exceptions described in this guidance (see:
deferral), the notice period must be of the following minimum time periods:



  . normal enforcement cases - minimum 72 hours (including at least two
    working days)
  . third country cases and cases where the decision certified the claim
    (see section 2.4.3) - minimum five working days (unless the case has
    already been reviewed by JR: see NSA cases already reviewed)

Normal enforcement cases (administrative removal and deportation)
Unless an exception applies, there are three rules to consider when
calculating the minimum notice period:


    . a minimum of 72 hours must be given
    . this 72-hour notification period must always include at least two
      working days
    . the last 24 hours must include a working day unless the notice period
      already includes three working days

The below table shows the latest times you can notify a person of their
removal in normal enforcement cases, assuming you want to immediately
remove at the end of the notice period, taking into account the minimum 72
hours notice period and the provisions in terms of working days.  In
summary, the notification times are as follows:


If removing on a Monday:

    . If you wish to remove before 10am on a Monday, notice must be given by
      10am on Wednesday.  This is because the last 24 hours does not include
      a working day so the notice period must be extended to include three
      working days.  Those you intend to remove between 10am and 5pm on a
      Monday will need sufficient time to access the courts on the Thursday
      and Friday of the preceding week so that they can challenge the
      decision to remove them if necessary.  Those due to be removed after
      5pm on a Monday will, however, have sufficient time to access the
      courts on the day of their removal, so removal directions can be set
      as late as 10am (when the courts open) on the Friday prior to removal.



If removing on a Tuesday:

    . Individuals you intend to remove on a Tuesday may also need sufficient
      time to access the courts during the preceding week.  Those due to be
      removed before the courts open on a Tuesday or between 10:00am and
      5:00pm must be given sufficient time on the Friday before the planned
      removal to challenge the decision to remove them if they so wish.
      However, those due to be removed after 5pm on a Tuesday will have
      sufficient time to access the courts on the day of, and the day
      before, their removal, so you can serve removal directions as late as
      the same time on the preceding Saturday (72 hours before removal).

If removing on a Wednesday, Thursday or Friday:

    . If you intend to remove a person on a Wednesday, a Thursday, or a
      Friday, unless there has been a bank holiday, the weekend is of no
      consequence when calculating the minimum notice period. You must
      ensure when giving notice of removal that the person has at least two
      working days before their removal to challenge the decision to remove
      them in the courts if necessary.

If removing at the weekend:

    . The courts are shut at weekends, so individuals you intend to remove
      then or before the courts open on a Monday must be given sufficient
      time in the preceding working days to challenge the decision to remove
      them if they so wish.  Those due to be removed at the weekend or
      before the courts open on a Monday must therefore be notified of their


removal on the Wednesday prior to the planned removal, so that they have
three working days to access the courts if necessary.


This table does not take account of bank holidays, which must be considered
as extra                         non-working days.


|Removal set for                 |Notify by latest                |
|12:00am to 10.00am Monday       |10:00am Wednesday               |
|10.00am to 17:00pm Monday       |Same time Thursday              |
|17:00pm to 12:00am Monday       |10:00am Friday                  |
|12:00am to 10:00am Tuesday      |10:00am Friday                  |
|10:00am to 17:00pm Tuesday      |Same time Friday                |
|17:00pm to 12:00am Tuesday      |Same time Saturday              |
|Wednesday                       |Same time Sunday                |
|Thursday                        |Same time Monday                |
| Friday                         |Same time Tuesday               |
|12:00am to 10:00am Saturday     |Same time Wednesday             |
|From 10:00am Saturday           |10:00am Wednesday               |
|Sunday                          |10:00am Wednesday               |



In addition to the above table and summary, you can use the removal notice
calculator when considering the latest time you can notify a person of
their removal in normal enforcement cases.


There are occasions where the standard 72 hour notification period is not
required (See: Notice of removal) which you must consider before giving
notice of removal.


Persons detained for removal must be given access to telephone facilities
to enable instruction of and on-going contact with representatives.


Consideration of deferral of notice period

Whether or not they are detained, individuals must be allowed a reasonable
opportunity to access legal advice and have recourse to the courts.  The
purpose of the notice period is to enable individuals to seek legal advice.
 If, during the notice period, an unrepresented person is yet to instruct a
legal representative you must always consider deferring the removal window
for an additional period


It is reasonable to expect individuals who are aware that they have not
been successful in an immigration claim and/or appeal and/or that
outstanding representations may be or have been rejected to act promptly in
seeking legal advice. Each case for deferral must be considered on its
individual merits.  The key consideration is whether the person has had a
reasonable opportunity to access legal advice and recourse to the courts.



Change of legal representative

A delay caused by a change in legal representative may be unavoidable and
consideration should be given based on the merits of the case. It may be
reasonable to defer removal for an additional period where the individual
has unavoidably lost contact with previous representatives, for instance,
because the legal service has ceased business or discontinued
responsibility for other reasons.  However, consideration must also be
given to related factors.  Deferral should not normally be considered in
cases where there is no clear reason provided (and you have asked for
reasons) for the change of representatives and/or there is cause to believe
that the motive for the change is to bring about a postponement of removal,
for instance, multiple changes of representative within a short period.


Access to legal advice: detained cases

Individuals detained in Immigration Removal Centres have access to legal
advice 'surgeries'. DSO 06/2013 provides that detainees must be told of the
availability of Legal Aid Agency (LAA) surgeries during the induction
process within the first 24 hours.  IRC welfare officers act in accordance
with DSO 7/2013 to alert detainees to the Duty Solicitor scheme that
operates in the individual IRC, the timetable of provision and the
mechanism for making an appointment.  They also:


  . direct detainees to information about how to find an alternative
    solicitor or other immigration advisor accredited by the Office of the
    Immigration Services Commissioner
  . provide information about the Law Society and Legal Services Commission
    in a language that detainee can understand
  . provide copies of the Bail for Immigration Detainees (BID) notebook

A request for an appointment with the surgery may be made at any time.  It
is reasonable to expect an individual to make use of the 72-hour notice
period allowed for legal consultation at the earliest opportunity should
they wish to do so.


Generally speaking, if an unrepresented person (in detention) wishes to
obtain legal advice and cannot be given an appointment at an LAA advice
surgery within the initial 72-hours notice period, the removal window
should normally be deferred to enable an appointment to be arranged.
However, any request for an appointment that necessitates deferral and
continued detention should be carefully considered on its merits.
Consideration should be given whether the individual:


  . was properly notified of access to legal advice
  . made their request at the earliest reasonable opportunity
  . cooperated with any attempt to arrange a consultation
  . delayed their request in order to thwart removal

Access to relevant documentation

Legal representatives need access to relevant documents and case papers in
order to properly advise their client. There may be some circumstances
where an individual does not readily have access to their documents; for
instance, because they have been detained at a reporting event or they have
been outside the UK for a significant period.


Any refusal decisions, notice of liability to removal and Immigration
Factual Summary will be provided to the representatives on request either
when the individual is detained or at the point they seek legal advice on a
same day removal. In most instances, the Immigration Factual

Summary should be fully completed and will provide the necessary key facts
and case history.


Where requested by representatives, it is reasonable to provide all
relevant documents but, it should be noted, you may reasonably expect that,
unless there has been a change of representative, documents previously
provided to an individual and/or their representatives should have been
retained.  You may therefore reasonably request representatives to be
specific in their requests.  A request to release all case papers, whatever
their relevance, is not reasonable and should be challenged.
Deferral of removal

It is not necessary to defer removal on a threat of JR, though it is
important to satisfy yourself that the person concerned has had the
opportunity to lodge a claim with the courts (particularly in certified or
third country cases where there is no statutory in-country right of
appeal).  See: Consideration of deferral


The Home Office will only consider deferring removal if a JR application
made in England and

Wales is properly lodged with the Administrative Court in accordance with
Practice Direction 54A Section II of the Civil Procedure Rules, or properly
lodged with the Upper Tribunal in accordance with the Tribunal Procedures
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended).


The JR application, as received by the Home Office, may take the following
forms:


Claim form issued with detailed grounds.

The Home Office will normally defer removal where a JR application made in
England and Wales has been properly lodged with the Administrative Court or
the Upper Tribunal in accordance with the relevant procedure rules.
However, removal will not automatically be deferred where there has been
less than six months since a previous JR or statutory appeal or the person
is within the removal window, or the person is being removed by special
arrangements (including by charter flight) (see: Special arrangements).


Claim form issued with statement of reasons for non-compliance with the
Practice Direction.

In cases where the claim form has been issued and the person has provided a
statement of reasons for non-compliance with the Practice Direction, the
court will notify the Home Office and the matter will be placed before a
judge for consideration as soon as practicable.  In these circumstances,
the Home Office will defer removal if:


  . the court decides that good reason has been provided for failure to
    comply (and gives a direction, for example that detailed grounds be
    submitted by a specified date)
  . permission to proceed to JR is granted
  . the court has not yet considered the matter by the time/date of
    removal, in such circumstances, it will be necessary to defer removal
    until the court has reached a decision

Out-of-hours claims prior to lodging with the court.

Where it is not possible to file a claim due to the Administrative Court or
Upper Tribunal office being closed, the Home Office may defer removal if
provided with a copy of detailed grounds and subject to a consideration of
the exceptions set out in section 6 of this guidance. The responsibility
remains with the claimant to file the claim form as soon as possible on the
next day the Administrative Court or Upper Tribunal office is open and to
notify the Home Office that the claim form has been issued.



Withdrawing an application for judicial review

In some cases, a person with an outstanding JR application may ask to leave
the UK.  Where a person wishes to make a voluntary departure, you must ask
them to sign a disclaimer (form IS101).  The person (or their legal
representative) must also contact the courts to withdraw their JR
application so that the court file is closed.  This must be done before the
person leaves the UK so that a Notice of discontinuance can be filed.  See
also: assisted voluntary returns.


Cases where the removal window should not be used

Removal window used but found to be inappropriate

It is possible that notice of a removal window may have been served on a
person before it is established that they constitute a vulnerable group. If
that has been done, the notice may not be relied upon to enforce removal.
Instead new notice of removal must be given in accordance with  notice of
removal .


Family cases

Since 1 March 2011, an end to end process has been in place for working
with families with children (see :Family Returns Process. This new process
provides families with greater support and advice when considering their
options for voluntarily leaving the UK (Assisted Return).  Where families
are not prepared to return voluntarily they may be given the opportunity to
leave under their own steam (Required Return) before enforcement action
(Ensured Return) is considered.


As part of the Assisted Return stage of the new process, all families
liable for return are given the opportunity to attend a Family Return
Conference to discuss their options for returning home and raise any legal
challenges or further submissions regarding their departure.  Where
necessary, families are then given a minimum of two weeks after their
Family Return Conference to think about how best to go home before the Home
Office consider setting removal directions.


In addition to the minimum two week Assisted Return reflection period,
specific notification periods have been established for giving notice of
removal at the Required Return and Ensured Return stages of the family
returns process.


Notifying a family of their Required Return
In almost all cases, families who are not prepared to voluntarily leave the
UK are given the opportunity to make a Required Return which means they
leave under their own steam without any enforcement action.  In these
cases, the Home Office pursues a self check-in or assisted check-in return
in which we give notice of removal with at least two weeks notice while
they remain living at home.


Notifying a family of their Ensured Return
Families reach the Ensured Return stage of the new process only where the
Assisted and

Required routes of return have failed or, in exceptional circumstances,
where we consider a

Required Return is not appropriate.  The standard notification times  apply
to families subject to Ensured Return unless one or more of the exceptions
in section 3 applies. If the family is subject to a limited notice removal,
the standard notification period will be used to provide the time and date
before which they will not be removed.


See also: NSA family cases

Third country and Non-suspensive appeal (NSA) cases

Cases certified under a) s.94, s.94B or s.96 of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and b) EEA Regulation 24AA,
as well as third country cases do not attract a statutory in-country right
of appeal.  When you give notice of removal to a person in these cases, you
must satisfy yourself that they have the opportunity to access the courts
before their departure is enforced. See: Consideration of deferral.  If
notice of removal is given at the same time as the NSA or third country
decisions this is likely to be their first opportunity for legal redress.
A minimum of 5 working days notice must therefore be given between giving
notice of removal and the removal itself (unless the case has already been
reviewed by JR, or in some circumstances where the individual has received
such notice previously: see NSA cases already reviewed by JR or following a
failed removal).


As the courts are shut at weekends, you will need to give notice of removal
seven days before you intend to remove the person in most third country and
NSA cases.  Where you intend to remove an individual on a Saturday or a
Sunday, you may, in some cases, actually need to give notice of removal as
much as eight or nine days in advance of removal if, for any reason, you
are not able to give notice of removal the preceding weekend.


The below table shows the notification times for NSA and third country
cases.  It does not take account of bank holidays which must be considered
as extra non-working days.


|Removal directions set   |Notify by latest:                                    |
|for:                     |                                                     |
|Monday                   |Same time the preceding Monday (7 days before)       |
|Tuesday                  |Same time the preceding Tuesday (7 days before)      |
|Wednesday                |Same time the preceding Wednesday (7 days before)    |
|Thursday                 |Same time the preceding Thursday (7 days before)     |
|Friday                   |Same time the preceding Friday (7 days before)       |
|Saturday                 |Same time the preceding Saturday (7 days before) or  |
|                         |Friday of the previous week (eight days before) if   |
|                         |you are not able to serve removal directions at the  |
|                         |weekend                                              |
|Sunday                   |Same time the preceding Sunday (7 days before) or    |
|                         |Friday of the previous week (9 days before) if you   |
|                         |are not able to serve removal directions at the      |
|                         |weekend                                              |



In addition to the above table and summary, you can use the removal notice
calculator when considering the latest time you can notify a person of
their removal in third country and NSA cases.


There are instances where standard notification may not be required for NSA
and third country cases (some family cases for example), which you must
consider before setting removal directions.


Special arrangements (including charter flights)

Chartered flights are subject to special arrangements because of the
complexity, practicality and cost of arranging an operation.  For this
reason, a JR application may not defer removal.


Special arrangements may also apply in other cases. For example, where
complex medical needs require a significant number of medical escorts and
special equipment. If you believe a case in which you are arranging removal
should be treated as a special arrangements case, you should consult OSCU
before setting removal directions.


Operational constraints will determine arrangements necessary for charter
operations and other special cases.  Details concerning these arrangements
will be communicated to the High Court by OSCU in advance of the date
planned for the operation.  The person being removed will also be notified
of these arrangements and that removal will not necessarily be deferred in
the event that a JR is lodged.  Where removal is not deferred, the person
concerned will be advised in a letter to be provided by OSCU of the need to
obtain an injunction to prevent removal.


Individuals being removed by special arrangements (including charter
flights) who wish to legally challenge their removal are normally required
to seek injunctive relief as a JR application will not usually result in
deferral of removal.  In these circumstances, the person will be given a
minimum of five working days notice of removal so they have the opportunity
to take legal advice.  The purpose of this extended period of notice of
removal is to minimise the number of last minute applications for
injunctive relief to the High Court in England and Wales, the Court of
Session in Scotland or the High Court in Northern Ireland and to encourage
people to inform the Home Office at the earliest opportunity of any further
submissions they want to make.


If individuals being removed by charter flight or special arrangements are
not required to seek injunctive relief to challenge removal, a JR
application will usually continue to result in a deferral of removal.  In
these circumstances, the standard 72 hours notice period applies rather
than five working days.


To protect the safety of those on board a chartered aircraft to particular
destinations it may be necessary, for security reasons, to withhold the
exact details of departure. In these cases, all those being removed by that
flight will be given limited notice of removal (ie they will still be given
a minimum of five working days notice of removal but will be informed that
they will be removed no sooner than five working days and no less than 21
days from the date where notice of removal is given).

.

As well as referring to the tables, you can use the removal notice
calculator when considering the latest time you can notify a person of
their removal in charter flight and other special arrangement cases.



Where standard notification may not be required when giving notice of
removal

This section details the circumstances in which you do not need to provide
standard notification when giving notice of removal. Standard notification
of removal does not need to be given where either:


  . an exception applies
  . a second period of notification is not needed following a failed
    removal.

Exceptions to standard notification of removal

Below we detail the following exceptions to standard notification of
removal. These are:


  . port cases where removal occurs within seven days of refusal
  . third country and NSA family cases subject to Ensured Return

Port cases

In port cases, if removal takes place within seven days of refusal, you do
not need to provide 72 hours notice.  You must provide the standard 72
hours notification of removal in cases which are refused entry at port
where removal does not take place within seven days of refusal.


If a human rights claim is raised in a port case where standard
notification is not required, the Operational Support and Certification
Unit (OSCU) may, where the claim falls to be refused, be able to certify
the claim without deferring the removal directions.  Such cases must be
referred to OSCU who will decide whether such action is appropriate.


Third country and NSA family cases subject to Ensured Return

Families are liable for Ensured Return only where Assisted and Required
Return have both failed or, exceptionally, where we consider a Required
Return is not appropriate.  Therefore, any family that reaches this stage
of the family returns process will have already had opportunities following
their Family Return Conference and, where appropriate, when they were given
notice of removal at the Required Return stage, to make an application for
JR, if they wanted to do so.


If a third country or NSA family case has reached the Ensured Return stage
of the family returns process, you do not need to provide a minimum of five
working days notice because they will not need this longer notification
period to access the courts.  Instead, you must provide standard
notification (minimum 72 hours) of removal in these cases.


NSA cases already reviewed by JR or following a failed removal

Where an NSA decision has already been challenged by way of JR and either
all JR proceedings have been concluded or the JR proceedings are no longer
a legal barrier to removal (e.g. the court has made a finding of 'no merit'
or that renewal will not be a bar to removal) any subsequent removal
directions will only require the standard notice period of 72 hours, not
five working days.


Where removal directions have been set for five working days in an NSA case
and the individual either does not challenge the removal during that period
or their challenge does not result in deferral of their removal, but the
removal fails for other reasons (eg travel document issues or technical
reasons), you should apply the ten days policy where possible (see: Where
second period of notification is not needed). Where this is not possible
(eg travel documents take longer than ten days to obtain) removal
directions may be reset with 72 hours notice rather than five days.


Where a second period of notification is not needed.

Where a person was given the required notice of removal but the removal
fails or is deferred, it may not be necessary to give a further period of
notice when rearranging removal for within 10 days of the failed or
deferred removal.


Where a person has been given notice of a removal window or limited notice
and an attempted removal fails, removal may be rescheduled without further
notice if it is within the removal window or limited notice period which
they have already been given, without the ten-day policy being applied.
This does not prevent the ten-day policy being applied (if it is
appropriate to do so) if a removal fails towards the end of the removal
window or limited notice period.


When could I apply this?
The list below is not exhaustive and is subject to the circumstances
outlined below at, 'When could I not apply this?'


  . the flight cannot depart as scheduled due to a technical fault with the
    aircraft or transport difficulties with the relevant contractor
    including problems with the availability of aircraft, related aircrew
    or the scheduled departure slot
  . the scheduled departure time of the flight has had to change for other
    reasons such as adverse weather conditions, industrial action or other
    significant factors that can be reasonably deemed to be outside of the
    Home Office's control
  . the person has attempted to frustrate their removal by being non-
    compliant e.g. refusing to leave the immigration removal centre or
    board the vehicle
  . where removal has been disrupted by another person's behaviour
  . removal was deferred following a JR of removal which has been concluded
    or the judge has given a finding of 'no merit' or 'renewal should not
    act as a bar to removal' subject to the following conditions

When could I not apply this?
Appropriate notice must continue to be given in cases where there has been
more than 10 days since the initial deferral/cancellation or where there
has been a significant change in circumstances, such as:


  . we are re-setting removal directions to a different country
  . further submissions (involving issues of substance which had not been
    previously raised and considered) have been received and refused since
    the earlier removal direction failed
  . in certain circumstances if there has been a change of route, see below



Removal via a different route
If for operational reasons it is required to change the route of return to
remove a place of transit you do not need to allow a further period of
notice when re-setting removal directions for within 10 days of the failed
removal, providing the place of final destination remains unchanged. For
example, the alteration is from a flight from London to Abidjan via Lagos
to a direct flight from London to Abidjan.


If for operational reasons it is required to change the route of return to
insert or amend a place of transit you must give a new standard notice
period unless the new place of transit is in a safe country.  A new
standard notice period will not be required when the new place of transit
is in Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland,

France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxemburg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, or Switzerland.


For example, if the original removal directions were set from London to
Abidjan via Lagos, you may alter the place of transit (Lagos) to Paris
without a new notice period. However, if you changed the transit point from
Lagos to Nairobi, a new notice period would be required.


See also: Country information


Threat of judicial review

All JR applications received in respect of cases where removal directions
have been set must be referred to OSCU who will consider on an individual
case by case basis whether deferral of the removal directions is necessary.



JR applications relating to third country cases must be referred to the
Third Country Unit (TCU) between 9am-5pm Monday to Friday.  Deferral of
removal directions will be considered by TCU on a case by case basis.


Where there is a threat of JR, removal directions must remain in place
until a Crown Office reference, Upper Tribunal reference or injunction is
obtained in accordance with 4.1 above. However, even if a complete JR claim
is submitted, removal directions can be maintained where certain exceptions
apply and the JR would not be barrier to removal (see: When JR will not
suspend removal and Stayed Cases).


In all removal cases, if a person is unable to file a claim because the
Administrative Court or Upper Tribunal office is closed, you must still
consider whether deferral is appropriate where a copy of detailed grounds
is provided to the Home Office and lodged with the court or tribunal at the
earliest opportunity. A decision on whether to defer in these circumstances
will be taken by

OSCU.


Special arrangements (including charter flights)

Where your case is scheduled to be removed by special arrangements,
including charter flight, and a threat of JR is received:


  . you must refer the case to OSCU immediately
  . OSCU will let you know if the removal can go ahead on a case by case
    basis
  . if OSCU decide not to defer removal, they will provide a letter for you
    to send to the person or his representatives of this decision and the
    reasons, the letter will explain that removal will continue unless an
    injunction is obtained
  . if an injunction is obtained, all enforcement action must be suspended
    immediately

Port cases

In port cases where removal directions are set for a date within seven days
of refusal, you must defer removal when a written threat of JR is received.
 The person must be given 48 hours to lodge their application with the
Administrative Court or Upper Tribunal, so any removal planned for within
this period must be re-scheduled.  You must also inform the person that
their removal will proceed if they do not properly lodge their application
with the court or tribunal (as set out in section 4 above) within this
period.  The 48 hours begins when you receive the written threat of JR and
must include at least one working day.


When judicial review proceedings will not suspend removal

When should you refer to this section?
This section tells you how to determine whether removal should be suspended
in situations where removal arrangements are in place, or Immigration
Enforcement have made a removal request, and judicial review ("JR")
proceedings have been brought against that removal.  This guidance only
applies to JR proceedings brought in England and Wales.


Special arrangements
This section does not apply where the subject is being removed under
'special arrangements' provisions.


The qualifying criteria

Where JR proceedings against removal are brought, the removal will normally
be suspended.  However, in certain circumstances it will not be necessary
to suspend removal.


The first consideration is whether one or more of the following qualifying
criteria are met:


  . there has been less than 6 months since a previous JR or statutory
    appeal has been concluded on the same or similar issues - a JR will be
    on the same or similar issues unless it is brought on completely
    different grounds, for example the previous JR or statutory appeal
    related to unlawful detention or was purely procedural
  . there has been less than 6 months since a previous JR or statutory
    appeal has been concluded on the same evidence, even though the legal
    basis of the challenge is different from that previously brought
  . there has been less than 6 months since a previous JR or statutory
    appeal has been concluded and the issues being raised could reasonably
    have been raised at that previous JR or statutory appeal
  . the JR is brought while the person is within the removal window and as
    long as the person remains within the removal window (unless another
    'qualifying criteria' applies)
  . there has already been an order refusing an injunction against removal
    in the JR and no subsequent application for an injunction on removal
    has been granted
  . where a JR renewal application has been made but an application for
    injunction has already been refused in relation to that same JR
    application or an order has been made that renewal is no bar to removal
    (see also "Handling JRs involving simultaneous injunction
    applications")

When JR proceedings will always suspend removal
Even where the qualifying criteria are met, removal will always be
suspended in any of the following circumstances:


  . an injunction against removal is granted by the court or tribunal
  . this is the first JR challenge to a decision to certify a claim, the
    result of which being there is either no appeal, or any appeal right is
    out of country only
  . permission has been granted in the JR

Removal may also be suspended where there is insufficient time before
removal for OSCU to consider the merits and barriers tests of a case that
meets the qualifying criteria. In these cases removal will initially be
suspended, however where one of the qualifying criteria is met the
litigation handling team will determine whether or not the JR is bound to
fail in the course of filing the AoS (see section "JR received when CID
shows that removal arrangements are in place or preparations are being made
to put removal arrangements in place" below for further details).


The merits and barrier tests

Where one or more of the qualifying criteria are met, and there are no
reasons why removal must be suspended, you should go on to consider whether
the JR is bound to fail and /or whether any of the issues raised in the JR
are a barrier to removal.

Where the JR is bound to fail and does not raise any issues which are a
barrier to removal then removal does not need to be suspended.


Is the JR bound to fail (the "merits test")?

You must consider whether the JR is bound to fail either before the
decision is taken not to suspend removal or before a decision is taken to
arrange removal following a removal request. Examples of when a JR is bound
to fail are:


  . the grounds for JR are very weak, for example they do not make sense,
    are clearly standard grounds or are generic (they do not refer to the
    specific circumstances of the Claimant, unless the claim is a "class
    issue" namely multiple Claimants raising the same legal point)
  . the JR is obviously unarguable on the facts
  . there is clear authority on the legal point in issue

 Concluding that a JR is not bound to fail does not mean that it is
arguable and therefore that permission should be granted.


Are the issues raised in the JR a barrier to removal? ("the barrier test")

You must also consider whether the issues raised in the JR should be
treated as a barrier to removal:


  . does the JR raise new grounds, for example a first time asylum or human
    rights claim or further submissions that fall to be considered under
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules? If so, refer to the section
    "Fresh claims"
  . does the JR rely on new and relevant evidence that has not previously
    been considered by the SSHD in deciding a previous application or claim
    and (where a right of appeal was exercised against the refusal of that
    previous application or claim) by the court in an appeal? If so,
    consider the nature of that evidence. If it amounts to a first-time
    asylum or human rights claim or further submissions that fall to be
    considered under paragraph 353, refer to the section "Fresh claims"

In OSCU, the decision on whether the JR meets the merits and barrier test,
must be taken at a minimum HEO grade and countersigned at a minimum SEO
grade. This does not apply to the litigation handling team who will work
closely with GLD when applying the merit test.


Summary of process

JR received when CID shows that removal arrangements are in place or
preparations are being made to put removal arrangements in place:

The JR must be passed to OSCU who will:


  . check CID to confirm that removal arrangements are in place or
    preparations are being made for removal arrangements
  . create a JR record on the JR screen in CID
  . consider whether one or more of the qualifying criteria are met, if
    yes, apply the merits and barrier test and decide whether removal
    should be suspended
  . outcome = removal suspended: pass the JR to the litigation handling
    team to manage the litigation
  . outcome = removal not suspended: write to the person or their
    representatives to confirm that removal will not be suspended. Pass the
    JR to the litigation handling team to manage the litigation

Where the applicant meets the qualifying criteria, but there was
insufficient time before removal for OSCU to apply the merits and barrier
tests (resulting in removal being suspended) the litigation handling team
will, in the course of filing the AoS, apply the merits and barrier test.
If the JR is bound to fail and there are no barriers to removal the
litigation handling team will notify the enforcement/removal team and
provide them with a copy of the JR grounds on request.


  . the enforcement/removal team should re-instate removal arrangements and
    write to the applicant notifying them that the JR is not suspensive and
    they are commencing removal directions
  . the litigation handling team will serve the AoS

Where an injunction is granted at any stage in the process, removal must be
suspended. In these circumstances, it will not be appropriate for the
litigation handling team to undertake a merits test within 21 days of
service of the JR (see section "Immigration Enforcement make removal
request following receipt of a JR" and injunctions).


Where permission is granted in the JR removal will be suspended and the JR
will be handled in accordance with the usual JR process (refer to the
Judicial Review guidance).


Removal request made by Immigration Enforcement following receipt of a JR:
The enforcement / removal team will assess whether the individual case
meets the qualifying criteria. If it does, using the relevant referral pro-
forma, they will ask the litigation handling team to apply the merits and
barrier test. No further removal action will be taken until the litigation
handling team has considered the JR.


The litigation handling team will apply the merits and barrier test.
Where the JR has merit and/or raises barriers to removal the litigation
handling team will notify the enforcement/removal team and continue to
manage the JR in accordance with the usual JR process (refer to the
Judicial Review guidance). The enforcement/removal team will write to the
applicant notifying them that removal is suspended.


Where the JR has no merit and raises no barriers to removal the litigation
handling team will notify the enforcement/removal team. The litigation
handling team will serve the AoS and continue to manage the JR in
accordance with the usual JR process (refer to the Judicial Review
guidance). The enforcement/removal team will write to the applicant
notifying them that the JR is not suspensive and they are commencing
removal directions.


Where the AoS is served before the enforcement/removal team has written to
the applicant and it has been more than seven days since the AoS has been
lodged, the enforcement/removal team should re-confirm with the litigation
handling team that the JR grounds have not been varied before they write
out.


Where an injunction granted at any time in the process removal must be
suspended (see: Injunctions).


Where permission granted on the JR removal will be suspended and the JR
will be handled in accordance with the usual JR process (refer to the
Judicial Review guidance)


Family cases

Families will be notified when invited to the Family Return Conference that
they have 5 working days from the date of invitation to the Family Return
Conference to bring a judicial review to challenge their removal from the
United Kingdom.


JR received when CID shows that removal arrangements are in place or
preparations are being made to put removal arrangements in place:
The JR will be passed to OSCU who will check CID to establish whether 5
working days have expired following the invitation to the Family Return
Conference. If so, OSCU will:


. consider whether the qualifying criteria are met - if yes o apply the
merits and barrier test

o and decide whether the JR suspends removal


Removal request made by Immigration Enforcement following receipt of a JR:
The case working team will consider whether one or more of the qualifying
criteria are met. If yes, using the relevant referral pro-forma, they will
ask the litigation handling team to apply the merits and barrier test.


Where the litigation handling team conclude that the JR has merit and/or
raises barriers to removal they will notify the enforcement/removal team
and provide them with a copy of the JR grounds on request. The
enforcement/removal team will write to the applicant notifying them that
removal is suspended.


Where the litigation handling team conclude that the JR has no merit and
raises no barriers to removal they will notify the enforcement/removal team
and provide them with a copy of the JR grounds on request. The
enforcement/removal team will write to the applicant notifying them that
the JR is not being treated as suspensive and they are commencing removal
directions. In both situations, the litigation handling team will continue
to manage the JR in accordance with the usual JR process (refer to the
Judicial Review guidance).


Where an injunction is granted at any time in the process removal must be
suspended. In these circumstances, the injunction will be received by OSCU
who will take the necessary actions to suspend removal.


Where permission is granted on the JR removal will be suspended and the JR
will be handled in accordance with the usual JR process (refer to the
Judicial Review guidance)


Fresh claims and/or further submissions

A JR is not the right vehicle for raising new matters to the SSHD (for
example a first time protection claim, human rights claim or further
submissions that fall to be considered under paragraph 353 of the
Immigration Rules).  However, a JR which meets the qualifying criteria test
might raise such matters.


JR received when CID shows that removal arrangements are in place or
preparations are being made to put removal arrangements in place:

Grounds raised in the JR amount to a first-time protection claim - where
the grounds amount to a first time claim for asylum or humanitarian
protection and the claimant has not previously made an asylum or
humanitarian protection claim (note that EU asylum claims are inadmissible
unless there are exceptional circumstances as defined in paragraph 326F
Immigration Rules) OSCU will:


  . suspend removal
  . refer the protection claim to the Asylum Casework Directorate or to
    Criminal Casework Directorate for deportation cases
  . refer the JR to the litigation handling team to be handled in
    accordance with the usual JR process (refer to the Judicial Review
    guidance)

Grounds raised in the JR amount to a first-time human rights claim - where
the  grounds raised in the JR amount to a human rights claim and the
claimant has not previously made a human rights claim and had a right of
appeal against its refusal OSCU will:


  . suspend removal
  . consider the human rights claim

Where the claim can be certified so that no right of appeal arises (section
96) or the appeal right can only be exercised from out-of-country (sections
94 and 94B) the JR will not suspend removal and OSCU will issue a decision
on the human rights claim including the relevant notice of liability to
removal / deportation giving 5 days notice of removal, and write to the
person or their representatives to confirm that the judicial review will
not suspend removal.


Where a further JR challenging certification is received or the person
amends their JR grounds to challenge the certification decision within the
5 day notice period, removal should be suspended and the JR passed to the
litigation handling team to be handled in accordance with the usual JR
process (refer to the Judicial Review guidance). If no further JR is
received within the 5 day notice period, removal can proceed.


Where the claim cannot be certified and there is an in country right of
appeal against the refusal of the human rights claim, OSCU will suspend
removal and refer the JR to Litigation Operations to be handled in
accordance with the usual JR process (refer to the Judicial Review
guidance)  Grounds in the JR raise EEA rights - where a non-EEA national
claims to have a right of residence under the Immigration (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006 in the judicial review, removal cannot take
place until the grounds have been considered. OSCU will:


  . consider whether the qualifying criteria test is met
  . consider the EEA grounds

Where the EEA grounds do not demonstrate the person has a right of
residence under EU law removal can continue. The JR should be passed to the
litigation handling team to be handled in accordance with the usual JR
process (refer to the Judicial Review guidance).


Where the judicial reviews grounds have some merit as to whether the person
has a right of residence under EU law, the removal will be suspended. OSCU
will pass the case to the relevant caseworking team for further
consideration and the JR will be passed to the litigation handling team to
be handled in accordance with the usual JR process (refer to the Judicial
Review guidance).


Ground raised in the JR amount to further submissions to be considered
under paragraph 353 Immigration Rules  - OSCU will:

  . consider whether the qualifying criteria test is met
  . consider the further submissions

Where the outcome is that:


  . the further submissions will not lead to a grant of leave or amount to
    a fresh claim such that there is a right of appeal against their
    rejection
  . will not lead to a grant of leave but do amount to a fresh claim but
    the claim can be certified so that there is either no right of appeal,
    or any right of appeal can only be brought from out of country

OSCU will issue a decision on the further submissions and write to the
person or their representatives to confirm that removal will not be
suspended.


Where the outcome is that the further submissions will lead to a grant of
leave or amount to a fresh claim such that there is an in country right of
appeal against their refusal, removal must be suspended. OSCU will suspend
removal and refer the JR to the litigation handling team to be handled in
accordance with the usual JR process (refer to the Judicial Review
guidance).


Removal request made by Immigration Enforcement following receipt of a JR:
In this situation, the JR will be handled by the litigation handling team.


Where either OSCU or the litigation handling team consider that the JR is
not bound to fail, the enforcement/removal team should treat the JR as a
barrier and suspend removal.


Where OSCU or the litigation handling team consider that the JR is bound to
fail and that there are no barriers to removal then the process set out
above should be followed except that the litigation handling team will not
consider the substantive claim but will pass it to the appropriate casework
team for consideration.


Handling JRs involving simultaneous injunction applications

If a decision has been taken to suspend removal on the basis of a JR
received simultaneously with an injunction application, the guidance on
injunctions should be followed.  OSCU must confirm the suspension of
removal to the relevant court centre (Administrative Court or UTIAC) by
email or telephone the duty clerk at the Administrative Court out-of-hours
on 020 7047 6260. UTIAC has no out-of-hours facilities.


The Administrative Court and UTIAC have standing instructions to telephone
OSCU (or CCU outside OSCU's hours of operation) in advance of considering
an application for an injunction. They will do so where they have not
received confirmation of whether removal is to be suspended.


OSCU will advise the court whether removal is imminent and, if so, whether
removal will be suspended as a result of the JR.


Action when suspending removal

If a decision is made to suspend removal, you must cancel removal
directions.


  . if removal arrangements are in place you must refer to the OSCU
    standard operating procedures for the next steps to take, JR must be
    raised as a barrier to removal on the CID removals screen
  . if removal arrangements are not in place the JR must be raised as a
    barrier to removal on the CID removals screen

Action following a decision not to suspend removal
You must close the JR barrier on CID, update CID notes and write to the
person or their representatives to let them know that the removal will go
ahead unless they obtain an injunction preventing removal. The letter must
include reasons why removal is not being suspended.

If an injunction is obtained, all enforcement action must be suspended
immediately.

If a decision is made not to suspend removal but the removal fails for
reasons unrelated to the JR proceedings, then removal directions may be re-
set (or the ten-day policy applied), provided that the reasons for the
original decision that removal should not be suspended are still
applicable.


Applications for permission to JR in third country cases must be referred
to TCU. TCU's hours of operation are 9am-5pm Monday to Friday. If the
timing of removal means that the JR needs to be considered outside TCU's
hours of operation, contact OSCU or CCU as appropriate.


Process map

[pic]
Stayed cases

Where the grounds for the JR have been resolved in a 'lead' case, removal
directions can be reset where:


  . the person's application for JR was stayed as a result of the lead case


  . the application in that lead case has been dismissed or permission to
    JR in that lead case has been refused
  . the person's grounds do not raise any issues additional to those which
    were the subject of the lead case

Additionally, the Home Office must consider whether it is appropriate to
pursue removals in stayed cases, taking into account:


  . any relevant court order
  . time given to provide the lead case with an opportunity to appeal
  . time given to provide stayed cases with an opportunity to amend their
    grounds

Lead case has been resolved
Once a lead case is resolved, the unit dealing with the case will inform
appropriate business areas of the outcome and implications.  You must
review your case against the lead case and decide whether the person's
grounds raise any issues additional to those in the lead case.


If you decide they do not, you may contact the GLD and ask them to write to
the person to request that they either withdraw their JR or apply to amend
their grounds, making clear that removal directions will be re-set
immediately if there is no response.  The person must be given at least 14
days to reply (or longer if necessary to comply with a relevant court
order).  GLD will let you know the outcome.


If there is no application to amend grounds within the deadline, you may re-
set removal directions to take effect no sooner than 72 hours has expired
and write to the person and their legal representative informing them of
the new removal directions.


You must instruct the GLD to inform the court or tribunal that removal
directions have been set and removal will continue.


If an application to amend the grounds is received you must consider
deferring removal directions and also consider whether the case can be
expedited.


Judicial review challenges other than to removal

You must not automatically defer removal directions in these cases.  You
must only potentially suspend removal when Article 6 (right to a fair
trial) of the European Convention of Human Rights is cited and must decide
this on a case by case basis.


Removal directions deferred

If removal directions have been cancelled and JR proceedings have started
you can get more information on next steps from the following areas:


  . enforcement cases: Litigation Operations (Enforcement)(LOE)
  . third country cases: Third Country Unit between 9am-5pm Monday-Friday
    and OSCU at any other time
  . deportation cases: Litigation Operations Criminality and Detention
    (LOCDI)

If a JR has been received and you have deferred removal directions you must
inform TCU in third country cases or LOCDI in deportation cases. They will
notify GLD and instruct them on the grounds for defence (it is important
that you ensure that GLD can obtain instructions or they will not be able
to get the case before a judge quickly). For enforcement cases, there is no
need to notify LOE separately as OSCU pass enforcement cases to LOE once
the decision has been made to defer RDs.  LOE will consider if the case is
suitable for expedition (see: Expedited process).


Where summary grounds have been lodged and it is considered that the JR
claim has no merit, GLD must be instructed by the appropriate JR unit to
notify the court of this, with a request that the application is expedited.
 Where possible, detention can be maintained pending the outcome of the JR.
 See also: expedited process.


Removal directions must not be re-set until the appropriate JR unit has
given authority to do so.


Preparing the judicial review documentation

Once instructed by the appropriate Home Office JR unit, GLD will draft an
Acknowledgement of Service setting out our argument.  There are 21 days to
do this once a claim has been issued.  Under the expedited process, the JR
caseworker will normally instruct GLD to lodge our grounds of defence much
earlier.  The JR caseworker must make sure the file is ready and be
prepared to provide additional information to GLD.


The Acknowledgement of Service, summary grounds, and detailed grounds in JR
proceedings are disclosable to third parties so in each case you must
decide whether sensitive information or material is included or whether you
make an objection to disclosure for example, where information is:


  . sensitive on grounds of security, policy, or some other ground of
    public interest
  . contains personal information relating to a third party

The JR caseworker must discuss this with GLD who will be able to advise on
the duty of candour to the court and tribunal.


Most applications are dealt with on the papers but the person may, if
refused permission on the paper application without a finding that the case
is totally without merit, renew their request for permission orally.  If
permission for a substantive JR is granted, the appropriate Home Office JR
unit will consider if it is appropriate to continue to defend the case and
if so, will need to provide further instructions and more information to
GLD.  There are 35 days to submit detailed grounds of defence.


Permission to apply for judicial review granted

If permission is granted either at the paper permission stage or oral
hearing, the Home Office is required to lodge our Detailed Grounds of
defence within 35 days.  A full 'substantive' hearing is listed. LOE, TCU,
or LOCDI as appropriate, in conjunction with GLD (and Home Office Legal
Advisers in appropriate cases), will decide if the challenge is resisted.



If permission to apply for JR is granted:


  . LOE, TCU, or LOCDI will inform the enforcement office or case owning
    team of the procedure to follow and the likely time scale involved -
    especially when detention is a consideration
  . all enforcement action must be suspended immediately and must not be
    resumed until the application is resolved, you must regularly review
    detention

GLD will instruct Counsel to represent the Home Office at the substantive
hearing.



Expedited process

If your case falls into one of the categories detailed below, it may be
suitable for expedition and you must refer the case to LOE for enforcement
challenges and LOCDI for Criminal Casework cases, to take a decision on
expedition.  They, along with GLD, will let you know if the case is
suitable to be put forward to the court to be dealt with quickly.


  . the claimant is in detention
  . the claim is from a family being managed to departure through the
    family return process
  . the claim appears to be clearly without merit
  . the claim is an abuse of process
  . the issue of public safety arises
  . the decision-making process has previously been subject to accelerated
    timescales (e.g. NSA cases, Detained)
  . there is a risk of self-harm
  . the claimant is or was to be removed as part of an enforcement
    operation (e.g. such as a special charter flight)
  . for third country and CC cases expedition will be agreed directly with
    GLD.  The JR caseworker must notify LOE to ensure that the court's
    expedited quota is not exceeded)

The decision as to whether a case is expedited or not rests with the High
Court.


How to refer a case for expedition

To enable LOE and GLD to make a decision on whether a particular case is
expedited you must ensure that the following key documents (if available)
are included in your referral to OSCU for a decision in relation to
deferral of removal:


  . JR claim form and grounds
  . tribunal determination(s)
  . Reasons for Refusal Letter (RFRL)
  . any supplementary refusal letters
  . any submissions from the claimant
  . any other documents you consider appropriate

LOE officers will update CID notes when a decision regarding expedition has
been made and will provide reasons for rejecting any recommended cases from
the expedited process.  You must also ensure that the Home Office file (or
complete dummy file) is available as a matter of priority.  Any delay in
obtaining the file may lead to a case being rejected from expedition if
further evidence from the file is needed to make a decision on expedition.
JR caseworkers will aim to lodge an Acknowledgement of Service and grounds
of defence within seven days where expedition is deemed appropriate and the
person is detained.


Where the Home Office has lodged grounds with a request to expedite, we can
normally expect an outcome from the court or tribunal within two weeks
(from the date of lodging grounds).


Cases must only be expedited where we are confident that we can complete
removal quickly if the permission application is refused.  Normally
detention is maintained while a JR permission application is expedited as
it is considered removal is still imminent.  If you do not believe there is
a real likelihood of a quick removal you must inform LOE (LOCDI in criminal
cases) explaining why.


Permission to apply for judicial review refused

If permission to apply for JR is refused and the court or tribunal decides
that the application for JR is clearly without merit or that renewal is not
a bar to removal, it will be made clear in the order refusing permission.
In these circumstances, the appropriate unit (LOE, TCU or LOCDI) will
advise whether removal action can proceed.  The normal removal process must
then be followed.  You must apply the exceptions outlined in this chapter
if appropriate to do so.


If further submissions have been received, OSCU will notify the person and
their legal representative if it is decided that removal will not be
deferred pending any application for oral renewal.


In other cases where permission on the papers is refused but oral renewal
remains a possibility, LOE or TCU or LOCDI will update CID, but will
usually advise you not to re-set removal directions until the time limit
for oral renewal has passed unless there is a specific finding or order
from the court or tribunal.


Where an application for injunction has been made and refused, or a JR was
lodged within three months of conclusion of a previous JR or appeal), OSCU
may advise that oral renewal or the possibility of oral renewal should not
suspend removal.


Application to the Court of Appeal or Supreme Court

The Home Office or the claimant can seek to appeal against the decision of
the Administrative Court or the Upper Tribunal to the Court of Appeal and
then to the Supreme Court.


If the claimant or their legal representative tells you that they intend to
appeal to the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court you must contact the
appropriate unit (OSCU or TCU or LOCDI) immediately.  They will let you
know what to do next and advise whether or not to suspend enforcement
action.


Where the application to the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court concerns
a challenge to a High Court or Upper Tribunal Judge's decision to refuse to
grant permission to apply for JR then removal directions can be maintained
in line with the judgment in Pharis - you must however refer these cases to
OSCU in the first instance for their confirmation of the position.



Injunctions in removal cases

An injunction is an order issued by a court requiring a party to do
something or to refrain from doing something.  In removal cases, an
injunction might be put in place to prevent the Home Office removing a
person(s) from the United Kingdom.


Where it is alleged by a person that an injunction against removal has been
obtained, you must try to confirm this with their legal representative
(time permitting in writing or by fax).  The written confirmation from the
legal representative may be no more than 'At [time] this evening Mr Justice
X has granted an injunction over the telephone barring removal - this is
the phone number of the clerk of the judge who can be called to confirm the
existence of the order'.  Where there is written confirmation or a verbal
confirmation from a Duty Judge that an injunction has been granted, this
must be referred to OSCU immediately.


If there is any reason to believe an injunction may have been granted, you
must contact OSCU who will check with the Duty Judge to confirm verbally
that an injunction has been issued.

OSCU is open 7am-9pm Weekdays and 7am-7pm at the Weekend.  Outside of OSCU
opening times, contact the Command and Control Unit (CCU).


The removal must be stopped if enquiries confirm that an injunction has
been issued.


Injunction confirmed

If the removal is imminent (the person is en-route to, or at, the port of
embarkation) or is in progress (the aircraft is on the ground and the doors
are still open), the case owner [or CCU out of hours] must immediately take
all reasonable steps to ensure that the removal is stopped.  In these
cases, you must not wait until you have received written confirmation of
the injunction before cancelling the removal. You must:


  . if the removal is escorted: Immediately notify the Detainee Escorting
    and Population Management Unit (DEPMU) that removal must be deferred,
    DEPMU will inform the escort officers
  . if the removal is unescorted, immediately inform CCU
  . confirm to the legal representative or the High Court that the removal
    has been stopped and/or did not proceed

You must clearly minute the file, CID records, and any other internal notes
to confirm what action was taken to attempt to stop the removal.


Out of hours and urgent injunctions

Claimants are served the Immigration Factual Summary when notice of removal
is given which advises them that any urgent application for an injunction
preventing removal or order granting or refusing an injunction must be sent
to the Home Office team handling their case.  The Immigration Factual
Summary provides the appropriate telephone and fax numbers to use.  Outside
of normal office hours (9am to 5pm weekdays) or during a public holiday,
the urgent application or order must be sent to CCU.


If an urgent injunction is not sent to CCU, but another Home Office
premises, there is a risk that the information will not be actioned prior
to the person's scheduled removal and they will be removed from the United
Kingdom despite the injunction being granted.


You must keep OSCU updated of any developments on the case.  Where an
injunction is received but you are of the opinion that the removal must not
be pursued for other reasons, you must still inform OSCU that an injunction
has been issued.


OSCU operate between 7am and 9pm weekdays and from 7am to 7pm at weekends.
Between those hours you must forward any last-minute challenges to removal
to OSCU to deal with.


You must ensure that, outside of your usual working hours and during
weekends or bank/public holidays, legal representatives know that urgent
queries relating to any injunction against an imminent removal must be made
to the emergency hot line at CCU.


All answer-phone and voicemail messages for all areas must be updated to
include the following:


|Team or area   |Message                                                    |
|LEOs/LITs/ ICE |'This office is now closed and will re-open at (insert     |
|teams          |time), for out of hours assistance, please call the Command|
|               |and Control Unit on 0161 261 1640'.                        |
|Other areas    |'This office is now closed and will re-open at (insert     |
|               |time), for assistance with the service of injunctions or   |
|               |last minute judicial reviews please call the Command and   |
|               |Control Unit on 0161 261 1640'.                            |



Injunction received, but it proves too late to halt the removal.

Where a removal has already taken place, because the injunction arrived too
late to halt the removal (for example after the doors of the aircraft have
closed):


  . you must inform the Court and OSCU as soon as possible that the person
    was removed
  . if you are able to quickly trace or contact the person (perhaps through
    their legal representatives in the UK or, via DEPMU, any escorting
    officers who may be escorting them), you must make every effort to
    assist their return to the UK
  . if it is not possible to return the person quickly, due to difficulties
    in tracing and/or organising their return, you must continue to try to
    facilitate the return while ensuring that the court is kept aware of
    progress
  . you must update CID regarding all actions taken, this must include
    times of events, such as telephone calls from representatives or court
    staff, so that we are able to show that the Home Office has acted in a
    timely fashion
  . the Grade 7 for the area that owns the case and has actioned it to the
    point of removal must notify the Director for that area of work, the
    Director of OSCU and the Rapid Response Team (RRT) of the removal
    immediately with all available information while further enquiries are
    being made and to put them on notice that an urgent submission to the
    Minister will be prepared
  . immediately following the removal an urgent submission must be sent,
    via the relevant
Director General, to the Home Secretary, this must contain a chronology of
events,

detailing the efforts made to halt the removal and why these were
unsuccessful.  It must also contain details of any efforts being made to
facilitate the person's return


Injunction received, but removal has already taken place

Where an injunction is received but removal was not prevented:


  . you must inform the court as soon as possible that the individual was
    removed
  . you must contact GLD and seek their advice
  . you must inform OSCU
  . the Grade 7 for the area that owns the case and has actioned it to the
    point of removal must notify the Director for that area of work, the
    Director of OSCU and the Rapid Response Team (RRT) of the removal
    immediately with all available information while further enquiries are
    being made and to put them on notice that an urgent submission to the
    Minister will be prepared
  . immediately following the removal an urgent submission must be sent,
    via the relevant Director General, to the Home Secretary, this must
    contain a chronology of events, detailing the efforts made to halt the
    removal and why these were unsuccessful. It must also contain details
    of any legal advice received from GLD

The case must be referred to LOE to review the full facts of the case to
consider whether the order has been obtained without any merit. If LOE
believe this to be the case they can apply for the Court order to be
discharged, bearing in mind that a decision to make such an application
must be made quickly and in consultation with Home Office Legal Advisers
and GLD. Note that you must continue to try to facilitate the individual's
return whilst this application is being processed.


Where, despite all efforts made, it is not possible to return the
individual to the UK, LOE must approach the court again to explain the full
extent of steps taken, why return is not possible and to ask that the order
is discharged. Any decision not to pursue return must be taken at SCS
level.


Information that must be recorded on file

When handling allegations of injunctions, you must maintain a clear record
of all the actions taken on both the file minutes and on CID.  You must
include the following details as part of your notes:


    . who informed you about the injunction and the time you were
      told/became aware
    . whether the injunction was confirmed by the legal representative or
      the Duty Judge and, if so, the time confirmation was obtained
    . if no confirmation was received, the steps taken to confirm the
      existence or otherwise of the injunction
    . details of other units or staff you contacted to cancel the removal in
      DEPMU or OSCU or CCU, include the time these units were notified to
      cancel the removal and the time they confirmed removal was cancelled
      (if times are different)
    . where an unlawful removal has taken place, details of all actions that
      have been taken to trace the person and return them to the UK

Applications to the European Court of Human Rights

The Human Rights Act 1998 came into force on 2 October 2000, incorporating
rights and freedoms guaranteed under the European Convention on Human
Rights into domestic law.  A decision under section 82 of the Nationality
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 can be appealed on human rights grounds.
It is still possible for an application to be made to the European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR), in Strasbourg, but it is unlikely that such an
application will be accepted until appeal rights have been exhausted.


An application made to the ECtHR does not in itself require the suspension
of removal.  However, when applying it is possible to ask the Court, in
effect, to order the suspension of removal action as an interim measure to
allow the Court to consider the substantive matter in full before removal
takes place.  The technical procedure to achieve this is by making a
request under Rule 39 of the Court's Rules.  In response to such an
application request, the ECtHR will

(where appropriate) give a 'Rule 39 indication' indicating that the person
must not be removed. This must be treated in the same way as an injunction.



Rule 39 indications from the European Court of Human Rights

All enquiries relating to threats of, or applications for Rule 39
indications must be directed to the OSCU Duty Officer in the first
instance. Ongoing litigation (should a Rule 39 indication be granted) will
be handled by Litigation Operations.

A Rule 39 indication is similar to a High Court injunction but is made by
the ECtHR.  Where you have been notified that a Rule 39 indication has been
made, you must:


  . defer removal immediately
  . where the person is detained, make sure this development is considered
    in relation to any decision to continue with detention

If a subject subsequently wishes to withdraw their Rule 39 application,
that must be communicated to the Court, The Court may wish to confirm this
with the applicant, and you must take no action to enable removal of a
subject (including via voluntary departure) until you receive confirmation
that the Court has accepted the application as withdrawn.


Judicial review in Scotland

Judicial review (JR) in Scotland is pursued by means of a petition to the
Court of Session in Edinburgh.  There are several differences in the way
cases are handled in Scotland, not the least of which is the fact that
there is no permission to apply stage.  If the court accepts the petition
for JR they will grant First Orders.  The granting of First Orders allows
the person bringing the case to serve the petition on the Office of the
Advocate General (OAG).


Where a person has been granted First Orders and removal directions are in
place, you must ask them for a copy of the court order (interlocutor)
granting First Orders and their petition for judicial review.  You must
then immediately refer the case to Litigation Operations Scotland and
Northern Ireland (Lit Ops SNI) or OSCU (particularly when referring the
case outside of normal office hours) who will provide advice on whether to
defer removal.  Lit Ops SNI / OSCU will normally advise to suspend removal
when a person has been granted First Orders, but there are exceptions to
this.


Where a person has been granted First Orders, you must not automatically
defer removal where:


  . there has been less than three months since a JR (in Scotland or
    elsewhere in the UK) or statutory appeal has been concluded on the same
    or similar issues
  . there has been less than three months since a previous JR (in Scotland
    or elsewhere in the UK) or statutory appeal has been concluded and the
    issues being raised could reasonably have been raised at that previous
    JR or statutory appeal
  . an interim order to stay removal has already been refused, and no
    subsequent application for an interim order has been granted
  . the person is being removed by special arrangements (including by
    charter flight).
  . removal is at the Ensured Return stage of the Family Returns Process

This list is not exhaustive, so you must always seek advice from Lit Ops
SNI /OSCU when you are considering whether to defer removal.


If an appeal is marked (called a reclaiming motion) against a decision of
the Court of Session dismissing a petition for JR that will not of itself
prevent removal directions being set.  Removal directions can be set if,
after consultation with the OAG, it is considered that an appeal is
obviously lacking in merit.  Generally, removal directions will not be set
within the 21 days during which a reclaiming motion can be marked.  If a
reclaiming motion is marked and removal directions are subsequently set,
the petitioner (via their legal representatives where applicable) must be
advised that in order to have their removal cancelled they must seek and
obtain from the Inner House of the Court of Session an interim order
suspending those removal directions.


If you decide that removal will not be deferred, you must immediately
notify the person or his legal representatives in writing that removal will
go ahead unless they obtain an interim order preventing removal.  If an
interim order is granted, removal cannot take place until the petition is
determined.


If a decision is made not to defer removal, in line with the exceptions set
out in points 1 to 4, but the removal fails for reasons unrelated to the JR
proceedings, then removal directions may be re-set (or the ten-day policy
applied), provided that the reasons for the original decision that the JR
should not suspend removal are still applicable. Removal should be
suspended if an interim order is obtained.




Judicial review in Northern Ireland

Judicial review (JR) in Northern Ireland is pursued by means of an
application to the High Court of Justice.  Leave to apply for JR is made on
an ex parte basis setting out the relief sought and the grounds of review
relied upon.


Applications for JR in Northern Ireland must be brought to the attention of
the Crown Solicitor's Office (CSO) via the litigation team at Festival
Court in Glasgow, who act on the Home Office's behalf in these cases, and
who can provide advice on how to proceed.  Criminal cases are dealt with by
LOCDI.


Completing the Immigration Factual Summary

Immigration Factual Summary: functions

An Immigration Factual Summary must, in all cases, be completed and served
along with a notice of removal. It has a number of functions:


  . it outlines to the person being removed all of the different actions
    which have been taken on their case which have led to the setting of
    removal directions
  . should the person lodge an application for JR, their legal
    representative, OSCU, and the Administrative Court or Upper Tribunal
    rely on the information contained within the summary in order to make a
    quick and informed decision concerning the person's case for JR and
    whether it is appropriate to maintain or defer removal
  . additionally, the ECtHR relies on the information contained within the
    summary to assess the merits of an application to them to impose
    interim measures under Rule 39 of the ECtHR's Rules of Court
  . it enables the Home Office to demonstrate to the court all of the steps
    that have been taken to address a claim to remain in the UK, and to
    demonstrate that removal is now the appropriate course of action

Immigration Factual Summary: completion

The contents of the Immigration Factual Summary must be written clearly so
that it can be understood by a person outside the Home Office.  It must be
completed in plain English and without acronyms.


All fields must be completed.  Most fields are self-explanatory, however
some guidance is provided below.


Basic data fields

In the field entitled 'Legal Rep Address', if the person does not have a
legal representative 'No legal representative on record' must be recorded
in that field and, where appropriate, 'The subject has been provided with a
list of legal representatives'.

In the field entitled 'Removal Date', do not record the date of departure
if the person is being provided with only 'limited advance notification of
removal'.  Instead, you must record 'limited advance notice' in this field.
 The date and time of departure must not be mentioned in the 'Immigration
History' section of the form, but the reason for giving 'limited advance
notification of removal' must be stated in the 'Immigration History
section'.


In the field entitled 'Other Litigation' all previous applications for JR;
injunctions; and applications for interim measures under Rule 39 to the
ECtHR must be recorded.  The Administrative Court or Upper Tribunal office
reference number for each JR/injunction application must be recorded here
in order to assist the Court.  As an example, 'The subject submitted an
application for judicial review on dd/mm/yyyy (CO Ref: CO/00000/2011 or
Upper Tribunal ref: JR/00000/2014). Permission was refused on dd/mm/yyyy.'



It is important that wherever possible all of the information needed to
complete the summary is obtained directly from the Home Office file rather
than from CID alone.


Immigration history

The more complete and accurate the immigration history the more able the
Home Office will be to deal with litigation quickly and effectively. An
accurate Immigration Factual Summary will also reduce the likelihood of the
High Court granting last minute injunctions.


The Immigration History must be completed in chronological order.


The instructional text contained within the document will aid completion of
the history and the guidance below provides further assistance.


Arrival in the UK
  . record the most recent date of arrival in the UK, record the dates of
    any previous arrivals in the UK and whether entry was made on a valid
    visa etc, or if leave to enter was refused
  . record any attempts at entering the UK illegally and method used (e.g.
    false passport, clandestine entry in a lorry)
  . record any documents served to the person at the point of entry and the
    date on which the document was served
  . record any periods of Temporary Admission granted
  . record if the person has re-entered the UK post-removal or was returned
    from a third country under the Dublin Convention
  . note if the person has entered in breach of an extant Deportation Order



Departures or Removals from the UK
  . record the date of any previous removals of the person from the UK
  . record the date of any voluntary departures made by the person from the
    UK

Details of any valid leave held
  . record the type and length of any previous leave held
  . if leave was curtailed, record the date of curtailment and the reason
    for the decision, note any documents served to the person

Claims made to the Home Office (asylum, human rights)
  . note the date that the person made the claim and the nature of the
    claim (e.g. asylum, human rights)
  . record the outcome of the claim and the date of decision (e.g. refused
    asylum but granted exceptional leave to remain (ELR), or certified as
    clearly unfounded under section 94 of the 2002 Act etc)
  . record if the refusal carried a right of appeal to the Tribunal or
    whether and why the claim did not carry a right of appeal (for example
    claim certified under section 96 of the 2002 Act or refused under
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules)

Applications for leave to remain
  . record the date of each application made to the Home Office and what
    type of application (for example Leave to remain as a spouse, Leave to
    remain outside the Rules etc)
  . record the outcome of each application and, if appropriate period
    covered by the leave (for example Leave to remain granted from
    dd/mm/yyyy to dd/mm/yyyy)
  . if the application was refused by the Home Office, state whether the
    refusal attracted a right of appeal and whether the appeal was 'in
    country' or only exercisable from abroad
  . state if the application was refused and certified under either s94 or
    s96 of the 2002 Act
  . record the dates and outcome of any administrative review of a decision



Appeals
  . detail the date of any appeals made and the date and outcome of each
    appeal
  . detail all applications for permission to appeal to the First Tier
    Tribunal or Upper Tier Tribunal and the outcome,  prior to the
    existence of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber, applications for
    reconsideration were made to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal and/or
    to the High Court, and this must be reflected in the Immigration
    Factual Summary if appropriate
  . record the date on which the person exhausted their appeal rights, also
    note if there are any remaining appeals which may be exercised from
    outside the UK (for example following a refusal under section 94 of the
    2002 Act)
  . if the person had a right of appeal but did not exercise that right,
    record this information along with the date on which they subsequently
    exhausted their appeal rights

Further submissions
  . record the dates of all occasions when further submissions were made
    and the date of the outcome in each instance, this includes any
    submissions made by Members of Parliament
  . if the further submissions attracted a right of appeal, record whether
    or not the appeal was exercised and the outcome of the appeal

Deportation Orders
  . record the date when the person was notified of their Liability to
    Deportation and documents issued
  . record the date of Decision to Make a Deportation Order, note whether
    the person exercised a right of appeal and the outcome of the appeal,
    record the date on which they exhausted their appeal rights
  . record the date that the Deportation Order was signed and served
  . if the person is subject to Automatic Deportation, record the date that
    the Decision to Make a Deportation Order was served and whether there
    was a right of appeal to the Tribunal, date of appeal and outcome, also
    note if there was a human rights or asylum claim refused in the
    Decision to Make a Deportation Order which was certified under section
    94 or section 96 of the 2002 Act

Applications for JR and injunctions
  . record the date of any applications for JR and/or injunctions, and
    record the outcome of those applications together with the
    Administrative Court or Upper Tribunal office reference numbers
  . record if no JRs or injunctions have been sought in the 'Further
    Litigation' field
  . if removal is not being deferred despite a JR application state why
    (for example, there has been an appeal within the last three months,
    removal via charter flight etc)

Periods of detention and reasons for release
Give details of:


  . all previous periods of detention and the reason for release
  . dates of service of IS96 and the reporting restrictions imposed
  . all incidents of failure to comply with reporting restrictions and the
    action taken
  . dates of all bail hearings and outcomes

Dates of any periods of absconding Give details of:
  . any periods where the individual has been classified as an absconder
    (see: Absconders and non-compliance)

Removal directions
  . record the date of any removal directions previously set and the reason
    for the failure to remove (for example, the person was disruptive,
    illness, violence etc)
  . record the service date and time of removal directions, if less than
    standard notification is being provided, state why, but do not record
    the date and time of the removal
  . state whether self check-in removal directions have been set previously
    and the reason for failure
  . where removal directions are set for removal by charter flight record
    the date that the assertive letter was served
  . third country cases - state certified in accordance with third country
    legislation, claim to be considered by [member state]

Disclaimers
  . record the dates of any disclaimers signed by the person and the
    content of the disclaimer (withdrew a right of appeal, agreed to depart
    voluntarily)
  . include any issues of non-compliance by the person in obtaining the
    Emergency Travel
         Document (for example, failing to attend an interview or failing to
                                                     complete documentation)

Assisted Voluntary Return (AVR) and Facilitated Returns Scheme (FRS)
  . record the date of when AVR was offered and how it was offered (e.g.
    face-to-face)
  . if a family is being returned you must state the date of any Family
    Return Conference(s) conducted
  . state if an AVR application was made but later withdrawn
  . for individuals subject to deportation, record if they have applied for
    FRS and the outcome of the application

Medical conditions
  . record any known medical conditions (when diagnosed)
  . record if the Home Office has provided the person with medication
  . note any treatment they are currently receiving.  Alternatively, state
    if treatment is not currently received
  . record any provisions that the Home Office has made for the removal of
    the person (for example, medical escort, any additional medical
    equipment)

Risk of self-harm or suicide
  . note if there is a medical escort travelling with the person being
    removed
  . record if there is any evidence that the person has previously
    deliberately harmed themselves or has attempted suicide


-----------------------
Does one or more of the following apply?



.

It has been less than six months since a JR was brought

-



o

on the same or similar issues



o

on the same evidence

,



even though the legal basis of

the challenge is different f

rom that previously

brought



o

the issues being raised could reasonably have been

raised at that previous JR or statut

ory appeal (one

-

stop

provision)



.

the pers

on is within the removal window



.

a JR renewal application has been made but an

application for injunction has already been



refused in

relation to that same JR application or an order has been

made th

at renewal is no bar to removal



.

there has been an injunction against removal refused

Do any of the following apply?



.

permis

sion h

as been granted on the JR



.

there has been an injunction against remova

l granted by

the court/tribunal



.

this is the first JR challenge to a decision to certify a claim,

the result of which being there is either no appeal, or any

appeal right is out of country



only (unless an

The merits test

-



is the JR

bound to fail?







Yes



No

No



Remov

al is

suspen

ded



No



Remov

al is

not

suspen

ded



No



Ye

Ye

The barrier test

-



are any

of the issues raised by the

JR a barrier to removal?





Ye


