
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Alam (s 85A - commencement - Article 8) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00424(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2011                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P R LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MD Mahbub Alam
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R. Hopkin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B. Poddar, of Kalam Solicitors


(1) Where it applies, s. 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
2002 precludes certain evidence from being  relied  on,  in  order  to  show
compliance with the Immigration Rules.

(2) "Fairness" arguments concerning  the  application  of  the  transitional
provisions regarding s. 85A, in  article  3  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
(Commencement No. 7 and Transitional Provisions)  Order  2011,  may  have  a
legitimate part to play in a proportionality assessment under Article  8  of
the  ECHR,  when  assessing  the  strength  of  the  State's   interest   in
maintaining the integrity of the Immigration Rules.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The respondent (hereinafter referred to as the claimant) is a  citizen
    of Bangladesh born on 1 January 1981 who entered the United Kingdom  on
    26 August 2011, with entry clearance as a student.  On 2 July 2010  his
    leave was varied, as a Tier 4 migrant until 17 April 2011.  That  leave
    was itself subsequently varied so as to terminate on 12 April 2011.

2.    On 1 April 2011 the claimant applied for further variation  of  leave,
    in order to continue his studies for  an  ACCA  qualification.   On  20
    April 2011 the Secretary of State  decided  to  refuse  the  claimant's
    application on the basis that the claimant's bank statements  submitted
    with the application were dated more  than  one  month  prior  to  that
    application  and  accordingly  could  not  be  taken  into  account  in
    assessing points claimed for maintenance (funds).

3.     The  claimant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and his appeal was heard at Sutton by Immigration Judge Meates
    on 10 June 2011.  By the time of the hearing, the claimant had produced
    bank statements covering the period 27 December 2010 to 26 March  2011,
    which demonstrated that he had  sufficient  funds  over  the  requisite
    period in order to meet the requirements of  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules.

4.    However, at the Immigration Judge hearing it was  common  ground  that
    the claimant's ability to adduce this evidence in support of his appeal
    was restricted by section  85A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Section 85A sets out a number of  exceptions  to  the
    general proposition in section 85(4) that:-

         "(4)     On an appeal under section 82(1), 83(2) or 83A(2)  against
             a decision the Tribunal may consider evidence about any matter
             which it thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,
             including evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the
             date of the decision."

5.    In the present  case,  the  relevant  exception  in  section  85A  was
    exception 2:-

         "(3)     Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if -


             (a) the appeal is against an immigration decision  of  a  kind
                  specified in section 82(2)(a) or (d),


             (b) the immigration decision concerned  an  application  of  a
                  kind identified in immigration rules as  requiring  to  be
                  considered under a Points-Based System, and


             (c) the appeal relies wholly or partly on grounds specified in
                  section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).


         (4)      Where  exception  2  applies  the  Tribunal  may  consider
             evidence adduced by the appellant only if it -


             (a) was submitted in support of, and at the  time  of  making,
                  the application to which the immigration decision related,


             (b) relates to the appeal insofar as  it  relates  on  grounds
                  other than those specified in sub-section (3)(c),


             (c) is adduced to prove that a document is genuine  or  valid,
                  or


             (d) is adduced in connection with  the  Secretary  of  State's
                  reliance on  a  discretion  under  immigration  rules,  or
                  compliance with a requirement  of  immigration  rules,  to
                  refuse an  application  on  grounds  not  related  to  the
                  acquisition of 'points' under the 'Points-Based System'."

6.    In the present  case,  the  immigration  decision  against  which  the
    claimant appealed was, as I have already indicated, a refusal  to  vary
    leave to remain, that is to say, the "immigration  decision"  described
    in section 82(2)(d).  That immigration decision  plainly  concerned  an
    application made under the Points-Based System.  The claimant's grounds
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal asserted that the claimant met the
    relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules.  His grounds of appeal,
    accordingly, fell within section 84(1)(a) ("that the decision is not in
    accordance with Immigration Rules") and  (e)  ("that  the  decision  is
    otherwise not in accordance with the law").  There is no  reference  in
    the claimant's grounds of appeal to the Secretary of  State's  decision
    being unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.   Indeed,
    the ECHR was not mentioned.

7.    Although section 85A was prospectively inserted in  the  2002  Act  by
    the UK Borders Act 2007, section 85A came into operation only on 23 May
    2011, as a result of the UK Borders Act 2007 (Commencement  No.  7  and
    Transitional Provisions) Order 2011 (2011 No. 1293 (C.53)).  Article  3
    of the 2011 Order contained the following transitional provision:-

         "3. -    (1)  The amendment made to  the  Nationality,  Immigration
                  and Asylum Act 2002 by section 19 of the  UK  Borders  Act
                  2007 will not have effect in  relation  to  an  appeal  in
                  respect of which a hearing at the First-tier  Tribunal  of
                  the Immigration and Asylum Chamber has taken place  before
                  23 May 2011 and which is still pending.


            (2)   For the purposes of this article, a 'hearing' is one where
                  one or  more  Immigration  Judges  hear  an  appeal  under
                  section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
                  Act 2002 against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,
                  at the First-tier Tribunal of the Immigration  and  Asylum
                  Chamber and includes Case Management Review hearings.


            (3)   For the purposes of this article, an appeal  is  'pending'
                  when it has been instituted under  section  82(1)  of  the
                  Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but  has  not
                  yet been finally determined, withdrawn or abandoned or  is
                  not lapsed under section 99 of that Act."

8.    Before the Immigration Judge, Mr Poddar (who also appeared before  me)
    submitted that section 85A did not apply in the case  of  the  claimant
    because the claimant's appeal was part-heard.  It is apparent from  the
    determination  that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not  consider   that
    submission to have any force.  According to Mr Poddar, it was based  on
    the fact that, prior to 23 May 2011, the claimant had received a notice
    of hearing from the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  cannot  rationally  be
    asserted that submission of a notice of hearing constitutes a "hearing"
    within the scope of Article 3(1) of the 2011  Order.   The  Immigration
    Judge was, accordingly, right to find that the section 85A  applied  to
    the present appeal.

9.    The effect of this, as regards the claimant's ability to  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules, was set out by the Immigration Judge at paragraph 11
    of her determination:-

         "11.     In support of his appeal the [claimant] produced his  bank
             statements covering the period 27 December 2010  to  26  March
             2011 clearly showing that for  the  requisite  period  he  had
             sufficient funds  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.
             However as Section 85A is now in force I am only  entitled  to
             consider circumstances appertaining as  at  the  date  of  the
             decision  and  can  only  consider  evidence  adduced  by  the
             [claimant] if it was submitted in support of, and at the  time
             of making his application to vary leave as a Tier 4  (General)
             Migrant.  Thus I cannot consider the bank  statement  for  the
             period 27 February to 26 March 2011 as this bank statement was
             not submitted in support of the original  application,  albeit
             that the bank statement shows  that  the  [claimant]  has  the
             requisite funds to claim 10  points  under  Appendix  C.   The
             [claimant] has now  produced  evidence  showing  that  he  had
             sufficient funds available  to  him  prior  to  the  decision,
             however unfortunately I cannot take this evidence into account
             and therefore I must dismiss the appeal under the  Immigration
             Rules."

10.   For some reason, the Immigration Judge then turned  to  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.  I say this because, as I have already indicated, there is no
    indication in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal that the
    claimant  was  asserting  that  his  removal  in  consequence  of   the
    immigration decision would violate  his  rights  under  the  ECHR.   It
    seems, however, that Mr Poddar was given permission by the  Immigration
    Judge at the hearing to advance an Article 8 claim  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant.

11.   The Immigration Judge found that the claimant had a  private  life  in
    the United Kingdom since he had "embarked on  a  particular  course  of
    study in the United Kingdom, the  ACCA,  which  it  is  his  desire  to
    complete" (paragraph 15).  At paragraph 16, the Immigration Judge found
    that the Secretary of State's decision was "lawful and  legitimate  ...
    bearing in mind the need to maintain an effective immigration control".
     The matter, therefore, came down to proportionality.  The  Immigration
    Judge found as follows:-

         "17.     As to whether the decision is  proportionate  my  view  is
             that there was real strength in the argument that  it  is  not
             proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  in   maintaining   an
             effective  immigration  control  because  the  [claimant]  has
             clearly established that he  meets  the  requirements  of  the
             Rules to be awarded 10 points under Appendix C, the Rules  set
             up by the [Secretary of State] to allow for students to  study
             and  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Thus  it  cannot   be
             forcefully argued by the [Secretary of State] that he is [sic]
             decision is legitimate in maintaining an effective immigration
             control as the [claimant] clearly meets  the  requirements  of
             the Rule set up to establish this  immigration  control.   The
             problem however in allowing the appeal under Article 8 is that
             it was not the basis upon which the  [claimant's]  application
             was made and could result in a grant  of  discretionary  leave
             for a period of three years (as is the [Secretary of  State's]
             policy) which is clearly not the type of leave the  [claimant]
             sought or envisaged being granted.  However given my  findings
             that the decision is not proportionate  I  have  come  to  the
             conclusion that this appeal should be allowed under Article  8
             of the ECHR but urge that the [Secretary  of  State]  consider
             granting the [claimant] the limited leave requested.


         18.      As indicated  at  the  hearing  I  also  record  that  the
             [Secretary of State] should be amenable to a fresh application
             by the [claimant]."

12.   The Immigration Judge  was,  of  course,  correct  to  find  that  the
    structure of sections 85 and 85A was such that her ability to  consider
    evidence in respect of the ground  advanced  (albeit  belatedly)  under
    section 84(1)(g) was not covered  by  the  evidential  restrictions  in
    section 85A, with the result that the Immigration  Judge  was  entitled
    under section 85(4) to consider evidence  about  any  matter  which  he
    thought  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision.   Thereafter,
    however, she fell into error.

13.   There is an obvious  contradiction  between  the  Immigration  Judge's
    finding at the end of paragraph 11, that the claimant  could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and the finding at paragraph
    17,  that  he  did  so.   It  is  immediately  apparent  that,  if  the
    Immigration Judge's logic is  correct,  the  relevant  restrictions  in
    section 85A on the type of evidence that  may  be  adduced  will  often
    count for nothing.  Provided that an  Article  8  ground  is  advanced,
    persons who, because of section 85A, cannot prove that  they  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules can, nevertheless, use  precisely
    the same evidence in order to demonstrate that they do, in  fact,  meet
    the requirements of those Rules, with the result  that  (provided  they
    have some  form  of  protected  private  life)  the  meeting  of  those
    requirements destroys the Secretary of State's  ability  to  place  the
    importance of maintaining immigration controls on the State's  side  of
    the proportionality balance.

14.   Either the logic of this position escaped the  Immigration  Judge  or,
    more likely, she chose to ignore it in order to enable the claimant  to
    escape what  might  be  regarded  as  the  harsh  consequences  of  the
    application of section 85A to an appeal  which  was  pending  when  the
    Commencement Order brought that section into force.

15.   There will inevitably be cases in which the  same  evidence  will,  on
    the one hand, fall to be excluded by virtue of section 85A, in deciding
    whether a person meets the points-based Rules, but may nevertheless  be
    considered  in  connection  with  that  person's  assertion  that   the
    immigration decision, if acted upon, would violate his or her Article 8
    rights.  However, as the present case demonstrates,  a  judicial  fact-
    finder faced with such a situation must pay proper regard to  the  fact
    that, in enacting section 85A, Parliament has decided that  there  will
    be circumstances in which a person  is  to  be  disabled  from  proving
    compliance with the Immigration Rules, where the evidence relied on  is
    not submitted at the time of making the relevant application.  Provided
    that the judicial fact-finder appreciates the  position,  namely,  that
    there has not been compliance with the Immigration Rules, the weight to
    be placed upon the State's interests in maintaining  the  integrity  of
    United Kingdom immigration control will be a matter  for  him  or  her.
    The proportionality  balancing  exercise  cannot,  however,  be  short-
    circuited by a finding that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    have been met.  They have not.

16.   Before me, as he had (it  seems)  before  the  Immigration  Judge,  Mr
    Poddar  in  effect  submitted  that  section  85A  should  be  ignored,
    certainly in a transitional case of the present kind, on the basis that
    it would be "unfair" to do otherwise.  When pressed, Mr Poddar drew  no
    distinction between applying his "unfairness" submission to policies of
    the Secretary of State, Immigration  Rules  or  provisions  of  primary
    legislation.  It is, however, inappropriate for the First-tier Tribunal
    or the Upper Tribunal to ride roughshod over  primary  legislation,  as
    suggested by Mr Poddar.

17.   There may well  be  an  issue  in  connection  with  the  transitional
    provisions in article 3 of the 2011 Order, in that a  person  may  have
    embarked on an appeal on the basis that he  or  she  could  adduce  the
    relevant evidence to show compliance with  the  Immigration  Rules,  in
    connection with an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, only to find that
    the Commencement Order has removed that ability.   If  it  was  thought
    that article 3 was irrational or otherwise could not have been lawfully
    made, a challenge to the making of  the  2011  Order  could  have  been
    brought by means of judicial review.

18.  It would also be wrong  to  rule  out  the  possibility  of  "fairness"
    arguments being deployed in individual appeals,  in  order  to  address
    problems raised by article 3 of the Order. As I have already  indicated
    at paragraph 15 above and as I shall go on to address in a moment, such
    arguments can play a legitimate role in assessing the strength  of  the
    State's interests, as part of the proportionality assessment.  What is,
    however, clear is that the Immigration Judge in the  present  case  was
    wrong in law to find as she did at paragraph 17 of  the  determination;
    and Mr Poddar was unable to advance before me any alternative basis for
    upholding the determination. I accordingly set it aside.

19.   Mr Poddar did not submit on behalf of the  claimant  that  the  latter
    had been unable, when he sent in his application, to provide  the  bank
    statements the Secretary of State required in order to show  compliance
    with the Immigration Rules. Whilst I  accept  that  the  claimant  (and
    others in his position) would have  been  able  to  use  the  appellate
    proceedings to cure this difficulty, but for the coming into  force  of
    section 85A of the 2002 Act, Parliament has  seen  fit  to  enact  that
    section and to give the Secretary of  State  power  to  bring  it  into
    force, by means of statutory instrument.   I  am  not  aware  that  the
    validity of the 2011 Order has been successfully challenged on judicial
    review. I accordingly find that  the  effect  of  section  85A  in  the
    present case is to preclude the claimant from showing that he meets the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

20.   The claimant has been here for some four years,  undertaking  studies.
    He has thereby formed some sort of protected  private  life.  No  other
    aspect of his life here was relied upon. As requested, I have regard to
    the written statements of the claimant, dated 31 May  2011.   In  this,
    the claimant states that, when he received the  acknowledgement  letter
    from the Secretary of State in respect of his application,  he  thought
    that "If any further document is necessary I would be asked to  provide
    but this was not done and subsequently my application has been refused.
     As a layperson I did  not  understand  the  actual  procedure  and  my
    documents show that qualify the requirements [sic]."  The claimant goes
    on to state that he "have no intension [sic] to prolong my stay  in  UK
    upon completion of my course".  Paragraph 8 of the statement  indicates
    that  the  claimant's  mother  "is  a  cancer  patient  and  surviving,
    practically I do not know whether I will be able to see my mom again or
    not, even I could not inform to my family members of my  visa  problem,
    kindly consider my compassionate grounds and allow my visa, then I will
    be able to see my mom, just to remind you respectfully law is  for  the
    people and people is not for the law [sic]".

21.   I appreciate that it is the claimant's wish to continue with his  ACCA
    course and that his plans for the future may be significantly  affected
    if he is now required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   It  has  not,
    however, been shown that he would be unable to return to  this  country
    in due course to complete his studies, should he so wish.  The claimant
    has not asserted any family life of any kind in this country.   On  the
    contrary, as his written statement makes plain, his family life remains
    in Bangladesh.  The ill-health of the claimant's mother is such that he
    wants to return to that country to be with her and that  understandable
    desire is likely to have an impact on his course  of  studies  in  this
    country. In short, having regard to all the evidence,  I  consider  the
    claimant's private life in the United Kingdom, as  advanced,  to  be  a
    very weak one.

22.   So far as the State's interest is concerned, I am compelled,  for  the
    reasons I have given, to find that  the  claimant  does  not  meet  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  that  there  is  a  legitimate   interest   in
    maintaining the integrity of those Rules, when necessary  by  requiring
    those who do not meet them  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   I  have,
    nevertheless, considered the circumstances in which  the  claimant  has
    failed to meet the Rules: viz. that he is one of  a  necessarily  fixed
    class whose ability to prove compliance with the Rules has  changed  by
    operation  of  law  since  he  began  his  appeal  proceedings.   Those
    circumstances do, to some extent,  diminish  the  State's  interest  in
    removing the claimant, merely in order to maintain the integrity of the
    Rules. If the claimant's Article 8 rights  had  been  any  stronger,  I
    might well have concluded in the  circumstances  that  his  removal  in
    consequence of the immigration decision would be disproportionate.   As
    it is, however, I consider that the  balance  falls  to  be  struck  in
    favour of the Secretary of State.


Decision

23.   The determination contained an error of law and I have set  it  aside.
    I re-make the decision by dismissing the claimant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

                               Signed                         Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge P R Lane
