
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

            RH (UTIAC - remittals) Jamaica [2010] UKUT 423 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 4 October 2010                    |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                           IMMIGRATION JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     RH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

1) In deciding whether to set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
under section 12 of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  the
Upper Tribunal can dispose of the appeal in  one  of  two  ways,  either  by
remitting the case to the Fist-tier Tribunal or by re-making  the  decision.
However, that choice is regulated by para  7  of  Part  3  of  the  Practice
Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
which only contemplates remittal in very limited circumstances.

2)  Proper  exercise  of  the  discretion  afforded  by  reg  17(4)  of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 requires the decision-
maker to take into account whether  or  not  the  effect  of  refusal  of  a
residence card to the claimant would  hinder  or  frustrate  the  continuing
exercise of  the  free  movement  rights  of  the  EEA  family  member/Union
citizen.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M O'Connor, Counsel instructed by Hackney Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr. R Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, was admitted  to  the  UK  on  20
    October 2002 as a visitor.  In 2005 he adopted a fake identity,  making
    use of a British passport belonging to someone else.  On 2 May 2009  he
    was arrested for using a false instrument and on 22  May  2009  he  was
    convicted and sentenced to twelve months imprisonment.  On 29 June 2009
    he claimed asylum, a  claim  he  withdrew  on  7  September  2009.   On
    14 October 2009 he applied for a residence card on the basis  that  he
    was in a durable relationship with an  EEA  national,  Ms  NM.   On  19
    November 2009 the respondent refused his application. He appealed. In a
    determination notified on 17 May 2010 Immigration Judge (IJ) P J  Scott
    dismissed his appeal.

2.    Disagreeing with the respondent the IJ found that  the  appellant  and
    his partner had been in a durable relationship since December 2007  and
    so met the requirements of reg 8 of the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (hereafter "the 2006 Regulations").  However, he
    considered that the respondent's decision  to  refuse  the  application
    under reg 17(4)  was  "in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the
    Regulations".

3.    Turning to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    (ECHR) the IJ was satisfied that the appellant had  established  family
    and private life in the UK and that his  removal  would  constitute  an
    interference with that right.  But he did not consider  that  it  would
    amount to a disproportionate interference. He concluded:

         "The Appellant is also  potentially  at  risk  of  deportation  and
         clearly that is a matter  of  consideration  by  the  Secretary  of
         State. One must, however, take into account the family  members  of
         the appellant, namely his partner and son.  His partner  is  French
         and, despite her desire solely  not  to  return  to  France,  there
         appears to be no reason why she should not so return.  Their  child
         is  already  living  in  France,  where  he  has  been   for   some
         considerable period of  time.   There  appears  to  be  nothing  to
         prevent the appellant's partner returning with him  to  Jamaica  if
         she so desires, or for the Appellant to make application to move to
         France  with  his  partner  if  she  were  to  return  there.   The
         Appellant's child's situation would not be drastically effected  by
         the Appellant's removal to Jamaica. There  is  nothing  to  suggest
         that it would be unreasonable for the  Appellant's  partner  and/or
         their child if they so desire, to  move  to  Jamaica,  or  for  the
         entire family to live in France. Having considered  the  principles
         set down in Chikwamba  [2008]  and  Beoku-Betts  [2008]  and  I  am
         satisfied that it would be entirely proportionate for the Appellant
         to be removed from the United  Kingdom  to  Jamaica.  Whilst  there
         might be a close and genuine bond with his  partner,  that  partner
         can be reasonably expected to follow the Appellant to  the  country
         of removal.  The effect of the  Order  would  not  be  to  sever  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship between parent  and  child,  as
         parent and child are already living separate and apart as they have
         been for some time."


4.    The appellant's grounds of appeal  were  twofold.   It  was  submitted
    that the IJ erred firstly in failing to consider  whether  to  exercise
    for himself the discretion afforded  by  reg  17(4)  of  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations; and secondly in finding his removal would be proportionate
    because it would not be unreasonable for the entire family to  live  in
    France.

5.    We are satisfied that the IJ materially erred in law in his  treatment
    of reg. 17(4). As explained by the  Tribunal  in  FD  (EEA  discretion:
    basis of appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 00049, at [15-17] an appellant is
    entitled  to  have  his  appeal  allowed  under   s.86(3)(6)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 if the Tribunal  considers
    that a discretion exercised in making the  decision  should  have  been
    exercised differently.  For an IJ to confine himself to the question of
    whether the actual exercise of discretion by the Secretary of State was
    a lawful act is an error of law.  Yet that is precisely the  error  the
    IJ made in this case at [21]  when,  instead  of  deciding  whether  to
    exercise the reg 17(4) discretion  differently,  he  stated  that  "the
    respondent's decision to refuse the application under the  [2006  Regs]
    is in accordance with the requirements of those Regulations."   Plainly
    this failure may have had a material  effect  on  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal. Accordingly we set aside the IJ's decision.  Ordinarily, having
    decided the IJ has materially erred in law, our next task would  be  to
    proceed to remake the decision. However at this point  in  the  hearing
    both parties sought to raise preliminary points: Mr O'Connor  sought  a
    remittal; Mr Hopkins sought an adjournment.

6.    Dealing with Mr  O'Connor's  point  first,  he  raised  a  new  matter
    relating to the fact that the appellant had a pending appeal against  a
    decision that he was liable to automatic deportation under s.33 of  the
    Borders Act 2007.  Mr O'Connor submitted that in view of the fact  that
    there were two  sets  of  proceedings  currently  before  the  Tribunal
    dealing with almost identical issues in relation to the same  appellant
    "the most efficient method" of disposing of the current appeal  was  to
    (i) set aside the determination of IJ Scott; and (ii) remit the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal (with directions for the two appeals  to  be
    heard in tandem) pursuant to s.12(2)(b) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.  Section 12 states:

         "12 Proceedings on appeal to Upper Tribunal


         (1)      Subsection (2) applies if the Upper Tribunal, in  deciding
             an appeal under section 11,  finds  that  the  making  of  the
             decision concerned involved the making of an error on a  point
             of law.


         (2)      The Upper Tribunal -


         (a)      may (but need not) set aside the decision  of  the  First-
             tier Tribunal, and


         (b)      if it does, must either -


         (i)      remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal with  directions
             for its reconsideration, or


         (ii)     re-make the decision.


         (3)      In acting under subsection (2)(b)(i), the  Upper  Tribunal
             may also -


         (a)      direct that the members of the First-tier Tribunal who are
             chosen to reconsider the case are not to be the same as  those
             who made the decision that has been set aside;

             (b)   give  procedural  directions  in  connection  with   the
             reconsideration of the case by the First tier Tribunal


        (4)      In acting under subsection (2)(b)(ii), the Upper  Tribunal
             -


        (a)      may make any decision which the First-tier Tribunal  could
             make if the First-tier Tribunal were re-making  the  decision,
             and


        (b)       may  make  such  findings  of  fact   as   it   considers
             appropriate."

7.     There  is  also  an  Upper  Tribunal  Practice  Statement   for   the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal, which states:

                 "7.   "Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal

             Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal  under section 12(2)(b)(i) or proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to  re-make  the
             decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).


         7.2      The Upper Tribunal is likely on each occasion  to  proceed
             to re-make the decision instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:-


                  (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party
                      before the First-tier Tribunal  of a fair hearing  or
                      other opportunity for that party's case to be put  to
                      and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


                  (b)  there are highly compelling reasons why the  decision
                      should not be re-made by the  Upper  Tribunal.  (Such
                      reasons are likely to be rare)."

   8. We note that s.12 of the 2007 Act affords  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  a
      discretion as to whether to set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and as to whether, if it does, to remit the case to the First-
      tier  Tribunal  or  re-make  the  decision.  That  choice  is  clearly
      regulated by the Practice Statement.  The  latter  emanates  from  the
      Senior President of Tribunals, who has authority  not  only  to  issue
      Practice Directions (s.23) but also to "preside over both of the First-
      tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal" (s. 3(4)) and to have regard  to
      the need for tribunals to be  fair  and  to  be  handled  quickly  and
      efficiently.


   9. Mr O'Connor's response did not take issue with  the  validity  of  the
      Practice Statement but did  contend  that  the  circumstances  of  the
      appellant's case fell squarely within Practice Statement  7.2(b):   he
      submitted that the highly compelling reasons were firstly that it  was
      the only way to ensure a one-stop, all-in-one treatment of his appeal;
      secondly a remittal was the only way to ensure that the appellant  was
      granted adequate appeal rights.  For us to proceed to  deal  with  the
      present appeal on its own would effectively fragment,  he  maintained,
      the Tribunal's proper disposal of his rights of appeal.

  10. We ruled that we would not remit the appeal.  In deciding  whether  to
      set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  s.12  of  the
      Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007,  the  Upper  Tribunal  can
      dispose of the appeal in one of two ways, either by remitting the case
      to the Fist-tier Tribunal or by re-making the decision. However,  that
      choice is regulated by para 7 of Part 3 of the Practice Statements for
      the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal,  which  only
      contemplates remittal in very limited circumstances. In our  judgement
      the circumstances of this case do not fall within either  7.2  (a)  or
      7.2(b) of this Practice Statement.

  11. It is quite unsatisfactory that the respondent should not  have  dealt
      with the appellant's application for a residence card and the question
      of his deportation at one and the same time.  She had known about  his
      conviction for some time. Further, it  should  have  been  foreseeable
      that if the appellant could show he was an "other family member" (OFM)
      within reg 8 of the 2006 Regulations, the first  question  that  would
      arise would be whether the discretion afforded by reg 17(4) should  or
      should not be exercised in the appellant's favour and that this  would
      involve  "an  extensive  examination  of  the  [appellant's]  personal
      circumstances", which would include (to quote from  para  2.4  of  the
      European Casework Instructions cited in YB (EEA reg 17(4) -  a  proper
      approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062) examining "whether  refusing
      the family member would deter the EEA national from exercising his/her
      treaty rights or would create an effective  obstacle  to  exercise  of
      treaty rights."  If the respondent decided in the appellant's  favour,
      the appellant  would  then  fall  under  the  exception  to  automatic
      deportation set out at s.33 of the UK Borders Act 2007  and  he  could
      only be deported if that  would  be  compatible  with  the  safeguards
      contained in reg 20(1) and 21 of the 2006  EEA  Regulations:  see  reg
      17(8).

12.   However, failure on the part  of  the  respondent  to  deal  with  the
    appellant's immigration position in this way does not justify  remittal
    of this appeal. Dealing with the residence card appeal separately would
    not result in any fragmented consideration of his circumstances. On the
    contrary, it would only  assist  in  clarifying  a  matter  that  would
    inevitably arise at the outset of his deportation  appeal,  namely  the
    matter of his EEA/Union law rights.

13.   If in this appeal the  appellant  is  found  to  have  a  right  to  a
    residence card then the separate deportation appeal would have to  take
    that as its starting point.  Indeed in that eventuality we  cannot  see
    that the respondent could maintain her decision since it would not have
    been made on the  correct  legal  basis:  as  already  noted,  in  that
    eventuality any decision to deport would have  to  be  made  under  reg
    20(1) of the 2006 EEA Regulations: see reg 17(8).

14.   If, on the other hand, we were to find in the context of  this  appeal
    that the appellant was not entitled to  a  residence  card,  then  that
    finding would properly inform the separate assessment of  both  of  the
    validity  of  the  decision  to  deport  and   his   Article   8   ECHR
    circumstances.

15.   We fail to understand how it could properly be said that remittal  was
    the only way to secure the appellant's appeal rights. Exercise  of  his
    right to appeal  against  refusal  of  a  residence  card  has  already
    resulted in his appeal progressing to the stage of the Upper  Tribunal.
    In relation to the deportation appeal the appellant will still have  an
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, with an opportunity to apply for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  if  unsuccessful.   Indeed,
    assuming lack of success in this appeal, even though in relation to the
    deportation appeal the  FtT would have to treat the  findings  of  this
    Tribunal as its start-point, there would be no  bar  to  the  appellant
    seeking to make a statement under s.120 raising the matter of  his  EEA
    rights afresh: see s.85(2).  If anything,  it  seems  to  us  that  the
    respondent's careless compartmentalisation of  its  decision-making  on
    the appellant's appeal has only  been  to  the  appellant's  advantage,
    offering him more than one bite of the cherry.

16. We turn then to Mr Hopkin's request that if we decide to set aside  the
    decision of the IJ we should adjourn. We can deal with this  much  more
    briefly. The respondent was directed to furnish any further evidence or
    submissions some time ago. The respondent made no response.  Mr  Hopkin
    did not suggest there were any mitigating circumstances to explain this
    failure. We had before us sufficient information about the  appellant's
    circumstances including the judge's sentencing  remarks  and  a  recent
    NOMS report dated 16 April 2010.


The 2006 Regulations

 17.  The 2006 Regulations  implement  provisions  of  Directive  2004/38/EC
    (the "Citizens' Directive"). Article 3(2)  imposes  a  duty  on  Member
    States to "facilitate entry and residence" in  respect  of  (a)  "other
    family members" (OFMs) and (b) "the partner with whom the Union citizen
    has a durable relationship duly  attested".   Regulation  8,  which  is
    headed "Extended family members" provides at 8(5) that:

         "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is a partner of an EEA national (other than a  civil  partner)  and
         can  prove  to  the  decision  maker  that  he  is  in  a   durable
         relationship with the EEA national."
18.   Regulation 17(4) then deals with the  circumstances  under  which  the
    Secretary of State may issue a residence card  to  an  extended  family
    member.
19.   The Tribunal has recently considered the case law  on  Article  3.2(a)
    family members in VN (EEA rights - dependency)  Macedonia  [2010]  UKUT
    00380 (IAC) and has previously considered the Article 3(2)(b)  "durable
    relationship" category in YB. The Court of  Appeal  briefly  considered
    the function of reg 17(4) in CS (Brazil) [2009] EWCA Civ 480. We should
    note at this point that whilst  there may be issues of  acte  clair  in
    relation to the precise ambit of the Article 3.2  duty  to  "facilitate
    entry and residence" as well as  in relation to the precise meaning  of
    "durable relationship", they do not have a  material  bearing  in  this
    case. That is because, as we shall now  come  to,  this  case  concerns
    whether there was a proper exercise of the discretion afforded  by  the
    2006 Regulations at reg 17(4)  and relates  to  an  appellant  who   is
    accepted as being in a "durable relationship".
 Our Assessment
20.   Before stating our  conclusions  on  the  appellant's  appeal  against
    refusal of a residence card we remind ourselves of the IJ's findings of
    fact, which have not been challenged by the respondent,  together  with
    the further written evidence  we  have  had  presented  to  us  at  the
    hearing, whose truth Mr Hopkin did not question. The appellant has been
    in a durable relationship with his EEA partner since December 2007. She
    is a full-time employee of one of  the  River  Island  outlets,  having
    recently been promoted to the  post  of  supervisor  and  she  is  also
    currently receiving in-house training to be a manager.  She  wishes  to
    continue to progress her employment  career  in  the  UK  and  is  also
    considering undertaking further studies here in the future. She and the
    appellant have a child D born on 3 December 2008.  When  the  appellant
    was in prison she decided that  her  son  should  live  temporarily  in
    France with his grandmother.  Since the  appellant  was  released  from
    prison she had wanted her son to return to live with them, but this was
    delayed because she had to make an application for  a  French  identity
    card and the French authorities had not accepted the photograph she had
    first enclosed.  However, very recently she had received  the  identity
    card and her son had travelled to the UK with  his  grandmother  -  the
    latter was due to return to France  shortly.   The  appellant,  as  was
    planned, is now D's carer whilst she is at work.

21.   In addition to his family life with  his  current  partner  and  their
    child, D, the appellant also has a child, M, from his  former  partner.
    The latter and their child now live in France, but the  appellant  with
    his former partner's blessing has contact with M and had seen him, both
    before and after he went to prison, on several occasions.

22.   The  appellant's  evidence  was  that  he  no  longer  had  any  close
    relations in Jamaica.

23.   We also had a NOMS report dated  16  April  2010  which  assessed  the
    appellant as at low risk of reoffending.

24.   Balanced against the appellant's family life ties just described,  the
    appellant has a poor immigration history.  He came to the UK in October
    2002 on a visitor's visa and when that expired in March 2003 he  became
    an overstayer.  Although he had been in a genuine relationship with his
    current EEA partner since 2007, he began that knowing  fully  that  his
    immigration status was precarious and also keeping from his partner the
    truth about his immigration position for some time.   In  May  2009  he
    was found to be in possession of, and to have used, a British  passport
    belonging to someone  else.  He  had  not  only  used  this  to  obtain
    employment but also to travel abroad, thereby exercising deception both
    abroad and in the UK. For this he had been convicted and  sentenced  to
    twelve months' imprisonment. The fact that he  had  made  a  claim  for
    asylum in June 2009 only to withdraw  it  in  September  2009  strongly
    suggests that this claim was made as a delaying tactic rather than  for
    any genuine reason.  His claims that his father was killed  in  Jamaica
    as a result of gang crime and that he would be at risk on return  there
    were found not credible by the IJ.   Even if the appellant had no close
    family in Jamaica he had lived there for  most  of  his  life  and  had
    travelled back there for his great-aunt's funeral in 2007.   He  was  a
    fit and healthy young man. The evidence relating to whether his partner
    and their child, D, could accompany him to Jamaica  was  not  open  and
    shut, although she was adamant she did not want to live in Jamaica  and
    that she and her child would find it difficult there.

25.   Our task is to  decide  whether  we  should  exercise  the  discretion
    contained in reg 17(4) differently from the  respondent.  (Mr  O'Connor
    had initially submitted that we should allow the appeal as not being in
    accordance with the law in view of the respondent's failure to exercise
    his  reg  17(4)  discretion,  but,  very  properly  conceded  that  the
    respondent's  refusal  letter  did  amount  to  an  exercise  of   that
    discretion).  Having considered the evidence in the round we are  quite
    satisfied that we should exercise our  discretion  in  the  appellant's
    favour.  In part our reasons have to do with  the  fact  that  although
    serious his criminal conduct in making use of someone  else's  passport
    does not appear to have been undertaken for any purposes other than  to
    enter employment to enable him to travel back to Jamaica  to  attend  a
    funeral and to visit France  with  his  French  partner.  Although  the
    sentencing judge noted that this  type  of  crime  -  use  of  a  false
    instrument - "is also committed  by  international  terrorists  and  in
    organised crime syndicates, and so your offence diverts attention  from
    these serious matters", the sentence imposed was the shortest the judge
    could properly impose. It is true that the sentencing judge went on  to
    say that the sentence "carries a mandatory deportation attached to it",
    but (leaving aside the fact that the powers of the sentencing court are
    only to recommend deportation) he was not to know (or did not appear to
    know) that the appellant had entered into a genuine  relationship  with
    Ms NM and that as a result  the  appellant's  case  would  fall  to  be
    considered under the 2006 EEA Regulations.  Nor can  we  see  that  the
    refusal to issue a residence card  could  be  justified  on  reg  20(1)
    grounds, namely "grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
    health".  The requirement that  the  personal  conduct  of  the  family
    member of an EEA national be considered  as  a  "genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society" (reg 21(5)) - a requirement which closely mirrors  Articles
    27-28 of the Directive - plainly cannot be met in this case.

26.   Mr Hopkin made the centrepiece of  his  submission  the  point  relied
    upon by the IJ who had dismissed the appeal, namely that:

         "His partner is French and, despite her desire solely not to return
         to France, there appears to be no reason  why  she  should  not  so
         return. ... There appears to be nothing to prevent the  appellant's
         partner returning with him to Jamaica if she so desires, or for the
         appellant to make application to move to France with his partner if
         she were to return there.  The appellant's child's situation  would
         not be drastically affected by the appellant's removal to  Jamaica.
         There is nothing to suggest that it would be unreasonable  for  the
         appellant's partner and/or their child if they so desired, to  move
         to Jamaica, or for the entire family to live in France."

27.   Mr Hopkin acknowledged that when the Immigration  Judge  was  deciding
    the case the child D was still living in France, but submitted that the
    fact of his very recent arrival in the UK did not  significantly  alter
    the fact that he was clearly happy whether he lived in France or the UK
    and he could be with this mother wherever she went.

28.   The principal difficulty we have  with  this  submission  is  that  it
    attaches no positive weight to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  is  an
    Article 3.2(b) family member (or extended  family  member  to  use  the
    language of the 2006 Regulations) in respect of whom the UK is under an
    obligation to "facilitate" his entry or residence. Whatever the precise
    meaning of that obligation it  cannot  amount  to  its  opposite:  i.e.
    positive discouragement of entry and residence. Nor  does  Mr  Hopkin's
    submission engage with the fact that the appellant's EEA national/Union
    citizen partner is in the UK exercising treaty rights and  has  evinced
    her clear desire to continue  to  do  so.   In  our  judgement,  proper
    exercise of the discretion afforded by reg  17(4)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 requires  the  decision-maker
    to take into account  whether  or  not  the  effect  of  refusal  of  a
    residence card to the claimant would frustrate the continuing  exercise
    of the free movement rights of the EEA family member/Union citizen.

29.   If the appellant were removed to Jamaica that would  clearly  have  an
    adverse impact  on  his  partner's  rights  as  an  EEA  national/Union
    citizen. She would be put in an invidious position:  having  to  choose
    between continuing to reside in the UK without her partner and  without
    the father of her son or going (with her  child)  to  live  in  Jamaica
    despite not wishing to do so. In our judgment the effect of the refusal
    of a residence card to the appellant would be to  hinder  or  undermine
    effective exercise of his partner's right of free  movement.  The  same
    would apply if  she  decided  to  return  to  France.  The  appellant's
    partner, we note, has recently been promoted in her shop job.  She also
    expressed a hope to study in the UK, which  is  of  course  a  separate
    basis on which she might qualify in the future as  a  qualified  person
    (subject to meeting resources requirements).

30.   Of course, we recognise that  not  every  EEA  national/Union  citizen
    will be hampered in their exercise of Treaty rights by the removal of a
    family member (whether an Article 2.2(c) or (d) family  member  or  (as
    here) an Article 3.2 family  member).  To  use  the  example  given  by
    Advocate General Sharpston in the case of Zambrano  (Case  C-34/09)  30
    September 2010, that will not be the position of an EU citizen who  has
    attained his majority who is able to exercise his rights to travel  and
    to reside within the territory of the European Union without  it  being
    necessary to grant his parents concurrent rights of  residence  in  the
    chosen Member State.  But  the  evidence  in  this  case  is  that  the
    appellant's EEA partner's right to reside in the UK would be  adversely
    affected by the appellant's expulsion.

31.   Mr Hopkin has echoed  the  IJ's  view  that  there  was  a  reasonable
    alternative open to the appellant which would involve him applying  for
    entry and residence in France. However, that  would  be  a  matter  for
    French domestic law and the French authorities  would,  of  course,  be
    aware  of  his  poor  immigration  history  and  his  use  of  a  false
    instrument. In respect of his efforts to reside in France he would  not
    be able to invoke any EEA right of free movement or residence,  as  his
    EEA partner is a national of France.

32.   We would also observe that if the respondent were to continue to  seek
    to deport the appellant, she would have to do so on the more restricted
    grounds specified in reg 20(1) and reg 21 of the 2006  Regulations.  As
    already noted, we see no realistic prospect of the  respondent  meeting
    the stringent requirements set out therein.

33.   In light of the above assessment we conclude that we  should  exercise
    our discretion under reg 17(4) to decide that the appellant  should  be
    granted a residence card.

34.   Given our findings under reg 17(4) it is unnecessary for  us  to  deal
    at any length with the appellant's Article 8 ECHR grounds. Clearly,  in
    view of the fact that we have found he has  an  EEA  right  to  reside,
    there is no public interest in his expulsion from the  United  Kingdom.
    The appellant is entitled to succeed on Article 8 grounds as well.

35.   To summarise:

    The IJ materially erred in law and we have set aside his decision.  The
    decision we remake is to allow the appellant's appeal.





Signed                                             Date


Senior Immigration Judge Storey
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
