
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of GB by litigation friend, Francesco Jeff) v
Oxfordshire County Council (age dispute- relevance of documents) IJR [2015]
UKUT 00429 (IAC)


                                                     20, 21, 22 October 2014
                                                             5 November 2014

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE clive lane

                                   Between

                                  The queen
                            on the application of
                                     G B
                   (by litigation friend, francesco jeff)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                         OXFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Ms Shu Shin Luh, instructed by Scott-Moncrieff & Associates, LLP appeared
on behalf of the Applicant.

Mr Joshua Dubin, instructed by Oxfordshire County Council, appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.

The duty of the Tribunal in disputed age  assessments  is  to  consider  the
evidence as a whole, including documentary evidence relied upon, even  where
there are a number of documents produced purporting to  verify  the  claimed
age. SA (Kuwait) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1157 considered.




                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE CLIVE LANE: By a claim for judicial review issued on  29  October
    2013, the applicant (whom I shall hereafter refer to as G B) challenges
    an age assessment carried  out  by  officers  of  the  defendant  which
    assessed his date of birth as 5 April 1995.  G B  claims  that  he  was
    born on 5 April 1998.  G B entered the United Kingdom on  3  July  2013
    since which time  he  has  been  in  the  care  of  Oxfordshire  Social
    Services.  By G B's account, he was 15 years old when  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom; by the assessment of the defendant,  he  was  18  years
    old.


 1. Neither party to these proceedings carries any burden of proof.  It  is
    for the court to

     determine whether the applicant was a child at the material time  with
reference to

    all relevant evidence and by applying the  standard  of  proof  of  the
balance of

    probabilities (see R (CJ) v Cardiff County  Council)  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    1590). The

    Court of Appeal in R (CJ) observed:
      1. In R (A and M) v Croydon and Lambeth Borough Councils [2009] UKSC
         8, [2009] I WLR 2557,  the  Supreme  Court  settled  the  question
         whether, in the event of a challenge to the decision  of  a  local
         authority as to the claimant's age, the High  Court  was  required
         either to reach its own decision as  to  the  claimant's  age  or,
         alternatively, the challenge was by way of  review  of  the  local
         authority's assessment on Wednesbury principles alone.  Baroness
         Hale gave the leading judgment with which the other members of the
         Supreme Court agreed.  At  paragraphs  26  and  27  Baroness  Hale
         explained the difference in approach required for  the  evaluative
         judgment whether a child was "in need" within the mean of  section
         20 of the 1989 Act and the decision upon the precedent question of
         fact whether the individual concerned was a child. She said this:
           "26. ... the 1989 Act draws a  clear  and  sensible  distinction
           between different kinds of
            question. The question whether a child is "in need" requires  a
           number of different value judgments ... but where the  issue  is
           not what order the court should make but what service should the
           local authority provide it is entirely reasonable to assume that
           Parliament intended such evaluative questions to  be  determined
           by the Public Authority, subject to the control of the courts on
           the ordinary principles of judicial review. Within the limits of
           fair process and "Wednesbury reasonableness" there are no clear-
           cut right or wrong answers.
           27. But the  question  whether  a  person  is  a  "child"  is  a
           different kind of question. There is a right or a wrong  answer.
           It may be difficult  to  determine  what  that  answer  is.  The
           decision-makers may have to do their best on the basis  of  less
           than perfect or conclusive evidence but that  is  true  of  many
           questions of fact which regularly come before the  courts.  That
           does not prevent them from being questions for the courts rather
           than for other kinds of decision-makers."
      Lord Hope, in his concurring judgment, said at paragraph 51:
           "51. It seems to me that the question whether or not a person is
           a child for the purposes of section 20 of  the  1989  Act  is  a
           question of fact which must ultimately be decided by the  court.
           There is no denying the difficulties that the social  worker  is
           likely to face in carrying out an  assessment  of  the  question
           whether an unaccompanied asylum seeker is or is  not  under  the
           age of  18.  Reliable  documentary  evidence  is  almost  always
           lacking in  such  cases.  So  the  process  has  to  be  one  of
           assessment. This involves  the  application  of  judgment  on  a
           variety of factors, as Stanley Burnton J recognised in R (B)  v
           Merton London Borough Council [2003] 4 All ER 280, para 37. But
           the question is not whether the person can properly be described
           as a child. Section 105 (1) of the Act provides:  "in  this  Act
           ... 'child' means, subject to paragraph  16  of  Schedule  1,  a
           person under the age of 18". The question is whether the  person
           is, or is not, under the age of 18. However difficult it may  be
           to resolve the issue, it admits of only one answer. As it  is  a
           question of fact, ultimately this  must  be  a  matter  for  the
           court."


 2. Both parties accept that the applicant is an Albanian citizen.

Preliminary Issue

 3. At the outset of the hearing, Ms Luh, for the applicant, submitted that
    the documentary evidence adduced by the  applicant  was  sufficient  to
    determine his age without further reference  to  other  evidence  being
    necessary.  She sought support from the Court of Appeal authority of SA
    (Kuwait) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    1157.  In that case, an appellant in an asylum claim  had  produced  an
    identity card and a birth certificate showing that she  was  an  ethnic
    Bidun from Kuwait.  The documents had  been  "verified  as  authentic".
    The Court of Appeal held that the Secretary of State was  not  entitled
    to reject her asylum claim based on  apparent  inconsistencies  in  her
    account of past events in Kuwait; the only issue that mattered  in  the
    determination of her asylum  claim  was  the  fact  of  her  ethnicity.
    Giving the leading judgment, Sedley LJ held at [14]:

         "Without seeking in any  way  to  modify  this  guidance,  I  would
         observe that it has to  be  applied  with  careful  regard  to  the
         particular issue before the tribunal. In many cases an  appellant's
         unreliability on aspects of his or  her  history  may  legitimately
         colour the tribunal's appraisal of documents on which  reliance  is
         placed; but it depends very much on the kind of document. Where the
         only issue is the appellant's status, and the documents relied  on,
         if genuine, are conclusive of status, it can only rarely be helpful
         or relevant to test out the appellant's veracity  or  dependability
         in other ways. IJ Jones recognised this, although he did  not  give
         effect to it: see �5 above. Here, for example, it  simply  did  not
         matter  to  the  genuineness  of  the  two  documents  whether  the
         appellant's family had been harassed by the police  or  whether  an
         unreliable witness purported to confirm her status. It  might  have
         mattered if there had been evidence showing that her date of  birth
         was different from that on the birth certificate or  casting  doubt
         on the genuineness of  the  aliens  registration  certificate;  but
         there was none."

 4. Sedley LJ went on to record that:

         "It is  also  worth  bearing  in  mind  in  cases  turning  on  the
         authenticity of official documents that  there  are  two  different
         kinds of inauthenticity: forgery of the document  itself,  and  the
         making of false entries on a genuine document. It  is  useful,  and
         sometimes essential, for advocates and tribunals to be clear  which
         kind is in issue. The Home Office letter which I have  quoted,  for
         example, accepts that  the  documents  produced  by  the  appellant
         "correlate with [available] descriptions". The HOPO at the  resumed
         hearing went further, making it clear that they had  actually  been
         compared with examples held by the  Home  Office.  This  being  so,
         there was  no  ground  for  suspecting  forgery  of  the  documents
         themselves. Was there then reason to suspect that  the  entries  on
         them were false? There are parts of the world  where  it  is  known
         that false entries on official forms can be procured for  a  bribe;
         but the immigration judge  was  given  no  evidence  and  heard  no
         suggestion that this can be done in Kuwait  by  biduns,  much  less
         that it had been done here."

 5. Sedley LJ proposed a two-stage test:

             i) Is there reason to suspect a document as a forgery?

            ii) If not, is there reason to suspect the entry on the document
                was false?

 6. If the answer to both questions is in the negative, then the  documents
    adduced in evidence should be determinative  of  the  fact  which  they
    purport to prove.

 7. The documents relied on by G B  in  the  instant  claim  are  helpfully
    summarised in [5] of Ms Luh's skeleton argument, which I quote in  full
    below.  I am not aware that the contents of this paragraph are  in  any
    way disputed by the respondent:

         "This is a different and unusual age  case.   In  this  claim,  the
         court  has  before  it  five  pieces  of  documentary  evidence  of
         different nature each confirming the claimant's claimed age  -  his
         biometric   passport;   his   birth   certificate;   his   personal
         certificate; a school certificate for his final year,  Year  9,  at
         school; and his immunisation record.  Significantly, the claimant's
         biometric passport and birth certificate have been accepted by  the
         Albanian Embassy as genuine; the claimant's biometric passport  has
         also been accepted by the Home Office as genuine  following  checks
         by its forgery  expert.   A  jointly  instructed  expert  has  also
         confirmed the same findings as the Albanian Embassy  and  the  Home
         Office.  Additionally the jointly instructed expert  has  confirmed
         that the claimant's school certificate and immunisation record  are
         consistent with the correct  format  expected  in  these  documents
         issued in Albania."

 8. Addressing the documents in greater detail, Ms Luh submitted  that  the
    Home Office Forgery Office (in an  email  to  the  defendant  dated  19
    August 2013 - bundle [2/F334]) confirmed that G B's passport:

         "contained all the  expected  document  safeguards.   There  is  no
         evidence available ...  to  suggest  that  the  document  had  been
         fraudulently obtained ... given  this  and  the  fact  that  [G  B]
         visibly looked under 18, the passport was accepted as  establishing
         [G B's] identity and nationality and the officer accepted  his  age
         as 15."

    Likewise, the Albanian Embassy in London had stated in an  email  of  5
    November 2013 [1/B61] that:

         "based on our records, the biometric passport and birth certificate
         pertains to [G B] [and] are  authentic  issued  from  the  Albanian
         authority (sic)."

    Further, Dr Korovilas, the expert jointly instructed by both parties in
    the judicial review proceedings, confirmed that the birth certificate:

         "appears  in  the  correct  format.   ...  This  birth  certificate
         contains the appropriate municipal stamps that you would expect  to
         see on a genuine certificate."

    He also noted that:

         "the personal certificate ... also appears to be in order with  the
         correct format and appropriate stamps you would expect to see on  a
         genuine certificate."

 9. As regards the contents  of  the  documents,  Ms  Luh  directed  me  to
    documents in the bundles before the court which, she submitted,  should
    lead the Tribunal to accept the entries on the  documents  as  accurate
    and true.  It had been accepted by the  Albanian  government  that  its
    management of statistical data required  modernisation.   The  Albanian
    government, in association with Statistics Norway, had embarked upon  a
    project  to  digitalise  municipal  records  of   civil   registration,
    including births.  A National Civil Register had  been  established  in
    2008 and local Civil Status Registers had been computerised.   Existing
    manual records had been scanned, including those from the Diber area of
    north eastern Albania, where G B claims to have been born and lived.

10. In addition, Ms Luh submitted that the Immigration and Refugee Board of
    Canada (7 February 2014) had found that an Albanian citizen could apply
    for and possess simultaneously multiple copies of  birth  certificates,
    each copy  emanating  from  the  central  registers.   Further,  G  B's
    passport is a modern biometric document and the process by  which  G  B
    claimed to have obtained the passport was,  she  submitted,  consistent
    with the IRBC (Immigration and Refugee Board of  Canada)  evidence;  he
    had submitted an application together with a birth  certificate  and  a
    fee and had been given a  coupon  which  he  exchanged,  several  weeks
    later, for his completed passport.

11. Finally, the applicant had given an account of how he had obtained  his
    school certificate and immunisation record (for  vaccinations  detailed
    on the immunisation record the first entries on which appeared  shortly
    after his claimed date of birth).  Ms Luh submitted that the  applicant
    had provided evidence to the age assessors in July 2013 and to the Home
    Office in August 2013  which  had  been  consistent  with  the  details
    appearing  on  the  immunisation  record  which  only  came  into   his
    possession in the United Kingdom after those  interviews.   The  school
    certificate indicates that GB had completed Year 9. It is dated 10 July
    2013, a date consistent with the applicant's account of having finished
    Year 9 before he left Albania.   The  certificate  indicates  that  the
    applicant performed particularly well in mathematics, a claim which  he
    had also made in his witness statement.

12. Mr Dubin, for the defendant, submitted that it would be unfair for  the
    claim to be terminated in the summary fashion proposed by  Ms  Luh  and
    without a proper consideration of the  oral  evidence.   In  answer  to
    queries which I put to him, he confirmed that  the  defendant  did  not
    seek to argue that the documents referred to above related to any other
    individual than the applicant, G  B  or,  indeed,  that  the  applicant
    himself may be living in the United Kingdom under the assumed  identity
    of G B, the person to whom the (genuine) identity  documents  referred.
    Finally, Mr Dubin told me that  he  would  not  seek  to  persuade  the
    Tribunal, in the light of the evidence from the  Home  Office  and  the
    joint expert witness, that the  documents  themselves  were  forgeries.
    Instead, he  told  me  that  the  defendant's  position  was  that  the
    information upon which the documents had been  based  may  itself  have
    been inaccurate including, for example, the applicant's date  of  birth
    as recorded on the central Albanian register.

13. As I have noted above [4] it is the duty of the  Tribunal  to  consider
    the evidence as a totality before reaching any conclusion.  If  I  were
    to have acceded to  Ms  Luh's  submission,  I  would  have  denied  the
    defendant the opportunity of testing the applicant's evidence by cross-
    examination and of adducing oral  evidence  from  the  Social  Services
    officers who had prepared the age assessment; Ms Luh had not  submitted
    that the age assessment was not Merton compliant (see B  v  Merton  LBC
    [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin)).  I considered that I could not discount  the
    possibility that the oral evidence might prove  to  be  significant  in
    enabling the Tribunal to reach a decision in this case and it  was  for
    that reason that I refused Ms Luh's application to determine the  claim
    on the basis of the documentary evidence alone.  Having said that,  for
    reasons which I shall give later in  this  judgment,  that  documentary
    evidence proved to be a considerable significance.

The Evidence of G B - the Applicant

14. The applicant gave his evidence in Albanian, with the assistance of  an
    interpreter.  He adopted his  written  statement  as  his  evidence-in-
    chief.  In that statement, G B claims that he was born on 5 April  1998
    in Peshkopi in northern Albania.  His  father  was  an  alcoholic  with
    mental health problems.  His parents separated two  years  before  G  B
    left Albania.  G B's father abused  him  physically,  on  one  occasion
    injuring his head and damaging the sight in his left  eye.   G  B  left
    home because he could not tolerate repeated beatings by his father.  At
    first, he had lived in an abandoned house  and  relied  on  friends  to
    bring him food.  He told his mother that he intended to  leave  Albania
    but did not say where he was going.  He had "tagged along"  with  other
    friends who were leaving the country and who, as it  turned  out,  were
    heading towards the United Kingdom where they had relatives.  G  B  had
    applied for his passport earlier in 2013 and had it  with  him  on  the
    journey from the country.  He and his friends were given a  lift  by  a
    lorry driver  travelling  through  Macedonia  and  Austria.   G  B  was
    exhausted by the time he reached the United Kingdom and  found  himself
    in Oxford where he met with "a couple of  Albanians  who  were  already
    living there" [21].  G B  made  himself  known  to  Oxfordshire  Social
    Services who interviewed him on a number of occasions and "kept  asking
    me for documents about my age" [23].  G B could  not  remember  exactly
    when he obtained the birth certificate and  personal  certificate.   He
    did recall that he was living at Cowley Road, Oxford, when a  housemate
    told him there was somebody at the door who wished to  see  him.   G  B
    went to the door and there met a man whom he did not know but who  gave
    him  an  envelope  containing  the  birth  certificate   and   personal
    certificate.  G B had spoken once with his mother after arriving in the
    United Kingdom but he was aware that Oxfordshire  Social  Services  had
    contacted her by telephone also (again, on one occasion only).

15. When Oxfordshire Social Services did not accept his age as claimed, G B
    contacted a friend in Albania.  His friend had obtained a copy of G B's
    school certificate and sent it to him.  G B's aunt  (who  worked  in  a
    clinic in Peshkopi) was also  contacted  by  the  Albanian  friend  who
    obtained a copy of the immunisation record.  This was also sent to G  B
    in the United Kingdom.

16. G B claimed that he had done well at school, especially at mathematics.
     His last day at school  on  14  June  2013  had  been  followed  by  a
    graduation ceremony (which he had also attended) on 20 June 2013.   His
    examination results and school certificate  had  been  issued  in  July
    2013, after G B had left Albania.

17. Cross-examined by Mr Dubin, G B was asked why,  in  the  record  of  an
    interview with the Council age assessors [D53] he had said  that,  when
    he had applied for a passport,  "no  documents  were  used,  [he]  just
    presented his coupon."  In the witness statement, G B claimed  that  he
    had produced his personal certificate and birth certificate in order to
    obtain the passport.  G B  said  he  could  not  remember  telling  the
    assessors that he had produced no documents.

18. In the age assessment [D54] the following account is  recorded  by  the
    assessors as to how G B obtained his passport:

         "[G B] explained  on  the  day  before  the  first  age  assessment
         meeting, the assessors confirm this to be Wednesday July  17th,  he
         had been walking along Cowley Road in Oxford.  He was approached by
         an adult male who, in Albanian, asked [G B]  to  confirm  his  name
         upon which he passed him his passport, birth certificate and family
         certificate.  [G B] was asked how he  thought  it  possible  to  be
         reunited with his documents under these circumstances.  He said  he
         was surprised.  Secondly, as  one  of  the  assessors  had,  having
         spoken to his mother just two days prior  to  the  age  assessment,
         been advised that he had left Albania with his  passport  and  that
         she had his birth certificate with her in the home.  [G B] said  he
         was unsure and unable to answer this question."

    G B said that he could not remember saying that to the  assessor.   The
    documents had arrived, as detailed in the  written  statement,  to  his
    home address in Oxford.

19. When G B had claimed asylum, he had given a Screening Interview.   This
    interview recorded [G13] that no documents had been used by G B  during
    his journey from Albania to the United Kingdom.  In  court,  G  B  said
    that he had used a passport; he could not explain why this fact had not
    been recorded in the interview.

20. G B was asked by Mr Dubin why Social Services officers had recorded the
    fact that he had been visited at his lodgings in Oxford by several 50 -
    40 year old men.  G B said that he had "no adult men friends."

21. I found it helpful to hear G B give oral evidence.   I  am  well  aware
    that limited weight should be placed on impressions  gained  in  court,
    but I record that the applicant was confident and at ease whilst giving
    evidence (including under cross-examination) and has, in my opinion,  a
    physical appearance  consistent  with  his  claimed  age.   There  were
    inconsistencies in his  evidence.   First,  the  evidence  of  the  age
    assessment differs from the oral evidence of the applicant  as  regards
    the documents which he had been required to produce in order to  obtain
    his passport.  Secondly, the applicant has given inconsistent  evidence
    as to how he obtained identity  documents  after  he  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom; in one account, he met a stranger at the  door  of  his
    home who gave him  the  documents  and,  according  to  an  alternative
    account, he had been encountered by a stranger whilst walking in Cowley
    Road, Oxford.   Finally,  the  Screening  Interview  records  that  the
    applicant did not use any  documents  on  his  journey  to  the  United
    Kingdom whereas G B claims that the driver of the  lorry  had  arranged
    for his passport to be stamped as they travelled to the United Kingdom.

22. I find that these inconsistencies are sufficient for me  to  doubt  the
    credibility of the applicant's evidence and, indeed, the reliability of
    anything he has told me.  No  explanation  was  given  as  to  why  the
    applicant's account should differ although I accept that  some  of  the
    inconsistencies appear in documents prepared by third parties following
    interviews with the applicant, rather than in any statement prepared by
    the applicant himself.



The Evidence of Maria Rahimi

23. Ms Rahimi is a student social worker who obtained a  degree  in  social
    work at Ruskin College Oxford in September 2014.  She  has  worked  for
    Oxfordshire Social Services, in particular with  unaccompanied  asylum-
    seeking children.  At the time she gave evidence to the  Tribunal,  she
    was awaiting her final registration as a social  worker.  She  was  the
    lead social worker in the preparation of the age assessment of G B.

24. Ms Rahimi has carried out more than 100 age assessments  and  told  the
    Tribunal that in about 80% of assessments she had found individuals  to
    be older than they had claimed.   Together  with  her  co-assessor,  Ms
    Juliet Romanis, Ms Rahimi had assessed G B over two  days  (18  July/22
    July 2013).  In her statement, Ms Rahimi confirms that G B had produced
    a school certificate and vaccination record during the  course  of  the
    assessment.

25. Cross-examined by Ms Luh, Ms Rahimi said  that  she  had  telephoned  a
    woman in Albania using a telephone number provided by  G  B.   She  had
    been satisfied that the woman she spoke to was G B's mother.  She  said
    that G B's mother had been anxious but not hostile.  She had,  however,
    terminated the telephone call when Ms Rahimi had indicated that  Social
    Services were intending to return G B to Albania.  Ms Rahimi said  that
    she had no reason to doubt that G B had, as he claims,  suffered  abuse
    in his home in Albania at the hands of his father.

26. Ms Rahimi said that she had been lead assessor in the report  for  G  B
    and  that  she  herself  had  written  the  age  assessment  which  her
    colleague, Ms Romanis, had then approved.

27. Ms Luh asked Ms Rahimi to explain why, in a file attendance  record  of
    the call with G B's mother [F330] it was noted that she had:

         "advised that we are in the process of arranging [G B's] return  to
         Albania.  Mrs B said if he is returned he would just run away again
         so why return him.  I advised that  he  is  best  placed  with  his
         family and so we are willing to meet the costs of his flight home."

    Ms Luh queried why that statement had been made at a time when the  age
    assessment had yet to be  finalised.   Ms  Rahimi  said  that  she  had
    prepared the attendance note which she described as "badly phrased  but
    not sinister."  The repatriation of G B to Albania had been "a process,
    not an event."

28. Ms Luh then referred Ms Rahimi to a number of emails contained  at  [F]
    of the bundle.  Ms Rahimi confirmed that there  had  been  a  so-called
    "minded to" meeting (at which the conclusions of the  report  had  been
    discussed prior to finalisation) on 25 July 2013.  She was asked by  Ms
    Luh why an email of 22 July 2013 was headed "age assessment carried out
    by Maria Rahimi and Juliet Romanis - outcome 18" and why  an  entry  on
    the record by Ms Cabrera-Jimenez (Ms Rahimi's supervisor at Oxfordshire
    Social Services) which was dated 24 July 2013  stated  "age  assessment
    approved.  Adult.  Case to close."  Ms Luh put it  to  Ms  Rahimi  that
    these records indicated that a decision had  been  reached  before  the
    final "minded to" meeting.  Ms Rahimi said she could  not  explain  the
    entries.  She insisted that there had been no final decision until  the
    meeting on 25 July 2013.  Pressed on the matter by Ms  Luh,  Ms  Rahimi
    said, "I have to say this throws me slightly."  Ms Rahimi insisted that
    her supervisor would not have "signed off" the age assessment prior  to
    the "minded to" meeting.

29. Ms Luh asked Ms Rahimi  about  the  apparent  inconsistency  in  G  B's
    evidence as regards the documents which he had  needed  to  produce  in
    order to obtain his passport.  The age  assessment  at  [D53]  recorded
    that he had not used any documents;  However,  Ms  Rahimi's  manuscript
    note at [D15] records the answer given by G B when questioned about the
    documents as "can't remember."  Ms Rahimi said she  could  not  explain
    this discrepancy.  She acknowledged  that  she  should  have  put  this
    question in greater detail to G B at  the  "minded  to"  meeting.   She
    said, "we didn't address the process of obtaining the passport  or  our
    doubts about how he had obtained it."

30. She acknowledged that she should have asked G B how he had been able to
    obtain the passport without any documents; she said, "I see  the  logic
    of the question and I would certainly ask in the future."

31. Ms Rahimi was  asked  about  the  school  certificate  and  vaccination
    certificate.   In  her  statement,  she  claimed  that  she  had  these
    documents before  her  when  she  prepared  the  age  assessment.   She
    admitted in cross-examination that she was not sure that she  did  have
    them.  She acknowledged that the age assessment itself does  not  refer
    to the school certificate or vaccination certificate.   She  said  that
    she had no recollection  of  having  seen  the  school  certificate  or
    vaccination certificate at all.  She said that her  statement  at  [12]
    ("G B disclosed a school certificate and vaccination record")  was  not
    true or accurate.  She denied, however, that she  had  embellished  the
    statement.

32. Ms Rahimi also acknowledged that she should have checked what G  B  had
    said about his school career against the school certificate  which  had
    been produced.  She could not explain why she had not done this.

33. I found Ms Rahimi to  be  a  helpful  and  candid  witness.   The  fact
    remains, however, that the cross-examination of  her  evidence  exposed
    serious inadequacies in her recording of information, including that in
    the assessment report itself.  I was concerned that she was  unable  to
    offer any explanation for the statement made in the  assessment  report
    that G B had not used any documents in order to  obtain  his  passport;
    that statement is plainly at odds with her handwritten, contemporaneous
    note.  I was also concerned that,  despite  her  protestations  to  the
    contrary, the computer  record  appears  clearly  shows  that  a  final
    decision had been taken as to G B's age before the "minded to"  meeting
    at which any discrepancies in G B's evidence should have  been  put  to
    him. Any responses should have been considered by the assessors  before
    they made a final decision.   It was also  surprising  that  Ms  Rahimi
    adopted a witness statement the contents of which she later denied,  in
    part, in her  oral  evidence.   I  do  not  find  that  Ms  Rahimi  has
    deliberately sought to mislead the Tribunal or the applicant but  I  do
    find that the problems exposed in cross examination lead me  to  attach
    less weight to her evidence (including the  assessment  report  itself)
    than might otherwise be the case in  a  Merton  compliant  report.   In
    particular, it is difficult to see how  the  Tribunal  should  consider
    that the weight attaching to G B's evidence has been diminished because
    it conflicts with  statements  which  he  had  allegedly  made  to  the
    assessors and which are recorded in Ms Rahimi's own unreliable  witness
    statement and oral evidence.

The Evidence of Juliet Romanis

34. Ms Romanis is a social worker working for the Children,  Education  and
    Families Department at Oxfordshire County Council.   She  has  fourteen
    years' experience with that council and had been an  assessment  social
    worker for the last nine years.  The assessment of G B was  her  fourth
    age assessment.

35. Examined by Mr Dubin, Ms Romanis said that she had been trained in  age
    assessment by Ms Rahimi and  others.   Cross-examined  by  Ms  Luh,  Ms
    Romanis admitted that  she  "probably  should"  have  arranged  for  an
    assessment to be made of the authenticity of the documents produced  by
    G B.  She had assumed that Ms Rahimi had  asked  the  Albanian  Embassy
    how, for example, an Albanian birth certificate may  be  obtained.   In
    her written statement at [4] Ms Romanis records that she had:

         "read  Maria  Rahimi's  written  statement   produced   for   these
         proceedings and confirm that it accords  with  my  recollection  of
         what happened during the two assessment days."

    She told the Tribunal that she had not seen the final,  signed  version
    of Ms Rahimi's statement.  To that extent, her statement at [4] was not
    accurate.

36. Ms Romanis said she had not been aware of G B's school  certificate  or
    vaccination records.  She said  that,  had  she  been  aware  of  those
    documents, she and Ms Rahimi should have invited G B back for a further
    interview to discuss the documents with the likely result that his  age
    would have been reassessed.

37. Ms Luh asked Ms Romanis (as she had asked Ms Rahimi) why  she  believed
    that her supervisor had signed off the report before  the  "minded  to"
    meeting.  She could offer no explanation.  Ms Romanis commented on  the
    nature of the manual records which had been uploaded onto the  computer
    register in Albania.  She said that her comments were  based  upon  her
    reading of the Norwegian report.  She described the system as "chaotic"
    but admitted that she did  not  know  how  the  records  were  actually
    uploaded; she was not suggesting  that  births  had  been  inaccurately
    registered in Albania under the previous manuscript system.

38. Finally, Ms Romanis was asked whether, if she were now to consider  all
    the evidence including the school report and vaccination document,  she
    would reassess G B's age.  She said that she would.  She  said,  "if  I
    had all the documents, I probably would have accepted his age."  At the
    very least, Ms Romanis said that there should have been a  reassessment
    of G B's age.

39. I accept that both Ms Rahimi and Ms Romanis have  endeavoured  to  give
    truthful and accurate evidence before the Tribunal.  I  do  not  accept
    any suggestion  that  they  have  deliberately  given  false  evidence.
    However, in acknowledging the failings of the process as  conducted  by
    her and Ms Rahimi, Ms Romanis was particularly candid as was  shown  by
    her final admission that, knowing what she now knows  and  having  been
    directed to important documentary evidence which she had previously not
    considered, she would accept G B's claimed age or, at the  very  least,
    would have considered a reassessment necessary.  As I have noted in  my
    account of her evidence, Ms Romanis'  written  statement  and  the  age
    assessment report contain statements which  she  told  me  she  can  no
    longer describe as accurate.

40. Having heard the helpful oral submissions of Counsel for both  parties,
    I reserved my judgment.

Discussion and Conclusions

41. I return to the documents produced by G B which I have addressed  above
    (see Preliminary Issue).  It is clear from the judgment of Sedley LJ in
    SA (Kuwait) that the Tribunal may, in effect,  ignore  or  discount  an
    applicant's unreliable personal testimony as to a  particular  fact  if
    that fact is capable  of  being  proved  by  documentary  evidence  the
    authenticity of which is not contested.  Whilst I continue to  consider
    that it was right for the Tribunal to examine all the evidence (indeed,
    it is arguable that it was required in law to do  so)  the  submissions
    made  by  Ms  Luh  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  now  return  with
    considerable force.  The applicant has produced documents which,  prima
    facie, prove that he was born, as he claims, on 5 April 1998.  Evidence
    has been adduced detailing the  administrative  systems  out  of  which
    those documents have been  generated;  (see  Prenga  [2010]  EWHC  1765
    (Admin) - whether a document can be determinative of age depends on the
    applicant's country of origin and the quality of the material contained
    within the document).   In  Albania,  an  antiquated,  manuscript  (and
    possibly unreliable) record system has been systematically replaced  by
    a computer system and an extensive retrospective computerisation of old
    records undertaken.  There is no evidence to  suggest  that  the  Diber
    area (where G B claims to have been born)  has  failed  to  upload  its
    records to the new system whilst the Albanian  Embassy  in  London  has
    confirmed that the birth  certificate  and  passport  produced  by  the
    applicant matches the central record held in  Albania.   Significantly,
    the defendant authority does not  suggest  that  the  applicant  is  an
    imposter or that the (genuine) records relate to anyone other than  the
    applicant.   The  best  which  Mr  Dubin  could  offer  was  that   the
    applicant's  mother  (to  whom  the  Social  Services  officers   have,
    unusually, spoken directly by telephone) may have  innocently  provided
    inaccurate information about G B's birth to the Albanian  registry.   I
    have to say that it does not appear to me to be very likely at all that
    any mother would make a mistake as to her child's date of  birth  which
    was wrong by a margin of several years.

42. I do not consider anything which I heard in evidence in court has  cast
    significant doubt on the provenance of, or  the  information  contained
    within, identity documents  from  Albania  which  both  parties  accept
    relate to G B.  That is a view underlined by the  fact  that  the  Home
    Office Forgery Department and an independent expert (jointly instructed
    by the parties) could find nothing wrong  with  the  documents  GB  has
    produced.   My  primary  finding,  therefore,  is  that  the   identity
    documents  alone  prove  G  B's   claimed   age   notwithstanding   the
    inconsistencies (which I have recorded above) which  were  revealed  by
    cross-examination and G B's own evidence.

43. If I am wrong in that finding, then the documents need to be considered
    as part of the totality of the evidence  and  weighed  accordingly.   I
    accept that the manner by  which  G  B  claims  to  have  obtained  his
    documents appears  implausible.   Indeed,  if  one  reads  (4)  of  the
    addendum to the age assessment dated 21 October 2013 one can  see  that
    the only reason given by Ms Romanis and  Ms  Rahimi  for  doubting  the
    accuracy of the documentary evidence is that they did not  believe  his
    story as to how he obtained the documents.  However, as  I  have  noted
    above, the fact that G B may have given an unreliable account does not,
    on SA (Kuwait) principles, undermine his case.  Nor, in my opinion, are
    the implausibilities and discrepancies in G B's  evidence  sufficiently
    serious to be trumped by the age assessment report or other evidence of
    Ms Rahimi and Ms Romanis.  I have attached limited  weight  to  an  age
    assessment  report  which  (i)  contains  details  at  odds  with   the
    assessors' own manuscript notes; (ii) was prepared without  any  proper
    consideration of  the  school  report  and  vaccination  report;  (iii)
    appears to have been "signed off" by the supervisor before a meeting at
    which G B was to  be  given  the  opportunity  of  addressing  apparent
    discrepancies in the details which he had provided.  I have also  taken
    account of the fact that Ms Romanis candidly admitted that, if she were
    reassessing G B's age in the light of all the  evidence  now  produced,
    she might well agree that he is the age he claims to be.

44. I find, on the standard of  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
    applicant's date of birth is 5 April 1998 and I make a  declaration  to
    that effect accordingly.  The parties have fourteen days following  the
    receipt by them of this judgment to make further submissions in writing
    as to the terms of any further orders sought and, in particular, as  to
    the question of costs.  In the absence of any agreement on these issues
    between the parties, I will determine any  issues  outstanding  on  the
    basis of the written submissions.~~~0~~~~

