
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

LS (Article 45 TFEU - derivative rights) [2018] UKUT 00426 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 September 2018                          |                              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     LS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A Metzer QC and Ms S Saifolahi, Counsel,
                    instructed by Sterling & Law Associates LLP
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   1) In determining whether the  absence  of  adequate  provision  for  the
      childcare of the child of a Union citizen may be a factor  capable  of
      discouraging that Union citizen from effectively exercising his or her
      free movement rights under Article 45 TFEU, the Tribunal will need  to
      undertake a wide evaluative assessment  of  the  particular  childcare
      needs in light of all relevant circumstances.


   2) It is necessary for an appellant claiming to have a  derivative  right
      of residence under Article 45 TFEU to establish a causal link  between
      the absence of  adequate  childcare  and  the  interference  with  the
      effective exercise by a Union citizen of  his  or  her  free  movement
      rights, and the appellant will need to demonstrate, by  the  provision
      of reliable evidence, that genuine  and  reasonable  steps  have  been
      taken to obtain alternative childcare provision.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal concerns the circumstances in  which  a  third  country
         national who is a family member of a British citizen may be able to
         establish a derivative right of residence  under  Article  45  TFEU
         when the British citizen is living in the UK but travels to another
         Member State as part of his employment.


      The legal framework

     2. Article 20 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the  European  Union
        (TFEU) provides, in material part,

          1. Citizenship of the Union is hereby  established.  Every  person
          holding the nationality of a Member State shall be  a  citizen  of
          the Union. Citizenship of the Union shall be additional to and not
          replace national citizenship.


          2. Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights and be subject  to
          the duties provided for in the Treaties. They  shall  have,  inter
          alia:


          (a) the right to move and reside freely within  the  territory  of
          the Member States;
          ...

     3. Article 21(1) provides,


          Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and reside
          freely within the territory of the Member States, subject  to  the
          limitations and conditions laid down in the Treaties  and  by  the
          measures adopted to give them effect.

     4. Article 45 reads,

          1. Freedom of movement for workers shall be  secured  within  the
             Union.


          2. Such freedom of movement shall entail  the  abolition  of  any
             discrimination based on nationality  between  workers  of  the
             Member States as regards employment,  remuneration  and  other
             conditions of work and employment.


          3. It shall entail the right, subject to limitations justified on
             grounds of public policy, public security or public health:


                (a) to accept offers of employment actually made;
                (b) to move freely within the territory of Member States for
                this purpose;
                (c) to stay in a Member State for the purpose of  employment
                in accordance with the provisions governing  the  employment
                of nationals of that State laid down by law,  regulation  or
                administrative action;
                (d) to remain in the  territory  of  a  Member  State  after
                having been employed in that State,  subject  to  conditions
                which shall be embodied in regulations to be drawn up by the
                Commission.


          4. The provisions of this article shall not apply  to  employment
             in the public service.

The Citizens Directive (Directive 2004/38/EC)

     5. Article 2 of the Citizens Directive  is  headed  "Definitions".  It
        states,


            For the purposes of this Directive:

             1) "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality  of
                a Member State;


             2) "Family member" means:


                  (a) the spouse;


                  (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted
                  a registered partnership, on the basis of the  legislation
                  of a Member State, if the legislation of the  host  Member
                  State treats  registered  partnerships  as  equivalent  to
                  marriage and in accordance with the conditions  laid  down
                  in the relevant legislation of the host Member State;


                  (c) the direct descendants who are under the age of 21  or
                  are dependants and those  of  the  spouse  or  partner  as
                  defined in point (b);


                  (d) the dependent direct relatives in the  ascending  line
                  and those of the spouse or partner  as  defined  in  point
                  (b);


             3) "Host Member State" means the Member State to which a Union
             citizen moves in order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free
             movement and residence.

     6. Article 3(1) of the Citizens Directive is  headed  "Beneficiaries".
        It reads,

          This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to  or
          reside in a Member State other than  that  of  which  they  are  a
          national, and to their family members as defined  in  point  2  of
          Article 2 who accompany or join them.

S & G (C-457/12) (S v Minister voor Immigratie,  Integratie  en  Asiel,  and
Minister voor Immigratie, Integratie en Asiel v C)

     7. S & G is a decision of the Grand Chamber  of  the  CJEU,  dated  12
        March 2014.


     8. The son-in-law of S, a Ukrainian national,  is  a  citizen  of  the
        Netherlands. He worked for an employer based in the Netherlands but
        spent 30% of his weekly time  preparing  for  and  making  business
        trips to Belgium and travelled to Belgium at least once a  week.  S
        sought a residence document on the basis that she took care of  her
        grandson, the child of her son-in-law.


     9. G, a Peruvian national, married a national of the  Netherlands  who
        worked for a company established in Belgium and who travelled daily
        between the Netherlands and Belgium for his work. G and her husband
        had a daughter and G was also the mother of  a  son  who  has  been
        received into her and her husband's family. G  sought  a  residence
        document as confirmation of her right to reside in the Netherlands.




    10. The Netherlands courts  referred  several  questions  to  the  CJEU
        concerning whether S and G were entitled to  derivative  rights  of
        residence under Union law.


    11. In determining the issues raised by the Netherlands courts the CJEU
        considered whether the Citizens Directive  and  Articles  20  TFEU,
        21(1) TFEU and 45 TFEU  had  to  be  interpreted  as  precluding  a
        refusal by a Member State to grant a right of residence to a third-
        country national who is a family member of a Union  citizen  within
        the meaning of Article 2(2) of the Citizens  Directive  where  that
        citizen is a national of and  resides  in  that  Member  State  but
        regularly travels to another Member State in the  course  of  their
        professional activities.


    12. Having  regard  to  its  decision  in  O  and  B  v  Minister  voor
        Immigratie, Integratie en Asiel  (Directive  2004/38/EC  -  Article
        21(1) TFEU)  Case  C-456/12,  delivered  the  same  day,  the  CJEU
        concluded, in reliance on Article 3 of the Citizens Directive, that
        the Directive does not confer a derived right of residence on third-
        country nationals who are family members of a Union citizen in  the
        Member State of which that citizen is a national.

    13. The CJEU turned to consider Article 45 TFEU. It found that both the
        son-in-law of S and the husband of  G  fell  within  the  scope  of
        Article 45 because they were Union citizens who,  under  employment
        contracts, worked in a Member State other than that of their  place
        of residence.


    14. The CJEU next considered whether a  right  of  residence  could  be
        invoked on the basis of Article 45.  The  reasoning  of  the  Grand
        Chamber is contained in paragraphs 40 to 43 of the decision.

          40 Admittedly, the Court's interpretation of Article  56  TFEU  in
          Carpenter is transposable to Article 45 TFEU. The effectiveness of
          the right to freedom of movement of workers  may  require  that  a
          derived right of residence be granted to a third-country  national
          who is a family member of the worker - a Union citizen  -  in  the
          Member State of which the latter is a national.


          41 However, the purpose and justification of such a derived  right
          of residence is based on the fact that a refusal to allow it would
          be such as to interfere with the exercise of fundamental  freedoms
          guaranteed by the FEU Treaty (see, to that  effect,  C-40/11  Iida
          [2012]  ECR,  paragraph  68;   Ymeraga   and   Ymeraga-Tafarshiku,
          paragraph 35; and Case  C-86/12  Alokpa  and  Others  [2013]  ECR,
          paragraph 22).


          42 It is therefore for the referring court to  determine  whether,
          in each of the situations at issue in the  main  proceedings,  the
          grant of  a  derived  right  of  residence  to  the  third-country
          national in question who is a family member of a Union citizen  is
          necessary to guarantee the citizen's  effective  exercise  of  the
          fundamental freedom guaranteed by Article 45 TFEU.


          43 In that regard, the fact noted by the referring court that  the
          third-country  national  in  question  takes  care  of  the  Union
          citizens'  child  may,  as  is  apparent  from  the  judgment   in
          Carpenter, be a relevant factor to be taken into  account  by  the
          referring court when examining whether  the  refusal  to  grant  a
          right of residence to that third-country national  may  discourage
          the Union citizen from effectively  exercising  his  rights  under
          Article 45 TFEU. However, it must be noted that, although  in  the
          judgment in Carpenter the fact that  the  child  in  question  was
          being taken care of by the third-country national who is a  family
          member of a Union citizen was  considered  to  be  decisive,  that
          child was, in that case, taken care  of  by  the  Union  citizen's
          spouse. The mere fact that it  might  appear  desirable  that  the
          child be cared for by the third-country national who is the direct
          relative in the ascending line of the Union  citizen's  spouse  is
          not therefore sufficient in itself to constitute such a dissuasive
          effect.

    15. In its conclusion at paragraph 44 the Grand Chamber held,

          In the light of the foregoing, Article 45 TFEU must be interpreted
          as conferring on a third-country national who is the family member
          of a Union citizen a derived right  of  residence  in  the  Member
          State of which that citizen  is  a  national,  where  the  citizen
          resides in that Member State  but  regularly  travels  to  another
          Member State as a worker within the meaning of that provision,  if
          the refusal to grant such a right  of  residence  discourages  the
          worker from effectively exercising his  rights  under  Article  45
          TFEU, which it is for the referring court to determine.

Practical principles extracted from S & G


    16. An analysis of S & G bears the following observations.


    17. In assessing whether a third  country  family  member  of  a  Union
        citizen has established a derived right of residence  the  Tribunal
        must first be satisfied that the third country national is a family
        member, within the definition of the Citizens Directive,  and  that
        the Union citizen is exercising Treaty rights.  Any  Union  citizen
        who regularly travels, in the course of  his  or  her  professional
        activities, to a Member State other that the Member State in  which
        he or she resides will fall within the scope of Article 45.  It  is
        for an appellant to prove, on the balance  of  probabilities,  that
        the Union citizen is in fact exercising free movement  rights,  and
        the  Tribunal  will  be  assisted  by  reliable  evidence  such  as
        verifiable letters from the Union citizen's employer detailing  the
        nature and extent of the employee's business travel to other Member
        States, and ticket and booking receipts relating to that travel.

    18. The CJEU recognised that the absence of adequate provision for  the
        childcare of the child of a Union citizen may be a  factor  capable
        of discouraging that Union citizen from effectively exercising  his
        or her free movement rights. The CJEU also made it clear  that  the
        desirability of having a third country family member of  the  Union
        citizen or his or  her  spouse  is  not  sufficient  in  itself  to
        constitute a dissuasive  effect  on  the  exercise  of  Article  45
        rights. In each case the Tribunal will therefore need to  undertake
        a wide evaluative assessment of the particular childcare  needs  in
        light of all relevant circumstances including the age and health of
        the child, the stage of the child's education, and  the  reasonable
        availability of  adequate  childcare  from  other  family  members,
        including the Union citizen's spouse  or  partner,  or  from  other
        professional or informal providers.  The  appellant  will  need  to
        demonstrate, by the provision of reliable  evidence,  that  genuine
        and reasonable steps have been  taken  or  investigated  to  obtain
        alternative childcare provision. Sources of  alternative  childcare
        may include, inter alia,  other  friends  or  family,  the  child's
        nursery or school (including  breakfast  or  after  school  clubs),
        child-minders, the use of one or more au pairs, the  employment  of
        one or more live-in nannies, or a combination of the above.


    19. It is necessary for an appellant to establish a causal link between
        the absence of adequate childcare and  the  interference  with  the
        effective exercise by a Union citizen of his or her  free  movement
        rights. In so doing the Tribunal will need to determine the reasons
        for and extent of any interference with the Union citizen's Article
        45 rights. Any interference must be real such that the Tribunal  is
        satisfied that the Union citizen will in fact be  discouraged  from
        the effective exercise of his or her rights as a direct consequence
        of the childcare issues.

    20. In determining  whether  alternative  professional  child  care  is
        reasonably available the Tribunal will need to  bear  in  mind  the
        Treaty rights of other family members and the requirements  of  the
        Working Time Regulations 1998.

Facts of this appeal


    21. The appellant is a national of Russia who was  born  in  1950.  She
        entered the UK in February 2015 as a visitor. Her daughter, IB,  is
        a dual British/Russian citizen who naturalised as a British citizen
        in August 2007. She  is  married  to  MB,  a  dual  British/Russian
        citizen who naturalised as a British citizen  in  July  2007.  They
        have a British citizen  child,  AB,  born  in  February  2015.  The
        appellant is AB's grandmother. AB is currently 3� years old.


    22. Having entered as a visitor the appellant  intended  to  return  to
        Russia in April 2015 but the strain of childcare  was  proving  too
        much for IB as her husband was required  to  travel  frequently  to
        Europe for business purposes and the  appellant  remained  to  help
        look after AB. IB started looking for a nanny in the spring of 2015
        in anticipation of returning to her work in July 2015 but could not
        find a suitable candidate who would be able to  work  10+  hours  a
        day. She and  her  husband  consequently  asked  the  appellant  to
        continue looking after their child for a little longer. No suitable
        alternative childcare could however be found.


    23. On 27 August 2015 the appellant applied for a residence card as the
        dependent direct relative of the spouse of a  British  citizen  who
        regularly travelled to another EEA Member State in  the  course  of
        his professional activities. The appellant's help and support  were
        said to be essential for the family as IB completed  her  maternity
        leave in July 2015 and was now working full time. Both  IB  and  MB
        worked long hours when they were in the UK,  and,  in  addition  to
        MB's frequent trips to Europe,  IB  was  also  required  to  travel
        within and outside Europe for prolonged periods. Were  it  not  for
        the appellant's presence, MB would be unable to exercise  his  free
        movement rights. The appellant placed particular  reliance  on  the
        decision of the CJEU in S & G and the  earlier  European  Court  of
        Justice (ECJ) decision in Carpenter v Secretary of  State  for  the
        Home Department (C-60/00) to support her claimed right of residence
        under Article 45 TFEU.


    24. The respondent refused the application on 24  January  2016.  On  5
        February 2016 a fresh application  was  submitted.  In  a  decision
        dated 1 August 2016  the  respondent  considered  this  application
        under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
        (the 2006 Regulations). As MB had not  lived  in  any  of  the  EEA
        states in which he worked, the respondent was not satisfied that he
        had transferred the centre of his life to another Member State,  as
        required  under  Reg  9  of  the  2006  Regulations.  Nor  was  the
        respondent  satisfied  that  the  appellant  provided  evidence  to
        confirm her financial dependency on her son-in-law. The  respondent
        refused to issue a residence card.


    25. The decision of 1 August 2016 attracted a right of appeal under the
        2006 Regulations. It was conceded by the appellant's representative
        at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  that  she  did  not  meet  the
        requirements of Reg 9 of  the  2006  Regulations.  The  appeal  was
        advanced on the basis that the appellant had  a  derived  right  of
        residence  flowing  directly  from  Article  45  TFEU  because  her
        presence in the UK enabled her son-in-law to  exercise  his  Treaty
        rights as a worker and that if she was unable to reside this  would
        effectively discourage her son-in-law from  exercising  his  Treaty
        rights under Article 45.


    26. In a decision  promulgated  on  11  December  2017  the  First-tier
        Tribunal allowed the appeal. The judge found that the appellant was
        dependent on her son-in-law and that the appellant and  her  family
        were credible witnesses. The judge found  that  the  appellant  was
        AB's carer and MB's effective exercise of his Article 45 rights was
        possible  only  because  the  appellant  provides   the   necessary
        childcare to enable him to do so.

    27. The respondent obtained permission to appeal the FtJ's decision  on
        the basis that the decision contained inadequate reasoning. It  was
        submitted that the appellant only  provided  additional  assistance
        with child care and had not assumed full  parental  responsibility,
        and that little regard was  given  to  the  possible  existence  of
        alternative childcare arrangements. Nor had the  judge  taken  into
        account the principle that rights of residents are not extended  to
        suit the preference of a family, a point most recently  articulated
        in Patel v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA
        Civ 2028. The Grounds did not however challenge the  FtJ's  finding
        that the appellant was dependent on her son-in-law.


    28. In an error of law decision promulgated on 27 July 2018 I found the
        FtJ failed to provide adequate reasoning for  his  conclusions  and
        failed to adequately engage with the actual terms of  the  decision
        in S v G. I adjourned the hearing to enable further evidence to  be
        provided.

    29. At the re-made hearing there was no dispute that MB is a worker who
        falls within the terms of Article 45, or that the appellant is  his
        'family member'. I had  before  me  a  large  bundle  of  documents
        prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing running to 416  pages.
        The bundle included, inter alia, statements from the appellant,  MB
        and IB, several letters from MB's employer (where MB is a  Managing
        Partner), details of MB's travel history, a current  Care  Plan  in
        respect of AB, text exchanges between IB  and  babysitters/nannies,
        posts made by IB on the childcare.co.uk website,  invoices  from  a
        Montessori school, and financial details relating to  both  MB  and
        IB. I received further statements from the appellant,  MB  and  IB,
        and further  evidence  of  the  childcare  needs  and  the  efforts
        undertaken to obtain alternative childcare. I heard  oral  evidence
        from the appellant and  MB  (IB  adopted  her  statements  and  was
        tendered as a witness but was  not  asked  any  questions),  and  I
        recorded  submissions  from  both  representatives,  which  I  have
        carefully considered. I reserved my decision.

Findings and reasoning

    30. I was assisted  by  Mr  Tarlow  who  indicated  that  the  evidence
        produced on behalf of  the  appellant  was  not  controversial.  Mr
        Tarlow did not take issue  with  the  credibility  of  any  of  the
        witnesses and did not challenge the  authenticity  of  any  of  the
        documents. Mr Tarlow accepted that both MB and  IB  would  be  away
        from their home for long periods of time. There was consequently no
        factual dispute between the parties. In these circumstances  it  is
        not necessary to set out in any detail the evidence  relied  on  by
        the appellant, and I refer to that evidence only so far  as  it  is
        necessary for my application of the relevant legal principles.


    31. It is accepted by both parties that MB is a worker who falls within
        the scope of Article 45 TFEU, and that the appellant is his 'family
        member' as  defined  in  Art  2  of  the  Citizens  Directive  (and
        reflected in Regulation 7 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
        Area) Regulations 2006, although the Immigration (European Economic
        Area) Regulations 2016 do not materially differ). Both  MB  and  IB
        provided detailed professional documents and  financial  statements
        relating to  their  respective  employers,  and  wage  slips,  bank
        account statements and tax documents confirming their employment.

    32. The unchallenged letters issued by MB's employer confirm that he is
        required to undertake frequent  European  travel,  often  at  short
        notice. Specific details of his past and planned future travel were
        provided, which were  supported  by  ticket  and  booking  receipts
        identifying MB by name, as well as by spreadsheets produced by MB's
        employer.


    33. The unchallenged  documentary  evidence  confirms  that  IB's  work
        duties require regular and at  times  long  distance  international
        travel, and that regularly travelling  to  client  premises  is  an
        essential component of her work.  Her  employer's  letters  confirm
        that IB is likely to be required to travel regularly to the  EU  in
        2018, And this may take up to  50%  of  her  working  time.  It  is
        anticipated that IB's employment may require intensive EU travel in
        the future. She has previously travelled to other Member States  as
        part of her employment duties. She also spends a significant number
        of weekends working or travelling for work purposes. I find, and it
        was not challenged, that both MB and IB frequently have  to  travel
        at short notice for several days at a time,  and  that  there  have
        been occasions when both of them are travelling at the same time.


    34. At present the  appellant  is  caring  for  AB.  The  provision  of
        childcare is a matter of fact, as  is  the  ultimate  determination
        whether the absence of that childcare does have a dissuasive effect
        on the exercise of free movement rights under Article 45. There  is
        therefore no requirement  that  the  appellant  has  full  parental
        responsibility for AB, or that she  is  a  legal  guardian  of  AB,
        although this may, on the particular facts of a case, be relevant.

    35. I find that the care needs of AB are complex due to nature  of  her
        parents' employment. AB  attends  a  nursery  full  time,  but  the
        nursery closes by 6pm. AB has often been sick and unable to  attend
        the nursery for up to a week  or  two  at  a  time.  The  appellant
        provided weekly care plans  outlining  her  care  for  AB  covering
        several scenarios, including times when both MB and IB are  present
        in the UK, times when either MB or IB are outside the UK, and times
        when both MB  and  IB  are  outside  the  UK  by  reason  of  their
        employment. Mr Tarlow did not take issue with  the  reliability  of
        the care plans, which indicate significant child  care  needs  even
        when both IB and AB were in the UK given their hours of  employment
        and commuting. When MB travels in Europe the daily childcare  needs
        can stretch to 14 hours. When both MB and  IB  are  travelling  the
        childcare needs stretch to several continuous days  at  a  time.  I
        accept, on the particular facts of this case, that MB and his  wife
        essentially require 24/7 childcare during most weeks  in  light  of
        the short notice and frequent and inflexible nature of their  work-
        related travel requirements.


    36. As already indicated, Mr Tarlow did not challenge  the  credibility
        of the witnesses. I found, in any event, that the appellant and  MB
        gave their evidence in a detailed and  direct  manner  and  without
        embellishment or hesitation. In his statement MB  maintained  that,
        unless suitable childcare provision was in place, either he or  his
        wife would have to give up their jobs.  In light of  the  extensive
        documentary evidence confirming MB's work-related travel  to  other
        Member States, and in light of  the  significant  childcare  issues
        involved, I am persuaded that MB would be deterred from  exercising
        his free movement rights as a worker under Article 45 unless  there
        were suitable childcare arrangements for AB.

    37. In their additional  statements  both  MB  and  IB  outlined  their
        extensive research for a nanny or au pair as an  alternative  child
        carer to the appellant. There was no suggestion by Mr  Tarlow  that
        the efforts made by IB and MB to obtain alternative childcare  were
        not genuine. I find, for the following reasons,  that  genuine  and
        reasonable steps have been taken to  obtain  alternative  childcare
        provision.


    38. Neither IB nor MB had any other family in the UK, and none of their
        friends are capable of providing  for  AB's  childcare  needs.  The
        evidence produced on behalf  of  the  appellant  includes  text/MMS
        messages between IB and previous child carers who had been employed
        and  an   outline   of   archived   conversations   left   on   the
        childcare.co.uk  website  between  IB   and   potential   childcare
        candidates.  The  text  messages  indicated  the  unreliability  or
        unsuitability of some of the past and prospective child carers,  or
        their unavailability for  the  times  or  days  required.  IB  also
        provided broad details of searches she conducted from May 2015  for
        suitable candidates using two of the largest  UK  childcare  online
        directories (Sitters.co.uk and Findababysitter.co.uk).

    39. I am persuaded, given AB's particular childcare needs, that  an  au
        pair would not be a suitable alternative. According to  an  extract
        from the Gov.UK website provided by  the  appellant  au  pairs  are
        unlikely to be classed as workers or employees and are  treated  as
        members of the family with whom they live and who provide them with
        'pocket money'. Evidence provided by the appellant stemming from au
        pair agencies indicate that au pairs can be on duty up to around 30
        hours a week which includes evening babysitting, that au pairs  are
        generally unqualified child carers and should not  be  expected  to
        have sole care for a child  all  day,  and  that  au  pairs  cannot
        perform regular night duties. Given that, on occasions, both MB and
        IB may be away on business, an au pair, or even a combination of au
        pairs (which itself would present difficult  accommodation  issues)
        would not be available 24 hours a day.


    40. I am additionally satisfied that reasonable steps have  been  taken
        in  exploring  the  alternative  of  live-in  nannies.  Given   the
        significant amount of travel undertaken by both MB and IB, and  the
        possibility that they could both be required  to  travel  at  short
        notice for several  days  at  the  same  time,  and  the  statutory
        requirement to give daily rest periods contained in  Regulation  10
        of the Working Time Regulations 1998, I am satisfied that at  least
        two  live-in  nannies  would  be  required,  and   that,   in   all
        probability, three would be needed in case one is unable to work on
        a particular day and bearing in mind  night-care  requirements  and
        weekend care requirements. The financial and practical consequences
        in employing 3 live-in nannies would be significant for MB and  IB,
        requiring  them  to  purchase  a  bigger  house  and   leading   to
        significantly  increased  mortgage  costs,  if   a   mortgage   was
        available,  in  addition  to  the  wages  of  the  nannies.  I   am
        consequently persuaded that the possibility  of  employing  live-in
        nannies, on the particular and unusual facts of this case,  is  not
        reasonably open to AB's parents.

    41. Mr Tarlow did not suggest that it would be  reasonable  for  IB  to
        give up her employment in order to look after her daughter. Whether
        it would be reasonable to expect one spouse to limit or  relinquish
        their own employment so as to enable the other spouse  to  continue
        to  exercise  their  free  movement  rights  will  depend  on   the
        particular  facts  of  each  case.  In  the  present   appeal   the
        unchallenged evidence indicates that IB  also  exercises  her  free
        movements rights as a worker pursuant to Article 45 TFEU,  although
        to a lesser degree than MB. She nevertheless also  travels  in  the
        course of her professional activities  to  Member  States.  If  she
        abandoned or limited her employment this  would,  I  find,  equally
        discourage her from exercising her free movement rights as a worker
        under Article 45. For these reasons I do not find it reasonable for
        IB to give up or limit her employment.


    42.  The essential issue that  I  need  to  determine  is  whether  the
        refusal to issue the appellant a residence card discourages MB from
        effectively exercising his rights under Article 45  TFEU.  For  the
        reasons given above I am satisfied  that  MB  would  be  unable  to
        effectively exercise his  free  movement  rights,  given  the  very
        particular childcare needs of AB, unless the appellant is granted a
        right of residence. This is not a case of MB and IB  preferring  to
        have a family member look after their child. I find, 'but for'  the
        issuance of  a  residence  card  to  the  appellant,  MB  would  be
        discouraged from travelling to other Member States in the course of
        his employment. I consequently find that the appellant does  derive
        a right to reside in the UK from Article 45.

Notice of Decision

The EEA appeal is allowed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               2 October 2018

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



