
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Bilal Ahmed) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (EEA/s 10 appeal rights: effect) IJR [2015] UKUT 00436 (IAC)

Field House
24th July 2015


                                  The QUEEN
                     (ON The application OF Bilal ahmed)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                       Upper Tribunal Judge PETER LANE

                          Hearing date: 8 June 2015
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr S Karim, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors, appeared on behalf of the
applicant.

Ms J Smyth, instructed by Government Legal Department, appeared on behalf
of the respondent.
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


(1)   The fact that P (who is not an EEA national) has a   right  of  appeal
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 against
    an EEA decision to refuse P a residence card does not have  the  effect
    of precluding the Secretary of State from removing P under  section  10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


(2)   Section 92(4)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    (as it was before the changes made by the Immigration  Act  2014)  does
    not afford P an in-country right  of  appeal  against  the  section  10
    decision, where the issue of whether P is a member of the family of  an
    EEA national is a matter of dispute.


(3)  The factual issue  of  whether  P  is  a  family  member  falls  to  be
    determined by the First-tier Tribunal on appeal by P  against  the  EEA
    decision and/or the section 10 decision, whether or not P may  by  then
    be outside the United Kingdom. A judicial review by P of  the  decision
    to remove and/or the setting of removal  directions  will  not  succeed
    where P's application is based on marriage to an EEA national,  if  the
    Secretary of State reasonably suspects P of being a party to a marriage
    of convenience.


JUDGE PETER lane


What follows is the judgment of the Tribunal.


A.   The scenario


    1.    A scenario currently encountered with some frequency by the  Upper
    Tribunal in the course of its immigration judicial review  work  is  as
    follows.  P, who is not an EEA national,  and  who  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom  with  limited  leave  granted  by  the  respondent  under  the
    Immigration Acts (or whose leave has already expired) marries Q, an EEA
    national who is in the United  Kingdom  exercising  Treaty  rights  (or
    purporting to do so).  Relying  on  the  marriage,  P  applies  to  the
    respondent  for  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom as the family  member  of  Q.  At  some
    point, P's limited leave has expired, with the result that, so  far  as
    the respondent is concerned, P is an overstayer. This may have happened
    before or after the marriage and/or P's  application  for  a  residence
    card.


2.   Having interviewed P  and  Q  on  separate  occasions,  the  respondent
    considers that the marriage is "a marriage of  convenience",  with  the
    result that, so far as the respondent is concerned, P is not  a  family
    member of Q because regulation 2 of the EEA Regulations provides that a
    "'spouse' does not include a party to a marriage of convenience".   The
    respondent therefore refuses P's application for a residence card.


3.    Since P is an  overstayer,  the  respondent  makes  a  decision  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  (as  it  was  before
    amendment by the Immigration Act 2014) to  remove  P  from  the  United
    Kingdom. The section 10 decision can occur before or after the  refusal
    of P's application.  The respondent sets directions for P's removal.


4.   P brings judicial review proceedings to  challenge  the  lawfulness  of
    removal on the basis that P has a right of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under the EEA Regulations, which is suspensive of P's removal.
    P may also contend that there is a separate  right  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the section 10 removal  decision,  which  P
    says is also suspensive of removal.


5.   As can be seen, there is  scope  in  this  scenario  for  a  number  of
    variants (including some that  we  have  not  mentioned).  The  central
    questions, however, remain the same; namely  (a)  whether  a  right  of
    appeal against the refusal of the residence card and/or or against  the
    section 10 decision is suspensive; and (b) whether P's contention  that
    the marriage is not one of convenience is  a  "precedent  fact"  to  be
    determined by the Upper Tribunal in the  judicial  review  proceedings,
    particularly if the answer to  (a)  is   in  the  negative  and  it  is
    intended to remove P before the issue of the marriage has been  decided
    by the First-tier Tribunal in the course of P's appeal.





B.  Background


6.   On 4 April 2011, the applicant, a citizen of Pakistan, arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in possession of a Tier 4 Student visa.  On 21  November
    2014, the applicant married a Romanian national.  On 17 December  2014,
    the applicant submitted an  application  for  an  EEA  residence  card,
    pursuant to the EEA Regulations.  The applicant's leave to remain as  a
    student expired on 22 December 2014.


7.    On  20  February  2015,  the  applicant  and  his  wife  attended  for
    interviews, conducted by a representative of the respondent.  Following
    the interviews, the respondent concluded that the applicant's  marriage
    was one  of  convenience.   Since  the  applicant  had  by  this  point
    overstayed his leave, he was detained and served with  a  notice  of  a
    decision to remove, pursuant to section 10 of  the  1999  Act.   On  24
    February 2015, the applicant issued his judicial review  claim  in  the
    Upper  Tribunal.   The  following  day,  the  respondent  refused   the
    applicant's application for  an  EEA  residence  card.   The  applicant
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.


8.   On 27 February 2015, the Upper Tribunal  refused  to  grant  permission
    and also refused a stay on the applicant's removal.  On 5  March  2015,
    fresh removal directions were set, for 17  March  2015.   Following  an
    oral hearing at which  both  the  applicant  and  the  respondent  were
    represented by Counsel, the Upper Tribunal granted permission to  bring
    judicial review proceedings.  The Tribunal considered it arguable  that
    the applicant's right of appeal fell within the scope of section  92(4)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, so that it  should
    have attracted an in-country right of appeal; and that the relevance of
    section 92(4) was not  addressed  by  the  High  Court  in  R  (on  the
    application of Abdullah) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2009] EWHC 1771 (Admin).  It was  also  thought  that  there  was  "an
    apparent conflict between the  Abdullah  decision  and  the  subsequent
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in LO [2009] UKAIT 00034".


9.   Case  management  directions  were  made.   Regrettably,  however,  the
    applicant failed to serve a skeleton argument until immediately  before
    the substantive hearing on 8 June 2015.   At  that  hearing,  Mr  Karim
    applied orally to amend the grounds of application, so  as  to  contend
    that the right of appeal arising from the refusal of the residence card
    on 25 February 2015 was suspensive  of  the  applicant's  removal.   In
    order to ensure fairness,  both  parties  were  given  the  opportunity
    (which they took) of making  written  submissions,  subsequent  to  the
    hearing, on this issue, in the light of which the  respondent  withdrew
    her objection to Mr Karim's application.  Permission was,  accordingly,
    given to the applicant to amend his grounds.  In deciding  to  withdraw
    her objection, the respondent referred not only to the  fact  that  the
    proposed ground was, in the event, the subject of  submissions  at  the
    hearing but also that it "arises in other cases".


10.  In accordance with directions given following the grant  of  permission
    to bring judicial review proceedings, the present panel  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal also sat as a panel of the First-tier Tribunal on 8  June,  in
    order to hear the applicant's appeal against the refusal to grant him a
    residence card as the family member of an EEA national.





C.  The legislation


11.  The relevant legislation is to be found in:


    (a)  Directive 2004/38 ("the Directive");


    (b)  The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006;


    (c)  section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  (prior  to  its
         amendment by the Immigration Act 2014);


    (d)  sections 78 and 92 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
         2002 (again, before amendment by the 2014 Act).


The relevant provisions are set out in the Appendix to this judgment.








D.  Is the right of appeal against the EEA decision suspensive of removal?


(i) Submissions


12.  Mr Karim submitted that the applicant's right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse him a residence card, which it is common ground  may
    be brought whilst he is in the United Kingdom, means  that  the  appeal
    proceedings must fully run their course before the applicant's  removal
    can take place.  Were it otherwise, the right of  appeal  would  become
    "redundant and useless".  In this regard,  Mr  Karim  relied  upon  the
    determination of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in LO (Partner  of
    EEA national) Nigeria [2009] UKAIT 00034, in which  it  was  held  that
    there existed an in-country right  of  appeal  against  a  decision  to
    refuse a person a residence card as a partner of an EEA national within
    regulation  8(5)  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   In  the  course  of  its
    determination, the AIT held:-


         "10. The appellant's claim to be an 'extended family member' and to
             be entitled to a residence card was met by a refusal  to  give
             him a residence card.  That was an  EEA  decision  within  the
             meaning of regulation 2 of the 2006 Regulations.  It therefore
             carried a right of appeal unless paragraphs (2) or (3) of  reg
             26 apply to it.  Neither of those paragraphs  do  apply.   The
             appellant is not himself an EEA  national;  and  he  does  not
             claim to be a 'family member' or relative.  Quite  apart  from
             the terms of reg 8(1), the Regulations as a whole  distinguish
             clearly between family members and  extended  family  members.
             It therefore seems clear to me that the appellant had  an  in-
             country right of appeal against the  refusal  of  a  residence
             card.


         11.  I reach that conclusion with no enthusiasm at all.  The effect
             of it is that any person threatened with removal, who  applies
             for a residence card, even on an entirely spurious  basis,  so
             that refusal is inevitable, is entitled to an in-country right
             of appeal against that refusal and cannot be removed until the
             appeal has run its course.  That cannot be intentional, but it
             does not appear to me that the regulations can be read in  any
             other way."


13.  Earlier in 2009, Blair J had handed down the judgment in  R  (Abdullah)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department and Asylum and Immigration
    Tribunal [2009] EWHC 1771 (Admin).  In that case,  a  citizen  of  Iraq
    applied for a residence card as the extended family member of a  Polish
    citizen, exercising Treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.   Following
    refusal of that application, the applicant filed notice  of  appeal  to
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal ("AIT") against the refusal of  the
    residence card.  An application for  judicial  review  was  also  made,
    including an application for a stay on removal.  The application for  a
    stay was unsuccessful and the applicant was removed.  At that time,  it
    was considered the AIT had acted lawfully  in  refusing  to  admit  the
    notice of appeal.  By the time the judicial review application  reached
    Blair J, however, it had been established that a right of appeal to the
    AIT did, in fact, exist.


14.  The issue before Blair J was thus whether the right of  appeal  to  the
    AIT rendered the claimant's removal unlawful; in other  words,  whether
    that right was suspensive of removal:-


         "In her oral submissions for the claimant, Ms Chapman accepted that
         if his right of appeal was not suspensive, in the  sense  that  the
         law precluded his removal while the appeal was pending, removal was
         not unlawful and there can be no question of bringing the  claimant
         back.  In my judgment she was right to adopt that position ..."


15.  Blair  J  was  specifically  referred  to  regulation  29  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.  Having set out regulation 29(2)  and  (3),  his  judgment
    continued as follows:-


         "24. For the defendant, Mr Eicke submits  that  this  provision  is
             clear.  While an EEA decision refusing  admission  or  an  EEA
             decision to remove a person ceases to have effect while appeal
             against such a decision is pending, the same does not apply to
             an appeal against a decision  not  to  issue  someone  with  a
             residence card.  That was the subject of the claimant's appeal
             in the present case.  There is,  he  submits,  no  requirement
             under the Citizens Directive to provide a suspensory right  of
             appeal in these circumstances, and none should be read in.


         25.  For the claimant, Ms Chapman submits that it cannot have  been
             intended that an  appeal  against  a  decision  not  to  issue
             someone with a residence card was excluded from the  ambit  of
             EEA decisions having a suspensory effect.  In  substance,  she
             submits, in the present case there amounts either a refusal to
             admit or a decision to remove.  Both of  these  decisions  are
             suspended by virtue of Regulation 29 on the true  construction
             of the Regulations.  In the present case, she further submits,
             this also follows from the order made on 10th  December  2008,
             the effect of which, she argues, was  to  quash  the  original
             removal order.  The subsequent order, she submits,  must  have
             been taken as a consequence of an EEA decision.


         26.  Ms Chapman advances an  alternative  argument  which,  as  put
             orally, is as follows.   Although  she  accepts  that  an  EEA
             decision is not one of those  listed  in  section  82  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and therefore not
             subject to the general section 78 prohibition on removal while
             an appeal is pending, she submits that  it  cannot  have  been
             intended that a right of appeal in respect of such a  decision
             would not be suspensory in effect.  Following the decision  of
             8th December 2008 by which the  application  for  a  residence
             card was refused, there was in effect a fresh removal decision
             taken on 26th January 2009 falling  within  section  82(1)(g).
             This, she submits, was subject to the section 78 prohibition.


         27.   I  have  come  to  the  conclusion   that   the   defendant's
             construction of Regulation 29 is the right one.  It is  to  be
             noted that the definition of 'EEA decision' in Article 2(1) of
             the EEA Regulations 2006 distinguishes between  EEA  decisions
             as to (1) entitlement to admission; (2) entitlement to various
             documents including a residence card; and (3) removal.  By its
             terms, Regulation 29 provides that appeals in respect  of  the
             first and third categories are to have suspensory effect.  The
             second category is not included and nothing  in  the  Citizens
             Directive  has  been   cited   to   require   an   alternative
             interpretation.  The EEA decision in the present  case  was  a
             refusal of the claimant's application for  a  residence  card.
             There was an appeal against that refusal.  But  both  the  EEA
             decision  and  the  appeal,  in  my  view,  fell  outside  the
             suspensory provisions in Regulation 29.


         28.  I also accept the defendant's submissions that  the  appellate
             regime under the EEA Regulations 2006 and under the  2002  Act
             are  distinct.   The  original  removal  directions  of   27th
             November 2008 followed from the fact that the claimant was  an
             overstayer whose  appeal  rights  in  respect  of  his  asylum
             application had been exhausted.  The removal directions do not
             themselves constitute an appealable decision.  The refusal  of
             a residence card could not change the nature  of  the  removal
             directions.  Consequently, there was, in my  view,  no  appeal
             pending at the time of the claimant's removal on 10th February
             2009, the effect of  which,  under  either  Regulation  29  or
             section  78,  was  to  prevent  the  claimant's  removal.   In
             particular, the appeal against the decision refusing to  issue
             him with a residence card did not have that effect.  For  that
             reason, his removal on that date was not unlawful."


16.  Mr Karim's position on Abdullah was that the case was wrongly  decided.
     Because the refusal of an EEA residence  card  carries  an  in-country
    right of appeal, there is no need to spell out in  regulation  29  that
    this decision would also be suspensive.  Furthermore, the fact  that  a
    refusal of a residence card does not automatically lead to  removal  of
    the person concerned means that the safeguards  in  regulation  29  are
    unnecessary.  A "sensible reading" of the  EEA  Regulations  would,  Mr
    Karim said, lead to  the  conclusion  that  the  right  of  appeal  was
    suspensive of removal.


17.  Mr Karim urged us to consider  the  Directive.   He  pointed  out  that
    Article 35 (abuse of rights) requires any necessary measures to  combat
    "abuse of rights or fraud, such as  marriages  of  convenience"  to  be
    "proportionate and subject to the procedural safeguards provided for in
    Articles 30 and 31".  Article 31(4) enables Member States to exclude:-


         "the individual concerned from their territory pending the  redress
         procedure, but they may not prevent the individual from  submitting
         his/her defence in person, except when his/her appearance may cause
         serious troubles to public policy or public security  or  when  the
         appeal or judicial  review  concerns  a  denial  of  entry  to  the
         territory."


18.  Mr Karim submitted that the exception concerning denial of  entry  does
    not apply here and that it was  not  the  respondent's  case  that  the
    applicant's appearance at his appeal hearing  could  have  a  seriously
    deleterious effect on public policy or public  security.   Accordingly,
    Mr Karim said that the Directive, properly  read,  had  the  effect  of
    precluding the respondent from removing the applicant, and  persons  in
    his position, where  removal  would  prevent  him  from  defending  the
    serious allegations made against him.  In the present case,  where  the
    respondent is contending that the marriage is a  sham,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal would  ordinarily  be  required  to  hear  direct  "in-person"
    evidence from the applicant.


19.  Finally on this topic, Mr Karim contended that, even if  the  right  of
    appeal was non-suspensive, the applicant clearly had a right  to  lodge
    an appeal before removal.  In the present case, the  removal  initially
    planned by the respondent had been such as to give the  applicant  only
    two days within which  to  bring  an  appeal,  which  was  procedurally
    unfair.


20.  For the respondent, Ms Smyth drew attention to  the  commentary  on  an
    earlier version of what became the Directive.  In this commentary  (COM
    (2001) 0527 final) the Commission, commenting  on  a  version  of  what
    eventually became Article 31, stated  that  "giving  appeals  automatic
    suspensory effect would not be a suitable solution, since it would  lay
    the arrangements open to abuse."  She also relied  upon  Recital  (28),
    which specifically states that in  order  to  guard  against  abuse  of
    rights or fraud "notably marriages of convenience or any other form  of
    relationships contracted for the sole purpose of enjoying  a  right  of
    free movement and residence", Member States would have the  possibility
    of adopting "necessary  measures".   In  giving  effect  to  that  aim,
    Article 35 of the Directive empowers Member States  to  adopt  measures
    "to refuse, terminate or withdraw any right conferred by this Directive
    in the case  of  abuse  of  rights  or  fraud,  such  as  marriages  of
    convenience."


21.  In the respondent's contention, regulation 29 of  the  EEA  Regulations
    exhaustively  lists  those  appeals  in  relation  to   which   removal
    directions are to be of no effect and/or may not be  made.   Regulation
    29(3) draws a distinction between an EEA decision to remove  and  other
    EEA decisions.  As has recently been held by Jay J in  Symon  Byczek  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWHC  4298  (Admin),
    the appellate regimes in, respectively, the  EEA  Regulations  and  the
    2002 Act, are distinct.  Schedule 1 to the Regulations,  which  applies
    certain provisions of the 2002 Act for the purpose of  appeals  against
    EEA decisions, does not apply section 78 of  that  Act,  which  is  the
    general provision providing that in-country appeals under the  Act  are
    to be suspensive of removal.  The issue of  suspension  under  the  EEA
    Regulations is therefore the exclusive preserve of regulation 29.


22.  Ms Smyth submitted that Abdullah was correct to  hold  that  there  was
    nothing in the Directive or the EEA Regulations that requires an appeal
    against a  refusal  of  a  residence  card  to  be  treated  as  having
    suspensive effect.  To the extent that the AIT had come to  a  contrary
    conclusion in LO,  the  Tribunal's  comments  were  obiter  and/or  per
    incuriam, as it had not been referred to regulation 29.


23.  The Directive, the background  commentary  and  the  Recitals  made  it
    plain, according to Ms Smyth, that it was  not  the  intention  of  the
    framers of the Directive to require there to be a suspensive  right  of
    appeal for those third country nationals reasonably  suspected  by  the
    relevant Member State to have entered into a marriage  of  convenience.
    Articles 27 to 33 apply expressly to restrictions  on  pre-existing  EU
    law rights on the grounds of public policy, public security and  public
    health.   Accordingly,  the  references  in  Article  31  to   "persons
    concerned" having access to judicial etc. redress procedures of  appeal
    or review fall to be construed as references to persons  enjoying  such
    pre-existing rights.


24.  In any event, even if Article 31  did  apply  to  the  applicant,  this
    would not entitle him to a suspensive  appeal  right.   The  most  that
    could be obtained by the  application  of  Article  31  was  the  right
    (subject to exceptions) to submit  a  "defence  in  person".   However,
    according to Ms Smyth,  the  commentary  document  (COD/2001/0111:  see
    above) made it plain that what is now Article 31(4)  of  the  Directive
    was intended to reflect the CJEU's judgment  in  Pecastaing  v  Belgium
    [1980] ECR 691.  That case was concerned  with  a  person  excluded  on
    public policy grounds.  In the present case, the applicant was  not  in
    this position and could not  sensibly  be  described  as  submitting  a
    "defence".


(ii) Discussion


25.  We are in no doubt that Abdullah was  rightly  decided  and  should  be
    followed. The passage in paragraph 11 of LO on which Mr Karim relies is
    obiter and per incuriam.  The  AIT  was  not,  crucially,  referred  to
    regulation 29 or to the fact that section 78 (no removal  while  appeal
    pending) of the 2002 Act is not  applied  by  Schedule  1  to  the  EEA
    Regulations. As is plain from paragraph 5 of the determination, the AIT
    was constrained by the procedure rules, as then in force,  under  which
    the decision in the case had to be made without a hearing.


26.  The basic flaw in the applicant's case is to conflate the absence of  a
    statutory prohibition on the bringing of  an  appeal  from  within  the
    United Kingdom with the existence of a right to be so present in  order
    to bring such an appeal and to prosecute it to its conclusion. There is
    no principle of law, whether purely domestic or European, that  confers
    a right on an individual to remain within a jurisdiction, regardless of
    his or her status, in order to pursue an  immigration  appeal  in  that
    jurisdiction.  Were the position otherwise then, so far as  the  United
    Kingdom is concerned, there would have been no need for  Parliament  to
    enact section 78 of the 2002  Act,  which  specifically  provides  that
    whilst a person's appeal under section 82(1) of  that  Act  is  pending
    that person may not be removed from the United  Kingdom  or  leave  it,
    pursuant to the Immigration Acts.  The fact  that  section  78  is  not
    amongst the provisions of the 2002 Act applied by Schedule 1 to the EEA
    Regulations is, accordingly, of key significance.


27.  Nor is there anything in the Directive that can  properly  be  said  to
    confer a right of the kind we have described.  This is not  surprising,
    given  the  observations  in  COM  (2001)  0527  that  "giving  appeals
    automatic suspensory effect would not be a suitable solution, since  it
    would lay the arrangements open to  abuse".   If  the  framers  of  the
    Directive envisaged that the availability  of  an  appeal  against  any
    decision taken under the Directive  precludes  the  Member  State  from
    removing the person concerned while that appeal is pending, Article  31
    would plainly not have been framed in the way  it  is.  The  protection
    afforded by Article 31 is expressly limited in scope to certain classes
    of persons.


28.  Mr Karim's attempt to invoke Article 31 as  in  some  way  covering  an
    appeal against the refusal of a residence card must fail.  That Article
    occurs  within  Chapter  VI  of  the   Directive,   which   is   headed
    "RESTRICTIONS ON THE Right of Entry  and  the  Right  of  Residence  on
    Grounds of Public Policy, Public Security or Public  Health".   Article
    27 (general principles) states  that,  subject  to  the  provisions  of
    Chapter VI, "Member States may restrict the  freedom  of  movement  and
    residence of Union citizens and their family members,  irrespective  of
    nationality, on grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public
    health."  Article 27, together  with  Article  28  (protection  against
    expulsion) and Article 29 (public health), accordingly informs who  are
    the "persons concerned" referred to in Article 31(1).  They  are  Union
    citizens and their family members,  subject  to  expulsion  or  removal
    measures.  As a result, Article 31 has nothing whatsoever to say  about
    a person who is not being expelled as a Union citizen or family  member
    but who is appealing a decision that he or she is  not  such  a  family
    member.


29.  In view of what we have said, the respondent has no need to  rely  upon
    Ms Smyth's secondary submission, to the effect that the applicant, even
    if falling within the scope of Article 31, may  be  excluded  from  the
    United Kingdom by virtue of the opening words  of  Article  31(4);  and
    that the applicant has no entitlement to return to submit  his  defence
    in person.  The fundamental reason why Article 31(4) does not avail the
    applicant is, we find, because the entire Article is of no relevance in
    his case.


30.  In the light of our findings regarding the Directive,  it  is  apparent
    that regulation 29 of the  EEA  Regulations  correctly  transposes  the
    relevant provisions of the Directive; in particular, Article  31  (read
    with regulation 29AA (temporary admission in order to  submit  case  in
    person)). (We deal with regulation 24AA at paragraph 52 below).


31.  Given that the applicant's right of  appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse him a residence card is not suspensive of his removal  from  the
    United Kingdom, we do not find that Mr Karim is able  to  rely  upon  a
    secondary submission, which (if we  understand  correctly)  is  to  the
    effect that the appellant was not removable  from  the  United  Kingdom
    until the time limit for appealing the EEA decision to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had elapsed.  Such a proposition finds no express  or  implied
    expression in the Directive or  the  EEA  Regulations.   The  right  of
    appeal is in no sense  rendered  illusory  by  removing  the  applicant
    before the end of the 14 day period for providing a notice  of  appeal,
    in the case of a person who is in the United Kingdom. Not only  is  the
    appeal not abandoned, rule 19(3)(b) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014  makes  it
    plain that, in the circumstances  with  which  we  are  concerned,  the
    applicant has 28 days within  which  to  appeal,  after  receiving  the
    notice of decision, if he is outside the United Kingdom:-


         "(2) If the person is in the United Kingdom, the notice  of  appeal
             must be received not later than 14 days after  they  are  sent
             the notice  of  the  decision  against  which  the  appeal  is
             brought.


         (3)  If the person is outside the United  Kingdom,  the  notice  of
             appeal must be received -


             (a)  not later than 28 days after  their  departure  from  the
                  United Kingdom if the person -


                  (i)  was in the United Kingdom when the  decision  against
                      which they are appealing was made, and


                  (ii) may not appeal while they are in the  United  Kingdom
                      by reason of a provision of the 2002 Act; or


             (b)  in any other case, not later  than  28  days  after  they
                  receive the notice of the decision."






E.  The decision to remove under section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 1999


(i) Submissions


32.  Although Mr Karim stated that his instructions were that the  applicant
    had filed notice of appeal against the section 10 removal decision,  no
    documentary material to this effect has been placed  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Ms Smyth  informed  us  that  the  respondent  was  likewise
    unaware of any such appeal.


33.  The possibility nevertheless exists that, even if no such appeal is  on
    foot, the applicant may seek  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    outside the relevant time limit.  It is also relevant to  observe  that
    permission to bring these judicial review proceedings was  granted,  in
    part by reference to the possible effect of  section  92(4)(b)  of  the
    2002 Act on the respondent's ability to remove the applicant.   We  are
    also aware that this issue is arising in other, similar cases.   It  is
    therefore necessary to address it in some detail.


34.  It is common ground  that  an  appeal  against  a  section  10  removal
    decision, being a decision falling within section 82(1)(g) of the  2002
    Act (before amendment by the 2014 Act), may not be brought  whilst  the
    person concerned is within the United Kingdom, unless the appeal is  of
    a kind to which section 92 applies (section 92(1)).  The  only  way  in
    which section 92 can apply in the circumstances of the present case  is
    by reason of section 92(4)(b); namely, that the appellant:-


         "(b) is an EEA national or  a  member  of  the  family  of  an  EEA
             national and makes a claim to the Secretary of State that  the
             decision breaches the appellant's rights under  the  Community
             Treaties in respect of entry to or  residence  in  the  United
             Kingdom."


35.  With effect from April 2015, the 2014 Act has substituted  an  entirely
    new version of section 92, in which there is no  equivalent  of  former
    section 92(4)(b).  The new section 92, however, does not apply  to  the
    applicant's case.


36.  Mr Karim submitted that the use of the word  "also"  in  section  92(4)
    highlights  the  fact  that  subsection  (4)  applies  in  addition  to
    subsections  (1),  (2)  and  (3).   Until  a  Tribunal  has  found  the
    applicant's marriage to be one of convenience, with the result that the
    applicant is not a family member of an EEA national, Mr Karim submitted
    that the applicant falls within section 92(4)(b), with the result  that
    the applicant could not be removed, since he had made a  claim  to  the
    respondent that removal would breach his  rights  under  the  Treaties.
    The question whether the applicant is or is  not  the  "member  of  the
    family of an EEA national" is, according to Mr Karim, a precedent fact,
    to be determined by a Tribunal.  Accordingly, the word "is" in  section
    92(4)(b) should be read as, in effect, including the  words  "may  be".
    That interpretation was, according to Mr  Karim,  strengthened  by  the
    fact that there could be no circumstances in which the respondent would
    make an immigration decision under section 82  in  respect  of  an  EEA
    national, which would require that national to assert Treaty rights.


37.  Ms Smyth submitted that Mr Karim's analysis ignores the plain  language
    of the provision, which uses the word  "is"  and  not  "may  be".   The
    suggestion that there would be no circumstances in which the respondent
    might make an immigration decision in  respect  of  EEA  nationals  and
    family members was, she said, misconceived.  For example, a 19 year old
    third country national who is a direct descendant of  an  EEA  national
    "is" a family member.  If he or she had not previously relied on EU law
    rights, they may well wish to do so when faced  with  the  prospect  of
    removal.  Even an EEA national might be the subject of  an  immigration
    decision if the respondent did not know  that  he  or  she  is  such  a
    national; for example,  a  dual  country  national  who  had  not,  for
    whatever reason, relied on EU citizenship in the first instance.





(ii) Discussion


38.  Particularly in the light of our findings regarding the  scope  of  the
    Directive, there is, we consider, no  justification  for  adopting  the
    approach to the construction of section 92(4)(b)  for  which  Mr  Karim
    contends.  The word "is" does not fall to be construed as  if  it  read
    (or included) "may be".  We agree  with  Ms  Smyth's  submissions  that
    there may indeed be cases where a person who  is  an  EEA  national  or
    family member is given an immigration  decision  under  the  2002  Act.
    Thus the provision does not bite on air, unless it is given Mr  Karim's
    construction.


39.  Not only is there no reason to construe section  92(4)(b)  in  the  way
    the applicant contends; there is a strong policy reason not to  do  so.
    We have already  indicated  at  paragraph  1  above  that  the  factual
    scenario of the present application (or some variant of  it)  is  being
    commonly encountered by judges in this jurisdiction.  A  third  country
    national who is refused a residence card on the ground that his or  her
    marriage is considered by the respondent to be one  of  convenience  is
    commonly made the subject of a decision to remove under section  10  of
    the 1999 Act.  Parliament's decision not to make an appeal against  the
    EEA decision suspensive of removal from the  United  Kingdom  would  be
    rendered  effectively  nugatory  if  section  92(4)(b)   were   to   be
    interpreted in such a way as to  confer  such  a  suspensive  right  of
    appeal, which in practice will have at its heart the very issue  to  be
    determined in the EEA appeal; namely, whether the marriage  is  one  of
    convenience.


40.  This brings us to the scope of these judicial review proceedings.   The
    respondent's position is that the relevant legislation entitles her  to
    remove the applicant, so that any  appeal  against  this  type  of  EEA
    decision or the removal decision must be brought or,  in  the  case  of
    this type of EEA decision,  brought  or  continued,  from  outside  the
    United Kingdom.  The respondent accepts that her decision to remove is,
    of course, susceptible to judicial review. The applicant's case at this
    point appears to be that, if the appellate route does not  provide  the
    means whereby the applicant can remain in the United Kingdom whilst the
    issue of the marriage of convenience is factually determined, then that
    issue needs to be  so  determined  through  the  judicial  review.   By
    contrast, Ms Smyth submitted that the judicial review should  be  based
    on normal public law  principles,  characterising  the  test  as  being
    whether, on the material available to the respondent, the applicant was
    a person "reasonably  suspected"  of  being  party  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience.


41.   We agree with Ms  Smyth  that  the  applicant's  judicial  review  can
    succeed only if the respondent's categorisation of the marriage as  one
    of convenience is found to be unlawful on public  law  principles.   We
    can see no reason to depart from  those  principles  in  this  type  of
    judicial review.  On the contrary,  any  greater  intensity  of  review
    beyond that advocated by  Ms  Smyth  (which  is  anyway  somewhat  more
    intrusive than a pure Wednesbury  test)  risks  the  very  abuse  which
    European and domestic lawmakers have been at some pains to avoid.


42.  In the present case, the fact that  the  respondent  had  a  reasonable
    basis for taking the view that the  applicant's  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience is  unarguable.  The  reasons  for  refusal  letter  of  25
    February 2015  went  into  considerable  detail  regarding  problematic
    aspects of the answers given at interview by the applicant and his wife
    respectively.  The  interview  record  has  also  been  adduced,  which
    provides a basis for the respondent's conclusion regarding  the  nature
    of the marriage.  There is, in short, no irrationality or other  public
    law unlawfulness in the decision to remove.


43.   Although Ms Smyth did not seek to  rely  upon  it,  we  observe  that,
    where Parliament provides for a matter  to  be  determined  by  appeal,
    albeit  out-of-country,  there  need  to  be  "special  or  exceptional
    factors" before a court or tribunal will permit a substantive challenge
    to a removal decision pursuant to section  10  of  the  1999  Act.  The
    rationale is that the appeal affords an  adequate  alternative  remedy.
    This principle has recently been trenchantly re-stated in  R  (Mehmood)
    and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ
    744. We cannot begin to see any such factors in the present case.


44.  It follows that although, as we have already indicated,  the  applicant
    remains in the United Kingdom,  where  his  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  has  been  heard,  the  decision-making  challenged  in  this
    judicial  review  was  not  unlawful.   The  applicant  had  no   legal
    entitlement to remain in the United Kingdom for the purpose of pursuing
    that appeal.


45.  Mr Karim submitted that it would be unsatisfactory  for  the  appellant
    to be removed and thus precluded  from  playing  a  full  part  in  his
    appeal, including giving "live" evidence to a Tribunal about the  issue
    of his marriage.  An in-country appeal would, we accept, be  likely  to
    offer more to the applicant. But it is the clear effect of the relevant
    legislation that the applicant is not entitled to such an appeal and it
    is not for the Tribunal to circumvent this.





F.  Post-hearing submissions


(i) Regulation 21B of the EEA Regulations


46.   Both  parties  commented  in  their  post-hearing   submissions   upon
    regulation 21B (abuse of rights or fraud).  Mr  Karim  considered  that
    21B "appears to only concern itself with EEA nationals or their  family
    members".  In similar vein, Ms Smyth submitted that there was "no  need
    for the Secretary of State to invoke the regulation 21B power"  in  the
    circumstances of the present case because a  party  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience is not a spouse and an application for a residence card  by
    such a person would fail for that reason.


47.  As can  be  seen,  regulation  21B  derives  from  Article  35  of  the
    Directive.  We agree with Counsel that it is directed  at  persons  (a)
    who are (and accepted to be) EU nationals or their family  members  and
    (b) who seek to abuse rights to reside  by,  inter  alia,  entering  or
    attempting to enter into a marriage  of  convenience  or  by  employing
    fraud to obtain a right to reside.  The opening words -"The abuse of  a
    right to reside includes"- make this plain. Thus, for example,  an  EEA
    national who enters into a marriage of convenience with a  third  party
    may find him or herself the subject of an adverse EEA decision, such as
    to remove the national under regulation  19.   There  is,  however,  no
    requirement for the respondent to take an EEA decision by reference  to
    regulation 21B in the case of a person whom she has reasonable  grounds
    to regard as having no relevant rights under the Directive.


(ii) Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights


48.  Article 47, so far as material, provides as follows:-


         "Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the  law  of  the
         Union are violated has the right to an effective  remedy  before  a
         tribunal in compliance  with  the  conditions  laid  down  in  this
         Article.


         Everyone is  entitled  to  a  fair  and  public  hearing  within  a
         reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal previously
         established by law.  Everyone shall have the possibility  of  being
         advised, defended and represented."


49.  We asked the parties to comment, in their post-hearing submissions,  on
    the significance,  if  any,  of  Article  47  as  regards  the  present
    proceedings.  Mr Karim submitted that  removing  one  or  both  of  the
    parties to the alleged marriage of convenience from the United  Kingdom
    meant that the party or parties concerned could not effectively  engage
    in any appeal process.  It was particularly important in cases such  as
    the present for a fact-finding Tribunal to consider the mannerisms  and
    demeanour of the applicant, in the course of giving his oral  evidence.
    Without this there could not be a fair and effective  trial.  Ms  Smyth
    submitted that the content of any Article 47  right  must  be  context-
    specific.


50.  We agree with that last submission.  As  was  noted  by  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union in  Case  C-249/13  Khaled  Boudjlida  at
    [43]:


        "... it is... in accordance with the Court's settled case law  that
        ... fundamental rights, such as  respect  for  the  rights  of  the
        defence, do not  constitute  unfettered  prerogatives  and  may  be
        restricted, provided that the restrictions in  fact  correspond  to
        objectives of general interest pursued by the measure  in  question
        and that they  do  not  involve,  with  regard  to  the  objectives
        pursued, a  disproportionate  and  intolerable  interference  which
        infringes upon the very substance of  the  rights  guaranteed  (the
        judgments  in  Alassini   and   Others,   C-317/08   to   C-320/08,
        EU:C2010:146, paragraph 63; G and R, EU:C:2013:533,  paragraph  33;
        and Texdata Software, C-418/11, EU:C:2013:588, paragraph 84)".


51.   In order to see where the balance is to be struck  in  cases  of  this
    kind, one looks to the provisions of the Directive.  There, as we  have
    noted, the relevant appeal  rights  are  non-suspensive.   However,  in
    cases covered by Article 31 (which, we emphasise, does not include  the
    applicant's type of EEA appeal), the persons concerned have a qualified
    right of re-entering in order to submit a  "defence  in  person".   The
    scheme of the Directive is, we find, entirely compatible  with  Article
    47 of the Charter.  Article  47  does  not  necessitate  the  wholesale
    conferring of suspensive rights of appeal against any EEA decision.


(iii) Macastena v Secretary of State for the Home Department and  regulation
    24AA


52.   Regulation 24AA of the EEA Regulations applies where the Secretary  of
    State intends to give directions for the removal of a  person  to  whom
    regulation 24(3) applies; that is to say, a person to be removed  under
    regulation 19. Regulation 24AA gives effect to Article 31. In the light
    of what we have found at paragraphs  28  to  30  above  regarding  that
    Article,  it  is  plain  that  regulation  24AA  can  have  no   direct
    application to this type of EEA decision.


53.   In Macastena v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWHC
    1141 (Admin), a renewed  permission  hearing,  Collins  J  doubted  the
    practical  utility  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  certifying   under
    regulation 24AA that a person may be removed from the United Kingdom in
    a family life case, given that the person has a right to return (at the
    Secretary of State's expense, per Collins J) in order to present  their
    case in person under regulation 29AA, at the First-tier Tribunal.


54.   Not only does regulation 24AA have no direct bearing  on  the  present
    proceedings, we reject Mr Karim's submission  that  it  may  have  some
    indirect effect. Mr Karim  submitted  that  it  cannot  be  right  that
    persons subject to removal under regulation 19 as a  result  of  having
    committed criminal offences can  be  in  a  better  position  that  the
    present applicant, so far as  concerns  being  present  at  his  appeal
    hearing. But, for the reasons  we  have  already  given,  that  is  the
    position; and there are sound policy reasons for it. Macastena thus has
    no bearing on cases of the present kind.


Decision


55.  For these reasons, this application is dismissed.









                                  APPENDIX


                                 LEGISLATION





Directive 2004/38/EC


Recitals


(5)  The right of all Union citizens to move and reside  freely  within  the
    territory of the Member States should, if it is to be  exercised  under
    objective conditions of freedom and dignity, be also granted  to  their
    family members, irrespective of nationality.  For the purposes of  this
    Directive, the definition of 'family member' should  also  include  the
    registered partner if the legislation of the host Member  State  treats
    registered partnership as equivalent to marriage.


...


(28) To guard against  abuse  of  rights  or  fraud,  notably  marriages  of
    convenience or any other form of relationships contracted for the  sole
    purpose of enjoying the right of free movement  and  residence,  Member
    States should have the possibility to adopt the necessary measures.


Article 3


Beneficiaries


1.   This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to or  reside
    in a Member State other than that of which they are a national, and  to
    their family members as defined in point 2 of Article 2  who  accompany
    or join them.


2.   Without prejudice to any right  to  free  movement  and  residence  the
    persons concerned may have in their own right, the  host  Member  State
    shall, in accordance with its national  legislation,  facilitate  entry
    and residence for the following persons:


    (a)  any other family members, irrespective of their  nationality,  not
         falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2  who,  in  the
         country from which they have come, are dependants or members of the
         household  of  the  Union  citizen  having  the  primary  right  of
         residence, or where serious health  grounds  strictly  require  the
         personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;


    (b)   the  partner  with  whom  the  Union  citizen   has   a   durable
         relationship, duly attested.


    The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination  of  the
    personal circumstances  and  shall  justify  any  denial  of  entry  or
    residence to these people.


...





                                 Chapter VI


                 Restrictions on the Right of Entry and the


               Right of Residence on Grounds of Public Policy,


                      Public Security or Public Health


    Article 27


    General principles


1.   Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member States  may  restrict
    the freedom of movement and  residence  of  Union  citizens  and  their
    family members, irrespective  of  nationality,  on  grounds  of  public
    policy, public security or public health.  These grounds shall  not  be
    invoked to serve economic ends.


2.   Measures taken on grounds of public policy  or  public  security  shall
    comply with  the  principle  of  proportionality  and  shall  be  based
    exclusively on  the  personal  conduct  of  the  individual  concerned.
    Previous  criminal  convictions  shall  not  in  themselves  constitute
    grounds  for  taking  such  measures.   The  personal  conduct  of  the
    individual concerned must represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    Justifications that are isolated from the particulars of  the  case  or
    that  rely  on  considerations  of  general  prevention  shall  not  be
    accepted.


3.   In order to ascertain whether the person concerned represents a  danger
    for public policy or public security,  when  issuing  the  registration
    certificate or, in the absence of a registration system, not later than
    three months from the date of arrival of the person  concerned  on  its
    territory or from the date of reporting  his/her  presence  within  the
    territory, as provided  for  in  Article  5(5),  or  when  issuing  the
    residence card, the host Member State  may,  should  it  consider  this
    essential, request the Member State of origin and, if  need  be,  other
    Member States to provide information  concerning  any  previous  police
    record the person concerned may have. Such enquiries shall not be  made
    as a matter of routine.  The Member  State  consulted  shall  give  its
    reply within two months.


4.   The Member State which issued  the  passport  or  identity  card  shall
    allow the holder of the document who has been expelled  on  grounds  of
    public policy, public security, or public health  from  another  Member
    State to re-enter its territory  without  any  formality  even  if  the
    document is no longer valid or the nationality  of  the  holder  is  in
    dispute.


Article 28


Protection against expulsion


1.   Before taking an expulsion decision on  grounds  of  public  policy  or
    public  security,  the  host  Member  State  shall  take   account   of
    considerations such as how long the individual concerned has resided on
    its territory, his/her  age,  state  of  health,  family  and  economic
    situation, social and cultural integration into the host  Member  State
    and the extent of his/her links with the country of origin.


2.   The host Member State may not take an expulsion decision against  Union
    citizens or their family members, irrespective of nationality, who have
    the right of permanent residence on its territory,  except  on  serious
    grounds of public policy or public security.


3.   An expulsion decision may not be taken against Union  citizens,  except
    if the decision is based on imperative grounds of public  security,  as
    defined by Member States, if they:


    (a)  have resided in the host Member State for the previous ten  years;
         or


    (b)  are a minor, except if the expulsion is  necessary  for  the  best
         interests of (b) are a minor, except if the expulsion is  necessary
         for the best interests of the child, as provided for in the  United
         Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989.


...


Article 30


Notification of decisions


1.   The persons concerned shall be notified  in  writing  of  any  decision
    taken under Article 27(1),  in  such  a  way  that  they  are  able  to
    comprehend its content and the implications for them.


2.   The persons concerned shall be informed, precisely and in full, of  the
    public policy, public security or public health grounds  on  which  the
    decision taken in their case is based, unless this is contrary  to  the
    interests of State security.


3.   The notification shall specify the court  or  administrative  authority
    with which the person concerned may lodge an appeal, the time limit for
    the appeal and, where applicable, the time allowed for  the  person  to
    leave the territory of the Member State.  Save  in  duly  substantiated
    cases of urgency, the time allowed to leave the territory shall be  not
    less than one month from the date of notification.


Article 31


Procedural safeguards


1.   The  persons  concerned  shall  have  access  to  judicial  and,  where
    appropriate, administrative redress procedures in the host Member State
    to appeal against or seek review of any decision taken against them  on
    the grounds of public policy, public security or public health.


2.   Where the application for appeal against  or  judicial  review  of  the
    expulsion decision is accompanied by  an  application  for  an  interim
    order to suspend enforcement of that decision, actual removal from  the
    territory may not take place until such time as  the  decision  on  the
    interim order has been taken, except:


    -    where the expulsion decision  is  based  on  a  previous  judicial
         decision; or


    -    where the persons concerned have had previous access  to  judicial
         review; or


    -    where the expulsion decision is based  on  imperative  grounds  of
         public security under Article 28(3).


3.   The redress procedures shall allow for an examination of  the  legality
    of the decision, as well as of the facts and circumstances on which the
    proposed measure is based.  They shall ensure that the decision is  not
    disproportionate, particularly in view of the requirements laid down in
    Article 28.


4.    Member  States  may  exclude  the  individual  concerned  from   their
    territory pending the redress procedure, but they may not  prevent  the
    individual from submitting  his/her  defence  in  person,  except  when
    his/her appearance may cause  serious  troubles  to  public  policy  or
    public security or when the appeal or judicial review concerns a denial
    of entry to the territory.


...


                                 Chapter VII


                              Final Provisions


Article 35


Abuse of rights


Member States may adopt the  necessary  measures  to  refuse,  terminate  or
withdraw any right conferred by this Directive  in  the  case  of  abuse  of
rights or fraud, such as marriages of convenience.  Any such  measure  shall
be proportionate and subject to the procedural safeguards  provided  for  in
Articles 30 and 31.





Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006


General interpretation


2.(1)    In these Regulations -


    ...


    'spouse' does not include -


    [(a) a party to a marriage of convenience; or


    ...]


'Qualified person'


6.-(1)   In these Regulations, 'qualified person' means a person who  is  an
    EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-


    (a)  a jobseeker;


    (b)  a worker;


    (c)  self-employed person;


    (d)  a self-sufficient person; or


    (e)  a student.


(2)  [Subject to regulation 7A(4) {and 7B(4)}, a person  who  is  no  longer
    working shall not cease to be treated as a worker for  the  purpose  of
    paragraph (1)(b) if -]


    (a)  he is temporarily unable to work as the result of  an  illness  or
         accident;


    (b)  {he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having been
         employed in the United Kingdom for at least one year, provided that
         he -


         (i)  has registered as a jobseeker  with  the  relevant  employment
             office; and


         (ii) satisfies conditions A and B;}


    {(ba)    he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment  after  having
         been employed in  the  United  Kingdom  for  less  than  one  year,
         provided that he -


         (i)  has registered as a jobseeker  with  the  relevant  employment
             office; and


         (ii) satisfies conditions A and B;}


    (c)  he is involuntarily unemployed  and  has  embarked  on  vocational
         training; or


    (d)  he has voluntarily  ceased  working  and  embarked  on  vocational
         training that is related to his previous employment.


[(2A)    A person to whom paragraph (2)(ba) applies may only  retain  worker
    status for a maximum of six months.]


(3) A person who is no longer in  self-employment  shall  not  cease  to  be
    treated as a self-employed person for the purpose of  paragraph  (1)(c)
    if he is temporarily unable to pursue his activity as  a  self-employed
    person as the result of an illness or accident.


[(4) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), a  "jobseeker"  is  a  person  who
    satisfies conditions A, B and, where relevant C}.]


(5)  Condition A is that the person -


    (a)  entered the United Kingdom in order to seek employment; or


    (b)  is present in the United Kingdom seeking  employment,  immediately
         after enjoying a right to reside pursuant to  paragraph  (1)(b)  to
         (e)  (disregarding  any  period  during  which  worker  status  was
         retained pursuant to paragraph (2)(b) or (ba)).


(6)  Condition B is that the person can provide evidence that he is  seeking
    employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged.


(7)  A person may not retain the status of a worker  pursuant  to  paragraph
    (2)(b), or jobseeker pursuant to paragraph (1)(a), for longer than  the
    relevant period unless he can provide compelling evidence  that  he  is
    continuing to seek  employment  and  has  a  genuine  chance  of  being
    engaged.]


[(8) In paragraph (7), "the relevant period" means -


    (a)  in the case of  a  person  retaining  worker  status  pursuant  to
         paragraph (2)(b), a continuous period of six months;


    (b)  in the case of a jobseeker, [91] days, minus the cumulative  total
         of any days during which the person concerned previously enjoyed  a
         right to reside as a jobseeker, not including any days prior  to  a
         continuous absence from the United Kingdom of at least 12 months.]


[(9) Condition  C  applies  where  the  person  concerned  has,  previously,
    enjoyed a right  to  reside  under  this  regulation  as  a  result  of
    satisfying conditions A and B -


    (a)  in the case of a person to whom paragraph (2)(b) or (ba)  applied,
         for at least six months; or


    (b)  in the case of a jobseeker, for at least [91] days in total,


    unless the person concerned has, since  enjoying  the  above  right  to
    reside, been continuously absent from the United Kingdom for  at  least
    12 months.]


[(10)    Condition C is that the person has had a  period  of  absence  from
    the United Kingdom.]


[(11)    Where condition C applies -


    (a)  paragraph (7) does not apply; and


    (b)  condition B has effect as if  "compelling"  were  inserted  before
         "evidence".]


Family member


7.-(1)   Subject to paragraph (2), for the  purposes  of  these  Regulations
    the following persons shall be treated as the family members of another
    person -


    (a)  his spouse or his civil partner;


    (b)  direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who are
         -


         (i)  under 21; or


         (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;


    (c)  dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or  that  of  his
         spouse or his civil partner;


    (d)  a person who is to be treated as the family member of  that  other
         person under paragraph (3).


(2)  A person shall not be treated under paragraph  (1)(b)  or  (c)  as  the
    family member of a student residing in the  United  Kingdom  after  the
    period of three months beginning on the date on which  the  student  is
    admitted to the United Kingdom unless -


    (a)  in the case of paragraph (b), the person is the dependent child of
         the student or of his spouse or civil partner; or


    (b)  the student also falls within  one  of  the  other  categories  of
         qualified persons mentioned in regulation 6(1).


(3)  Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is  an  extended  family  member
    and  has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a  registration
    certificate or a residence card shall be treated as the  family  member
    of the relevant EEA national for as long as he continues to satisfy the
    conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation to that  EEA
    national and the permit, certificate or card has not ceased to be valid
    or been revoked.


(4)  Where the relevant EEA national  is  a  student,  the  extended  family
    member shall only be treated as the  family  member  of  that  national
    under paragraph (3) if either the EEA family permit  was  issued  under
    regulation  12(2),  the  registration  certificate  was  issued   under
    regulation 16(5) or the residence  card  was  issued  under  regulation
    17(4).


...


[Abuse of rights or fraud


21B.-(1) The abuse of a right to reside includes -


       (a)    engaging in conduct which appears to be intended to circumvent
           the requirement to be a qualified person;


       (b)    attempting to enter the United Kingdom  within  12  months  of
           being removed pursuant to regulation 19(3)(a), where the  person
           attempting to do so is unable to provide evidence that, upon re-
           entry to the United Kingdom, the conditions  for  any  right  to
           reside,  other  than  the  initial  right  of  residence   under
           regulation 13, will be met;


       (c)    entering, attempting to enter or assisting another  person  to
           enter or attempt to enter, a marriage or  civil  partnership  of
           convenience; or


       (d)    fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain,  or  assisting
           another to obtain or attempt to obtain, a right to reside.


(2)  The Secretary of State may take an  EEA  decision  on  the  grounds  of
       abuse of rights where there are reasonable  grounds  to  suspect  the
       abuse of a right to reside and it is proportionate to do so.


(3)  Where these Regulations provide that  an  EEA  decision  taken  on  the
       grounds of abuse in the preceding twelve months  affects  a  person's
       right to reside, the person who is the subject of that  decision  may
       apply to the Secretary of State to have the effect of  that  decision
       set aside on grounds that there has been a  material  change  in  the
       circumstances which justified that decision.


(4)  An application  under  paragraph  (3)  may  only  be  made  whilst  the
       applicant is outside the United Kingdom.


(5)  This regulation may not be invoked systematically.


(6)  In this regulation, 'a right to reside' means a right to  reside  under
       these Regulations.]





Appeal rights


26.-(1)  Subject to the following paragraphs of this  regulation,  a  person
      may appeal under these Regulations against an EEA decision.


...


[(3) If a person [to whom paragraph (2) does  not  apply]  claims  to  be  a
      family member who has retained the right of residence  or  the  family
      member or relative of an EEA national he may not  appeal  under  these
      Regulations unless he produces -


      (a) a passport; and


      (b) either -


          (i) an EEA family permit;
          [(ia)   a qualifying EEA State residence card;]
          (ii)    proof that he is the family member or relative of  an  EEA
              national; or
          (iii)   in the case of a person claiming to be a family member who
              has retained the right of residence,  proof  that  he  was  a
              family member of the relevant person.]


...


Effect of appeals to the [First-tier Tribunal or Upper Tribunal]


29.-(1)  This regulation applies to appeals under these Regulations made  to
      the [First-tier Tribunal or Upper Tribunal].


(2)  If a person in the United Kingdom appeals against an  EEA  decision  to
      refuse to admit him to the United  Kingdom  [(other  than  a  decision
      under regulation 19(1), (1A) or (1B))], any directions for his removal
      from the United Kingdom previously given  by  virtue  of  the  refusal
      cease to have effect, except in so  far  as  they  have  already  been
      carried out, and no directions may be so given  while  the  appeal  is
      pending.


(3)  If a person in the United Kingdom appeals against an  EEA  decision  to
      remove him from the United  Kingdom  [(other  than  a  decision  under
      regulation 19(3)(b))], any directions given under section  10  of  the
      1999 Act or Schedule 3 to the 1971 Act for his removal from the United
      Kingdom are to have no effect, except in so far as they  have  already
      been carried out, while the appeal is pending.


(4)  But the provisions of Part I of Schedule 2, or  as  the  case  may  be,
      Schedule 3 to the 1971 Act  with  respect  to  detention  and  persons
      liable to detention apply to a person appealing against a  refusal  to
      admit him, or a decision to revoke his admission,  or  a  decision  to
      remove him as if there were in force directions for his  removal  from
      the United Kingdom, except that he may not be detained on board a ship
      or aircraft so as to compel him to leave the United Kingdom while  the
      appeal is pending.


[(4A)    In paragraph (4), the words "except that he"  to  the  end  do  not
      apply to an EEA decision to which regulation 24AA applies.]


(5)  In calculating the period of two months limited by  paragraph  8(2)  of
      Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act for -


      (a) the giving of directions under that paragraph for the removal of a
          person from the United Kingdom; and


      (b) the giving of a notice of intention to give such directions,


    any period during which there is pending an appeal by him under  is  to
    be disregarded [(except in cases  where  the  EEA  decision  was  taken
    pursuant to regulation 19(1), (1A), (1B) or (3)(b))].


(6)  If a person in the United Kingdom appeals against an  EEA  decision  to
      remove him from the United Kingdom, a deportation order is not  to  be
      made against him under section 5 of the 1971 Act while the  appeal  is
      pending.


(7)  Paragraph 29 of Schedule 2 to the  1971  Act  (grant  of  bail  pending
      appeal) applies to a person who has  an  appeal  pending  under  these
      Regulations as it applies to a person who has an appeal pending  under
      section 82(1) of the 2002 Act.


...


Regulation 26(7)
                                 Schedule 1

            Appeals to the [First-Tier Tribunal or Upper Tribunal]


[1.] The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002  Act  have  effect
    in relation to an appeal under these  Regulations  to  the  [First-tier
    Tribunal or Upper Tribunal] Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  as  if  it
    were an appeal against an immigration decision under section  82(1)  of
    that Act:


    section 84(1), except paragraphs (a) and (f);
    sections 85 to 87;
    ...
    section 105 and any regulations made under that section; and
    section 106 and any rules made under that section.





Immigration and Asylum Act 1999


10.  Removal of certain persons unlawfully in the United Kingdom.


    (1)  A person who is not a British citizen  may  be  removed  from  the
         United  Kingdom,  in  accordance  with  directions  given   by   an
         immigration officer, if -


         (a)  having only a limited leave to enter or remain,  he  does  not
             observe a condition attached to the leave  or  remains  beyond
             the time limited by the leave;


         [(b) he uses deception in seeking  (whether  successfully  or  not)
             leave to remain;


         (ba) his indefinite leave to enter or remain has been revoked under
             section 76(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
             2002 (person ceasing to be refugee);] or


         (c)  directions [...] have been given for the removal,  under  this
             section, of a person [...] to whose family he belongs.


    (2)  Directions may not be given under subsection (1)(a) if the  person
         concerned has made an application for leave to remain in accordance
         with regulations made under section 9.


    [(3) Directions for the removal of a person  may  not  be  given  under
         subsection (1)(c) unless the  Secretary  of  State  has  given  the
         person written notice of the intention to remove him.


    (4)  A notice under subsection (3) may not be given if -


         (a)  the person whose removal under subsection (1)(a) or (b) is the
             cause of the proposed directions under subsection  (1)(c)  has
             left the United Kingdom, and


         (b)  more  than  eight  weeks  have  elapsed  since  that  person's
             departure.


    (5)  If a notice under subsection (3) is sent by first class post to  a
         person's last known address, that subsection shall be taken  to  be
         satisfied at the end of the second day after the day of posting.


    (5A) Directions for the removal of a  person  under  subsection  (1)(c)
         cease to have effect if he ceases to belong to the  family  of  the
         person whose removal under subsection (1)(a) or (b) is the cause of
         the directions under subsection (1)(c).]


    (6)  Directions under this section -


         (a)  may be given only  to  persons  falling  within  a  prescribed
             class;


         (b)  may impose any requirements of a prescribed kind.


    (7)  In relation to any such directions, paragraphs 10, 11, 16  to  18,
         21 and 22 to 24 of Schedule  2  to  the  1971  Act  (administrative
         provisions as to control of entry), apply as they apply in relation
         to directions given under paragraph 8 of that Schedule.


    [(8) When a person is notified that a decision has been made to  remove
         him in accordance with this section, the  notification  invalidates
         any leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom previously given
         to him.]


    (9)  The costs of complying with a direction given under  this  section
         (so far as reasonably incurred) must be met  by  the  Secretary  of
         State.






Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002


78.  No removal while appeal pending


    (1)  While a person's appeal under section 82(1) is pending he may  not
         be -


         (a)  removed from the United Kingdom in accordance with a provision
             of the Immigration Acts, or


         (b)  required to leave the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  a
             provision of the Immigration Acts.


    (2)  In this section 'pending' has the meaning given by section 104.


    (3)  Nothing in this section shall prevent any of the  following  while
         an appeal is pending -


         (a)  the giving of a direction for the appellant's removal from the
             United Kingdom,


         (b)  the making of a deportation order in respect of the  appellant
             (subject to section 79), or


         (c)  the taking of any other interim or preparatory action.


    (4)  This section applies only to an appeal brought while the appellant
         is in the United Kingdom in accordance with section 92.


    ...


92.  Appeal from within United Kingdom: general


    (1)  A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while  he  is  in  the
         United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind to which this section
         applies.


    (2)  This section applies to an appeal against an immigration  decision
         of a kind specified in section 82(2)(c), (d), (e), (f) and (j).


    (3)  This section also applies to an appeal against refusal of leave to
         enter the United Kingdom if -


         (a)  at the time of the refusal  the  claimant  is  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and


         (b)  on his arrival in the United Kingdom the  claimant  had  entry
             clearance.


        ...


     (4)  This section also applies to an  appeal  against  an  immigration
         decision if the applicant-


             ...


            (b) is an EEA national or a member of  the  family  of  an  EEA
         national and makes a claim to  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
         decision  breaches  the  appellant's  rights  under  the  Community
         Treaties in respect of  entry  into  or  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom.





