
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of NK) v The Secretary of State for the Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00431 (IAC)


                                                                 3 June 2015

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE mcgeachy

                                   Between

                                     n k

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Ms B Asanovic, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan Solicitors appeared on
behalf of the Applicant.

Ms J Lean, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

1.    The applicant is a citizen of Cameroon. She claims that on  return  to
    Cameroon she would suffer persecution because she  is  a  member  of  a
    social group as she is a lesbian and that that persecution would be not
    only from the state but from agents  of  persecution  who  include  her
    husband and members of her family.

2.   The applicant was born in February 1987.  In 2008  she  says  that  she
    kissed her cousin and thereafter her uncle having learned of this,  she
    was raped. The following year she was married and then had  one  child.
    She was threatened by her husband that should she  be  found  to  be  a
    lesbian he would take action against her. She  formed  a  relationship,
    she claims, with a woman called C in June 2010 who she  had  met  on  a
    social media site.  In February 2013 she  left  Cameroon  with  a  visa
    which, as I understand it, was one for a steward on a ship rather  than
    visit visa.  She arrived in Britain on 10 February 2013.  Once here she
    was told that that a photograph of her with C had  been  found  by  her
    family; she was threatened and she said that then she feared  returning
    to Cameroon.

3.   She made an application for asylum which was  refused  and  the  appeal
    was entered into the fast track system.  The appeal  was  heard  on  20
    June 2013 before Judge A M Black and dismissed.

4.   In her determination, at paragraphs  35  onwards,  Judge  Black  placed
    weight on what she saw as the delay in claiming asylum, medical records
    at Harmondsworth which stated that the applicant was heterosexual and a
    number of other matters which led  the  judge   to  consider  that  the
    applicant's  story  of  what  had  happened  to  her  in  Cameroon  was
    implausible.  Judge Black  did  not  accept  her  claim  that  she  had
    contacted or joined the Movement  for  Justice.   She  noted  that  the
    applicant  had  claimed  one  relationship  here  but  there   was   no
    elaboration on that.

5.   Thereafter on 13 August, Lawrence Lupin instructed  on  behalf  of  the
    applicant,   made submissions to the Secretary of State.  They enclosed
    an arrest warrant and some email correspondence as  well  as  a  letter
    from Yoyo Yankam who was the Chairperson of  the  Afro-Asian  community
    Integration Unit.  That letter said that  Mr  Yankam  had  been  making
    enquiries in Cameroon on behalf of the applicant and that he understood
    there was a police summons  for  the  applicant  and  that  police  had
    attended her home.  He  referred  to  an  email  from  the  applicant's
    brother dated 10 August  2013.  Thereafter  it  appears  the  applicant
    changed representatives to Messrs. Sutovic &  Hartigan  and  they  then
    wrote to the Secretary  of  State  on  2  September  referring  to  the
    correspondence to which I have just referred.

6.   The further correspondence was considered by  the  Secretary  of  State
    who refused, in a letter of 2 September, to accept  the  correspondence
    as a fresh claim.  Judicial review proceedings were then started and on
    8 October 2013 permission on those was refused by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul.

7.   Sutovic & Hartigan wrote a number of further letters to  the  Secretary
    of State throughout January of  2014  and  the  fresh  claim  in  those
    letters led to a further refusal.   When  the  second  judicial  review
    proceedings were issued they were again considered  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Rintoul and he granted permission.

8.    The  further  submissions  made  included  correspondence  from  Karen
    McCarthy who wrote on behalf of the Lesbian Immigration  Support  Group
    (LISG). In a letter dated 20 December 2013 she had stated that  it  was
    the procedure of LISG not to write support  letters  until  the  person
    they wished to support had been to three meetings so  that  members  of
    the group could be sure that the applicant was a lesbian  or  bisexual.
    She detailed those meetings.  Ms Lean  has  argued  that  in  fact  the
    decision of LISG to support the applicant was merely based on what  the
    applicant had told them.  I do  not  consider  that  that  is  entirely
    correct.  It is true that members and supporters of LISG placed  weight
    on what the applicant had told them but it is clear  from  the  various
    letters that  the  writers  of  the  letters,  including  Ms  McCarthy,
    accepted the applicant as being a lesbian because,  as  she  says,  "we
    could clearly see she was a lesbian both from  our  own  experience  as
    lesbians ourselves and of meeting lesbian women from other parts of the
    world". So it was not just a decision made on what  the  applicant  had
    told them but because of their own experiences and their own sexuality.



9.   In a letter dated 16 January 2014 the Secretary of  State  refused  the
    further submissions made.  I have considered that letter together  with
    the earlier letter of 2 September as  it  was  accepted  would  be  the
    appropriate course of action.   I do  not  consider  that  that  letter
    together with the earlier  letter  do  show  anxious  scrutiny  of  the
    further evidence that had been put forward.  I do not consider moreover
    that it was open to the Secretary of State to consider  that  this  new
    evidence,  taken  with  the  earlier  evidence,  would  mean  that  the
    applicant would not have a reasonable prospect  of  success  before  an
    Immigration Judge.

10.  I reach that conclusion because of the weight  of  the  evidence  which
    was put forward, not only the evidence  of  Ms  McCarthy,  Ms  M,   the
    members of LISG,  and S G, whose  wife was a member of  LISG  but  also
    because of the evidence of Mr Yankam.  The evidence that he put forward
    is evidence which I  consider  should  properly  be  considered  in  an
    appeal.  It is not self-serving in the sense that has  been  argued  by
    the Secretary of State as being evidence that was  based  on  what  the
    applicant had herself said, but it is evidence based on  his  telephone
    calls  with  those  in  Cameroon  and  indeed  there   is   the   email
    correspondence.  Moreover, there is the documentary evidence by way  of
    the arrest warrant which has been put forward.

11.   I consider that taking all that evidence into account  and  taking  it
    holistically the decision of the Secretary of State was  not  one  that
    was open to her. It cannot be said that there would not be a  realistic
    prospect of success on appeal.   I therefore grant the order sought.


Application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

12.   Ms Lean has made an application for permission to appeal to the  Court
    of Appeal on two grounds.  That  I  should  have  found  that  the  new
    material was self serving and that I should not have taken into account
    the evidence from Mr  Yankam  because  that  had  been  considered  and
    rejected by the respondent. I refuse the application. Firstly, for  the
    reasons I have given above I consider that the evidence from members of
    LISG is rather more than a mere repetition of what  the  applicant  had
    told them in  that  it  was  based  on  their  own  assessment  of  the
    applicant's sexuality and also that that from Mr Yankam  was  based  on
    what he had been told by the applicant's  brother  and  there  are,  of
    course, emails from that brother. Secondly because I consider  that  it
    was my duty to take all evidence into account - not just evidence which
    post dated the first rejection of the submissions making a fresh claim.

Costs

13.  I order that the respondent pay the applicant's costs in a  sum  to  be
    agreed or, in default of agreement, to be determined by the Tribunal on
    the basis of written submissions not to exceed 4 pages from each party.




[pic]


A.L.McGeachy
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
12 June 2015
