
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Yusuf (EEA - ceasing to be a jobseeker; effect) [2015] UKUT 00433 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 December 2014                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               Ms Halimo Yusuf
                                and 3 others
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Fouladvand, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms S Wise, solicitor (Treasury Solicitors)
     and Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

An individual who has acquired the status of  worker  for  the  purposes  of
article 45 (ex Article 3) TFEU) (and  thus  regulation  4  (1)  (a)  of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006) only through being  a
jobseeker, who is a qualified person  under  regulation  6(1)(a),  does  not
retain the status of worker  on  ceasing  to  be  a  jobseeker.  In  such  a
scenario, the purpose in interpreting article 45 widely - to give effect  to
the right to move to another member state to seek employment - is absent.

The term 'worker' within article 45 covers, to a greater or  lesser  extent,
not only actual workers but also:

   1) those entering a state for the first time to seek employment  ('first-
      time' job seekers')

   2) those who have had a job and are again seeking work ('second-time  job
      seekers')

   3) vocational or occupational  trainees;   the  involuntarily  unemployed
      and sick;

   4) injured and retired workers; and,

   5) women who, because of the physical constraints of the late  stages  of
      pregnancy and the aftermath of childbirth, give up work or jobseeking,
      provided they return to work or find another job within  a  reasonable
      period after the birth of the child


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The first appellant (hereafter the  appellant)  is  a  citizen  of  the
    Netherlands born on 15 November 1966.  She is the mother of the  second
    to fourth appellants born on 3 December 1991, 21  August  1993  and  18
    December 1997 respectively.  They appeal with  permission  against  the
    determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  promulgated  on  28
    October 2013 in which he dismissed their appeals against  the  decision
    of the respondent who, on 23 April 2013, refused  to  issue  them  with
    documents confirming their right of permanent residence in  the  United
    Kingdom, pursuant to regulations 15 and 17 of the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 2. The appellants arrived in the United Kingdom in  2005  and  have  lived
    here ever since. The appellant first secured  a  job  on  24  September
    2009, having attended training courses on three previous occasions from
    11 June 2007 to 14 September 2007, 14 April 2008 to 25 July 2008 and 15
    March 2009 to 18 May 2009. It is the appellants' case  that  the  first
    appellant has, since October 2005 been a qualified  person  as  defined
    within the EEA Regulations, initially as a jobseeker from October  2005
    and since 24  September  2009,  as  a  worker.  The  second  to  fourth
    appellants' case is that they have  at  all  material  times  been  the
    dependent children of a qualified person. They argue that consequently,
    they have been lawfully resident in accordance with the EEA Regulations
    for in excess of five  years,  and  so,  have  acquired  the  right  of
    permanent residence. It was on that basis that on 12  March  2013  they
    applied for documents certifying their right  of  permanent  residence,
    pursuant to regulations 15 and 18 of the EEA Regulations.

 3.  The  respondent  refused  the  applications  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellants had not resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 for a  continuous
    period of five years.  No further details were given.

 4. On appeal, Judge Blum stated that while a jobseeker can be a  qualified
    person, that requires the provision of evidence that the individual  is
    seeking employment and has a genuine chance  of  being  engaged.  Judge
    Blum found that the appellant:-

      a) had entered the United Kingdom in October 2005 to  seek  employment
         and had thus entered as a jobseeker [22];

      b) had not worked prior to commencing  employment  in  September  2009
         [22];

      c) had provided no evidence of seeking employment other than her  word
         and although she did  try  to  obtain  employment  when  she  first
         entered in October 2005, she was unable to do so for  a  period  of
         three years and eleven months [23] and therefore he  could  not  be
         satisfied that she had a genuine chance of being engaged  when  she
         entered the UK or throughout the period she was looking for work;

 5. In respect of the second appellant, Judge Blum found:

      i) her claim was dependent on  that  first  appellant  [24]  and  thus
         failed; or, in the alternative,

     ii) her claim on the basis that she was  a  student  failed  given  the
         absence of evidence of  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  in  the
         United Kingdom as required by regulation 4 of the  EEA  Regulations
         [24].

    Judge Blum therefore dismissed the appeals under  the  EEA  Regulations
    and on human rights grounds.

 6. The appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal:-

      a) failed to have proper regard to the appellant's record of  national
         insurance contributions and credits indicating that she had entered
         the system on 10 November 2005 and was a jobseeker for twelve weeks
         in 2006/7, remaining a jobseeker until the  32nd  week  of  2009/10
         [ground 1A];

      b) erred in concluding that regulation 6(2)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
         requires that someone could not be treated as a jobseeker unless he
         had previously been in employment [ground 1A]; and,

      c) erred in finding that the appellant  had  not  worked  in  2006  in
         preferring the evidence of HMRC over that of her  daughter  [ground
         1B].

 7. On 13 December 2013 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey  granted  permission
    stating:-

         "It is arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  adopt  an
         analysis in accordance with case law  principles  by  reference  to
         which the first appellant's situation should have  been  considered
         not just in relation to whether she was a jobseeker but whether she
         was a worker who continued to be a worker after  becoming  again  a
         jobseeker.  The parties will be expected  to  have  regard  to  all
         relevant case law including  Shabani  v  SSHD  (EEA  -  jobseekers;
         nursery education) [2013] UKUT 315".

 8. There have been a number of case management hearings in  these  appeals
    which were previously linked to those stayed pending  the  decision  of
    the Court of Justice in Jessy St Prix v SSWP [2014] CJEU C-507/12.

    The hearing

 9. Mr Fouladvand submitted that the appellant had been a worker, a  status
    she had retained pursuant to regulation 6(2) and that she had  retained
    her status whilst in receipt of Job Seekers Allowance ("JSA") and while
    undergoing approved training on the three occasions - 11 June  2007  to
    14 September 2007, 14 April to 25 July 2008 and 15 March 2009 to 18 May
    2009 - as identified in the letter from Jobcentre Plus  dated  7  April
    2014. He submitted that she had been a worker when she  entered  (as  a
    jobseeker), and had not lost that status, and, alternatively  that  the
    finding she had not worked was not one open to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. Ms Wise submitted that the appellant had not been a "worker"  prior  to
    commencing employment in September 2009.  On that basis regulation 6(2)
    was not engaged and that there was no reason to overturn  the  findings
    of fact made by Judge Blum in particular at [23]. She submitted further
    that the attendance at approved training  could  not  be  equated  with
    employment given there was no contract of employment and no evidence of
    payment of wages and whilst JSA and credits were given, with  a  slight
    top-up being offered as an incentive, this did not equate to  work  and
    thus somebody attending training could not be seen as "worker".

11. Ms Wise submitted further that there  was  adequate  evidence  for  the
    conclusion that the appellant had no genuine chance  of  being  engaged
    given the length of time she had taken to find employment and also  the
    fact that she had been  required  to  go  on  three  separate  training
    courses including English for the Speakers of Other Languages ("ESOL").

12. In reply Mr Fouladvand submitted that even were the  appellant  not  to
    have been found to be a worker prior to  her  start  of  employment  in
    September 2009, she was nonetheless a qualified person as a jobseeker.

13. It was agreed that we would accept further written submissions  on  the
    nature of approved in training but we  received  submissions  from  the
    respondent alone.

Our Assessment

14. The question of whether or not the appellants had resided in accordance
    with the EEA Regulations turns on whether  the  appellant  had  been  a
    "qualified person" for the relevant period. It is  not  submitted  that
    she met that definition other than as a "worker" or "jobseeker".

15. The starting point for our analysis of the law is the  EEA  Regulations
    which transpose Directive 2004/38/EC ("the Citizenship Directive") into
    domestic law. The EEA Regulations define "worker" for their purposes as
    meaning a worker within the meaning of Article  39  TFEU  (now  article
    45).

16. We bear in mind that in analysing the EEA Regulations, we are assessing
    the law as it was on 28  October  2013,  the  date  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  We note that regulation 6 of the EEA  Regulations
    has been amended  extensively  since  that  date,  by  the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  (Amendment)  (No.2)  Regulations  2013  (SI
    2013/3032),  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   (Amendment)
    Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/1451) and the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) (Amendment) (No.3) Regulations 2014 (SI 2014/2761). In each case,
    there are in any event transitional provisions which we do not set  out
    here.

17. Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations provided at the date of the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision:

    6.-(1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a person  who  is
    an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

         (a) a jobseeker;

         (b) a worker;

         (c) a self-employed person;

         (d) a self-sufficient person; or

         (e) a student.

    (2) A person who is no longer working shall not cease to be treated  as
    a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

         (a) he is temporarily unable to work as the result of an illness or
    accident;

         (b) he is in duly recorded involuntary  unemployment  after  having
         been  employed  in  the  United  Kingdom,  provided  that  he   has
         registered as a jobseeker with the relevant employment office and-

             (i) he was employed for  one  year  or  more  before  becoming
         unemployed;

             (ii) he has been unemployed for no more than six months; or

             (iii) he can provide evidence that he is seeking employment in
             the United Kingdom and has a genuine chance of being engaged;

         (c) he is involuntarily unemployed and has embarked  on  vocational
    training; or

         (d) he has voluntarily ceased working and  embarked  on  vocational
         training that is related to his previous employment.

    (3) A person who is no longer in self-employment shall not cease to  be
    treated as a self-employed person for the purpose of  paragraph  (1)(c)
    if he is temporarily unable to pursue his activity as  a  self-employed
    person as the result of an illness or accident.

    (4) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker" means a person who
    enters the United Kingdom in order to seek employment and  can  provide
    evidence that he is seeking employment and  has  a  genuine  chance  of
    being engaged.

18. Article 45 (ex article 39) of TFEU provides:-

        Article 45 (ex Article 39 TEC)

        1. Freedom of movement for  workers  shall  be  secured  within  the
        Union.

        2. Such freedom of  movement  shall  entail  the  abolition  of  any
        discrimination based on nationality between workers  of  the  Member
        States as regards employment, remuneration and other  conditions  of
        work and employment.

        3. It shall entail the right, subject to  limitations  justified  on
        grounds of public policy, public security or public health:

        (a) to accept offers of employment actually made;

        (b) to move freely within the territory of Member  States  for  this
        purpose;

        (c) to stay in a Member State  for  the  purpose  of  employment  in
        accordance with the provisions governing the employment of nationals
        of that State laid down by law, regulation or administrative action;

        (d) to remain in the territory of a Member State after  having  been
        employed in  that  State,  subject  to  conditions  which  shall  be
        embodied in regulations to be drawn up by the Commission.

        4. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to  employment  in
        the public service.

19. This provision has been  supplemented  by  Directive  2004/38/EC  ("the
    Citizens' Directive") and also Regulation 492/2011.

20. The Citizens Directive provides within its recitals:

        (9)  Union citizens should have the right of residence in  the  host
        Member State for a period not exceeding three months  without  being
        subject  to  any  conditions  or  any  formalities  other  than  the
        requirement to hold a  valid  identity  card  or  passport,  without
        prejudice to a more favourable treatment applicable to jobseekers as
        recognised by the case-law of the Court of Justice.

        (10)  Persons  exercising  their  right  of  residence  should  not,
        however, become an unreasonable  burden  on  the  social  assistance
        system of  the  host  Member  State  during  an  initial  period  of
        residence. Therefore, the right of residence for Union citizens  and
        their family members for periods in excess of three months should be
        subject to conditions.

21. The Citizens Directive also provides at Article 7:

        Article 7 Right of residence for more than three months

        1. All Union citizens shall have  the  right  of  residence  on  the
        territory of another Member State for a period of longer than  three
        months if they:

         (a) are workers or self-employed persons in the host Member  State;
        or

         (b) have sufficient  resources  for  themselves  and  their  family
         members not to become a burden on the social assistance  system  of
         the host Member State during their period  of  residence  and  have
         comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member State; or



         (c) - are enrolled at a private or public establishment, accredited
         or  financed  by  the  host  Member  State  on  the  basis  of  its
         legislation or administrative practice, for the  principal  purpose
         of following a course of study, including vocational training; and

         - have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  host  Member
         State and assure the relevant national authority,  by  means  of  a
         declaration or by such equivalent means as they  may  choose,  that
         they have sufficient resources  for  themselves  and  their  family
         members not to become a burden on the social assistance  system  of
         the host Member State during their period of residence; or,

         (d) are family members accompanying or joining a Union citizen  who
         satisfies the conditions referred to in points (a), (b) or (c).

        2. The right of residence provided for in paragraph 1  shall  extend
        to  family  members  who  are  not  nationals  of  a  Member  State,
        accompanying or joining the Union citizen in the host Member  State,
        provided that such Union citizen satisfies the  conditions  referred
        to in paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c).

        3. For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), a Union  citizen  who  is  no
        longer a worker or self-employed person shall retain the  status  of
        worker or self-employed person in the following circumstances:

         (a) he/she is temporarily unable  to  work  as  the  result  of  an
        illness or accident;

         (b) he/she is  in  duly  recorded  involuntary  unemployment  after
         having been employed for more than one year and has registered as a
         jobseeker with the relevant employment office;

         (c) he/she is  in  duly  recorded  involuntary  unemployment  after
         completing a fixed-term employment contract of less than a year  or
         after having  become  involuntarily  unemployed  during  the  first
         twelve months and has registered as a jobseeker with  the  relevant
         employment office. In this case, the  status  of  worker  shall  be
         retained for no less than six months;

         (d)  he/she  embarks  on  vocational  training.  Unless  he/she  is
         involuntarily unemployed, the retention of  the  status  of  worker
         shall  require  the  training  to  be  related  to   the   previous
         employment.

22. There is a substantial jurisprudence of the CJEU dealing  with  workers
    and job seekers. Much of this pre-dates the Citizens  Directive  which,
    in part, seeks to enact principles derived from the jurisprudence.

23. We draw the following principles from the jurisprudence:

      i) the term 'worker' within article 45 covers, to a greater or  lesser
         extent, not only actual workers but also:

               1) those  entering  a  state  for  the  first  time  to  seek
                  employment  ('first-time' job seekers') (see AG and others
                  (EEA-jobseeker-self-sufficient    person-proof)    Germany
                  [2007] UKAIT 00075,  Begum  (EEA  -  worker  -  jobseeker)
                  Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00275(IAC)  and Antonissen [1997] ECR
                  1-441);

               2) those who have had  a  job  and  are  again  seeking  work
                  ('second-time job seekers') ( Shabani (EEA  -  jobseekers;
                  nursery education)  [2013]  UKUT  315  (IAC),  Case  75/63
                  Hoekstra (nee Unger) [1964] ECR 177,  Case  66/85  Lawrie-
                  Blum [1986] ECR 2121, Bernini v Minister van Onderwijs  en
                  Wetenschappen [1992] ECR  I-1071,  Case  C-85/96  Martinez
                  Sala v Freistaat Bayern [1998] ECR I-2691);

               3)  vocational  or  occupational  trainees  (Lair  v  Hanover
                  University [1988] ECR 3161, [1989] 3  CMLR  545,  Brown  v
                  Secretary of State for Scotland [1988] ECR 3205  [1988]  3
                  CMLR 403);  the involuntarily unemployed   and  sick  (see
                  FMB (EEA reg  6(2)(a)  -  'temporarily  unable  to  work')
                  Uganda [2010] UKUT 447  (IAC), Lair, Case C-302/90  Caisse
                  Auxiliare d'Assurance Maladie-Invalidite v Faux [1991] ECR
                  I-4875);

               4) injured and retired workers (FMB (Uganda) supra); and,

               5) women who, because of the physical constraints of the late
                  stages of pregnancy and the aftermath of childbirth,  give
                  up work or jobseeking, provided they  return  to  work  or
                  find another job within  a  reasonable  period  after  the
                  birth of her child (Jessy St Prix v SSWP  [2014]  CJEU  C-
                  507/12)

     ii) The amount of time given to jobseekers to find work  is  not  fixed
         although Member States may require them to  leave  their  territory
         after a reasonable period  unless  the  person  concerned  produces
         evidence:-

         (1) that he or she is continuing to seek employment  (Shabani, AG &
         Others ; and

         (2)  has  genuine  chances  of  being  employed   (Antonissen;   EC
         Commission v Belgium Case C-344/95 [1997] 2 CMLR 187).

24. We bear in mind in the light of St Prix at [38] that  Article  7(3)  of
    Directive 2004/38 does not list exhaustively the circumstances in which
    a migrant worker who is no longer in  an  employment  relationship  may
    nevertheless continue to benefit from that status but the facts of this
    case are  not  materially  different  from  Antonissen.   There  is  no
    suggestion in St Prix that Article 7 (3) should be expanded to  include
    those simply seeking employment; people in that  category  are,  unlike
    women in the position of Ms St Prix, already provided for.

25. Mr Fouladvand's submission that the appellant never lost her status  as
    a worker, achieved through being a  jobseeker  initially,  because  she
    never ceased being a jobseeker until she started full-time  work  seeks
    to equate those who are to be treated as having acquired the status  of
    worker  through  jobseeking  with  those  who   are   workers   through
    employment.  He seeks, in effect, to apply the  protections  for  those
    who have ceased to be employed,  set  out  in  article  7  (3)  of  the
    Citizenship Directive, to those who are  workers  for  the  purpose  of
    European Law through being jobseekers.

26. These submissions takes no account of the established law arising  from
    Antonissen and EC Commission v Belgium that there  are  limits  to  how
    long a person can seek employment, and that the individual must be able
    to show that she has a genuine chance of being employed. Those  seeking
    employment as to be treated as though they are  workers  as  otherwise,
    there would be significant constraints on the freedom of  movement  for
    workers. The protections under EU law for those who have ceased  to  be
    workers, as set out in Article 7 (3) are clearly  for  those  who  have
    ceased employment, to protect the right to move to seek work.

27. The effect of Mr Fouladvand's submission would be that there is no  end
    to the period in which an individual could be a jobseeker. There is  no
    support in either the Citizens Directive or the jurisprudence for  such
    a proposition; on  the  contrary  Article  7  (3)  of  the  Citizenship
    Directive places restrictions on those who can continue to  be  treated
    as workers.

28. We turn next to the question as to how  participation  in  an  approved
    training course should be considered.

29. We are grateful to Ms Wise for her further written submissions  on  the
    nature of approved training.  We bear in  mind  that  there  have  been
    since 2009 major and substantial changes to the benefits system in  the
    United Kingdom including wholesale changes to the relevant  regulations
    governing approved training. Those changes  are  not  relevant  to  the
    facts of these appeals; what we say about  approved  training  is  thus
    only of historical interest and cannot be  taken  as  relevant  to  the
    current provisions.

30. The appellant has not provided any material relating to the legislative
    and regulatory framework governing  approved  training  or  as  to  the
    content of the courses. We accept that, due  to  the  closures  of  the
    colleges the appellant attended and the lapse of time,  that  it  would
    have been difficult to obtain evidence relevant to the  courses.   What
    is clear from the letter from Jobcentre Plus is that there  were  three
    periods of approved training from 11 June 2006 to 14 September 2007, 14
    April to 25 July 2008 and 15 March 2009 to 18 May 2009.

31. In her written submissions, Ms Wise states that the  primary  power  to
    make provision for training and training allowances is in section 2  of
    the Employment and Training Act 1973. Further, regulation  170  of  the
    Jobseeker's Allowance Regulations 1996 provides that a  person may  be
    entitled to Income Based JSA without being available for employment; or
    without having entered in a jobseeker's agreement; or without  actively
    seeking employment if they are in  receipt  of  a  training  allowance.
    There are some exceptions to this if the training is training for which
    18-24 year olds are eligible.

32. It is noted also that "approved training" is training approved  by  the
    Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, and is  training  to  address
    skills issues and help move a claimant  into  work  or  closer  to  the
    labour market. A  training  allowance  is  paid  by  DWP/JCP  whilst  a
    jobseeker is attending full time training as regulation 15 of  the  JSA
    Regulations precludes a claimant  from  being  actively  available  and
    being able to seek employment whilst they  are  undertaking  full  time
    training. The training on average would be 20 hours per week.  Training
    credits are awarded for the period of the training allowance to protect
    the claimant's national insurance record.

33. It is also submitted  that  approved  training  is  compulsory  if  the
    Jobcentre has mandated  the  claimant  to  undertake  the  training  to
    address skills gaps and help move the claimant into work or  closer  to
    the labour market. Sanctions would be applied if a claimant refuses  to
    attend the course. The training could be more than  20  hours  or  less
    than 20 hours depending on the course length and structure. The courses
    are run by external organisations, such as local colleges.  A  training
    allowance is paid only if the training is for 16 hours or more  a  week
    and is equal in amount to the benefit they were receiving.

34. It is, however, accepted that the appellant  was  still  effectively  a
    jobseeker whilst attending the  approved  training,  and  the  training
    allowance  paid  by  her  local  Jobcentre  would  have  included   10p
    Jobseekers Allowance to administratively keep her Jobseekers  Allowance
    claim open. It is thus submitted  that  whilst  being  paid  a  DWP/JCP
    training allowance, a claimant is  still  effectively  unemployed,  and
    cannot be said to have employment status.  The  respondent  noted  also
    that the training certificates provided by the appellant show that  she
    has ESOL and essential skills training the purpose of which is to  give
    claimants with English as a second language  understanding  of  spoken,
    listening, written and reading  English,  and  to  help  them  progress
    towards employment.

35. The respondent's case is that a person  undertaking  approved  training
    and in receipt of a training allowance does not have employment status.
    It is for  the  appellant  to  show  that  the  approved  training  did
    constitute  employment  but  she  has  adduced  nothing  to  rebut  the
    submissions made by the respondent.

36. We do not consider that attending an approved course as a student could
    be considered as an employment relationship. It is,  we  consider,  not
    arguable that the relationship  meets  the  relevant  criteria  for  an
    employment relationship within the meaning of EU  law  as  set  out  in
    Barry v Southwark [2008] EWCA Civ 1440, given the absence  of  evidence
    of a contract for remuneration which meets the  necessary  criteria  in
    European law to create such a relationship between the first  appellant
    and either the DWP or the  college.  We  conclude,  therefore,  that  a
    person who attends an approved course is not employed.

37. It is, we accept, unclear from the evidence whether  the  courses  were
    "vocational", but given that they were mandated by the  DWP  to  assist
    the appellant to obtain employment, as the respondent submits, it would
    be perverse to conclude that they were not.

38. Nor do we consider that by attending courses the appellant was  in  the
    alternative a "student" for the purposes of the EEA Regulations,  given
    the  requirement  for  comprehensive  sickness  insurance.  It  is  not
    suggested by the appellants that such an insurance policy was in place,
    nor was there evidence thereof before the First-tier Tribunal.

    Applying the law to the facts

39. The grounds of appeal are, in part misconceived.  It  is  not  arguable
    that, as is averred at paragraph  [1.a]  that  Judge  Blum  misdirected
    himself to the effect that an individual could be a jobseeker  only  if
    previously employed, nor is it arguable that he misconstrued regulation
    6 (2) of the EEA Regulations. On  the  contrary,  he  directed  himself
    properly at paragraph [23] that a jobseeker can be a qualified  person,
    but that to do so an applicant must show that he is seeking  employment
    and has a genuine chance of being engaged. That is entirely  consistent
    with the established jurisprudence, in particular with Antonissen,  and
    with the EEA Regulations.

40. Contrary to what is averred,  Judge  Blum  did  accept  [23]  that  the
    appellant was seeking employment, and accepted the evidence of HMRC  to
    that effect. What he did not accept was that she had genuine chance  of
    being engaged in employment when she first entered, or  throughout  the
    period she was looking for employment.

41. The grounds of appeal are further misconceived  in  averring  at  [1.b]
    that Judge Blum erred in his approach to the evidence as to whether the
    appellant had worked prior to 2009. The grounds state at paragraph  [2]
    that  the  appellant  was  a  jobseeker,  looking  for  employment  and
    attending approved training from her arrival in this country until 24th
    September 2009 and make no mention of the alleged prior employment.  It
    is therefore inconsistent to argue  that  the  appellant  had  in  fact
    worked prior to that date.

42. Judge Blum records [22] that the appellant initially said she had  been
    employed for six months in 2006 and for  a  month  in  2008;  that  her
    evidence changed in cross-examination; that there  was  no  documentary
    evidence relating to such employment; and, that her daughter  said  she
    had not worked prior to 2009.  The records from  HMRC  adduced  by  the
    appellant and attached to the grounds of appeal disclose no  record  of
    tax or NI contributions paid until 2009/10.  There is thus no  positive
    documentary evidence from HMRC or any other source that  the  appellant
    had worked.

43. It was for the appellant to establish that she  had  been  employed  as
    claimed. The Judge noted discrepancies in the oral  evidence,  and  the
    absence of documentary evidence of employment, and the absence  of  any
    record or tax or National Insurance  paid  at  the  relevant  time.  He
    explained adequately why, in the circumstances, he did not  accept  the
    claim that the appellant had worked prior to September 2009, and he was
    entitled to come to that conclusion.

44. Judge Blum was thus entitled to find that, prior to starting work on 24
    September 2009, the appellant had spent a period  of  3  years  and  11
    months without employment, and despite attending  in  this  period  the
    three courses referred to above, had not previously  found  employment.
    We consider that in the circumstances, he was entitled to conclude that
    she had not, on her arrival or during the whole of that  period,  shown
    that she had a genuine chance of employment.  His conclusion  that  the
    appellant was not a qualified person  was  one  open  to  him  and  his
    reasons for reaching that conclusion are adequately reasoned and  based
    on sufficient evidence.

45. While the appellant's presence may have been lawful for the first three
    months of her stay here, it ceased to be so thereafter as the  evidence
    did not establish that she had a genuine chance of being employed  from
    the outset, nor could it be argued that she fell to  be  treated  as  a
    "worker" for the purposes of Article 45 (ex Article 39) TFEU (even with
    the Antonissen concept of a worker-cum-jobseeker).

46. We do not accept the argument that an individual who has  acquired  the
    status of worker for the purposes of article 45 (ex Article 39) through
    being a jobseeker, retains that status if she ceases to be a jobseeker.
    In such a scenario, the purpose in interpreting article 45 widely -  to
    give effect to the right to  move  to  another  member  state  to  seek
    employment - is absent. Such an  argument,  if  correct,  would  expand
    "worker" to cover any individual who had ever  entered  another  Member
    State to seek work. That is plainly contradictory to the  jurisprudence
    as set out above.

47. Further, while the appellant attended  three  courses,  that  does  not
    assist her. Even assuming that they were vocational courses, regulation
    6 (2) provides that the status of worker is only extended for those who
    have ceased working; the appellant had not worked. Article 7 (3) of the
    Citizenship Directive does not assist her either, as again, the  status
    of worker for those attending training is  predicated  on  that  person
    having worked prior to commencing training.

48. For these reasons, we find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error of law capable of affecting  the
    outcome. We therefore uphold its decision to dismiss the appeals.

    Endnote

49. It is apparent that the appellants may now have acquired the  right  of
    permanent residence, given that it  appears  the  first  appellant  has
    worked continuously for over 5 years. That is not a factor we can  take
    into account when assessing whether there is an error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It  is  of  course  open  to  the
    appellants to make fresh applications for certificates confirming their
    right of permanent residence. We express no view  as  to  whether  such
    applications would be successful, given that the position of the second
    and third appellants as dependants of their mother is unclear, in light
    of their ages.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


