
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

     Deliallisi (British citizen: deprivation appeal: Scope) [2013] UKUT
                                 00439(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 July 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                              JURGEN DELIALLISI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Naik, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)  An appeal under  section  40A  of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1981
against a decision to deprive a person of British citizenship  requires  the
Tribunal  to  consider  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's   discretionary
decision to deprive should be exercised differently. This will involve  (but
not be limited to) ECHR Article 8 issues, as well as  the  question  whether
deprivation would be a disproportionate  interference  with  a  person's  EU
rights.

(2)  Although, unlike section 84(1)(g) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002, section 40A of the 1981 Act does not involve any  statutory
hypothesis that the appellant will be removed from  the  United  Kingdom  in
consequence of  the  deprivation  decision,  the  Tribunal  is  required  to
determine the reasonably  foreseeable  consequences  of  deprivation,  which
may, depending on the facts, include removal.

(3)  A person who,  immediately  before  becoming  a  British  citizen,  had
indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom,  does  not  automatically
become entitled to such leave, upon being deprived of such citizenship.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


A. INTRODUCTION

1.   At the end of the last Millennium, Kosovo was part of the territory  of
    the state of Serbia, which itself had emerged  as  a  separate  entity,
    following the break-up of Yugoslavia.  The majority of  the  population
    of Kosovo were and are  ethnic  Albanians.   Many  were  in  favour  of
    achieving separation from Serbia. That led to an armed Serbian response
    and, in turn, large-scale conflict.  In 1999,  a  NATO  military  force
    intervened, in a bid to restore order.

2.   In 2000, the situation in Kosovo was still sufficiently grave for  many
    of its inhabitants to seek protection in other countries, including the
    United Kingdom.  In August 2000, the appellant, then aged  23,  arrived
    in this country.  Taking advantage of the crisis in Kosovo, he told the
    United Kingdom authorities that he was Kosovan.  In truth, he was  from
    Albania.  That was where he had lived with  his  parents,  although  he
    told the respondent that they too were Kosovan.

3.   On this false basis, the appellant in 2002 obtained refugee status  and
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  In 2005, he  applied
    to be naturalised as a British citizen.  On 15 May 2006 he  was  issued
    with a certificate of naturalisation.  In his citizenship  application,
    the appellant maintained that he was from Mitrovica in Kosovo.

4.   In February 2007, the appellant's parents applied for  entry  clearance
    to the United Kingdom, as visitors.  Their application, made in Tirana,
    indicated that the appellant was born in Durres in Albania on  17  July
    1977 (not Kosovo, on 17 July 1975, as the appellant had claimed).

5.   In response to a letter from the respondent,  informing  the  appellant
    that she was considering depriving  him  of  British  citizenship,  the
    appellant made a statement dated 11 August 2008, in which  he  admitted
    he was born in Durres, Albania on 17 July 1977.  He said  he  had  left
    Albania for a better life as the situation in that country was unstable
    and he was frightened of criminality there.  The agent who had  brought
    him to  the  United  Kingdom  instructed  the  appellant  to  tell  the
    authorities that he was from Kosovo, since if he did  so  he  would  be
    granted asylum; were he to tell the truth, the appellant was told  that
    he would be immediately returned.

6.   In 2005, the appellant's fianc�e had arrived from  Albania,  which  was
    also her home, with  entry  clearance  to  join  the  appellant.   They
    subsequently married and a son was born to them in 2007.  A second  son
    was born in 2010.  The wife's initial application for naturalisation as
    a British citizen was refused by the respondent,  who  considered  that
    she had used information concerning her husband, which she knew  to  be
    false.  She was banned from making  any  further  application  for  two
    years.  That was in 2009.  When she re-applied in 2011, her application
    was successful.

7.   On 13 October 2009, the respondent  gave  the  appellant  notice  of  a
    decision to deprive him of his British citizenship under section 40  of
    the British Nationality Act 1981.  The appellant was  informed  in  the
    same document that he  could  appeal  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal against that decision, pursuant to section  40A  of  the  1981
    Act.

B.  THE LEGISLATION

8.   The present version of section 40 of the British Nationality  Act  1981
    was substituted  for  the  original  enactment  by  section  4  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Section 40(2),  however,
    was itself substituted by section 56 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  Section 40 reads as follows:-

         "40. Deprivation of citizenship


         (1)  In this section a reference to a person's 'citizenship status'
             is a reference to his status as -


             (a)  a British citizen


             (b)  a British overseas territories citizen,


             (c)  a British Overseas citizen,


             (d)  a British National (Overseas),


             (e)  a British protected person, or


             (f)  a British subject.


         (2)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
             deprivation is conducive to the public good.


         (3)  The Secretary of State may by order  deprive  a  person  of  a
             citizenship status which  results  from  his  registration  or
             naturalisation if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the
             registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of -


             (a)  fraud,


             (b)  false representation, or


             (c)  concealment of a material fact.


         (4)  The Secretary of State may not make an order under  subsection
             (2) if he is satisfied that the  order  would  make  a  person
             stateless.


         (5)  Before making an order under this  section  in  respect  of  a
             person the Secretary of State must  give  the  person  written
             notice specifying -


             (a)  that the Secretary of State has decided to make an order,


             (b)  the reasons for the order, and


             (c)  the person's right of  appeal  under  section  40A(1)  or
                  under  section  2B  of  the  Special  Immigration  Appeals
                  Commission Act 1997.

         (6)  Where a person acquired a citizenship status by the  operation
             of a law which applied to him because of his  registration  or
             naturalisation  under  an  enactment  having   effect   before
             commencement, the Secretary of State may by order deprive  the
             person of the citizenship status if the Secretary of State  is
             satisfied that the registration or naturalisation was obtained
             by means of -


             (a)  fraud,


             (b)  false representation, or


             (c)  concealment of a material fact."

9.   The present method of challenging a decision under  section  40  is  by
    way of  appeal.   Leaving  aside  appeals  which  lie  to  the  Special
    Immigration Appeals Commission, relevant provisions are to be found  in
    section 40A of the 1981 Act:-

         "40A. Deprivation of citizenship: appeal


         (1)  A person who is given notice under section 40(5) of a decision
             to make an order in respect of him under section 40 may appeal
             against the decision to the First-tier Tribunal;


         (2)  ....


         (3)  The following provisions of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002 shall apply in relation  to  an  appeal  under
             this section as they apply in  relation  to  an  appeal  under
             section 82, 83 or 83A of that Act -


             (b)  ....


             (c)  section 106 (rules),


             (d)  section 107 (practice directions) and


             (e)  section 108 (forged document: proceedings in private).


         (6)  ....


         (7)  ....


         (8)  ....".

C.  THE APPELLANT'S APPEAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

10.  By the time the appellant's appeal came to be  considered,  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal had  been  replaced  by  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   On  21  October  2011,
    Designated Immigration Judge Woodcraft  and  Immigration  Judge  Pullig
    made a ruling in respect of the appellant and five other appellants, in
    respect of whom the respondent had decided to make  deprivation  orders
    on the basis that they too had obtained British citizenship  by  making
    false claims.  The ruling dealt with a number of matters, of which  the
    following are relevant to the present proceedings.

11.  At [19] to [23] of the ruling, the  First-tier  Tribunal  decided  that
    the scope of appeals under section 40A was as follows:-


         "19. Section 40A(1) does not define the scope of the  appeals.   As
             we have said, a decision  is  not  an  'immigration  decision'
             under Section 82 of the 2002 Act so the grounds of appeal  set
             out in Section 84 of that Act  do  not  apply,  in  particular
             Section 84(1)(e) - that the decision is not in accordance with
             the law, and (f) - that the person taking the decision  should
             have exercised  differently  a  discretion  conferred  by  the
             Immigration Rules.


         20.  Thus, altogether the power  of  the  respondent  to  make  the
             decision is simply that - the respondent 'may'  do  so  -  the
             Tribunal has no power to exercise  discretion  differently  as
             such a decision is not an 'immigration decision'.


         21.  Subject to what we say below with regard to human  rights,  we
             find that the scope of the appeal simply on the basis  of  the
             wording of Section 40A(1) is to examine the facts on which the
             respondent  made  the  decision,  examine  the  evidence   and
             determine whether the basis upon which the decision  was  made
             is made out.


         22.  The essential fact of falsely asserting being Kosovan  is  not
             disputed by any of the appellants.  It is in fact admitted  by
             each of them.  If this appeal were limited in scope as we have
             indicated then each one would fall to be  dismissed  for  that
             reason.


         23.  That would be the case even if the respondent had not followed
             her own policy in the Nationality Instructions (Chapter 55) as
             a challenge to such would be upon the basis that the  decision
             was not in accordance with the law.  Subject as below, we have
             no jurisdiction in that regard.  That would be  a  matter  for
             judicial review.  However, we now turn to Article 8.


         Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention


         24.  Because of what we have said above, all the other  submissions
             made to us raise matters that can only be argued under Article
             8."


12.  Having thus found that the scope of the  section  40A  appeal  was,  in
    effect, limited to Article 8 ECHR issues, the Tribunal  concluded  that
    Article 8 would be engaged only:-

         "(i) Where as a result of deprivation an appellant will  be  unable
             to work and receive benefits and thus  be  unable  to  support
             himself or herself and dependant;


         (ii) Where there are children who have  no  immigration  status  or
             will have none as a direct result of a Deprivation Order being
             made;


         (iii)    Spouses with limited leave  who  would  only  be  able  to
             obtain further leave if the appellant  were  not  deprived  of
             British citizenship." [50]

13.  It was on this basis that the same panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determined the appellant's appeal, following a hearing at Hatton  Cross
    on 12 December 2011.  At [4b] of its determination  the  Tribunal  made
    the following findings:-


         "25. It is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  had  deceived  the
             respondent when he sought asylum, obtained indefinite leave to
             remain and  subsequently  obtained  British  Citizenship.   It
             matters  not  that  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer   may   have
             overlooked that fact when  he  granted  the  appellant's  wife
             entry clearance to come to this country as  a  spouse.   There
             could be many explanations for that.  It does  not  alter  the
             fact that deception was practised.  One  way  or  another  the
             appellant's conduct clearly falls within Section 40(3) of  BNA
             1981 and as a consequence of the facts found the Secretary  of
             State's decision under Section 40(3)  is  right.   It  is  not
             argued that the appellant would become stateless as  a  result
             of this decision or any order made following it.


         26.  Turning to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention,  we  have
             dealt with this comprehensively in our ruling.   There  is  no
             evidence of precisely what the consequence  to  the  appellant
             will be of deprivation in practical terms.  If the  respondent
             makes an order depriving him of his citizenship but grants him
             leave he can continue to work as he  has  been  before,  claim
             benefits if that becomes necessary, and  continue  to  support
             his wife and son.  Their position is not affected directly  by
             the decision or any order made as a result.


         27.  It is appropriate to comment upon what was said  in  Fayed.[1]
             Mr Fayed was a man  of  considerable  reputation  one  way  or
             another.  He was extremely well-known  as  the  proprietor  of
             Harrods.  The decision of the  respondent  in  that  case  was
             equally  well-known  and  as  a  result   the   whole   affair
             culminating in the Court of Appeal  decision,  from  which  we
             have quoted.  It became notorious.


         28.  In this appeal the circumstances are rather different.  No one
             has pointed out what the actual consequences would be  of  the
             appellant and his family having different  nationalities  when
             they  travelled.   There  may   be   a   certain   amount   of
             inconvenience if one or more of  his  family  have  a  British
             passport and he  does  not  but  instead  some  other  status,
             possibly Discretionary Leave to Remain endorsed on some  newly
             acquired Albanian passport.  That is a practical inconvenience
             and one for which the appellant himself is solely responsible.


         29.  As to loss of citizenship of the European Union and the rights
             that accompany that citizenship, there is no  evidence  as  to
             what in this case would be the direct effect of that  in  this
             case.


         30.  Adopting the approach in  Razgar  (see  paragraph  29  of  the
             ruling) we find that Article 8 is not engaged in principle but
             if it is (because it can be) the interference  will  not  have
             consequences of such gravity as to engage it in fact  in  this
             case, having a mind to what was  said  in  AG  (Eritrea)  (see
             paragraph 31).  If we are wrong, we find the decision to be in
             accordance with  the  lawful  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
             control  (which  includes  the  grant   and   deprivation   of
             citizenship) in the economic interests of this country and  we
             find it to be entirely proportionate in that legitimate aim."


14.  Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  that
    Tribunal on 19 June 2012 and  the  appellant's  appeal  was  thereafter
    linked with those of two other similar appeals.  At a hearing on 3 June
    2013 the Upper Tribunal, by consent, found that there was an  error  of
    law in each of the determinations of the First-tier Tribunal, such that
    those determinations fell to be set aside.  In each case, the  approach
    adopted by the First-tier Tribunal to the application of Article  8  of
    the ECHR meant that it failed adequately  to  consider  the  Article  8
    issues advanced by the appellants.  That much was common ground between
    the parties.  As will become apparent, however, we found it  necessary,
    in re-making the decision in the appellant's appeal, to consider a more
    general issue, which featured in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  ruling  ;
    namely, the scope of an appeal under section 40A.

D.  EVIDENCE GIVEN AT THE RE-MAKING HEARING ON 9 JULY 2013

15.  The appellant gave evidence with the assistance of  an  interpreter  in
    the  Albanian  language.   He  confirmed  as  true  his  three  witness
    statements.  In that dated 11 August 2008, he had said  that  he  "left
    Albania for a better life, as the political  and  economical  situation
    was unstable.  I was unemployed and my family was very poor".  Law  and
    order was said  to  be  "very  awful".   Notwithstanding  the  family's
    poverty, they were able to borrow �5,000 from friends, which they  used
    to pay an agent to take the appellant to the United  Kingdom  since  he
    "had heard that UK is a country,  where  the  human  rights  [sic]  are
    properly respected and this country also treats the foreigners  fairly.
    Therefore I decided that UK was the best place for me".  The  appellant
    claimed that "as soon as I had the opportunity... I admitted that I  am
    from Albania".  He had been on NASS support only  for  six  months  and
    thereafter "always  worked  lawfully",  not  relying  on  any  form  of
    government support.  He said that he had "fully integrated into British
    society and I have never had any criminal record.   I  realise  I  have
    committed an offence and I sincerely apologise for what has happened".

16.  In his statement of 26 September 2011,  the  appellant  asserted  that,
    whilst in Albania, he had been approached by gang members and told that
    he should join them.  Since he was his parents' only  remaining  child,
    they decided that, rather than join the criminal  gang,  the  appellant
    should be sent to the United Kingdom.   The  agent  told  him  that  he
    should say he was from Kosovo since he would be granted asylum.  He was
    also told to say that he was older than  his  real  age.   Although  he
    "always felt guilty that I was not able to reveal my true  nationality"
    he was told that "in my community... if I reveal the truth at any time,
    I would be sent to prison and thereafter be returned  to  my  country".
    He did not want to do this as he did not wish  to  return  to  live  in
    Albania.  The appellant confirmed that he had been  working  whilst  in
    the United Kingdom, in a variety of capacities.

17.  In his statement of 28 May 2013, the appellant referred  to  his  elder
    son attending school and his wife currently attending  college,  whilst
    he worked part-time as a delivery driver.  He said that "I have settled
    into British culture, I have friends here and my ties are  all  to  the
    UK.  I have adapted to life in the UK, I speak English fluently  and  I
    want my children to also establish their lives in the UK.   Apart  from
    my parents who are in Albania, I have no ties or  connections  to  that
    country any longer".  The statement continued by saying that if he  was
    deprived of his nationality and sent back to  Albania,  this  would  be
    devastating for him and his family.

18.  Ms Naik asked the appellant what it meant to be a British citizen.   He
    said that he did not know where to start and there were so many  things
    to say.  He felt himself to be a member of the "British  family".   His
    elder son was at school, his wife was studying at college to be a  chef
    and he was working part-time as a delivery driver, as  well  as  taking
    care of the children.  He had applied for citizenship in 2005 in  order
    to "integrate into British life and look for a better future".

19.  In cross-examination, the appellant said that if he  lost  his  British
    citizenship he would be unable to  travel  together  with  his  family.
    What he meant by this was that, although he  was  still  a  citizen  of
    Albania, having an Albanian passport was not as advantageous  as  being
    British, since, for example, as an Albanian he needed a visa  in  order
    to visit such countries as the USA and Switzerland.

20.  Re-examined, the appellant agreed that it was also  more  difficult  to
    move freely in Europe, as an Albanian.  In answer to  a  question  from
    the Tribunal, the appellant said  that  he  had  travelled  in  Europe,
    namely to Italy, France, Belgium and Albania in the last six  to  eight
    years.  He would return to Albania once every year or  two,  since  his
    parents were still there.

E.  THE TWO OTHER APPEALS

21.  In response to the Tribunal's directions, following the  error  of  law
    hearing in June 2013, Mr Deller, for the respondent, gave  notice  that
    deprivation action was to be discontinued in the case of the two  other
    appellants.  There was no appearance by the other appellants on 9 July.
     The Tribunal  subsequently  gave  directions  in  order  to  ascertain
    whether, in the light of the respondent's stance, the  appellants  were
    withdrawing their appeals in the Upper Tribunal.

22.  Ms Naik submitted that it could be helpful to the appellant's  case  in
    order to know in detail why the respondent had decided  to  discontinue
    deprivation action in the case of the two other appellants.  Mr  Deller
    confirmed what he had said in his e-mail of 27 June 2013, namely,  that
    given that the two other appellants had been  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for fourteen years, the respondent had decided, pursuant to her
    policy in chapter 55 (Deprivation and Nullity of  British  Citizenship)
    of the Nationality Instructions, that it was not appropriate to  pursue
    deprivation.  Mr Deller told us that it was unlikely that anything more
    would or could be said in this regard.

23.  In the event,  we  gave  directions  concerning  the  reasons  for  the
    discontinuance in the two other  cases  and  for  the  parties  in  the
    present case to make  written  submissions  on  this  issue,  with  the
    appellant having the last word (which was received on 29 July). We have
    taken these submissions into account. They are dealt with  at  [70]  et
    seq below.

F. THE SCOPE OF AN APPEAL UNDER SECTION 40A OF THE BRITISH  NATIONALITY  ACT
    1981

24.  We have already seen how narrowly the First-tier Tribunal regarded  the
    appellant's right  of  appeal  under  section  40A.   Essentially,  the
    Tribunal's task was no more than to consider  whether  the  legal  pre-
    condition for the operation of section 40 had been satisfied  (in  this
    case, a false representation within section 40(3)(b)) and, if  it  had,
    to determine whether the respondent's decision would violate Article  8
    of the ECHR.

25.  Part V of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  confers  a
    right of appeal against an "immigration decision" within the meaning of
    section 82.  Section 84 sets out the grounds upon which such an  appeal
    may be brought.  These include, under subsection (1):-

         "(f) that the person taking  the  decision  should  have  exercised
             differently a discretion conferred by Immigration Rules".


26.  Section 86(3) requires the Tribunal to allow the appeal "insofar as  it
    thinks that -

         "(a) a decision against which the appeal is brought or  is  treated
             as being brought was not in accordance with the law (including
             Immigration Rules), or


         (b)  a discretion exercised in making a decision against which  the
             appeal is brought or is treated as being brought  should  have
             been exercised differently.


         ...


         (6)  Refusal to depart from or  to  authorise  departure  from  the
             immigration rules is not the exercise of  discretion  for  the
             purposes of subsection (3)(d)."


27.  Mr Deller's skeleton argument is in close alignment with the ruling  of
    the First-tier Tribunal:-

         "30. Whereas in an appeal regulated by section 86 of the  2002  Act
             the Tribunal  is  required  to  consider  for  itself  whether
             certain  types  of  discretion  'should  have  been  exercised
             differently' but is expressly forbidden  from  doing  so  with
             others (specifically a  refusal  to  depart  from  immigration
             rules),  no  such  explicit  parameters  exist  on   what   is
             prescribed by section 40A as simply an 'appeal'.


         31.  The Tribunal's explicit  powers  to  review  the  exercise  of
             discretion in certain cases and to hold that  such  discretion
             'should have been exercised differently' are not  the  default
             position in the general consideration of appeals.  They  exist
             in immigration appeals (and have done so since the Immigration
             Act 1971) only where  Parliament  provides  them.   Where  (as
             here) the enabling legislation is silent as to any  powers  to
             review discretion those powers do not exist."


28.  At paragraphs 25 and 26 of his skeleton, Mr Deller relied  upon  Arusha
    & Demushi (deprivation of citizenship - delay) [2012]  UKUT  80  (IAC).
    In that case, the Upper Tribunal approved what had been said by a panel
    of the First-tier Tribunal, regarding the  scope  of  an  appeal  under
    section 40A.  At [13] of its determination, the Upper Tribunal had this
    to say:

         "13. It was also contended on behalf of the first  respondent  that
             the first appellant was not entitled to raise human rights  in
             his appeal against this decision.  The Tribunal summarised its
             findings on this issue as follows:


             '41. We reject the submission that human  rights  grounds  are
                  outside the jurisdiction of  the  Tribunal  in  an  appeal
                  under s.40A of the 1981 Act although we  find  it  equally
                  plain that we cannot decide the case as if there had  been
                  a decision to remove the  first  appellant  when  no  such
                  decision had been made.


             42.  We have spent some  time  on  this  because  it  was  the
                  subject of detailed  argument  before  us.   Having  given
                  considerable thought to the matter  the  position  is,  we
                  find, quite simple and clear.  The first appellant  cannot
                  rely on a ground alleging that 'removal of  the  appellant
                  from the United Kingdom in consequence of the  immigration
                  decision would ... be unlawful  under  s.6  of  the  Human
                  Rights Act 1998 as being compatible with  the  appellant's
                  Convention rights.  Such a ground  can  be  raised  as  of
                  right in appeals against immigration decisions but this is
                  not such a decision.  The grounds could,  conceivably,  be
                  raised in a different deprivation  case  where,  unusually
                  and improbably, there was some reason to  think  that  the
                  appellant was going to be removed without an  'immigration
                  decision' being made but this would not be because it  was
                  a statutory ground but because it was an expression  of  a
                  claim  on  human  rights  grounds  formulated  to  meet  a
                  particular  case.   In  the  absence  of   any   statutory
                  restriction, the appellant can raise general human  rights
                  grounds but they must be framed to deal  with  the  breach
                  alleged to be  caused  by  the  decision  to  deprive  the
                  appellant of his nationality, and giving  effect  to  that
                  decision, and not framed to deal with the fiction that the
                  appellant would be removed'.
         Having


         14.  We have set out these conclusions reached  by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal following detailed comprehensive  submissions.   They
             have not been challenged by either party in the present appeal
             and we record them at the request of the parties to assist the
             First-tier  Tribunal  as  there  are  a  number   of   pending
             deprivation of citizenship appeals."

29.  As can be seen,  the  first  line  of  [13]  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    determination contains the word "also".  This is because both the First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal in those appeals rejected not only
    the respondent's contention that human rights were not engaged  in  the
    section 40A appeal, but also her contention that  such  an  appeal  was
    otherwise limited in its scope.  This is plain from [11] of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's determination:-

         "11. As the First-tier Tribunal pointed out neither s.84  nor  s.86
             of the 2002 Act applies to appeals under s.40A.  The right  of
             appeal in s.40A is not an  appeal  under  s.82(2)  against  an
             immigration decision and the grounds of appeal are not limited
             to or enhanced by those identified under  s.84  and  therefore
             the provisions of s.84(1)f giving the Tribunal power to  allow
             an appeal on the ground that a  discretion  contained  in  the
             immigration rules should have been  exercised  differently  do
             not apply.  The Tribunal directed itself  on  the  nature  and
             scope of the appeal as follows:


             '13. In our judgment the absence  of  prescribed  grounds  can
                  only mean that the Tribunal is to  have  a  wide  ranging
                  power to consider, by way of appeal not  a  review,  what
                  the decision in an appellant's  case  should  have  been.
                  The Tribunal has to ask itself 'does the evidence in  the
                  case establish that citizenship was obtained  by  fraud?'
                  If it does then it has to ask 'do the other circumstances
                  of the case point to discretionary deprival?'.


             14.  As this is an appeal not a review, the Tribunal  will  be
                  concerned with the facts as it finds them  and  not  with
                  the Secretary of State's view of them.  In terms  of  the
                  proof of fraud, the Tribunal will consider any  evidence,
                  whether or not available to the Secretary of State at the
                  time he made his  decision,  which  is  relevant  to  the
                  determination of that question'."

30.  It is apparent from [13] of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination,
    that that Tribunal held, in effect, that the section 40A  appeal  is  a
    full merits-based appeal, involving an appellate re-examination of  the
    discretionary decision under section 40 to deprive a person of  British
    citizenship.  Although the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    Arusha & Demushi was mentioned by the First-tier Tribunal in  the  case
    of the present appeal, this important finding  went  unnoticed.   As  a
    result, the First-tier Tribunal came to the  conclusion  that,  because
    section 40A, unlike section 86 of the 2002 Act, contains  no  provision
    allowing or permitting an appeal to succeed if discretion  should  have
    been exercised differently,  the  Tribunal  was  required  to  construe
    section 40A as excluding such a possibility.

31.  The correct approach is, we find, precisely the opposite of that  taken
    by the First-tier Tribunal in the present appeal.  If  the  legislature
    confers a right of appeal against a decision, then, in the  absence  of
    express wording limiting the  nature  of  that  appeal,  it  should  be
    treated  as  requiring  the  appellate  body  to  exercise  afresh  any
    judgement or discretion employed in reaching the decision against which
    the appeal is brought.  We acknowledge that, in certain  circumstances,
    the subject matter or legislative context may, nevertheless,  compel  a
    restricted reading of the enactment conferring the right of appeal; but
    courts and tribunals should not be over-ready to find such  exceptions,
    and should do so only where it is plainly demanded, in the interests of
    coherent decision-making  or  other  cogent  considerations  of  public
    policy.

32.   In this regard, the following passage from Jacobs,  Tribunal  Practice
    and Procedure (2nd Edition) is helpful:-

        "4.116     If the appeal is against a decision based on an  exercise
               of judgment, the question arises  whether  the  tribunal  is
               limited to deciding if the judgment was exercised wrongly or
               is allowed or required to exercise the judgment afresh.


         4.117    The approach to identifying the scope  of  the  appeal  in
               these cases was set out by Etherton J in Banbury  Visionplus
               Ltd v Revenue and Customs Commissioners [[2006]  STC  1568].
               The position is this.  The scope of the appeal may  be  made
               clear in the language of the statute that allows the appeal.
                In the absence of express provision, any limitation on  the
               scope of the appeal must be apparent from the nature of  the
               decision or the legislative context,  [[2006]  STC  1568  at
               [44]].


         4.118    The general approach of  the  courts  has  been  that  the
               judgment must be exercised afresh on appeal [As in Secretary
               of State for Children, Schools and  Families  v  Philliskirk
               [2009], ELR 68 at [19]].  Otherwise,  the  right  of  appeal
               would be rendered  illusory  [Lord  Goddard  CJ  in  Stepney
               Borough Council v Joffe [1949] 1 KB 599 at  602]  or  unduly
               restricted  [Lord  Parker  CJ  in  Godfrey   v   Bournemouth
               Corporation [1969] 1 WLR 47 at 51].


         4.119    However, there are cases in which this  approach  has  not
               been taken.  John Dee Ltd v Customs and Excise Commissioners
               [[1995] STC 941, as explained in Banbury  Visionplus  Ltd  v
               Revenue and Customs Commissioners [2006] STC 1568  at  [39]-
               [44]] is an example.  There it was  permissible  to  require
               security 'Where it appears to the Commissioners requisite to
               do so for the protection of the revenue'.  Statute  provided
               for a general appeal 'with respect to... the requirement  of
               security'.   Neill  LJ  explained  the  Court  of   Appeal's
               decision:


                    'It seems to me that the 'statutory condition'...  which
                    the Tribunal has to determine in an appeal... is whether
                    it appeared to the commissioners  requisite  to  require
                    security.  In examining whether that statutory condition
                    is satisfied the tribunal will... consider  whether  the
                    commissioners had acted in a way in which no  reasonable
                    panel of Commissioners could have acted or whether  they
                    had taken into account some  irrelevant  matter  or  had
                    disregarded something to which they  should  have  given
                    weight.  The tribunal may also have to consider  whether
                    the commissioners have erred on a point of  law  [[1995]
                    STC 941 at 952]'.


              One factor that influenced the decision in this case was  that
               the tribunal was under no duty to protect the revenue;  that
               statutory responsibility was imposed  on  the  Commissioners
               [[1995] STC 941 at 952].  It is not  clear  to  what  extent
               that factor affected the outcome.


         4.120    A fresh exercise of the  judgment  is  also  excluded  if,
               exceptionally, a right of appeal is given against a decision
               that involves a discretion which is  non-justiciable.   This
               may be because the discretion involves a consideration of  a
               number of unrelated  factors  with  no  indication,  in  the
               legislation or the context, of which were relevant.   Or  it
               may be because the discretion involves  non-legal  judgments
               on considerations of policy, finance or social matters.   In
               these limited circumstances, the right of  appeal  does  not
               allow a tribunal to substitute its  exercise  of  discretion
               for that of the decision-maker.  It is limited to challenges
               to the legality of the decision on judicial review  grounds.
               [See the decision of the Tribunal of Commissioners  in  R(H)
               6/06 (especially at [24] and [39]) analysing the decision of
               an earlier Tribunal of Commissioners in R(H) 3/04].


         4.121    If discretion (or any other judgment) has to be  exercised
               afresh on appeal, the way in which it was exercised below is
               not binding, but must be taken into account for whatever  it
               is worth.  As Lord  Atkin  explained  in  Evans  v  Bartlam:
               [[1937] AC 473]


                    '... where there is a discretionary  jurisdiction  given
                    to the Court or judge the judge in Chambers is in no way
                    fettered  by  the  previous  exercise  of  the  Master's
                    discretion.  His own discretion is intended by the rules
                    to determine the parties' rights: and he is entitled  to
                    exercise it as though the matter came before him for the
                    first time.  He will, of  course,  give  the  weight  it
                    deserves to the previous decision of the Master: but  he
                    is in no way bound by it [[1937 AC 473 at 478]."

33.  In the case of section 40 of the 1981 Act, it cannot possibly  be  said
    that  the  discretionary  decision  to  deprive  a  person  of  British
    citizenship  involves  a  discretion  which  is  non-justiciable.   The
    decision clearly involves important considerations  of  public  policy;
    but so  too  do  very  many  of  the  discretionary  decisions  of  the
    respondent taken under the immigration rules, as against which a "full"
    right of appeal exists, by reason of sections 84(1)(f) and 86(3)(b)  of
    the 2002 Act.  The Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal routinely has to balance public policy considerations  against
    individual rights and other interests, in reaching  decisions  in  such
    appeals; and in doing so it will have regard to the importance attached
    by the respondent to public policy interests, in a particular case.

34.  Accordingly, unlike the First-tier  Tribunal,  we  do  not  regard  the
    absence in section 40A of the 1981 Act of the relevant wording found in
    sections 84 and 86 of the 2002 Act as limiting  the  scope  of  section
    40A.  There is, in our view, no ambiguity, obscurity  or  absurdity  in
    the wording of that section, such as might call for the application  of
    Pepper v Hart [1993] AC 593 principles.  But, even if  there  were,  Ms
    Naik's researches reveal that Parliament quite clearly intended section
    40A to be construed in the way we  have  just  described.   During  the
    passage of the Bill for the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, which inserted section 40A into the 1981  Act,  the  Minister  of
    State, Lord Filkin, gave this assurance to  Lord  Avebury  (Hansard,  8
    July 2002, column 508):-

         "The Noble Earl, Lord Russell, suggested that the only appeal is  a
         judicial review.  We do not believe that that  is  the  case.   The
         appeal against deprivation is a full  appeal  on  the  merits.   We
         believe that perhaps the JCHR [Joint  Committee  on  Human  Rights]
         does not have that clearly in sight or perhaps we have not made  it
         as clear as we could have done.


         The appellate body will be able not only to remove [sic; presumably
         'review'] the legality of the Secretary of  State's  decision,  but
         also to hear arguments at his discretion  on  whether  or  not  the
         right to deprive should have been exercised differently.  The  bill
         proposes no restrictions on the issues which might be raised in  an
         appeal  either  to  an  Adjudicator  or,  where   that   body   had
         jurisdiction, to the Special Immigration Appeals  Commission.   The
         appellate body will be able to hear  argument  not  only  that  the
         Secretary  of  State  has   failed   to   observe   the   statutory
         requirements, but also  that  his  discretion  whether  to  deprive
         should have been exercised differently."


    If a search for  the  legislature's  intentions  were  necessary,  Lord
    Filkin's words could not be clearer.


35.  Having identified the nature of the  overarching  scope  of  an  appeal
    under section 40A, it is  possible  to  identify  the  significance  of
    issues such as the operation of the ECHR and of the respondent's policy
    on deprivation, as disclosed  in  the  Nationality  Instructions  ("the
    NIs").

36.  The fact that the respondent has reached a decision,  in  the  exercise
    of her discretion, by  reference  to  her  published  policy  regarding
    deprivation of citizenship is a matter to which an  appellate  tribunal
    might have regard,  in  deciding  whether  that  discretion  should  be
    exercised  differently.   This  is  part  of   the   wider   principle,
    extrapolated from Evans v Bartlam (see above), whereby the way in which
    discretion was exercised by  the  primary  decision-maker,  whilst  not
    binding, must nevertheless be  taken  into  account  by  the  appellate
    tribunal.  In cases  of  the  present  kind,  the  application  by  the
    respondent of her policy on deprivation must  be  taken  as  indicating
    where, as a general matter, the respondent considers the balance  falls
    to be struck, as between, on the  one  hand,  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining the integrity of immigration control and the rights flowing
    from British citizenship, and, on  the  other,  the  interests  of  the
    individual concerned and of  others  likely  to  be  affected  by  that
    person's ceasing to be  a  British  citizen.   As  in  similar  appeals
    governed by  the  2002  Act,  the  appellate  tribunal  must  give  the
    respondent's policy  due  weight,  bearing  in  mind  that  it  is  the
    respondent - rather than the judiciary - who is  primarily  responsible
    for determining and safeguarding public policy in these areas.

37.  So far as the ECHR is concerned, in most cases (including the  present)
    the provision most likely to be in  play  is  Article  8  (respect  for
    private and family life).  If, on the facts, the appellate tribunal  is
    satisfied that depriving an  appellant  of  British  citizenship  would
    constitute a disproportionate interference with the Article 8 rights of
    that person or any other person whose position falls to be examined  on
    the principles identified in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39,  then  plainly
    the tribunal is compelled by section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  to
    re-exercise discretion by finding in favour of the appellant.  However,
    the fact that the scope of a section 40A appeal is wider than Article 8
    means that, in a case where Article 8(2) is not even  engaged,  because
    the consequences of deprivation are not found to have  consequences  of
    such gravity as  to  engage  that  Article,  the  Tribunal  must  still
    consider whether discretion should be exercised differently.

38.  In the present case, the First-tier Tribunal decided  that  the  nature
    of the interference was not such as to require a positive answer to  be
    given to the second of the five questions in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.
    The First-tier Tribunal considered that finding to be determinative  of
    the appeal.  As a matter of law, it was not.

G.  THE EUROPEAN DIMENSION

39.  Even if the tribunal  concludes  that  the  issue  of  Article  8  ECHR
    proportionality does not arise in the particular appeal, it will  still
    be necessary to  decide  whether  deprivation  of  British  citizenship
    "observes the principle of  proportionality  so  far  as  concerns  the
    consequences it entails for the situation of the  person  concerned  in
    the light of a European Union law, in addition, where  appropriate,  to
    examination of the proportionality of the  decision  in  the  light  of
    national law" (Rottmann v Freistaat Bayers [2010]  EUECJ  C-135/08  (02
    March 2010)). In that case, a citizen of  Austria  had  exercised  free
    movement rights so as  to  settle  in  Germany.   He  applied  for  and
    obtained naturalisation in that country but, when it was discovered  he
    had  failed  to  disclose,  in  connection  with   his   naturalisation
    application, that he was subject to criminal investigations in  Austria
    concerning an alleged fraud,  the  German  authorities  took  steps  to
    withdraw his German nationality.  Upon becoming naturalised in Germany,
    Mr  Rottmann  had  lost  citizenship  of  Austria,  pursuant   to   the
    nationality laws of that country.

40.  For our purposes, the relevant findings of the CJEU are as follows:-

         "55. In such a case, it is, however,  for  the  national  court  to
             ascertain whether the withdrawal decision at issue in the main
             proceedings observes the principle of proportionality  so  far
             as concerns the consequences it entails for the  situation  of
             the person concerned in the light of European  Union  law,  in
             addition,   where   appropriate,   to   examination   of   the
             proportionality of the decision in the light of national law.


         56.  Having regard to the importance which primary law attaches  to
             the status of citizen of the Union, when examining a  decision
             withdrawing naturalisation it is necessary, therefore, to take
             into account the consequences that the  decision  entails  for
             the person concerned and, if relevant, for the members of  his
             family with regard to the loss of the rights enjoyed by  every
             citizen of the Union.  In this  respect  it  is  necessary  to
             establish, in particular, whether that loss  is  justified  in
             relation to the gravity  of  the  offence  committed  by  that
             person, to  the  lapse  of  time  between  the  naturalisation
             decision and the withdrawal decision  and  to  whether  it  is
             possible for that person to recover his original nationality.


         57.  With regard, in particular, to  that  last  aspect,  a  Member
             State whose nationality has been acquired by deception  cannot
             be considered bound, pursuant to Article 17EC, to refrain from
             withdrawing naturalisation merely because the person concerned
             has not recovered the  nationality  of  his  Member  State  of
             origin.


         58.  It is, nevertheless,  for  the  national  court  to  determine
             whether, before such  a  decision  withdrawing  naturalisation
             takes effect, having regard to all the relevant circumstances,
             observance of the principle of  proportionality  requires  the
             person concerned to be afforded a reasonable period of time in
             order to try to recover the nationality of his Member State of
             origin.


         59.  Having regard to  the  foregoing,  the  answer  to  the  first
             question and to the first part of the second question must  be
             that it is not contrary to European Union law,  in  particular
             to Article 17 EC, for  a  Member  State  to  withdraw  from  a
             citizen of the Union the nationality of that State acquired by
             naturalisation when that  nationality  has  been  obtained  by
             deception, on condition that the decision to withdraw observes
             the principle of proportionality."


41.  At 19.2 of Fransman's British Nationality Law (3rd Edition) the  author
    notes that:

         "Rottmann concerned a  case  where  a  person  had  exercised  free
         movement rights to move from his Member State of origin to  a  host
         Member State, in other words that there was a cross-border  element
         engaging EU law in  addition  to  the  subsequent  acquisition  and
         thereafter loss of the nationality of the host Member  State.   The
         case did not test the proposition of  whether  the  acquisition  by
         deception and subsequent loss of the nationality of another  Member
         State is within the scope of EU  law  in  circumstances  where  the
         person remains within the Member State of origin during the  period
         of acquisition and loss and does not move to that other state."


42.  In the light of Zambrano (European Citizenship)  [2011]  EUECJ  C-34/09
    (08 March 2011), we do not consider that Rottmann can be said to be  of
    no application to the circumstances of the present case, merely because
    the present appellant has not engaged EU free movement laws  by  moving
    to another EU State.  It is clear from Zambrano that the CJEU  requires
    importance to be attached to the rights and benefits  derived  from  EU
    citizenship, not merely as regards free movement.  Nevertheless,  where
    a person affected by a deprivation decision  has  made  actual  use  of
    rights flowing from EU citizenship, in particular, the right to work in
    another EU State, then the effect of removing such citizenship may well
    have a greater practical impact, compared with the position where  such
    rights have not been exercised.  Depending on the  circumstances,  that
    degree of impact may well require a greater degree of justification  on
    the part of the national  authorities,  as  regards  their  deprivation
    decision.

H.  BRITISH CITIZENSHIP AND INDEFINITE LEAVE TO REMAIN

43.  As she had before the First-tier Tribunal, Ms Naik  submitted  that  we
    should proceed to determine the appellant's appeal on the  basis  that,
    were he to be deprived of  British  citizenship,  the  appellant  would
    nevertheless enjoy the indefinite leave to remain, which  he  had  been
    granted prior to acquiring that citizenship  and  that  the  respondent
    would have to take action under section 76 of  the  2002  Act,  if  she
    wished to deprive him of it.   In  its  determination,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal noted, as we do, that  if  this  submission  is  correct,  the
    appellant's case is weakened, since deprivation  of  citizenship  would
    still leave him with a significant form of leave under the  Immigration
    Act 1971.  In particular, a  person  with  indefinite  (as  opposed  to
    limited) leave to remain in the United Kingdom  may  not  be  made  the
    subject of a condition restricting his employment or occupation in this
    country (see section 3(1)(c)(i) of the 1971 Act).   Nor  can  a  person
    with indefinite leave to remain be removed  from  the  United  Kingdom,
    except by way of deportation or after the completion of a legal process
    to revoke such leave.

44.  The appellant's stance is articulated in this passage from the  further
    skeleton argument of Ms Naik:-

         "34. The appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain in  2002.
             This grant of ILR is extant.  It  was  not  revoked  when  the
             [appellant] became a British citizen.  The only means by which
             the Secretary of State may revoke ILR is under section  76  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   Such  a
             decision was not taken.


         35.  The SSHD's view without any authority is  that  the  appellant
             does not retain his ILR on deprivation that it lapsed  on  the
             grant of British citizenship and that the appellant would fall
             liable to removal or require the grant of further leave."

45.   The following provisions of the 1971 Act are relevant:

           " 1.   General principles


            (1)  All those who are in this Act expressed to have  the  right
             of abode in the United Kingdom shall be free  to  live  and  to
             come and go into and from, the United Kingdom  without  let  or
             hindrance  except  such  as  may  be  required  under  and   in
             accordance  with  this  Act  to  enable  their  right   to   be
             established or as may be  otherwise  lawfully  imposed  on  any
             person.


            (2)  Those not having that right may live, work  and  settle  in
             the United Kingdom by permission and subject to such regulation
             and control of their entry into, stay in and departure from the
             United Kingdom as is imposed by this Act ...


          ...


          2.  Statement of right of abode in United Kingdom


            (1)  A person is under this Act to have the right  of  abode  in
             the United Kingdom if-


                   (a)  he is a British citizen; or


                   (b)  he is a Commonwealth citizen who-


                 (i) immediately before  the  commencement  of  the  British
                 Nationality Act 1981 was a Commonwealth citizen having  the
                 right of abode in the United Kingdom by virtue  of  section
                 2(1)(d) or section 2(2) of this Act as then in force; and


                 (ii) has not ceased to be a  Commonwealth  citizen  in  the
                 meanwhile.


             (2)  In relation to Commonwealth citizens who have the right of
              abode in the United Kingdom by virtue  of  subsection  (1)(b)
              above, this Act, except this section and section 5(2),  shall
              apply as if they were  British  citizens;  and  in  this  Act
              (except as aforesaid) 'British citizen'  shall  be  construed
              accordingly.


          2A.  Deprivation of right of abode


                 (1)  The Secretary of State may  by  order  remove  from  a
               specified person a right of  abode  in  the  United  Kingdom
               which he has under section 2(1)(b).


                 ...


                (4)  While an order  under  subsection  (1)  has  effect  in
             relation to a person-


                      (a) section 2(2) shall not apply to him; and


                      (b) any certificate  of  entitlement  granted  to  him
             shall have no effect.


          3.  General provisions for regulation and control


         (1)  Except as otherwise provided by or under  this  Act,  where  a
             person is not a British citizen -


             (a)  he shall not enter the United Kingdom unless given  leave
                  to do so in accordance with the  provisions  of,  or  made
                  under, this Act;


             (b)  he may be given leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  (or,
                  when already there, leave to remain in the United Kingdom)
                  either for a limited or for an indefinite period);


             (c)  if he is given limited leave to enter or  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom, it may be given subject to all or  any  of
                  the following conditions, namely -


                  (i)  a condition restricting his employment or  occupation
                      in the United Kingdom;


                  (ii) a condition requiring him to maintain and accommodate
                      himself, and any dependants of his, without  recourse
                      to public funds;


                  (iii)    a condition requiring him to  register  with  the
                      police;


                   (iv)     a  condition  requiring  him  to  report  to  an
                      immigration officer or the Secretary of State; and


                  (v)  a condition about residence.


                ...


                5. Procedure for, and further provisions as to, deportation


               (1)  Where a person is under section 3(5) or (6) above liable
               to deportation, then subject to the following provisions  of
               this Act the Secretary of State may make a deportation order
               against him, that is to say an order requiring him to  leave
               and prohibiting him from entering the United Kingdom; and  a
               deportation order against  a  person  shall  invalidate  any
               leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  given  him
               before the order is made or while it is in force.


               (2)  A deportation order against a person may at any time  be
               revoked by a further order of the Secretary  of  State,  and
               shall cease to have effect if he becomes a British citizen."


46.  As can be seen, the general provisions in the 1971 Act regarding  leave
    to enter and remain are expressly stated not to apply where a person is
    a British citizen.  We do not consider that it is compatible  with  the
    scheme of that Act to regard indefinite leave to remain (or  any  other
    sort of leave) as having some sort of vestigial existence,  whilst  the
    person concerned remains a British citizen. A person cannot be  both  a
    British citizen and concurrently subject to indefinite leave to remain.
    Upon becoming such a citizen, the appellant became  a  person  to  whom
    section 1(1) applied. As Mr Deller put it, the  appellant's  indefinite
    leave to remain simply ceased to exist.

47.  Unlike the position in respect of a  Commonwealth  citizen  who  has  a
    right of abode by reason of section 2(2)(b), and who may be deprived of
    that right under  section  2A,  the  1971  Act  contains  no  provision
    regarding deprivation  of  British  citizenship.  Furthermore,  section
    2A(4) indicates that the revocation of an order depriving a  person  of
    the right of abode will automatically bring the person back within  the
    ambit of section 2(2) and that  any  certificate  of  entitlement  will
    again be effective. One looks in  vain  for  any  comparable  provision
    regarding indefinite leave to remain for a person  who  had  it  before
    becoming a British citizen.

48.  We do not consider that the appellant  can  gain  any  assistance  from
    section 5(2), which provides that a deportation order  shall  cease  to
    have effect if the person subject to such an order  becomes  a  British
    citizen. The relationship between the final words of section  1(1)  and
    section 5 is such as to require the position  to  be  made  clear.  The
    drafter of the 1971 Act evidently took the view that it was unnecessary
    to say that indefinite leave to  remain  ceases  to  have  effect  upon
    acquisition of British citizenship because that was obvious, given  the
    scheme of the legislation.

49.  In support of her proposition, Ms Naik referred  to  the  judgments  of
    the Court of Appeal in Fitzroy George v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ  1362.   In  that  case,  the  Court,  by  a
    majority, found that where, pursuant to section 5(1) of the 1971 Act, a
    deportation order against a person has invalidated that person's  leave
    to enter or remain, the subsequent revocation of the deportation  order
    has the effect of reviving the earlier grant of leave  (in  that  case,
    ILR).

50.  We  do  not  consider  that  Fitzroy  George  assists  the  appellant's
    argument. Fitzroy George was at all material times a person subject  to
    the general provisions for regulation and control, set out in section 3
    of the 1971 Act. At no time had he  enjoyed  the  right  of  abode,  as
    described in section 1(1).  That is not the position with  the  present
    appellant who, upon becoming a British citizen, was  removed  from  the
    1971 Act's "regulation and control of entry into, stay in and departure
    from the United Kingdom" (section 1(2)).

51.   In further support of her argument on this issue, Ms  Naik  sought  to
    invoke section 76 of the 2002 Act. This provides that the Secretary  of
    State may revoke a person's indefinite leave to enter or remain in  the
    United Kingdom if that person is liable to deportation  but  cannot  be
    deported for legal reasons. The existence of this section (and  section
    5 of the 1971 Act) does not, however, mean  Parliament  has  legislated
    to the effect that  indefinite  leave  to  remain  can  cease  only  on
    deprivation under section 76 (or section 5 of the 1971 Act). Section 76
    and the corresponding provisions in section 5  contain  procedures  for
    terminating indefinite leave, whilst such leave subsists. They  do  not
    purport to offer a comprehensive guide as to whether a person has  such
    leave in the first place.

52.   Ms Naik, in oral submissions, said that a British citizen who is  also
    a citizen of another country would, in  practice,  retain  his  or  her
    indefinite leave to remain  "stamp"  in  the  passport  of  that  other
    country.  Whilst that may be so (we express  no  view),  the  continued
    physical presence of a stamp in a foreign passport cannot be  taken  to
    govern the interpretation of the 1971 Act.  We  reiterate  that  it  is
    incoherent with the legislation to assume indefinite  leave  to  remain
    can remain extant, in the case of a person who is a British citizen, or
    that, without express statutory  provision,  such  leave  automatically
    reappears on deprivation of that citizenship.

53.  Accordingly, for the purposes of these proceedings, we find that,  were
    the appellant to be deprived of British citizenship, he would not  fall
    to be treated as a person having indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   This,  of  course,  has  a  direct  bearing  on  the
    consequences for the  appellant  of  deprivation  and,  in  particular,
    necessitates  an  examination  of   the   respondent's   policies;   in
    particular, as set out in the NIs. Conversely, if  we  are  wrong,  our
    error could not be material to the outcome of this  appeal,  unless  we
    were to allow it.

I.  DETERMINING THE REASONABLY FORESEEABLE CONSEQUENCES OF DEPRIVATION

54.  The first thing to notice here  is  that,  unlike  the  position  under
    section 84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act, an appeal under section  40A  of  the
    1981 Act does not involve any statutorily imposed hypothesis, that  the
    appellant would be removed from the United Kingdom  in  consequence  of
    the decision to deprive him of British citizenship.   Secondly,  it  is
    common ground that, in  the  event  a  decision  were  taken  that  the
    appellant should be  removed,  following  deprivation,  the  respondent
    would have to take a decision on removal, whether or not also involving
    a  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave,  which  would  be  discretely
    appealable.

55.  The absence of a statutory requirement  to  hypothesise  removal,  does
    not, however, mean that removal as  a  consequence  of  deprivation  is
    automatically excluded  from  the  factors  to  be  considered  by  the
    Tribunal hearing a section 40A appeal.  Removal will  be  relevant  if,
    and insofar as the Tribunal finds, as a matter of  fact,  that  in  the
    circumstances of the particular case, it is  a  reasonably  foreseeable
    consequence of depriving the person of British citizenship.

56.  Indeed, the whole focus of a section 40A appeal  is  to  ascertain  the
    reasonably foreseeable consequences  of  deprivation,  whether  or  not
    involving removal.  Thus, even if removal is too uncertain  to  feature
    directly as a consequence, the possibility of removal and any period of
    uncertainty following deprivation may require to be taken into  account
    in assessing the effect that deprivation would have, not  only  on  the
    appellant but also on members of his family.

57.  In response  to  directions  given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    respondent on 1 December 2011, indicated as follows:

         "The current policy of the Secretary of State is that, in the event
         that directions are not given for the removal of the appellant:


         (a)  nonetheless, an Order will be made depriving the appellant  of
             British citizenship.


         (b)  In such circumstances, the appellant will be assigned leave to
             remain in the UK with effect from the date of the commencement
             of the  Order.   The  leave  assigned  will  depend  upon  the
             applicant's circumstances, but it is anticipated that  in  the
             majority of cases, this leave will  be  limited  in  time  and
             subject to the conditions normally associated with the type of
             leave granted."


58.  Ms Naik submitted that this policy left open the possibility  that  the
    appellant, following deprivation,  might  be  left  in  a  position  of
    "limbo", not knowing for an indefinite period of time whether,  on  the
    one hand, directions were to be given for his removal or, on the  other
    hand, that he was to be granted limited leave  to  remain.   There  is,
    however, no such "limbo" period.  Paragraph 55.7.7.1 of the current NIs
    makes this plain:-

         ".   In cases where a decision to deprive is appealed and  this  is
             unsuccessful, UKBA will then make a decision on removal  prior
             to the issue of the Deprivation Order.  This ensures that  the
             individual remains a British citizen until such  time  that  a
             decision is taken on removal.  The individual  therefore  also
             remains a British citizen at the time they appeal  a  decision
             to deprive."

59.  In the circumstances of the present case, we are  fully  satisfied,  on
    all the evidence, that the likelihood of the respondent's  deciding  to
    remove the appellant, upon his ceasing to be a British citizen,  is  so
    remote as to be disregarded in the context of the present  proceedings.
    The appellant has  been  present  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  almost
    thirteen years.  Apart from the admittedly  significant  dishonesty  he
    displayed in claiming to come from Kosovo, there is no suggestion  that
    he is otherwise of bad character.  He has been  in  gainful  employment
    for almost all of  his  time  in  this  country,  supporting  his  (now
    British) wife and two British children,  who  live  with  him  in  West
    London.  In short, we consider that Mr Deller  was  right  to  tell  us
    that, in his view, it was extremely unlikely that removal action  would
    be initiated.

60.   Accordingly,  we  proceed  on  the  basis   that,   immediately   upon
    deprivation, the appellant will be granted a period of leave to  remain
    in the  United  Kingdom.   We  consider  that  there  is  a  sufficient
    likelihood that any such  leave  would  be  of  limited  duration  and,
    accordingly, that it may be given subject  to  conditions  pursuant  to
    section 3(1)(c) of the 1971 Act.

61.  The duration of any such leave will, undoubtedly, be of concern to  the
    appellant.  However, given what we have found concerning  the  lack  of
    likelihood of removal, the reality of  the  matter  will  be  that  the
    appellant can expect any initial period of leave to be renewed,  unless
    he commits criminal offences  or  otherwise  behaves  in  a  way  which
    satisfied the respondent that it is no longer conducive to  the  public
    good that he should remain, notwithstanding his ties  with  the  United
    Kingdom.

62.  Of the conditions that might be attached  under  section  3(1)(c),  the
    most important is, plainly, that in  sub-paragraph  (i):  "a  condition
    restricting his employment or occupation in the United  Kingdom".   The
    appellant fears he would be refused permission to work and that,  as  a
    result, his family would suffer.

63.  In assessing the reasonably foreseeable  consequences  of  deprivation,
    the Tribunal needs to address this issue.  In the circumstances of this
    case, we consider it is  highly  unlikely  that  the  respondent  could
    rationally resolve, on the one hand, to  grant  the  appellant  limited
    leave but, on the other, effectively to preclude  him  from  continuing
    gainful employment.  Whilst that is our primary finding on this  issue,
    we shall, out of an abundance of  caution,  nevertheless  consider  the
    position on the  assumption  that  the  appellant  is  prohibited  from
    working.

J.  RE-EXERCISING DISCRETION

64.  Although, as we have indicated, this function has a  wider  ambit  than
    Article 8 of the ECHR or, indeed, EU proportionality, it  is  desirable
    to start with those issues, since it would plainly not be  possible  to
    uphold a decision which amounts to a violation of the ECHR  or  the  EU
    Treaties.

(a)  Would deprivation violate the ECHR Article 8 rights  of  the  appellant
    and/or his family?

65.  On its  findings  of  fact,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that
    Article 8 was not engaged because, notwithstanding what had  been  said
    by the Court of Appeal  in  AG  (Eritrea)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  801,  the
    interference with the appellant's ECHR rights  would  not  be  of  such
    gravity as to require an affirmative answer to the second of  the  five
    questions posed by Lord Bingham in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  at  [17].
    Thus, the issue of proportionality (question 5) was not reached.

66.  Although we have made our own findings  of  fact  and,  in  particular,
    have  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  will  not  enjoy
    indefinite leave  to  remain  automatically  on  deprivation,  we  have
    reached the same ultimate conclusion as the First-tier Tribunal, so far
    as the engagement of  Article  8  is  concerned.   Where,  as  here,  a
    discretionary decision needs to be re-taken and  where  proportionality
    in EU terms falls to be addressed, the temptation  for  judicial  fact-
    finders is to proceed to a determination  of  proportionality  in  ECHR
    terms.  Given the potentially serious consequences of deprivation, such
    a course may be required, in  any  event.   But  here,  the  reasonably
    foreseeable consequences of deprivation  are  not  ones  which  require
    question 2 of Razgar to be answered affirmatively.  The evidence points
    strongly to the appellant's continuing to live with his family  in  the
    United Kingdom and to being able to work.  Even if he were not able  to
    work, there is no evidence to indicate that  the  family  would,  as  a
    consequence, have to split up or that its members would suffer material
    hardship.  The appellant's British wife has chosen to pursue  a  course
    designed to enable her to work as a chef.  Despite the  fact  that  she
    has not, hitherto, worked in the United Kingdom, there is  no  evidence
    before us to demonstrate  that,  were  she  to  need  to  find  gainful
    employment, she would be unable to do so.  Nor is  there  any  evidence
    that, if circumstances so required, the family would be unable to claim
    benefits.

67.   In short, even on this "worst case" scenario,  there  is  no  material
    interference with the private and family life rights of  the  appellant
    or his family. In so finding, we have treated the best interests of the
    appellant's children as a primary consideration, as required by section
    55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  and  ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] 2 AC 166. We shall have more to say  on  that  matter
    under paragraph (b) of this Part of the determination.

68.  On the far more likely scenario, in which the  appellant,  albeit  with
    only limited leave, continues to be able to work, the position  of  the
    family is unaffected by  deprivation  of  his  citizenship.   The  only
    matters which might conceivably be relevant were  those  identified  in
    the appellant's evidence, concerning  difficulties  he  might  face  in
    travelling, particularly with his family.  We shall have  more  to  say
    about this in the context of re-exercising our discretion;  so  far  as
    Article 8 is concerned, however, such  matters  can  have  no  rational
    bearing on the protection of the fundamental rights  enshrined  in  the
    ECHR.

(b)  Would deprivation be a disproportionate interference with EU rights?

69.  We turn  to  EU  proportionality.   We  apply  the  approach  described
    earlier.  In determining whether  the  deprivation  of  citizenship  is
    proportionate, we have had regard to factors bearing on the appellant's
    side of the balance.  Although the appellant  has  not  exercised  free
    movement rights and the evidence does not  disclose  any  intention  or
    wish to do so  in  the  future,  we  nevertheless  recognise  that  the
    principle of free movement is an important one and that, if deprived of
    British (and hence EU citizenship), the appellant will lose  both  that
    and the other benefits inherent in EU citizenship.  We give this matter
    weight.

70.  We find that depriving the appellant of British citizenship  will  have
    no effect whatsoever on the  EU  citizenship  rights  of  his  wife  or
    children.  There is no prospect of the children being deprived of their
    ability to exercise such rights, including the right to education.

71.  We have  considered  the  lapse  of  time  between  the  naturalisation
    decision   and   the   withdrawal   decision.    The   certificate   of
    naturalisation in the present case is dated  15  May  2006.   In  2007,
    information came to light that  the  appellant  may  have  given  false
    information.  The decision to make a deprivation order was  made  on  3
    October 2009.  Plainly, the passage of time between the  naturalisation
    decision and the deprivation  decision  raises  no  issues  that  might
    affect the proportionality of  the  latter  decision.   Thereafter,  we
    acknowledge matters have moved more slowly, not least  because  of  the
    delay in the First-tier Tribunal's promulgation of its determination in
    Arusha and Demushi.  But, during  that  time,  the  evidence  does  not
    suggest the appellant's position has materially altered, such as by his
    becoming significantly more integrated  into  United  Kingdom  society.
    (Although he claims to speak English fluently, his  decision  to  speak
    through  an  Albanian  interpreter  meant  we  could  not  assess   his
    competence in the language.)  In summary, we do not consider the  lapse
    of time (or "delay") issue has  a  significant  role  to  play  in  the
    circumstances of the present case.

72.  Although deprivation will remove the  appellant's  EU  citizenship,  he
    does have continuing Albanian citizenship.  So far as  factors  on  the
    respondent's side are concerned, there is,  of  course,  the  important
    public  policy  aim  of  ensuring  that  the  laws  regarding   British
    citizenship (and, by extension, EU citizenship) are not  undermined  by
    the kind of deception that undoubtedly was employed by  the  appellant.
    Confidence in the citizenship laws  of  a  Member  State  needs  to  be
    maintained, with the inevitable consequence that those who are found to
    have obtained such citizenship deceitfully should, as a general matter,
    not be permitted to benefit  therefrom.   Overall,  we  find  that  the
    decision to deprive the appellant of British citizenship is, in all the
    circumstances, a justified and proportionate response, which  does  not
    go further than is necessary  for  the  purposes  of  the  respondent's
    legitimate policy aims.  On the contrary, on the facts as we find them,
    any other conclusion risks being seen as undermining those aims,  since
    the effectiveness of section 40 of  the  1981  Act  would  be  severely
    circumscribed.

(c) Is  there  any  other  reason  why  discretion  should  be  re-exercised
    differently?

73.  We turn to the question of whether, leaving aside ECHR and  EU  issues,
    the Tribunal should exercise discretion differently from  that  of  the
    respondent.  We reiterate that a finding against the appellant in terms
    of ECHR or EU proportionality is not fatal to his case, that discretion
    should be exercised differently.

74.  We do not propose to reiterate the factors already  described,  all  of
    which we have taken into account. We particularly take account  of  the
    appellant's length of residence in the United Kingdom and that he has a
    British wife and children (as to which see further  below).  We  accept
    that, even though the facts of this case cannot  properly  be  said  to
    engage the protection of fundamental human rights, there are  practical
    disadvantages in the father of a family, hitherto exclusively  enjoying
    British citizenship, reverting to being a non-EU citizen, of a  country
    which has stricter visa requirements (so far  as  third  countries  are
    concerned) than may be the case with the United Kingdom citizens.  But,
    on  the  facts,  we  nevertheless  do  not  find  that  the   potential
    difficulties described by  the  appellant  in  evidence  are  such  as,
    combined with all the other factors weighing on his side,  to  persuade
    us to re-exercise discretion differently.  The appellant will  need  to
    obtain an Albanian passport from the Albanian authorities and  have  it
    stamped with the leave which the respondent is likely to give him.  The
    appellant may need to obtain a visa in order to travel abroad with  his
    family,  including  to  European  destinations.   That   is   a   minor
    inconvenience for him and  his  family,  to  be  balanced  against  the
    importance of maintaining the integrity of British citizenship laws.

75.  As with the Article 8 issue, we approach  this  part  of  our  task  by
    considering the scenario in which deprivation results in the  appellant
    being  prohibited  from  working  in  the  United  Kingdom,  albeit  we
    reiterate that this scenario  is  not  one  which  we  consider  to  be
    reasonably likely to arise and is not our primary  finding.   The  fact
    that the appellant's wife may, in this scenario, find it  necessary  to
    obtain gainful employment, rather than continuing her  studies,  is  of
    some significance; but many others find themselves in the same position
    as family circumstances change; and we do  not  consider  that,  either
    alone or in combination with the other relevant factors, this  scenario
    is one which should lead us to exercise our discretion differently.  In
    so concluding, we have,  again,  treated  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's children as a primary consideration;  that  is  to  say,  a
    matter of substantial importance (SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  550  at
    [44]). Any change for the worse in a family's earning capacity is bound
    to have an impact on its children. But, even in this scenario, there is
    no evidence to indicate that the children would be likely  to  be  less
    well cared for by their parents; that their education might suffer;  or
    that  they  would  otherwise  experience  anything  approaching  actual
    hardship. In conclusion, even in this scenario, the balance  lies  with
    the respondent.

(d)   Does the existence of the respondent's policy in NIs 55.7.2.5 and  the
    way it was exercised in the case of the two  other  appeals  originally
    linked  with  this  case  mean  that  discretion  should  be  exercised
    differently (including by reference to ECHR Articles 8 and 14)?

76.    We return to the issue first mentioned at [21]  to  [23]  above.   In
    each of the two other cases that were due to be heard with the  present
    appeal, but which were withdrawn under rule  17,  the  respondent  gave
    essentially  the  same  reasons  for  the   decision   to   discontinue
    deprivation action:

                  "although your client obtained citizenship as a result  of
        deception, he has lived in the United  Kingdom  for  more  than  14
        years and so the case falls outside (sic) the scope of our  policy.
        As a result your client will remain a British citizen".

77.  The policy is in Chapter 55 of the NIs:

                  "55.7.2.5  In general the  Secretary  of  State  will  not
        deprive of British citizenship in the following circumstances:

                     Where  fraud  postdates  the  application  for  British
        citizenship it  will  not  be  appropriate  to  pursue  deprivation
        action.

                    If a person has been resident in the United Kingdom  for
        more than 14 years we will normally not deprive of citizenship."

78.  Ms Naik, in her written reply of 22 July, submitted that the  terms  of
    the letters to the other two appellants demonstrates that the policy is
    an  "absolute"  one,  in  that  14  years  residence   is,   in   fact,
    determinative, rather than  being  only  a  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account. As a result, the appeal should be allowed,  following  AG  and
    others (Policies;  executive  discretions;  Tribunal's  powers)  Kosovo
    [2007] UKAIT 00082. Furthermore,

        "if  the  policy  is  properly  interpreted  as  containing   other
        discretion outwith length of residence, then [the appellant in  the
        present case] is entitled to the benefit of consideration  of  such
        factors consistent with that... Here the  appellant  has  13  years
        residence (less one month) but additional to and distinct from  the
        appellant [H}, has 2 British born children who are British citizens
        and now a British wife".


        ...


        5.  There are no additional conducive to the  public  good  factors
        that can properly be relied on by the SSHD ... to  otherwise  bring
        him outside the policy on such grounds.


        6.  Treating him fairly and consistently with the linked cases  and
        properly applying article 8/14 this appellant  can  properly  argue
        that when reviewing the exercise of the merits of the  decision  to
        deprive for themselves that given the impact on the  Appellant  and
        given his history, notwithstanding the reasons given by the SSHD in
        those cases (sic)."


79.   We do not find that these submissions are made out. The fact that,  in
    the two particular cases with which we are concerned only the 14  years
    residence was mentioned does not mean that the policy is,  despite  its
    express terms, absolute in  nature.  As  Mr  Deller  submitted  in  his
    written response of 24 July, good administration cannot  require  every
    executive decision not to  pursue  action  to  provide  detailed  legal
    commentary and reviewable reasoning, merely in case this might  benefit
    a different person in a different case.

80.   But, in any event, even if the policy  were  absolute  as  to  the  14
    years residence requirement, the present  appellant  has  not  achieved
    that goal. In this respect, Ms Naik's  submission  looks  very  like  a
    "near miss" argument of the kind disapproved by the Court of Appeal  in
    Miah  and  others  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  261.  As  for  the  rest  of  her
    submissions, as we understand them to be, we  agree  with  Mr  Deller's
    categorisation of them as an attempt to create an  "imaginary  policy",
    involving a sliding scale, rather than a  clear  14  year  requirement,
    whereby a person might bring himself within its terms by a  combination
    of residence shorter than 14 years, coupled with  the  fact  of  having
    British citizen children. Such a policy does not, however, exist.

81.   Accordingly, we do not consider that the eventual outcome of  the  two
    other cases has any  material  bearing  on  the  manner  in  which  the
    appellant's case falls to be decided. We have already taken account  of
    his length of residence in the United Kingdom. Indeed,  that  residence
    is directly relevant to our finding  that  the  reasonably  foreseeable
    consequences of deprivation will not involve him  being  faced  with  a
    decision of the respondent that he should be removed from this  country
    or, indeed, that he should no longer be allowed to work.  The  presence
    of his children within the family  unit  is  another  reason  for  that
    finding.

82.   We see no scope for the application of ECHR Articles 8 and 14, in  the
    way for which Ms Naik contends. In particular,  there  is  no  arguable
    discrimination in the  way  in  which  the  respondent  has  chosen  to
    formulate her policy in Chapter 55 of the NIs.

K.  DECISION

83.     Although the issues in this appeal  have  called  for  and  received
    separate analysis, we have stood back and considered cumulatively  each
    of those issues, as they relate to whether we  should  re-exercise  the
    discretionary  deprivation  decision  in  favour  of   the   appellant.
    Extracting from each of them the elements that lie on  the  appellant's
    side of the discretionary balance, we have  nevertheless  come  to  the
    conclusion that it  is  appropriate  to  deprive  him  of  his  British
    citizenship.

84.  The making of the decision in this appeal by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error on a point of law.  We set  aside  that
    decision and substitute the following decision.

85.  The appellant's appeal under section 40A against the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  make  an  order  depriving  the  appellant  of  British
    citizenship is dismissed because we find that the  discretion  involved
    in making  that  decision  should  not  be  exercised  differently;  in
    particular, the decision is not a violation of  the  ECHR  and  is  not
    disproportionate so far as concerns the law of the EU.





                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane



                           -----------------------
[1] R v SSHD ex parte R v SSHD ex parte Fayed [2000] EWCA  Civ  523;  [2000]
1WLR 763: 'Apart from the damaging effect on  their  reputations  of  having
their applications refused the refusals have deprived them of  the  benefits
of citizenship.  The  benefits  are  substantial.   Besides  the  intangible
benefit of being a citizen of a country which is their and  their  families'
home,  there  are  the  tangible  benefits  which   include   freedom   from
immigration control, citizenship of the European Union and the rights  which
accompany that citizenship - the right to vote and the  right  to  stand  in
parliamentary elections.   The  decisions  of  the  minister  are  therefore
classically ones which but for section 44(2) would involve an obligation  on
the minister making the decision to give the Fayeds  an  opportunity  to  be
heard before  that  decision  was  reached'.   [773(e)  &  (f)]  [First-tier
Tribunal's footnote]

