
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2015                              |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     MaB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Davies instructed by Albany Solicitors

1. The phrase "unduly harsh" in para 399 of the Rules (and s.117C(5) of the
2002 Act) does not import a balancing exercise requiring the public
interest to be weighed against the circumstances of the individual (whether
child or partner of the deportee).  The focus is solely upon an evaluation
of the consequences and impact upon the individual concerned.

2. Whether the consequences of deportation will be "unduly harsh" for an
individual involves more than "uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable,
unwelcome or merely difficult and challenging" consequences and imposes a
considerably more elevated or higher threshold.

3. The consequences for an individual will be "harsh" if they are "severe"
or "bleak" and they will be "unduly" so if they are 'inordinately' or
'excessively' harsh taking into account of all the circumstances of the
individual.

(MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) at
[46] and BM and others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG
[2015] UKUT 293 (IAC) at [109] applied.)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  us  to
    rescind the order and we  continue  it  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended).

Introduction

 2. In this appeal, the Secretary of State appeals against  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Holder)  allowing  the  appeal  of  MAB
    against a decision taken on 6 May 2014 to  deport  him  to  the  United
    States of America pursuant to the automatic deportation  provisions  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 on the basis that his deportation would  breach
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The appeal raises an important point  of  construction  concerning  the
    meaning of the phrase "unduly harsh" in para  399  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in effect from 28 July 2014 (Statement of Changes in  Immigration
    Rules HC 395 as amended by HC 532).

 4. For convenience, we will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Background Facts

 5. The appellant is a citizen of the United States of America who was born
    on 30 June 1959.  He came to the UK in June 1990 as a visitor.   On  23
    April 1994, he married a British citizen, ED.  On 16 October  1995,  he
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 6. The appellant and his wife have three children, L born  on  1  February
    1995, V born on 14 October 1997 and F born on  25  August  2001.   They
    are, therefore, now 20, 17 and 13 years  old  respectively.   They  and
    their mother are British citizens.

 7. On 21 May 2013, the appellant, having pleaded guilty, was sentenced  at
    the Aylesbury Crown Court to three years' imprisonment on a  number  of
    counts for sexual offences involving children under the age of 13.  The
    appellant was also required to sign the Sex Offenders Register for life
    and a Sexual Offences Protection order was imposed for  ten  years,  in
    effect, severely restricting contact with any female under the  age  of
    16 years.

 8. In a letter dated 11 July 2013, the Secretary  of  State  informed  the
    appellant that he was liable to  automatic  deportation  under  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 as a 'foreign criminal'.  The  appellant  submitted  a
    questionnaire in response relying upon  Art  8  of  the  ECHR  and,  in
    particular, his relationships with his wife and three children.   On  6
    May 2014, the Secretary of State made a decision that s.32(5) of the UK
    Borders Act 2007 applied as the appellant's deportation  would  not  be
    contrary to Arts 3 or 8 of the ECHR.  On  2  May  2014,  a  deportation
    order was made against the appellant.

The Appeal

 9. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 11 November 2014, Judge Holder allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8.

10. The judge concluded that the appellant could  not  succeed  under  para
    399(b) on the basis of a "genuine and subsisting relationship" with his
    wife as the evidence before the  judge  was  that  their  marriage  had
    broken down.  Likewise, the judge found the appellant could not succeed
    on the basis of his 'private life' as para 399A did not apply.  It  was
    not established that there were "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration on return to the USA.

11. However, the judge allowed the appeal as he found that para  399(a)  of
    the Rules did apply.  The judge accepted that it would  "unduly  harsh"
    for the appellant's children to live in the United  States  of  America
    and also that it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK  if
    the appellant were deported.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

12. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Initially, permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal
    on 8 December 2014.  However, on 23 March 2015 the Upper Tribunal (DUTJ
    Sheridan) granted the Secretary of State permission to  appeal.   Thus,
    the appeal came before us.

Summary of the Submissions

13. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of State did not challenge  the
    judge's finding that it would be "unduly  harsh"  for  the  appellant's
    children to live in the USA.  However, he submitted  that  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant's deportation would have  a  "unduly  harsh"
    effect upon the children if they remained in the UK was flawed.

14. First, he submitted that the judge had failed to take into account  the
    public interest in assessing whether it would be "unduly harsh" for the
    children to remain in the UK without the appellant.  He submitted  that
    the judge had wrongly simply looked at the impact  upon  the  children.
    The question of whether his deportation would be "unduly  harsh"  could
    not, Mr Richards submitted, be decided in  isolation  from  the  public
    interest reflected in the seriousness and  nature  of  the  appellant's
    offending.  The magnitude  of  the  public  interest  was  relevant  in
    determining whether any "harsh" consequences were "unduly" so.

15. Secondly, in any event, Mr Richards submitted that the judge had failed
    to give adequate reasons for his finding that there  was  "overwhelming
    evidence" that the separation of the appellant from his children  would
    "have a significant and detrimental effect on them and would not be  in
    their best interests".  Mr Richards  submitted  that  the  only  matter
    relied upon by the judge was the financial impact upon  the  family  in
    the UK as the appellant would be "less likely" in  the  short  term  to
    obtain work in the USA whilst he was rebuilding his life.  Mr  Richards
    submitted that finding was both inadequately reasoned and irrational.

16. Mr Richards invited us to find a material error of law  and  set  aside
    the decision.

17. Mr Davies, on behalf of the appellant submitted that the judge had been
    entitled to find that the impact of the appellant's  deportation  would
    be "unduly harsh" upon the children on the basis of the  evidence  that
    they were struggling to survive.  Further, as we understood Mr  Davies'
    submissions, he did not accept that the "unduly  harsh"  test  required
    consideration of the public interest.  However, he submitted  that  the
    judge had done so by  considering  the  public  interest  when,  in  an
    earlier part of his determination,  he  set  out  ss.117A-117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIA  Act  2002")  and
    stated that he had taken account of the judge's sentencing remarks.  He
    accepted that the judge had  not  explicitly  referred  to  the  public
    interest in the relevant passage in his  determination  concerned  with
    the issue of "unduly  harsh"  at  para  53(iii)  but,  nonetheless,  he
    submitted the judge had sufficiently considered the public interest.

Discussion

18. The backdrop to this appeal is the automatic deportation provisions  in
    the UK Borders Act 2007 (the "2007 Act") which apply when an individual
    is a "foreign criminal", i.e. he or she is not a  British  citizen  and
    has  been  convicted  of  an  offence  and  sentenced  to  a  term   of
    imprisonment of, at least, twelve months (see, s.32 of the  2007  Act).
    A "foreign criminal" is subject to automatic deportation unless one  of
    the "Exceptions" in s.33 of the 2007 Act  applies  (see,  ss.32(5)  and
    33).  For these purposes, the important exception is "Exception  1"  in
    s.33(2), namely where the removal of the foreign criminal  pursuant  to
    the deportation order would breach an individual's "Convention  rights"
    protected by the Human Rights Act 1998.

19. For the purposes of this appeal, the important right is that  found  in
    Art 8 namely the right to respect  for  an  individual's  "private  and
    family life".  As is well-known, any infringement  of  an  individual's
    right to respect for his private and family life established under  Art
    8.1 may be justified providing that it is in accordance with  the  law,
    for a legitimate aim and is a proportionate interference under Art 8.2.
     Until 2012, there were no statutory or  other  legislative  provisions
    which  informed  the  application  of  Art  8,  in  particular  in  the
    immigration context.

    1. The New Rules

20. That position changed, however, with effect from 9 July 2012  with  the
    amendment to the Rules by HC 194 which inserted new paragraphs  396-400
    into the Rules.  These paragraphs, in particular, sought to set out the
    weight to be given to the public interest in deportation cases where an
    individual relied upon his private or family  life  under  Art  8  (see
    MF(Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192).

21. The new provisions were further amended by HC 532 with effect  from  28
    July 2014.  Those latter provisions apply to all appeals  heard  on  or
    after 28 July 2014 even if the Secretary of State's decision  was  made
    before that date (see JM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292).

22. We will focus on the Rules (in particular paras  398  and  399)  as  in
    force on 28 July 2014 as they are the applicable ones to this appeal.

23. We begin, however, with para 396 of the Rules which states that:

         "Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall  be
         that the public interest requires deportation.  It is in the public
         interest to deport  where  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
         deportation order in accordance with Section 32 of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007."

24. Having set out that presumption, para 397 creates  an  exception  where
    the individual's removal would breach the  Refugee  Convention  or  his
    human rights protected by the ECHR.

25. Paragraph A398 sets out the  scope  of  the  Rules  under  the  heading
    "Deportation and Article 8" as follows:

         "These rules apply where:

         (a)  a foreign criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

         (b)  a foreign  criminal  applies  for  a  deportation  order  made
             against him to be revoked."

26. Paragraph 398 sets out the basic framework depending upon the period of
    imprisonment imposed upon the appellant;  differentiating  between  (1)
    the most serious where a period  of  imprisonment  is  "at  least  four
    years"; (2) an intermediate category  where  the  individual  has  been
    sentenced  to  at  least  twelve  months  but  less  than  four  years'
    imprisonment; and (3) persistent offenders or those that cause  serious
    harm.  Paragraph 398 is in the following terms:


         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
                  contrary to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the
                  Human Rights Convention, and


                  (a)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                      conducive to the  public  good  [and  in  the  public
                      interest] because they  have  been  convicted  of  an
                      offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a
                      period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


                  (b)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                      conducive to the  public  good  [and  in  the  public
                      interest] because they  have  been  convicted  of  an
                      offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a
                      period of imprisonment of less than 4  years  but  at
                      least 12 months; or


                  (c)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                      conducive to the  public  good  [and  in  the  public
                      interest] because, in the view of  the  Secretary  of
                      State, their offending has  caused  serious  harm  or
                      they are a persistent offender who shows a particular
                      disregard for the law,


                  the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                  consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it
                  does not, [the public interest in deportation will only be
                  outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraphs 399 and 399A]."

    (The square brackets indicate the amendments made by  HC  532  from  28
    July 2014.)

27. Paragraphs 399 and 399A which are referred to in the concluding part of
    para 398, deal respectively with an individual's Art 8 claim based upon
    his family life (with  a  child  or  partner)  and  his  private  life.
    Paragraph 399A is not relevant to this appeal and it is unnecessary  to
    set it out.  The judge (at  paras  56  and  57  of  his  determination)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal under  399A  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant  could  not  show  "very   significant   obstacles   to   his
    integration" into the USA and that finding is not now challenged.

28. Paragraph 399 provides as follows:


         "399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
             if -


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and


                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or (ii) the child has
                      lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years
                      immediately preceding the  date  of  the  immigration
                      decision; and in either case
                      (a)  [it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported]; and


                      (b)  [it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child  to
                           remain in the UK without the person who is to  be
                           deported]; or


             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                  a partner who is in the UK and is a  [British  Citizen  or
                  settled in the UK], and


                  (i)  [the relationship was  formed  at  a  time  when  the
                      person (deportee) was in the UK  lawfully  and  their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and]


                  (ii) [it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported,
                      because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraph EX.2.  of  Appendix  FM;
                      and]

                  (iii)    [it would be unduly harsh  for  that  partner  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported]."

    (Again, the square brackets indicate the amendments made by HC 532 from
    28 July 2014.)

29. Paragraph 399(a) deals with the situation where  an  individual  has  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with a child  who  is  a
    British citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously  for  at  least  7
    years.

30. Paragraph 399(b) deals with the situation where the  individual  has  a
    "genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner".   The  latter  is
    not  relevant  to  this  appeal  because,  as  the  judge  found,   the
    appellant's  relationship  with  his  wife  had  broken  down  and  was
    therefore no longer "subsisting".  That finding is not challenged.

31. As will be clear from these provisions, where an  individual  has  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than  four  years  (i.e.
    para 398(b) or (c) applies) then he or she may rely on  para  399  (and
    para 399A).  Where, however, the individual has been  sentenced  to  at
    least four years' imprisonment then para 399  (and  indeed  para  399A)
    cannot apply and para 398 states that the:

         "public interest in deportation will only be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paras 399 and 399A".  (emphasis added)

    The requirement  to  establish  "very  compelling  circumstances"  also
    applies, if the individual has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment
    of less than four years where paras 399 and 399A cannot apply.

32. In MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD,  the  Court  of  Appeal  concluded  that  the
    Immigration Rules dealing with  Art  8  in  effect  from  9  July  2012
    amounted to a "complete code" (at [44]).   The  court  recognised  that
    there were two stages to  be  determined:  first,  does  the  appellant
    succeed under either para 399 or 399A; and secondly, if he  could  not,
    does he succeed under Art 8, on the basis of the wording then in force,
    that there are "exceptional  circumstances",  in  the  sense  of  "very
    compelling reasons", sufficient to outweigh  the  public  interest  (at
    [42] and [43]).  The Court of Appeal acknowledged that the second stage
    entailed the proportionality assessment under Art 8 with  which  courts
    and Tribunals were familiar (at [44]) but "great weight" must be  given
    to the public interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals  who  do  not
    satisfy the requirements of paras 399 or 399A (at [40] and [42]).  That
    approach has been approved and followed by the Court  of  Appeal  in  a
    number of subsequent cases (see, e.g. SSHD v AJ  (Angola)  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1636 and AQ (Nigeria) and others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 250).

33. In our judgment, that analysis is equally applicable to  the  Rules  as
    amended from  28  July  2014  subject  to  the  changed  wording.   The
    deportation rules still represent a  "complete  code".   The  structure
    based on the level of  the  appellant's  offending  in  particular  the
    period of imprisonment remains.  There  are  a  number  of  changes  in
    phraseology including the replacement of "exceptional circumstances" in
    the concluding part of para 398 with the phrase we have set  out  above
    that there must be "very compelling circumstances over and above  those
    described in paras 399 and 399A".  Likewise, the  original  version  of
    para 399(a) required that:

         "(a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         UK; and

         (b)  there is no other family member who is able to  care  for  the
         child in the UK;..."

34. The amended version of para 399(a), in effect since 28  July  2014,  as
    will be clear from the text we have set out above  no  longer  contains
    those words but rather enquires whether:

         "(a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the  country
             to which the person is to be deported;

         (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the  UK
             without the person who  is  to  be  deported;  ..."  (emphasis
             added)

35. In this appeal, it is accepted that the judge's finding that  it  would
    be "unduly harsh" for the appellant's children to live in the USA stand
    but his decision that it would be "unduly harsh" for  the  children  to
    remain in the UK without the appellant is challenged by  the  Secretary
    of State.

    2. Part 5A, NIA Act 2002

36. In addition to the amendments to the Rules from 28 July 2014, from that
    date statutory provisions in a new Part 5A of the NIA Act (inserted  by
    s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014) deal, in  legislative  form  for  the
    first time, with the issue of  the  "public  interest"  in  deportation
    (s.117C) and other cases  (s.117B)  where  the  court  or  Tribunal  is
    determining whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

37. Section 117A set out the scope of the new Part 5A headed "Article 8  of
    the ECHR; Public Interest Considerations" as follows:


         "117A         Application of this Part


             (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
                  to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                  Acts-

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
                  tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B, and

                  (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  section
                      117C.

             (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
                  the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is  justified
                  under Article 8(2)."

    The consideration listed in s.117B are  applicable  to  all  cases  and
    those in s.117C apply only in relation to the deportation  of  "foreign
    criminals" as defined in s.117D(2).


38. The generally applicable considerations in s.117B are as follows:

         "117B         Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable
             in all cases



             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom."


39. The considerations  applicable  specifically  in  the  context  of  the
    deportation of foreign criminals are set out in s.117C as follows:-


         "117C          Article  8:  additional  considerations   in   cases
                  involving foreign criminals


             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                      interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                      criminal, the  greater  is  the  public  interest  in
                      deportation of the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                      sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  four  years
                      or more, the public interest requires C's deportation
                      unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                           for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                           Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                           integration  into  the  country  to  which  C  is
                           proposed to be deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                      relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine
                      and   subsisting   parental   relationship   with   a
                      qualifying child, and the effect of  C's  deportation
                      on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                      to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,
                      the public interest requires deportation unless there
                      are very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
                      those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                      taken into account  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                      considering a decision to deport a  foreign  criminal
                      only to the extent that the reason for  the  decision
                      was the offence or offences for  which  the  criminal
                      has been convicted."


40. Section 117D provides the definition of a number of terms used in  Part
    5A. A "qualifying child" means a person under the  age  of  18  who  is
    either a British citizen or who has lived in the UK  for  a  continuous
    period of seven years or more.  The definition of "qualifying  partner"
    is also included but is not relevant  to  this  appeal.   In  addition,
    s.117D(2) defines "foreign criminal" as person who  is  not  a  British
    citizen, has been convicted of an offence in the United Kingdom and who
    has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  twelve
    months or has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm
    or is a persistent offender.

41. The requirement in s.117A to "have regard"  to  the  considerations  in
    s.117B and, if a deportation case, in s.117C means a court or  Tribunal
    must have regard to  those  considerations  in  substance  even  if  no
    explicit reference is  made  to  the  statutory  provisions  (see  Dube
    (ss.117A - 117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC)).

    3. Applying the Rules and Part 5A

42. It is clear that the new Rules and Part 5A of the NIA Act 2002 seek  to
    strike a "fair balance" between the competing  interests  under  Art  8
    and, in themselves, provide a persuasive statement about  the  relevant
    public interest consideration which a court or Tribunal must bring into
    account in striking the proper balance under Art 8.  Albeit not in  the
    context of deportation, in Haleemudeen v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558,
    Beatson LJ at [40] said that the new Rules in Appendix FM:

         "...are a central part of the legislative  and  policy  context  in
         which the interests of immigration control are balanced against the
         interests and rights of people who have come to  this  country  and
         wish to settle in it.  Overall, the Secretary of State's policy  as
         to when an interference with an Article 8 right will be regarded as
         disproportionate is more particularised in the new  Rules  than  it
         has previously been."

43. As a consequence, the court or Tribunal is required  to  give  the  new
    Rules (at [47]): "greater weight than as merely a  starting  point  for
    the consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  an  interference  with
    Article 8 rights" (see also SSHD v SS (Congo) and  Others  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387).

44. The approach is no  less  true  of  the  specific  rules  dealing  with
    deportation and an Art 8 claim based upon an  individual's  private  or
    family life.  In MF (Nigeria) the court spoke of "great  weight"  being
    given to the public interest (at [40]).  In SS (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 550 the court  concluded  that  the  strength  of  the  public
    interest meant that only  an  individual  with  a  "very  strong  claim
    indeed" was likely to succeed under Art 8 (at  [55]).   In  SSHD  v  AQ
    (Nigeria), the Court of Appeal, again  emphasised  the  nature  of  the
    deportation rules as a "code", the considerable weight to  be  accorded
    to the public interest, that the Art 8 exercise required the  court  or
    tribunal to look through "the lens" of the new Rules and  that  it  was
    likely to be an error of law to fail to do so.   Sales  LJ  (with  whom
    Sullivan LJ and Newey J agreed) said this (at [39]-[40]):

         "39. The fact that the new rules  are  intended  to  operate  as  a
         comprehensive  code  is  significant,  because  it  means  that  an
         official  or  a  tribunal  should  seek  to  take  account  of  any
         Convention rights of an appellant through the lens of the new rules
         themselves, rather than looking  to  apply  Convention  rights  for
         themselves in a free-standing  way  outside  the  new  rules.  This
         feature of the new rules makes  the  decision-making  framework  in
         relation to foreign criminals different from that  in  relation  to
         other parts of the Immigration Rules, where the Secretary of  State
         retains a general discretion  outside  the  Rules  in  exercise  of
         which, in some circumstances, decisions may  need  to  be  made  in
         order to accommodate certain claims for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         basis of Convention rights, as explained in Huang and R  (Nagre)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).



         40. The requirement that  claims  by  appellants  who  are  foreign
         criminals for leave to remain, based on the  Convention  rights  of
         themselves or their partners,  relations  or  children,  should  be
         assessed under the new rules and through their lens  is  important,
         as the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) has emphasised. It seeks  to
         ensure  uniformity  of  approach   between   different   officials,
         tribunals and courts  who  have  to  assess  such  claims,  in  the
         interests of fair and equal treatment of different appellants  with
         similar cases on the facts. In this  regard,  the  new  rules  also
         serve as a safeguard in relation  to  rights  of  appellants  under
         Article 14 to equal treatment within the scope of  Article  8.  The
         requirement of assessment through the lens of the  new  rules  also
         seeks to ensure that decisions are made in a way that  is  properly
         informed by the considerable weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
         interest in  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  as  declared  by
         Parliament in the 2007 Act and reinforced by the Secretary of State
         (as the relevant Minister with responsibility for operation of  the
         immigration system), so as to promote  public  confidence  in  that
         system in this sensitive area."

45. The structural approach in MF (Nigeria) remains, as we  have  seen,  in
    effect.  The court or tribunal must apply the rules and  there  is,  at
    least potentially, a two-stage approach.

46. First, at Stage 1 the court  or  tribunal  must  consider  whether  the
    individual can succeed under para 399 or 399A.

47. Secondly, if an individual cannot succeed under para 399 or 399A either
    because those  provisions  are  not  applicable  because  he  has  been
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment of at least four years  or  because
    the relevant requirements of those rules are  not  met,  the  court  or
    tribunal should move to consider Stage 2.   That  second  stage  is  to
    consider the issue of proportionality on  the  basis  that  only  "very
    compelling circumstances over and beyond those falling within para  399
    or para 399A" can outweigh the public interest.

48. That later assessment is made under the Rules.  It is, as we have seen,
    to be made through the "lens" of the Rules requiring a consideration of
    what factors exist and whether taken  together  they  amount  to  "very
    compelling" circumstances over and above those in paras 399  and  399A.
    It requires a careful assessment of  the  reasons  why  the  individual
    cannot otherwise succeed under the Rules.  It  requires  the  balancing
    exercise inherent in proportionality to be carried  out  but  with  due
    weight given to the public  interest.   However,  in  determining  that
    issue, the considerations set out in Part 5A of the NIA Act  2002  must
    be taken into account so far as relevant.  In other words, Part  5A  of
    the NIA Act 2002 only becomes relevant at Stage 2  when  the  court  or
    tribunal is considering the issue of  proportionality.   That  approach
    was approved by the Upper Tribunal in Chege (section 117D - Article 8 -
    approach) [2015] UKUT 165 (IAC)) and with which we respectfully  agree.
    Part 5A has no relevance to Stage 1.

49. Thirdly, it is also clear that if  an  individual  can  establish  that
    either para 399 or para 399A applies to him, that  in  itself  resolves
    the Art 8 issue in his favour.  Only if an individual cannot show  that
    either para 399 or para 399A applies should a court go on and  consider
    stage  2  and  carry  out  the  balancing   exercising   required   for
    proportionality under the "very compelling circumstances" test in  para
    398 together with Part 5A of the  NIA  Act  2002.   If  the  individual
    succeeds under para 399 or 399A then his deportation will breach Art  8
    of the ECHR (see, MF (Nigeria) at [35] and [46]; AQ (Nigeria)  at  [36]
    and SS (Congo) at [45]). If either para 399 or para  399A  applies  the
    circumstances of the appellant are  such  as  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation.  In our judgment, in paras 399 and  para  399A
    of the Rules  the  Secretary  of  State  has  identified  a  number  of
    circumstances where a  particular  matrix  of  facts  when  established
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.  That,  in  our  view,  is
    also clear from the structure of the Immigration Rules,  in  particular
    the inter-relationship between para 398 and paras 399 and 399A  and  is
    also the position accepted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  her  own
    Immigration Directorate Instructions (IDIs) - Chapter  13:  Criminality
    Guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases (Version 5.0, 28 July 2014).  At  para
    1.2.3, it is stated:

         "Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules sets  out  the  criminality
         thresholds.  An Article 8 claim from a foreign criminal who has not
         been sentenced to at least four years' imprisonment will succeed if
         the requirements of an  exception  to  deportation  are  met.   The
         exceptions to deportation on the basis of family life are  set  out
         in paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules, and the exception on the
         basis of private life is at paragraph 399A."  (our emphasis).

     4. 'Unduly Harsh'

50. We now turn to consider the specific issue of  the  proper  meaning  of
    "unduly harsh" in para 399(a).  Those words are,  as  we  have  already
    noted, also found in s.117C(5) setting  out  'Exception  2'  where  the
    proposed deportee has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a qualifying child and the effect of his deportation on the  child
    would be "unduly harsh".  Mr Richards submitted that whether the effect
    of deportation was "unduly harsh" required a context and  that  context
    was the individual's offending and the public interest reflected in its
    seriousness, society's expression of revulsion at  serious  criminality
    and  the  deterrent  effect  on  other  foreign  nationals   committing
    offences.  Mr Richards submitted that the words "unduly" had a sense of
    unfairness to the individual and required an evaluation of whether  the
    consequences were or were not 'due' to that  individual.   Mr  Richards
    submitted  that  even  though  deportation  might   have   very   harsh
    consequences, whether it was "unduly harsh" could only be determined by
    looking at the magnitude  of  the  public  interest  furthered  by  the
    individual's deportation.  He submitted that the more serious the crime
    the  greater  must  be  the  consequences  for  them  to  be   properly
    characterised "unduly" harsh.

51. In support of his submissions, Mr Richards  referred  to  the  relevant
    IDI, Chapter 13: Criminality Guidance in Article 8 ECHR Cases  (version
    5.0, 28 July 2014) at paras 2.5.2  to  2.5.4  where  the  Secretary  of
    State's view as to meaning of "unduly harsh" is set out.

52. At paragraph  2.5.2  the  IDI  adopts  the  Oxford  English  Dictionary
    definition as follows:

         "2.5.2   When considering the  public  interest  statements,  words
                  must be given their ordinary meanings.  The Oxford English
                  dictionary defines "unduly" as "excessively"  and  "harsh"
                  as "severe, cruel"."

53. Then at paras 2.5.3 and 2.5.4, the Secretary  of  State  sets  out  her
    position,  essentially  consistent  with  the  submission  made  by  Mr
    Richard, that the public interest must be factored into  an  assessment
    of whether the impact on a child (or partner) is "unduly harsh":

         "2.5.3   The effect of deportation on a  qualifying  partner  or  a
                  qualifying child must be considered in the context of  the
                  foreign criminal's immigration and criminal history.   The
                  greater the public interest in deportation,  the  stronger
                  the countervailing factors need to  be  to  succeed.   The
                  impact of deportation on a partner or child can be  harsh,
                  even very harsh, without being unduly harsh, depending  on
                  the extent of the public interest in  deportation  and  of
                  the family life affected.

         2.5.4    For example, it will  usually  be  more  difficult  for  a
                  foreign criminal who has been sentenced more than once  to
                  a period of imprisonment of at least 12  months  but  less
                  than  four  years  to  demonstrate  that  the  effect   of
                  deportation would be  unduly  harsh  than  for  a  foreign
                  criminal who has  been  convicted  of  a  single  offence,
                  because repeat offending increases the public interest  in
                  deportation and so requires a stronger  claim  to  respect
                  for family life in order to outweigh it."

54. The same point is made at 3.5.2 where it is stated:

         "3.5.2    When  considering  whether  the  effect  on  a  child  of
                  deporting a foreign criminal is unduly harsh, the strength
                  of the family life claim, including the best interests  of
                  the child, must be balanced against the public interest in
                  deportation.  As a  general  principle,  the  greater  the
                  public interest in deportation the foreign  criminal,  the
                  more harsh the effect of deportation must be on the  child
                  before it is considered unduly harsh."

55. In his skeleton  argument,  Mr  Davies  relied  upon  two  passages  in
    determinations of the Upper Tribunal  in  MK  (Section  55  -  Tribunal
    options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) at [46] and BM  and  Others
    (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 293 (IAC) at
    [109] to counter the Secretary of State's position.

56. In MK, the UT was considering the two questions in para 399(a),  namely
    whether it would be "unduly harsh" for the appellant's children to live
    in the country to which he was to be deported and, secondly whether  it
    would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without  the
    appellant.

57. At [46], the Chamber  President  (McCloskey  J)  said  this  about  the
    "unduly harsh" test:

         "The determination of the two questions  which  we  have  posed  in
         [44](d) above requires an evaluative assessment on the part of  the
         Tribunal.  This is to be contrasted with a fact  finding  exercise.
         By way of self-direction, we are mindful that "unduly  harsh"  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  "Harsh" in this context, denotes something  severe,  or
         bleak.   It  is  the  antitheses  of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb "unduly" raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

58. Having done so, the UT determined that it would be  "unduly  harsh"  in
    the following terms:

         "Approached in this way, we have no hesitation in  concluding  that
         it would be unduly harsh for either  of  the  two  seven  year  old
         British citizen children concerned to  be  abruptly  uprooted  from
         their United Kingdom life setting and lifestyle and exiled to  this
         struggling, impoverished and plague stricken  west  African  state.
         No reasons or right thinking person would  consider  this  anything
         less that cruel."

59. In that passage, the President made no reference to the public interest
    and was clearly not engaged in a balancing exercise weighing the public
    interest against the consequences to the  children  of  living  in  the
    appellant's own country but rather was simply focusing on the interests
    of the children.

60. At [47] McCloskey J turned to consider whether it would be unduly harsh
    for the children to remain in the UK without the appellant - the  issue
    raised in this appeal.  He said this:

         "The final question is whether it would be unduly harsh for  either
         child to remain in the United Kingdom without the Appellant.   This
         is a different question from that considered  in  [46]  above.   We
         have identified a range of facts and considerations bearing on this
         issue.  Once again, an evaluative  judgment  on  the  part  of  the
         Tribunal  is  required.   In  performing  this  exercise  we   view
         everything in the round.  The appellant plays an important role  in
         the lives of both children concerned particularly that of his  step
         son.  He is the provider of stability, security, emotional  support
         and financial support to both children.  We  have  rehearsed  above
         the various benefits and advantages which he brings to the lives of
         both children, coupled with his personal attributer and merits.  We
         remind ourselves of section 55 of the 2009 Act.  We acknowledge the
         distinction between harsh and unduly harsh.   We  remind  ourselves
         again  of  the  potency  of  the  main  public  interest  in  play,
         emphasised most recently by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SSHD  v  MA
         (Somalia) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1192.   The  outcome  of  our  careful
         reflections in  this  difficult  and  borderline  case  and  in  an
         exercise bereft of bright luminous lines is as follows.   Balancing
         all of the facts and factors, our conclusion is that  the  severity
         of the impact on the children's lives  of  the  Appellant's  abrupt
         exit  with  all  that  would  flow  therefrom  would  be  of   such
         proportions as to be unduly harsh."

61. Whilst McCloskey J did refer to "public interest in play", the focus of
    his reasoning is, again, firmly upon the effects upon the  children  of
    remaining in the UK  without  the  appellant.   We  do  not  understand
    McCloskey J to have reached his conclusion that that would  be  "unduly
    harsh" based upon the balancing exercise which Mr Richards  invites  us
    to adopt.  Rather, the focus was upon the "severity of the  impact"  on
    the children such that it was "unduly harsh" applying the "elevated" or
    "heightened" standard which McCloskey J recognised and applied in  [46]
    of the determination.  In neither paragraph, in particular in  para  46
    where the adverb "unduly"  is  defined,  does  McCloskey  J  adopt  the
    approach urged upon us by Mr Richards.

62. In BM and Others the Upper Tribunal was considering  'Exception  2'  in
    s.117C(5) of the NIA Act 2002.  At [109], reflecting what was  said  in
    [46] in MK,  McCloskey J said this:

        "Given the invocation of "Exception 2", we must assess  the  likely
        impact of the Appellant's deportation on his spouse.  In order  for
        the exception to apply, the impact must qualify as "unduly  harsh".
        We  consider  that  this  does  not  equate   with   uncomfortable,
        inconvenient,  undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely  difficult   and
        challenging.   Rather,  it  poses  a  considerably  more   elevated
        threshold.  "Harsh", in this context, denotes something severe,  or
        bleak, the antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.  Furthermore, the
        addition of the advert "unduly" raises an already elevated standard
        still higher.  The members of the family unit in question  are  but
        two.  We acknowledge the likelihood of this changing  in  the  very
        near  future,  while  adding  that  section  55  of  the   Borders,
        Citizenship an Immigration Act 2009 has no application to  a  child
        en ventre sa mere."

63. Again, we detect  no  suggestion  that  the  term  "unduly"  in  itself
    incorporates a  balancing  exercise  taking  into  account  the  public
    interest in  assessing  whether  the  consequences  to  the  child  (or
    partner) is "unduly" harsh.

64. At [110] McCloskey J gave his reasons for concluding that the appellant
    could not succeed under Art 8 as follows:

         "We accept that life will be very difficult  for  a  young,  single
         mother  who  will  have  the  additional  burden  of  grieving  her
         husband's departure abroad in circumstances where the prospects  of
         future reunification are unfavourable.  However, these we  consider
         to be typical effects of a husband's deportation and Parliament has
         decreed that cases of this kind are insufficient  to  outweigh  the
         public  interest.   Furthermore,   we   take   into   account   the
         availability of strong family support to the Appellant's spouse, as
         we have found above.  To this we add that she is a graduate who has
         evidently  been  in  regular  employment  and  it  is,   therefore,
         predictable that she will be able to support herself and her child.
          We do not overlook  the  duration  of  this  relationship  or  its
         various  qualities,  all  of  which  we  have  acknowledged  above.
         However, our conclusion is, balancing all of the relevant facts and
         factors, that the statutory public interest must  prevail  by  some
         measure.  Accordingly, this Appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR
         fails."

65. We acknowledge that here McCloskey J referred to "balancing of all  the
    relevant facts and factors"  and  stated  that  the  "statutory  public
    interest" must prevail by some measure.  Here, of course,  McCloskey  J
    was considering that appellant's claim under Art 8 at the second  stage
    in MF (Nigeria).  He was not considering the application of  para  399.
    At  that  second  stage,  it  is  inherent   in   the   assessment   of
    proportionality that the public interest must be taken into account  in
    assessing  whether  there  are  "very  compelling  circumstances"   (in
    deportation cases) or "exceptional circumstances" (in other  cases)  to
    outweigh that public interest.   In  our  judgment,  nothing  in  [110]
    detracts from the approach set out  in  [109]  to  the  phrase  "unduly
    harsh" which was also applied in MK.  What is said in [110] related, in
    our view, to an assessment at Stage 2 and, it is noticeable,  that  the
    Upper Tribunal made no specific finding on whether Exception 2 applies.

66. In short, therefore, nothing in MK or BM and Others  supports,  in  our
    judgment, Mr Richards' submission that inherent in the adverb  "unduly"
    is a consideration not only of the impact upon the child  (or  partner)
    but also the public interest reflected in the  individual's  offending.
    In our judgment, the approach set out in [46] of MK and [109] of BM and
    Others reflects the correct approach to the phrase  "unduly  harsh"  in
    para 399(a).

67. Whilst we have considered the Secretary of State's own view in her  own
    IDI of the phrase's meaning, it is obvious that that view cannot assist
    to interpret the phrase "unduly harsh" in  s.117C(5)  of  the  NIA  Act
    2002.  Parliament's intention must be discerned from the wording of the
    statute together with any admissible interpretive material  which  does
    not, in our judgment, include the Secretary of State's  IDI.   Further,
    we have not found the IDI relevant in interpreting the phrase  in  para
    399 of the Rules.  It is established law that an IDI  or  statement  by
    the Secretary of State cannot affect the plain and ordinary meaning  of
    the words in the Immigration Rules (see Mahad v Entry Clearance Officer
    [2009] UKSC 16).  In our judgment, the plain meaning of the word is, as
    the Upper Tribunal stated in MK and BM and Others.

68. In any event, even if there was an ambiguity  in  the  meaning  of  the
    words,  the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance  cannot  be  used  as  an
    interpretive tool so as to resolve an ambiguity against an  individual.
    In Pokhriyal v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1568 the Court of Appeal recognised
    that there was a qualification to the approach in Mahad [42} that:

         "if there is ambiguity in Immigration Rules and  the  Secretary  of
         State publicly declares that he/she will  adopt  the  more  lenient
         interpretation then the Tribunals and courts may hold the Secretary
         of State to that assurance."

69. Here, of course, the Secretary of State's interpretation is  not  "more
    lenient" but is properly viewed as being more stringent.  The Court  of
    Appeal  accepted  that  an  IDI  could  not  be  used   to   reach   an
    interpretation was more stringent.  At  [43],  Jackson  LJ  (with  whom
    Longmore and Voss LJJ agreed) said:

         "I do not think it is possible for the Secretary of State  to  rely
         upon extraneous material in order to persuade a court  or  Tribunal
         to construe the Rules more harshly or to resolve  an  ambiguity  in
         the government's favour.  The Secretary  of  State  holds  all  the
         cards.  The Secretary of State drafts the  Immigration  Rules;  the
         Secretary  of  State  issues  IDIs  and  guidance  statements;  the
         Secretary of State authorises the public statements made by his/her
         officials.  The Secretary of State  cannot  toughen  up  the  Rules
         otherwise than by making formal amendments and laying  them  before
         parliament.  That follows from the Supreme Court's reasoning  in  R
         (Alvi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 33;
         [2012] 1 WLR 2208."

70. In our judgment, Mr Richard's submissions, if correct, would result  in
    any ambiguity in  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  "unduly  harsh"  being
    resolved "more harshly" in the "government's favour" which is precisely
    what the Court of Appeal said was impermissible.

71. Further, in our view,  it  is  not  necessary  to  interpret  the  word
    "unduly" so as to necessarily  implant  a  balancing  exercise  as  put
    forward by Mr Richards in his submissions and the IDI.  It is clear  to
    us that the Secretary of State has, in paras 399 and 399A, set  out  in
    detail the number of circumstances where the particular factual  matrix
    has led the Secretary of State to conclude that the public interest  in
    deportation (providing the individual has  not  been  sentenced  to  at
    least four years' imprisonment) is outweighed by  those  circumstances.
    The policy in para 399 focuses upon  the  effect  upon  children  (para
    339(a)) or a partner (para 399(b)).  The wording of the  provision,  in
    itself, reflects that focus: "unduly harsh for the child".  It seems to
    us, contrary to Mr Richards' submissions, that  the  issue  of  "unduly
    harsh" is treated as an isolated issue focusing on the individual child
    or partner affected by the appellant's  deportation.   It  is  only  if
    neither para 399 nor para 399A applies that the Rules  contemplate  the
    decision  maker  carrying  out  a  balancing  exercise  for  themselves
    applying the "very compelling circumstances" rubric and, since Part  5A
    of the NIA Act 2002 came into force, including the  considerations  set
    out in s.117C and s.117B. There is no place for a balancing exercise to
    be carried out repetitively at both Stage 1 and Stage 2: rather, as all
    the case law recognises albeit prior to the 28  July  2014  amendments,
    that is carried out at Stage 2.

72. We do not accept  the  effect  of  Mr  Richards'  submission  that  the
    amendment to para 399 from 28 July 2014, when the word "reasonable" was
    replaced with the phrase "unduly harsh",  changed  the  nature  of  the
    exercise required of the decision maker under para  399.   Mr  Richards
    accepted the issue of whether it would be "reasonable" for a  child  to
    live in the deportee's country or remain in the UK without the deportee
    did not involve an assessment of the "public interest".   We  had  also
    never understood it to require that.   We  do  not  consider  that  the
    replacement of "reasonableness" with "unduly  harsh"  had  changed  the
    approach to the Rules.  Now, as then, the focus is on the  impact  upon
    the individual child (or partner).   That  said,  we  accept  that  the
    amendment has made some changes, for example phrase "unduly  harsh"  is
    intended, and may  well,  impose  a  heightened  hurdle  from  that  of
    "reasonableness" which was part of the Rules between 9 July 2012 and 28
    July 2014.  That is, in our judgment, reflected in [46] of MK and [109]
    of BM and Others.  In our judgment, albeit to add a gloss of  our  own,
    the  word  "unduly"  requires  that  the  impact  upon  the  individual
    concerned be 'inordinately' harsh.  By that we  mean  that  the  impact
    would be "unusually large" or "excessive".  We do not intend that to be
    a definition but rather a 'gloss' to assist  decision  makers  applying
    para 399, indeed, s.117C(5).  That is, as the Tribunal recognised in MK
    at [46] "an evaluative assessment" but bearing in mind  the  "elevated"
    or "heightened" standard that must be applied.  It is necessarily  fact
    sensitive but is focussed upon the impact on  the  individual  (whether
    child or partner) concerned.

73. In reaching our view, we note that the very same phrase "unduly  harsh"
    is a term familiar in refugee law as part of the "internal  relocation"
    issue.  An individual who is at real risk of persecution in his or  her
    home area cannot be expected to  internally  relocate  within  his  own
    country if to do so would  be  "unduly  harsh".   It  may  be  entirely
    coincidental that the very same phrase has been incorporated  into  the
    Rules and legislation dealing with deportation.  However, it  is  worth
    noting that in the context of refugee law  the  phrase  "unduly  harsh"
    focuses upon the circumstances of the individual concerned within their
    own country (see, e.g. Januzi v SSHD  [2006]  UKHL  5).   There  is  no
    balancing exercise but rather an "evaluative" exercise as to whether an
    individual cannot be expected to move and live within their own country
    because of the impact upon him or her.  That is  a  similar  evaluative
    exercise to that which we consider  is  required  under  para  399  and
    s.117C(5) transposed to whether an individual can be expected  to  move
    with the deportee to the latter's own  country  or  remain  in  the  UK
    without the deportee.  The words are well-known and  very  familiar  in
    the refugee area. It would not be prudent, in our judgment,  for  there
    to be two different approaches to the very same phrase, "unduly harsh",
    in two  immigration  contexts.   That  should  be  avoided  if  at  all
    possible.

74. With that in mind, we turn to the Judge's decision in respect  of  para
    399(a).

    5. The Judge's Decision

75. Turning now to the judge's reasoning which can be found at para 53(iii)
    of his determination as follows:

          "I find that it would be unduly harsh for them to  remain  in  the
          United Kingdom should the Appellant  be  deported  to  the  United
          States  given  that  the  overwhelming  evidence  is  that   being
          separated  from  him  in  that  way  would,  in  effect,  have   a
          significant an detrimental effect on them  and  would  not  be  in
          their best interests.  It is not only their evidence but also  the
          evidence of their mother (who, perhaps, has every  reason  not  to
          favour the Appellant) and their grandmother.

         Whilst [the appellant's wife] is able and willing to care  for  her
         children in the United Kingdom, it appears to be  a  fact  of  life
         that she struggles financially in the process.   The  Appellant  is
         able and willing to financially support his family.  It  is  likely
         that he has a job to go to in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  less
         likely in the short term that he will be able  to  offer  financial
         assistance to them from the United  States  as  he  would  have  to
         rebuild a life from scratch.

         These are children that need to have  the  opportunity  to  rebuild
         their relationship with their father.  I find, that this cannot  be
         satisfactorily achieved if the Appellant is living  in  the  United
         States; ..."

76. In our judgment, for the reasons we have given above, Judge Holder  did
    not fall into error by failing  to  consider  the  public  interest  in
    reaching  his  finding  that  it  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  for   the
    appellant's children to remain in the UK whilst he was deported to  the
    USA.  (Strictly the eldest child is not under 18 years old and so  para
    399(a) (and s.117C(5)) does not apply to her.  But for  these  purposes
    we are content, and nothing to the contrary was  suggested  to  us,  to
    treat the 3 children in the same way.) For those reasons, we reject  Mr
    Richards' first submission challenging the judge's decision.

77. Mr Richards' second submission was that the judge had given  inadequate
    reasons for his finding  that  it  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  for  the
    children to remain here without the  appellant  and  that  finding  was
    irrational.  In particular, the Judge did not set out the "overwhelming
    evidence" which showed that there was a  "significant  and  detrimental
    effect" on the appellant's children so that it was not  in  their  best
    interests if the appellant were deported to the USA.

78. In our judgment, this submission is  well-founded.   Whilst  we  accept
    that it may well not have been in the children's "best interests" to be
    separated from the appellant if he were deported to  the  USA,  we  are
    simply unable to discern what the "overwhelming evidence" was that  his
    deportation would have a  "significant  and  detrimental  affect"  upon
    them.  One of the appellant's children is a young adult, aged 19 at the
    date of the hearing.  Another child was aged 17.  The  third  child  is
    somewhat younger, being 13 years old.  However,  the  only  basis  upon
    which the judge considered that it would be "unduly harsh" for them  to
    remain in the UK is that their mother, with whom they  live,  but  from
    whom the appellant is now estranged, "struggles financially".  The fact
    of the matter is that the children's  mother  is  in  employment  as  a
    school dinner lady and cleaner.  The evidence was  that,  although  the
    appellant's parents  in  the  UK  were  elderly  and  lived  on  modest
    pensions, they try to assist the children's mother when possible within
    their limited means.  The appellant's mother and the children  survived
    without any income from the appellant during the time he was in  prison
    and the evidence before  the  judge  was  that  he  was  not  currently
    employed even if he had a job offer.  There was no basis for the  judge
    to infer that the appellant as a 55 year old man returning to  the  USA
    (even though he had not been there since 1990) would  be  unlikely,  at
    least in the short term,  to  find  employment  and  provide  financial
    assistance if it was needed from the USA.  As we have said, the  family
    has survived without any income from him in the  immediate  past  since
    his conviction in February 2013.

79. It is not clear whether in para 53(iii), the judge  took  into  account
    any difficulty the children might have in visiting their father in  the
    USA.  As we have said, one child is already an adult and a second child
    will be shortly.  There was no evidence that their mother would  object
    to them visiting the appellant in the USA or that there  would  be  any
    immigration difficulty in them doing so.  There would,  of  course,  be
    financial implications.  It may well be that the means  of  the  family
    would not allow frequent visits but, in our judgment, the evidence  did
    not  establish  that  the  visit  to  America  would  be  prohibitively
    expensive in the foreseeable future.  Between any visits,  children  of
    this age could meaningfully remain in contact with their father through
    such means as Skype which has revolutionised face-to-face communication
    between family members over great distances in recent years.

80. In our judgment, Judge Holder erred in law by failing to give  adequate
    reasons and in reaching an irrational conclusion that the  impact  upon
    the appellant's children of remaining in the  UK  was  "unduly  harsh".
    Further, in our judgment, the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  the
    consequence of his deportation for them remaining in the UK was "unduly
    harsh". Applying the meaning of "unduly harsh" set out in  MK  that  it
    does not  equate  with  "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable  or
    merely  difficult"  circumstances,  we   have   no   doubt   that   the
    circumstances identified by the judge could not be equated  to  "unduly
    harsh" consequences  for  the  children.   It  could  not  properly  be
    established that the effect on them of the appellant's deportation  was
    excessive, inordinate or severe.  The only proper finding, and  one  we
    make, is that the effect on the children has not been established to be
    'unduly harsh'.

81. For those reasons, the judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 involved the making of an error of law  and  cannot  stand.
    We set the decision aside and move to remake the decision.

Remaking the Decision

82. Both representatives invited us to remake the decision under Art  8  on
    the material before us if we were satisfied that the  judge's  decision
    could not stand.  We turn then to remake the decision under Art 8.   We
    do so in two-stages.  The decision under Art 8 must be made through the
    "lens" of the Rules (see SSHD v AJ (Angola)).

83. First, we consider paras 399 and 399A of the Rules.  As we have already
    determined, the appellant cannot succeed under para 399(a) on the basis
    of his relationship with his two minor children.  Although it would  be
    unduly harsh for his children to move to the  USA,  it  is  not  unduly
    harsh for them to remain in the UK whilst he is deported  to  the  USA.
    Before the judge it was accepted the appellant could not succeed  under
    para 399(b) on the basis of his  (now  former)  relationship  with  his
    wife.  The judge's decision that the requirements of para 399A are  not
    met is not challenged.  The appellant can, therefore, only  succeed  in
    his claim under Art 8 if there are "very compelling circumstances  over
    and above" those in  para  399  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.

84. Secondly, we turn to consider Art 8 applying  the  five-stage  test  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, in particular the issue of proportionality under
    the rubric of "very compelling circumstances" in para 398.

85. We accept that the appellant has established family life with his three
    children, L, V and F who are now aged,  respectively,  20,  17  and  13
    years of age.  It was accepted before the judge  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with his wife had broken down and family  life  that  once
    existed between them, plainly in our judgment, no longer exists.

86. In addition, the appellant has been in the UK since 1990  and  has,  no
    doubt, built  up  a  private  life  in  the  UK.   The  appellant  has,
    therefore, been resident in the UK for 25 years since he left the  USA.
    He is now 56 years old.  The evidence before the judge was that all his
    immediate family  members  reside  in  the  UK  including  his  elderly
    parents.  The evidence was that he  has  no  immediate  family  members
    residing in the USA.  The appellant has, for a number of years,  worked
    in the haulage industry although he does not  at  present  but  has  an
    offer of employment in the future.

87. Consequently, whilst we accept that the appellant has family life  with
    his three children, we do not accept that he has family life  with  his
    now estranged wife or with his parents.  As  regards  the  latter,  the
    appellant's mother gave evidence at the hearing and she did not suggest
    that they were financially or otherwise dependent upon  the  appellant.
    They had modest pension  and,  indeed,  they  financially  assisted  EB
    whenever possible from their limited  means.   The  evidence  does  not
    establish that the  'close  ties'  exist  beyond  that  normally  found
    between elderly parents and their son  in  the  absence  of  any  solid
    evidence of dependency or  reliance  sufficient  to  establish  'family
    life' with his elderly parents (see, e.g. Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]  EWCA
    Civ 31 and Singh and Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  630,  especially  at
    [24]-[26]).

88. Judge Holder accepted, as must we, that it would be "unduly harsh"  for
    the appellant's children to relocate to live with him in the USA.   The
    evidence from the appellant's mother was that they could not afford  to
    travel  to  the  USA.   There  was  also  evidence  of  the   financial
    difficulties that the appellant's  children  would  face  visiting  the
    appellant in the USA.

89. Although we were not taken to any specific  evidence,  we  also  accept
    that the appellant has established private life over the 25 year period
    of his residence in the UK.

90. For these reasons, we are satisfied that  the  appellant's  deportation
    would interfere with his family and private life in the  UK  so  as  to
    engage Art 8.1 of the ECHR.

91. The crucial issue in  this  appeal  is  whether  that  interference  is
    justified in the public interest given the appellant's offending  under
    Art 8.2.  There is no doubt that the decision is in accordance with the
    law and for a legitimate aim, namely  the  prevention  of  disorder  or
    crime and for the protection of the rights and freedoms  of  others  as
    well as the economic well-being of the country.

92. Approaching the issue of proportionality, as we have already indicated,
    para 398 makes clear that the public  interest  in  deportation,  given
    that the appellant cannot satisfy either the requirements of  para  399
    or 399A, can only be  outweighed  by  "very  compelling  circumstances"
    above those described in para 399 and para 399A.

93. That demonstrates that the public interest  is  entitled  to  be  given
    "great weight" and the deportation of a foreign criminal falling within
    the automatic deportation provisions of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  is
    proposed.   These  very  compelling  circumstances  "require,  in   our
    judgment, a very strong claim indeed to outweigh the  public  interest"
    (see, for example SS (Nigeria) v SSHD ).

94. In AJ (Angola) at [40] Sales LJ stated that:

         "The requirement of assessment through the lens of  the  new  Rules
         also seeks to ensure the decisions  are  made  in  a  way  that  is
         properly informed by the considerable weight to  be  given  to  the
         public interest in deportation of foreign criminals, as declared by
         parliament in the 2007 Act and reinforced by the Secretary of State
         (as the relevant Minister with responsibility for operation of  the
         immigration system), so as to promote  public  confidence  in  that
         system in this sensitive area."

95. Considering whether there are "very compelling circumstances", we  must
    consider the best interests of the appellant's two minor children as  a
    "primary" consideration but those best interests may be  outweighed  by
    sufficiently weighty matters of the public interest (see ZH  (Tanzania)
    v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4).  At [26] Lady Hale JSC said:

         "This does not  mean  (as  it  would  do  in  other  context)  that
         identifying their best  interests  would  lead  inextricably  to  a
         decision in conformity with those  interests.   Provided  that  the
         Tribunal did not treat any other considerations as inherently  more
         significant than the best  interests  of  the  children,  it  could
         conclude that the strength of the other  considerations  outweighed
         them."

96. The public interest reflected in an  appellant's  offending  may  be  a
    sufficiently weighty "other consideration" to outweigh  the  children's
    best interests.

97. Although we do not agree with the judge  that  there  is  "overwhelming
    evidence"  of   a  "significant  and  detrimental  effect"   upon   the
    appellant's children if the appellant were deported, we see  no  reason
    to depart from his finding that the appellant's deportation  would  not
    be in the children's "best  interests".   They  would  be  deprived  of
    regular and frequent direct contact with him.  That  would  be  equally
    true of L, aged 20 although, of course, not being  a  minor  her  "best
    interests" are strictly not engaged as a relevant criterion.   However,
    the impact upon her is also relevant.  We accept that  the  appellant's
    deportation  will,  therefore,  restrict  direct  contact  between  the
    appellant and his three children.  We do not accept, however,  that  it
    will deprive them of contact altogether.  We do  not  accept  that  the
    family's finances will prohibit visits by the appellant's  children  to
    the USA.  The appellant has previously been gainfully employed  in  the
    UK and we see nothing in the evidence to suggest that he could  not  in
    due course obtain employment  in  the  USA  which,  together  with  any
    financial support from the children's mother and paternal grandparents,
    could provide opportunities for them to  visit  him  in  the  USA.   In
    addition, although not a substitute for direct contact, modern internet
    video platforms such as Skype and FaceTime (together with social  media
    sites) permits regular and frequent interactions -  including  face-to-
    face communications via the internet - on a regular and frequent basis.

98. As regards the appellant's private life, Judge Holder  did  not  accept
    that  there  were  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the  appellant's
    integration into the USA despite the fact that he had  spent,  at  that
    time, approximately 24 years outside the USA  in  this  country.   That
    finding is not challenged and we accept it.

99. In carrying out our assessment of proportionality, we must have  regard
    to the factors set out in Part 5A of the NIA Act 2002, in particular in
    a deportation case to those in s.117C.  We do so as follows.

100. First, the deportation of the appellant as a "foreign criminal"  is  in
    the public interest (s.117C(1)).

101. Secondly, the  more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  the  foreign
    criminal the greater the  public  interest  in  his  deportation.   The
    public interest is reflected in the well-known three facets, namely the
    seriousness of the offence, the expression of  society's  revulsion  at
    serial criminal offending;  and  in  deterring  those  from  committing
    serious offences, (see, e.g. OH (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  694).
    We  have  already  noted,  the  recent   case   law   emphasising   the
    "considerable weight" to be given to  the  public  interest  under  the
    statutory regime stated by Parliament in the 2007  Act  and  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

102. In this case, the appellant  was  convicted  of  a  number  of  serious
    sexual offences against young children who were friends of his youngest
    daughter.  He was sentenced to a period of  three  years'  imprisonment
    concurrently  on  each  account.   In  her  sentencing   remarks,   the
    sentencing judge had no  doubt  that  the  appellant  had  "created  an
    environment  in  which  [the  children]  felt  comfortable  with  you."
    Although the appellant had initially accepted when interviewed for  the
    PSR  that  he  had  a  sexual  interest  in  pre-pubescent  girls,   he
    subsequently denied that, but the sentencing judge accepted that he did
    have such a sexual interest.  The PSR stated that the appellant posed a
    "high risk of harm - sexual  assaults  of  pre-pubescent  girls".   The
    judge accepted  that  was  correct.   The  judge  considered  that  the
    appellant should undertake a treatment programme  which,  the  evidence
    before Judge Holder was, that he intended to participate  in  a  Thames
    Valley Sex Offender course in January 2015.  We were not  told  at  the
    hearing whether he had done so and were not shown any document relating
    to such a course.

103. The judge went on to require the appellant to sign  the  Sex  Offenders
    Register for life and disqualified him indefinitely  for  working  with
    children.  The judge also imposed a Sexual  Offences  Protection  Order
    which, in essence, prevented any unsupervised contact or  communication
    with any female under the age of 16 without the consent of that child's
    parents  or  guardian  who  had  full  knowledge  of  the   appellant's
    conviction and the local police protection unit had given its approval.



104. There is no doubt, in our judgment, that the appellant's offending  was
    very serious indeed.

105. Thirdly, s.117C(3) of the NIA Act 2002 states that, in the  case  of  a
    foreign criminal such as the appellant who has not been sentenced to  a
    period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  "the  public  interest
    requires  [that  individual's]  deportation  unless  Exception   1   or
    Exception 2 applies."

106. Exception 1  in  s.117C(4)  does  not  apply.   It  requires  that  the
    appellant has lived lawfully in the UK  for  most  of  his  life.   The
    appellant has not done so having only lived in the UK for 25 of the  55
    years of his life and, apart from initial leave as a  visitor,  he  was
    only granted ILR on 16 October 1995.   In  any  event,  Judge  Holder's
    finding, which has not been challenged, was that there were  not  "very
    significant obstacles" to the appellant's integration into the USA.

107. Likewise, Exception 2  in  s.117C(5)  cannot  apply  as,  although  the
    appellant has a "genuine and subsisting relationship" with each of  his
    (two) children under the age of 18,  as  we  have  already  found,  the
    effect of his deportation  would  not  be  "unduly  harsh"  upon  them.
    Whilst it would be unduly harsh for them to go to the USA to  live,  it
    would not be unduly harsh for them to remain in the  UK  following  the
    appellant's deportation.

108. Fourthly, we must also  have  regard  to  any  relevant  factors  under
    s.117B.  We note that the maintenance of effective immigration  control
    is in the public interest.  We also note  that  it  is  in  the  public
    interest that an individual  speaks  English  as  does  the  appellant.
    Likewise,  it  is  in  the  public  interest  that  an  individual   is
    financially independent.  We accept that, in due course, the  appellant
    will be employed if he remained in the UK as, indeed  we  have  already
    found, he will in all likelihood, on return to the USA.  We accept that
    the appellant's private life has been, at least largely, established at
    a time when his immigration status was  not  precarious  following  the
    grant of ILR in October 1995.

109. In truth, the circumstance relied upon by the appellant in this  appeal
    to demonstrate "very compelling circumstances" do not  rise  "over  and
    above" those described in para 399(a), namely that it would  be  unduly
    harsh upon his children for him to be deported or para 399A namely that
    there would be "very significant obstacles to his integration" into the
    USA.  The substance of the appellant's claim is, in  effect,  that  his
    circumstances fall within either para 399(a) or 399A.  As Judge  Holder
    found in relation to the latter and we find in relation to the  former,
    the appellant cannot succeed under either of those provisions.

110. Given  the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's  offending,  taking  into
    account all the circumstances  we  have  set  out  above,  we  are  not
    satisfied that there are "very compelling circumstances over and above"
    those in para 399(a) and para 399A such as to outweigh the  significant
    and considerable weight which must be given to the public  interest  in
    this appeal.

111. Thus, we are satisfied  that  any  interference  with  the  appellant's
    private and family life is proportionate on the basis that  it  is  not
    established that there are "very compelling circumstances" to  outweigh
    the public interest.

112. The appellant has failed to establish a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

113. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellant's
   appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an error of law.  We set  aside
   that decision.

114. We remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal  under  Art  8
   of the ECHR.



                                                                      Signed



                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.


                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

