
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of Mureed Hussain) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department FCJR [2013] UKUT 00438 (IAC)


|Heard at Field House                 |Judgment sent               |
|On 13 June 2013                      |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                      The QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF
                               mureed hussain)

                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the applicant:     Ms C. Hulse, instructed by Duncan Moghal, solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr Z. Malik, instructed by Treasury Solicitor

                                  JUDGMENT


1. The applicant challenges as Wednesbury unreasonable  the  decisions  made
   by the respondent on 7 September 2012 and 2 April 2013 refusing to  treat
   the applicant's submissions of 22 January 2011 and 23 November 2011 as  a
   fresh claim within the meaning of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.




The claim under H1025235

2. The applicant, born on 1 January 1960, is said to  have  arrived  in  the
   United Kingdom on 21 March 2000 avoiding immigration controls. He claimed
   asylum on 23 March 2000. This was refused on 21 January 2002. He appealed
   the respondent's decision on 11 February 2002. Just over a year later, on
   25 February 2003, his solicitors withdrew the appeal before it was to  be
   determined by an Immigration Judge. These proceedings were  conducted  by
   the Home Office under  reference  H1025235.  For  the  purposes  of  this
   application, the applicant bore the name Qari Murid Hussain.

3. The decision letter refers to the fact that the basis of the  applicant's
   application for asylum was fear of persecution from  the  authorities  in
   Pakistan because the applicant had registered an FIR against persons  who
   had murdered his cousin and because he did  not  vote  for  the  Pakistan
   Peoples Party candidate in the 1997 elections.

4. In refusing the application, the Secretary of  State  accepted  that  the
   applicant may have been arrested by the police as a result of allegations
   made against him but that the authorities  were  obliged  to  investigate
   those accusations and the applicant  had  never  been  charged  with  any
   offence,  a  result  which  would  have  occurred  had  the   authorities
   considered the applicant was of  any  adverse  interest.  The  respondent
   claimed that, had this been the case, the applicant would have been tried
   in a lawful process to determine his guilt. These reasons  were  provided
   to support the respondent's reasoning that the applicant was not at  risk
   of serious harm.

5. On its face, this was a lawful refusal of the asylum  claim  for  reasons
   which, as a result  of  the  proceedings  which  were  initiated  by  the
   applicant as a challenge to  it  but  were  withdrawn,  have  never  been
   successfully set aside.

The claim under H1022661

6. Had the applicant's immigration history ended there, it would  have  been
   largely uneventful.  We can only speculate  about  why  the  Home  Office
   created a further file.  This  bore  the  Home  Office  reference  number
   H1022661. For the purposes of this application  the  applicant  bore  the
   name Qari Mardi Hussain.  This applicant was born 1 January 1966,  not  1
   January 1960 as in the other claim.  This resulted in the preparation  of
   a second refusal letter dated 25 June 2004. I shall refer to this as  the
   second claim but there is no definitive evidence that  this  claim  post-
   dated the other.


7.   A synoptic view of the two claims reveals they are the same.

|H1025235                        |H1022661                        |
|Fear of persecution from the    |The applicant was a member of   |
|authorities in Pakistan because |Jamiat Ul-Maih whose cousin had |
|the applicant had registered an |been killed by four people who  |
|FIR against persons who had     |were connected with the local   |
|murdered his cousin and because |political leader but their      |
|he did not vote for the Pakistan|cases, although taken to court, |
|Peoples Party candidate in the  |were dismissed following bribery|
|1997 elections. Those seeking   |of court officials. The         |
|revenge against him had used    |applicant campaigned against    |
|their power to influence the    |this injustice but those        |
|Pakistani police. After the 1997|involved attempted to force him |
|elections, he had been arrested |to vote for the Pakistan        |
|on 10 or 12 occasions and beaten|People's party as a result of   |
|and threatened. False           |which regular false complaints  |
|allegations had been made       |were made against him.  He was  |
|against him. When he had sought |arrested and detained between 10|
|a passport, his application had |and 12 times and that, during   |
|been refused and he had been    |the course of detention he was  |
|told a reward was being offered |threatened but not beaten. When |
|for his arrest.                 |the applicant tried to obtain a |
|                                |passport, he was told there was |
|                                |a reward offered for his arrest.|
|                                |                                |


8. Had the applicant relied on  the  second  claim  as  being  significantly
   different in that the material in support of it had not  been  considered
   in the first claim, it would have been open to  the  applicant  to  argue
   this was a conventional fresh claim.  However,  there  is  no  suggestion
   that the applicant seeks a determination on the substance of  this  claim
   in the judicial review proceedings.  Not by the  widest  possible  margin
   can the second claim be construed as a fresh asylum claim on the basis of
   facts falling within the ambit of paragraph 353.

9. It was not suggested by either party that the  claims  were  inconsistent
   with each other.  They have striking similarities albeit the details  are
   different. I would not regard these skeletal versions of the  two  claims
   as inconsistent or, indeed, significantly different and  the  differences
   between the two accounts appear no more than details given in one account
   but omitted from the other.  As the second claim was  the  same  as  that
   advanced under reference H1025235, it was disposed of in the first set of
   proceedings.

10. I was invited by Ms Hulse to treat the creation of  two  claims  as  the
   fault of the Home Office who muddled a single claim into two and put some
   evidence into one file and other evidence into another thereby  depriving
   the applicant of having his claim decided on all the evidence rather than
   on part.  This criticism has a hollow ring upon it when  the  two  claims
   are made under different names (albeit  retaining  common  features)  and
   where the applicants have different dates of birth.  I cannot infer  that
   the creation of two files was the respondent's fault.  I am unable to say
   whether  the  two  files  contained  different  material;  for   example,
   different interviews or supporting information.

11. I would not infer that the withdrawal of the asylum claim  in  2003  was
   an acknowledgment that the application should proceed on the basis of the
   second file.  If the respondent had thought  that  it  was  an  error  to
   maintain two  files  on  the  same  application,  it  would  be  for  the
   respondent to amalgamate the two, not for the applicant to  withdraw  his
   appeal in one without obtaining the approval of the respondent so  as  to
   avoid his withdrawal  being  misconstrued  or  having  relevant  material
   omitted from consideration.  Further, had the remaining appeal  been  the
   vehicle by which the applicant intended to  establish  his  right  to  be
   acknowledged as a refugee, I would have expected the  applicant  to  have
   pursued it, all the more so since there remained a lawful decision on the
   part of the Secretary of State that the applicant  had  not  successfully
   challenged.  If the two claims were,  indeed,  the  same  but  each  file
   contained different parts of the evidence, the withdrawal of one  of  the
   claims without preserving the evidence from it had  obvious  difficulties
   for the applicant.  If the applicant's representative  intended  to  have
   both files treated as a single claim, the more obvious course was for the
   two files to be treated as a single claim (just as the two files are  now
   being dealt with in tandem).

12. Notwithstanding the meagre basis for doing so, the  applicant  seeks  to
   assert that he has an outstanding claim for asylum which  the  respondent
   has failed to determine, notwithstanding it was made  some  time  between
   his arrival in March 2000 and June 2004.   He  relies,  however,  whether
   through opportunism or conviction, on a letter dated 14 October  2008  in
   which the H1022661 Home Office file (the second claim) was treated  as  a
   legacy claim being dealt with  by  the  Casework  Resolution  Directorate
   (CRD).   The  letter  goes  on  to  ask  the  applicant  to  complete   a
   questionnaire.

13. Ms Hulse portrays the applicant as  a  genuine  asylum  seeker  who  has
   waited for a decision for over 10 years and who waits to prove he  is  at
   risk of persecution.  By contrast, the Secretary of State regards him  as
   an individual who has abused the system of immigration  control  for  his
   own ends.

The nature of the claim and the Tribunal's jurisdiction to deal with it

14. At  this  stage,  it  becomes  necessary  to  take  stock  of  what  the
   applicant's case is or might be.  In their letter of  23  November  2011,
   following up one of 23 January 2011, the applicant's solicitors wrote  to
   the Further Submissions Unit  of  the  Home  Office  asserting  that  the
   applicant had since his arrival on  21  March  2000  established  such  a
   strong connection to the United Kingdom that his  removal  would  violate
   his human rights. Those submissions were answered by  the  respondent  in
   her letters of 11 November 2011 and 7 September 2012.  These  submissions
   were a classic application of paragraph 353 in that  the  development  of
   the applicant's private life since the appeal was withdrawn in  2003  was
   different from that originally considered by the  respondent.  The  issue
   was whether they created a realistic prospect of success before a  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge.


15. The application was transferred  by  the  Administrative  Court  to  the
   Upper Tribunal as a fresh claim under paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration
   Rules.  The Rule provides:

      When a human rights or asylum claim has been refused  and  any  appeal
      relating to that claim is no longer pending, the decision  maker  will
      consider any further submissions and, if rejected, will then determine
      whether they amount to a fresh claim. The submissions will amount to a
      fresh claim if they are significantly different from the material that
      has  previously  been  considered.  These  submissions  will  only  be
      significantly different if the content:
           (i) has not already been considered; and
           (ii) taken together with  the  previously  considered  material,
           created a realistic prospect  of  success,  notwithstanding  its
           rejection.

16. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is limited in scope to  that  contained
   in the Lord Chief Justice's direction  identifying  the  class  of  cases
   specified for the purposes of s.18  (6)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
   Enforcement Act 2007.  Cases so identified are:


      Applications calling into question the decision of  the  Secretary  of
      State not to treat submissions as an  asylum  claim  or  human  rights
      within the meaning of Part  5  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 wholly or partly  on  the  basis  that  they  are  not
      significantly  different  from  material  that  has  previously   been
      considered.


   An application also falls within the class specified if it challenges


      (i) a decision or decisions to remove (or direct the removal  of)  the
      applicant from the United Kingdom; or
      (ii) a failure or failures  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
      decision on submissions sent to support  an  asylum  or  human  rights
      claim;
      or both (i) and (ii); but not if it challenges any other decision.

17. Since there has been an appeal to  the  Tribunal  in  the  form  of  the
   appeal made by the applicant under Home  Office  reference  H1025235  and
   since that appeal was withdrawn by the applicant before it was determined
   by the AIT and is no longer pending, the  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to
   consider whether submissions amount to a fresh claim.

18. The Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction if it challenges a failure  to  make
   a decision on submissions sent to support an asylum or human rights claim
   but not 'any other decision'.

19.  In  the  pre-action  protocol  letter  dated  14  September  2012,  the
   applicant's solicitors whilst repeating the human rights submission, also
   asserted that, as the applicant was recorded  as  an  absconder  from  11
   September 2003, and the refusal letter is dated  25  June  2004,  'it  is
   unclear how and where the refusal was served'.  This  would  suggest  the
   applicant's solicitors were asserting that if an  overstayer  managed  to
   avoid service by moving address and failing to notify  the  Secretary  of
   State of the change as he is required to do, he might  benefit  from  the
   rights that would have  accrued  to  him  had  he  received  the  refusal
   decision and then appealed against it as well as from the delay  that  he
   himself causes.  Both propositions only need to be stated to  demonstrate
   their emptiness. Neither of these contentions has any validity.

20. Although at the outset of the hearing, Mr Malik,  acting  on  behalf  of
   the Secretary of State, conceded that there was no evidence of service of
   the 2004 asylum decision, having reconsidered the papers over  the  short
   adjournment, he withdrew that concession. Mr Malik points  out  that  the
   requirements  of  the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations   2003   Rules
   permitted service in a number of ways, including where a document is

      7(1)(c) sent by  postal  service  in  which  delivery  or  receipt  is
      recorded to:-
           i) an address provided for correspondence by the person  or  his
              representative; or
          ii) where no address for correspondence has been provided by  the
              person, the last-known or usual place of abode  or  place  of
              business of the person or his representative

21. He points out that, at pages 40 to 50 of the applicant's  bundle,  there
   are copies of file entries in relation to  the  second  claim  (H1022661)
   which deal with dispatch actions taken on 28 August 2004. At page 42, the
   applicant is named and an address provided. There is attached to the form
   a recorded delivery label indicating that  documents  were  sent  to  the
   applicant so named at the address provided. This is satisfactory evidence
   that these documents were served in  accordance  with  reg.  7(1)(c).  It
   seems proper to infer that the envelope was sent to the address given and
   that this address had been provided by the applicant; at least  the  fact
   that the August 2004 documents were sent out is prima facie evidence that
   this was the address on the file.   Whilst it is possible that  this  was
   not the correct address or that the person who sent it made a mistake  or
   misdirected  it,  it  seems  more  likely  than  not   that   there   was
   correspondence sent to the applicant in August 2004  which  included  the
   IS151A - the notice to a person liable to removal as an illegal entry and
   the IS151B - the notice of immigration decision.  This would tie in  with
   the refusal letter of 25 June 2004. The applicant has not  asserted  that
   he had notified the respondent of another address prior to  the  date  of
   posting.

22. The grounds of challenge conflate the reasons for refusal  letter  dated
   June 2004 and the underlying immigration decision which I have  not  seen
   but which is shown to have been served on 28 August 2004 and which is the
   appealable decision.  (The refusal letter  itself  carries  no  right  of
   appeal.) Nevertheless, the point is  clear.  The  applicant  alleges  the
   respondent had a duty to make a decision and failed to  do  so  and  this
   gives rise to a claim for judicial review. It  is  not  argued  that  the
   failure is to be treated as a facet of the Article 8 claim.

23. It is more likely than  not  that  the  respondent  served  the  refusal
   letter of 25 June 2004 and this  disposed  of  whatever  claim  was  then
   outstanding.  Unless the June letter had been sent, there would not  have
   been the process adopted on 28 August 2004 to take  steps  requiring  the
   applicant to leave.  That said, it is the 28 August 2004 material that is
   relevant since this included  the  immigration  decision.   The  evidence
   persuasively establishes that the applicant has no outstanding  decision,
   notwithstanding the respondent's letter of 14  October  2008  made  under
   reference H1022661 in which the UK Border  Agency  spoke  of  the  legacy
   programme and indicated that the applicant's claim fell within it.

24. The respondent, with some justification,  approaches  the  case  in  the
   alternative.  She asserts that, whether or not,  the  second  letter  was
   served on the applicant, a lawful decision had already been made  on  the
   same claim and he had no right to receive a second.  If  the  process  by
   which two separate files were created was  an  administrative  error  for
   which the respondent was wholly to  blame,  that  does  not  entitle  the
   applicant to receive a decision under each of the two files.  In essence,
   the respondent asserts that the applicant had one asylum claim which  was
   the one determined in the proceedings that were withdrawn.   That must be
   correct.

25. The applicant does not contend he notified the  Secretary  of  State  of
   any change of address sufficient to enable  the  Secretary  of  State  to
   effect  actual  service  upon  him.   As  I  have  set  out  above,   the
   overwhelming evidence is that he was properly served.  Nevertheless,  the
   applicant repeats in the grounds that, unless the respondent was able  to
   show the decision was served, it  remains  outstanding.  The  applicant's
   skeleton argument contains expanded grounds of  challenge  which  include
   seeking a mandatory order requiring the respondent 'to  serve  and  issue
   her decision dated 25 June 2004 with a right of appeal'.

26. Needless to say, the applicant is indifferent to receiving the  contents
   of this letter which he has had in his possession since it  was  supplied
   to him when he sought the contents of  the  files  kept  on  him  by  the
   respondent. Similarly, he already knows what the decision will  be.   His
   original purpose on having it served on  him  was  so  that  the  further
   immigration decision would give rise to a further right  of  appeal  with
   its concomitant right to remain pending its outcome.


27. Thus far, the claim for judicial review falls squarely within  the  type
   of claim that is capable of transfer to  the  Upper  Tribunal  since  the
   judicial review challenges


      (ii) a failure...by the Secretary of State to make a decision on
      submissions sent to support an asylum or human rights claim.;

The emergence of a Hakemi claim

28.  The pre-action protocol  letter  continues  in  paragraph  7  with  the
   assertion that the respondent had failed to consider the case of Hakemi &
   Ors v SSHD [2012] EWHC 1967.  This  is  the  first  time  this  point  is
   raised, as far as I am aware.  It  is  set  in  the  context  of  various
   allegations amounting to violations of the applicant's human  rights  and
   it appears to arise in the context of Article 8 and the  contention  that
   there is an outstanding human rights decision, rather  than  as  a  free-
   standing point.  The details are sparse and confined to these words:

      "The...case...dealt with the length of residence before  an  applicant
      was being granted leave under the legacy  cases  was  also  considered
      (sic).  The SSHD was applying a policy of  6  years  residence  before
      awarding leave.  Accordingly  we  note  that  the  Claimant  has  been
      resident in the United Kingdom for a period exceeding 12 years and has
      established a family life."


29. The reference to family life might appear to suggest it is  advanced  as
   an element of an Article 8 claim.  There are two  clear  errors  in  this
   passage.  First,  the  reference  to  Hakemi  principles  is  a  woefully
   inadequate summary of  the  relevant  principles  and  is  simply  wrong.
   Second, there has never been a viable claim that the applicant's 12 years
   in the United Kingdom have established  a  family  life,  rather  than  a
   private life.

30. The same point is made in the grounds of  application,  (paragraph  14).
   Furthermore, in the applicant's skeleton argument at paragraph 5 Ms Hulse
   puts the Hakemi claim in these terms:

      The Claimant challenges the Defendant's failure to grant him leave  to
      remain in accordance with Article 8 and with her own Legacy policy  as
      set out in the  Home  Office  Enforcement  Guidance  and  Instructions
      regarding cases of overstayers and others  subject  to  administrative
      removal.

31. Once again I find  it  difficult  to  construe  this  passage  in  which
   Article 8 and Hakemi principles are conjoined as doing anything more than
   placing  Hakemi  principles  as  part  and  parcel  of  the   Article   8
   consideration.

32. What appears to be an artificial and semantic distinction  is,  however,
   of some significance because it goes to the jurisdiction of the  Tribunal
   to deal with applications for judicial review.  In its simplest form, the
   claimant relying on Hakemi principles  asserts  he  has  a  right  to  be
   granted leave to remain under paragraph 395C of  the  former  Immigration
   Rules if his case falls to be decided as a legacy  of  unresolved  cases,
   decisions in respect of which have  been  delayed  by  the  Secretary  of
   State's own inaction.  The failure to make  a  decision  (or  to  make  a
   decision in favour of the claimant) may give rise to a right to leave  to
   remain under paragraph 395C but in circumstances  where  treatment  might
   well have been more favourable.  That is a claim that falls  outside  the
   Lord Chief Justice's direction  because  it  alleges  a  failure  by  the
   Secretary of State to make a decision on submissions which are  not  said
   to support an  asylum  or  human  rights  claim  but  challenges  another
   decision.

33. If, however, the Hakemi principles are raised  simply  as  part  of  the
   proportionality balance, there is no reason why it should  not  be  dealt
   with by the Upper Tribunal.

34. Ms Hulse did not advance her case on the basis that the  Upper  Tribunal
   lacked jurisdiction to decide the application for judicial review or that
   the application for judicial review should be  transferred  back  to  the
   Administrative Court as falling outside the scope of the Upper Tribunal's
   judicial review jurisdiction.  Mr Malik did not urge me to do so for  the
   sake of judicial propriety.  I therefore construed the applicant's  claim
   as an Article 8 claim in which the public interest in favour  of  removal
   was lessened or removed by reason of the applicant's underlying rights to
   have been entitled to receive leave to remain.

Resolution of the Hakemi point

35. Thus, I cannot avoid addressing the Hakemi point.  In  Hakemi  &  Ors  v
   SSHD, Burton J was considering the fact that by the end  of  2006,  there
   was  a  massive  and  unmanageable   backlog   of   asylum/human   rights
   applications,  by  which  the  Home  Office  was   overwhelmed.   500,000
   outstanding applications received prior to 5 March 2007 were  transferred
   to the Casework Resolution Directorate ("CRD") which endeavoured to grant
   or refuse leave to remain by July 2011. By July 2011 there was a rump  of
   some 116,000 cases, consisting in part of 18,000 still active  cases  and
   in a "controlled archive" of some 98,500 cases. The active cases and  the
   controlled archive were transferred, in July 2011, to  a  new  body,  who
   were to resolve them.   The  legacy  process,  over  its  five  years  of
   operation, resulted in considerably more grants than refusals  but  there
   was no amnesty.

36. The CRD was to consider the  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Immigration
   Rules but by reference to paragraph 395C.  Chapter 53 of the  Enforcement
   Instructions and Guidance ("EIG") was at all material times the published
   guidance as to 'relevant factors' in paragraph 395C  of  the  Immigration
   Rules.  The EIG drew a clear distinction between the accrual of  time  in
   the United Kingdom which was attributable  to  the  applicant  and  those
   periods which were caused by the Secretary of State. In non-family  cases
   where delay by UKBA had contributed to a significant period of residence,
   a period of residence of 6-8 years normally warranted  leave  to  remain.
   This developed into practice or policy, "all things being equal", that  6
   years' residence would result in a grant of leave, and this  practice  or
   policy was said to amount to a change or an alteration of  a  substantive
   criterion for leave to remain.  Burton J found that there was  no  change
   in Rule 395C, but simply discussion  and  guidance  in  relation  to  the
   factors to be taken into account, always subject to a holistic  approach.
   There was no such thing as a legacy policy.   Rather,  the  legacy  cases
   were a process by which guidance was offered to  case-owners  as  to  the
   implementation of the Immigration Rules  and,  in  particular,  paragraph
   395C.

37. The difficulty faced by Ms Hulse is that the legacy policy arose in  the
   context of a removal which was  itself  subject  to  a  consideration  of
   paragraph 395C and the duty to take into  account  all  relevant  factors
   including the Enforcement Instructions.   Paragraph  395C,  however,  was
   deleted from the respondent's policy by a change in the Immigration Rules
   introduced on 13 February 2012 by HC 1733.  The  decision  challenged  in
   the proceedings for judicial review is a decision  made  on  7  September
   2012.  It is clear that the Secretary of State is entitled to change  her
   policies and apply those changed policies to  decisions  made  after  the
   changes were introduced, notwithstanding the fact that, at  the  date  of
   application, the applicant met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
   then in force, Odelola v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 308 (10 April 2008).

38. Further, the Court of Appeal roundly rejected the  contention  that,  in
   such circumstances, the Secretary of State had a  duty  to  consult  with
   applicants prejudiced by the changes, R (on the  application  of  Rahman,
   Abbassi and Munir) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 814.The decision of  the  Court
   of Appeal was found to be 'plainly correct' in the words of Lord Dyson in
   the Supreme Court, a conclusion  with  which  the  other  Judges  of  the
   Supreme Court agreed, (Munir & Anor, R (on the  application  of)  v  SSHD
   [2012] UKSC 32). It is the inevitable consequence of these decisions that
   the applicant has no claim to be entitled to the benefit  of  the  legacy
   policy, even if there was an outstanding decision (which there was  not).



Recent decisions upon the Hakemi  jurisdiction  -  DM,  Re  Judicial  Review
[2013] ScotCS CSOH 114

39. Since I heard the appeal, further  decisions  have  been  made  shedding
   light on Hakemi principles in the context of a claim for judicial review.
   In DM, Re Judicial Review [2013] ScotCS  CSOH  114  (9  July  2013)  Lord
   Doherty considered the case of a petitioner who had come  to  the  United
   Kingdom in 1998 and claimed asylum. His asylum claim was refused;  on  15
   December 2000 he became appeal rights exhausted.  In the meantime he  had
   married a British citizen in August 1998 and  on  12  December  2001  was
   granted leave to remain for one year on  account  of  his  marriage.  The
   marriage collapsed.  The petitioner made no further application for leave
   to remain when his leave expired  on  12  December  2002.  He  became  an
   overstayer. He did not contact the authorities until  29  May  2009  when
   solicitors wrote applying for  discretionary  leave  on  the  basis  that
   removing him would breach his Article 8 ECHR right to  private  life  and
   that he had a right "to have his case considered/reconsidered in light of
   the policy as announced by the Secretary of State in July 2006 in respect
   of case resolution".

40. The Secretary of State did not reach  a  decision  on  the  petitioner's
   representations of 29 May 2009 until 14  November  2011.  Having  made  a
   decision in accordance with the factors contained in paragraph 395C,  the
   Secretary of State rejected the petitioner's claim for  leave  to  remain
   and concluded  removal  was  proportionate.  On  appeal,  the  First-tier
   Tribunal allowed his appeal, resulting in the grant on 31 August 2012  of
   discretionary (not indefinite) leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
   until 30 August 2015.

41. It was said that the  29  May  2009  representations  should  have  been
   answered by 19 July 2011, but were not responded  to  until  14  November
   2011 and the decision to refuse to grant the petitioner Indefinite  Leave
   to Remain was unlawful.  It was submitted on the petitioner's behalf that
   the various statements amounted to a promise that legacy  cases  such  as
   the petitioner's would be decided within five years of 25 July 2006; that
   there had been a  practice  that  persons  granted  leave  to  remain  on
   paragraph 395C considerations were granted Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain;
   that the promise had given rise to  a  legitimate  expectation  that  the
   petitioner's case would be decided within that period which, had it been,
   would have resulted in the grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain.

42. Lord Doherty was not persuaded that any of the  statements  relied  upon
   by the petitioner constituted a promise that all legacy  cases  would  be
   dealt with within five  years  of  25  July  2006.  The  statements  were
   aspirational  only:  a  clear  declaration  of  an  objective,  and   the
   expression of determination to achieve it.  However, it was not, and  was
   not intended to be, a binding undertaking to those with legacy claims.

43. The petitioner therefore failed to establish that  prior  to  July  2011
   there was a practice of granting Indefinite Leave to Remain in rule  395C
   cases which was so unambiguous, so widespread, so well-established and so
   well-recognised as to carry a commitment to  legacy  claimants  that  its
   continuance was assured and that  their  cases  would  be  determined  in
   accordance with it.  From 20 July 2011 the clear policy in rule 395C non-
   removal cases was to grant discretionary leave to remain for up to  three
   years.  But, even if on 24 July 2011 the respondent had decided  on  rule
   395C grounds not to remove the petitioner, he would not have been granted
   Indefinite Leave to Remain.  Further, there was no obligation  to  decide
   legacy cases in accordance with the law, policy and practice  applied  by
   the CRD when it was operational nor  was  there  a  commitment  that  its
   continuance was assured and cases would  be  determined  by  CRD  or  the
   respondent in accordance with it.

44. There is nothing within the decision in DM that provides  the  applicant
   with any purchase in his claim for judicial review.  Rather  the  reverse
   in that it demonstrates the limitations that exist upon applications  for
   judicial review advanced on the basis that the  Secretary  of  State  was
   required to make a decision and (a) was required to make a decision at  a
   particular time and/or (b) in a manner that was consistent with  historic
   policies that were no longer applicable.

Okonkwo (legacy/Hakemi; health claim) [2013] UKUT 00401 (IAC)

45. In Okonkwo (legacy/Hakemi; health claim) [2013] UKUT 00401 heard  on  23
   July 2013, the President and Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson decided that

      i) It may be unfair for the Secretary of State to fail to  apply   the
      terms of a policy to a case that fell within the terms of  the  policy
      when it was in existence: Hakemi and others [2012] EWHC 1967  (Admin),
      and Mohammed [2012] EWHC 3091 Admin  considered.


      ii)  Chapter 53 of the EIG Instructions  as in force December 2011 did
      not mean that any adult who had lawfully resided in  the  UK  for  six
      years had an expectation of discretionary  leave  to  remain  applying
      former rule 395 C together with the policy then in force.

46. In August 2011 the appellant and her husband applied  for  discretionary
   leave to remain outside the Rules. They relied on the  length  of  lawful
   residence of Mrs Okonkwo (over five years) and  the  fact  that  she  had
   received a kidney transplant in the United Kingdom and  the  consequences
   that removal would have upon her health.  There was a prompt reply to the
   application made on 29 September 2011 in which  the  Secretary  of  State
   refused the application  for  an  extension  of  stay.  Her  counsel,  Mr
   Medhurst, argued that a consideration of rule 395C would have had to take
   into account EIG Chapter 53 as in force on 8 December 2011. The  decision
   of the Administrative Court in Mohammed [2012] EWHC 3091 Admin made plain
   that a failure to apply those  instructions  to  a  decision  where  they
   should previously have been applied  could  make  a  subsequent  decision
   conspicuously unfair, and those instructions required in the normal  case
   that  a  person  who  had  been  resident  for  six  years  to  be  given
   discretionary leave to remain.

47. The proper meaning of the instructions in EIG Chapter 53 was central  to
   this submission but the panel concluded  Mr  Medhurst  had  misunderstood
   them. By the time the case came before the Judge, it was clear that  that
   no lawful removal  decision  had  yet  been  made  and  despite  previous
   regrettable uncertainty in the law, there was no obligation  in  law  for
   the Secretary of State to make decisions to remove at the same time as  a
   decision to refuse leave to remain.

48. Further 53.1.2 of the EIG referred to 'Residence accrued as a result  of
   delay by UKBA' and that they were  created  partly  in  response  to  the
   decisions of the higher courts that delay by the Home  Office  can  be  a
   significant  factor  in  the  assessment  of   whether   removal   is   a
   proportionate interference with human rights. Reliance  was  placed  upon
   the words, 'Any other case where delay  by  UKBA  has  contributed  to  a
   significant period of residence...4-6 years may  be  significant,  but  a
   more usual example would be a period of 6-8 years'.  It was  argued  that
   the appellant has been here for six years and there  had  been  delay  in
   making a decision on her  case  between  August  2011  and  October  2012
   thereby entitling her to qualify  for  exceptional  leave  on  length  of
   residence alone.

49. The panel disagreed.  Mrs Okonkwo's residence until August 2011 was  not
   because of any delay by the Home Office, but was  a  consequence  of  the
   progress of her studies and the post-study work experience  rule.   There
   was no delay by the Home Office in  any  decision  making  following  the
   August 2011 application. There was a prompt refusal in September 2011 and
   following appeal further decisions in March 2012 and October  2012  based
   on assertions of contentious issues of law. The factual predicate for the
   operation of the policy did not exist.

50. The proper meaning of the EIG was that, in the case of  adults  with  no
   children, residence of between four to  eight  years  may  be  considered
   significant but that was residence following an initial assessment of the
   prospect of removal. Removal was only considered in  September  2011  and
   decisions to remove were made in March 2012 and October  2012  against  a
   background of appeals and the clarification of a  complex  area  of  law.
   Thus, there was no delay of two, three  or  four  years,  that  were  the
   relevant periods needed under the instructions.

51. Although it is always a relevant factor, pure length of residence  alone
   has never been a decisive consideration in immigration  decision  making.
   Accordingly, the centre piece of the applicant's claim to unfairness fell
   away.

R (ex p. Julius Labinda Che) [2013] EWHC 2220

52. In R (on the application of Julius Labinda  Che)  v  SSHD   [2013]  EWHC
   2220 (Admin) (26 July 2013) Mr C M G  Ockelton,  Vice  President  of  the
   Upper Tribunal (sitting as a Deputy  High  Court  Judge)  considered  the
   application for judicial review of a person whose asylum claim  had  been
   refused in a letter dated 17 October 2006. On 30 March 2007 the Secretary
   of State made a decision to give directions for his removal as an illegal
   entrant. On 12 June 2007 his appeal against that decision was  heard  and
   dismissed principally because the claimant's claim was  disbelieved.  His
   appeal rights were exhausted on 23 November 2007. He had  never  had  any
   leave to be in this country, and did not depart after  the  dismissal  of
   his asylum claim. In 2009 his  representative  made  further  submissions
   enlarged on 19 March 2010 which the defendant answered by a  decision  of
   19 April 2011.   The  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  the  further
   submissions were not significantly different from the material which  has
   previously been considered and did not amount  to  a  fresh  claim.   The
   claimant was told he had no basis of  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
   should make arrangements to leave the United Kingdom without delay.

53. A letter dated 31 July 2011 was crucial to the claimant's case.   In  it
   the Secretary of State told the claimant's representative that, in  March
   2011, the UK Border Agency had  completed  its  internal  review  of  all
   outstanding legacy cases and that the claimant's case had  been  reviewed
   but no final decision had yet been made.

54. The claim for judicial review alleged a failure  both  to  consider  the
   claimant's case under the legacy  policy  and  a  failure  to  grant  the
   claimant leave to remain.  It was  said  that  the  defendant  unlawfully
   delayed in making a decision: the  letter  of  31  July  2011  created  a
   legitimate expectation that a decision would be made shortly and  it  was
   unreasonable for the defendant to delay making the  decision.   Secondly,
   the delay had a substantial adverse effect. The evidence of the  policies
   and practices of those making legacy decisions in the period  soon  after
   31 July 2011 suggested that if a decision had been made at that  time  it
   would have been a grant of leave. (The argument  that the  decision  made
   on 30 May 2012 was inadequately reasoned and failed to take into  account
   the submissions that have been made about the  claimant's  situation  was
   roundly rejected).

55. Mr Ockelton said the creation  of  the  CRD  was  for  the  purposes  of
   review, and in order to divide those who were  entitled  to  remain  from
   those who ought to be  removed.   Further,  the  policies  and  practices
   applied to the decision of individual cases were no different from  those
   which would be applied to any other cases that shared the same facts.  In
   the group of those who waited for a long time for a decision following  a
   claim for asylum, it could properly be said that it was the Secretary  of
   State's own inactivity that had enabled them to develop a  personal  life
   in the United Kingdom and to build up relationships  here.  Even  in  the
   case of those whose appeal rights were exhausted,  the  general  lack  of
   enforcement enabled such situations to develop, even if they  should  not
   have been allowed to do so. The inclusion of a case within  the  'legacy'
   gave no additional expectation of a grant of leave.

56. In those cases  in  which  the  claimant  complained  that  he  had  not
   received a 'legacy  decision'  granting  him  leave  to  remain,  it  was
   conventionally argued, amongst other things, that the  claimant  had  not
   had a 'legacy decision' and was therefore still awaiting one which,  with
   luck, would be  a decision granting leave.

57. Mr Ockelton decided that it was 'wholly unarguable' in  cases  in  which
   the claimant has had a notification that he was not to be  granted  leave
   but was to be removed, that he had not  had  a  decision  in  this  case.
   Although he was not a person who has yet actually been removed, his  case
   has been reviewed, he had  had  his  legacy  decision,  and  the  removal
   process, which had to start with such a notification, had begun.  Such  a
   person was not therefore awaiting a decision which  the  judicial  review
   proceedings were said to be seeking: decision-makers had completed  their
   task and only those charged with arranging the mechanics of  removal  had
   any further work to do on his  case.  The  claimant  had  no  perceptible
   entitlement  to  another  decision.   He  had  made  no   further   valid
   submissions and none was outstanding.

58. Nor did he have a legitimate expectation derived from the letter  of  31
   July 2011 since such an  expectation  arose  from  a  promise  which  was
   'clear, unambiguous, and devoid of relevant qualification'. In  order  to
   assess this, it was necessary to look to see what, on a fair  reading  of
   what was said, was reasonably to be understood by the person to whom  the
   words were expressed. Reliance on any promise was not essential,  but  if
   there has been reliance, that would be relevant in  deciding  whether  it
   was open to the authority to go back on the promise which would be one of
   the factors to bear in mind when deciding whether a change of policy or a
   revocation or abandonment of the promise could be justified in the public
   interest.

59. Whist the 31 July 2011 letter on its face did  amount  to  a  clear  and
   unequivocal representation that the claim was outstanding, the assessment
   of any expectation legitimately arising from the letter had to be made in
   the context of the recipient's knowledge. The claimant and his solicitors
   knew perfectly well that all the outstanding submissions  that  had  been
   validly made had been dealt with in the decision of 19 April  2011.  They
   knew that, contrary to what had been said in the letter,  the  claimant's
   case was not one in which the Secretary of State had  not  been  able  to
   come  to  a  final  decision.  The  decision  had   been   reached,   and
   communicated; all that was awaited was removal.  Mr Ockelton continued:

           40. Nothing to which the claimant has pointed indicates that the
           legacy programme involved any system of repeated review of cases
           in which no further (valid) submissions had  been  made.  It  is
           thus somewhat difficult to understand what it is said  that  the
           claimant's expectation was. It cannot have been that there would
           be a new decision based on submissions made after 19 April 2011,
           because no submissions had been validly made after that date.

60. His claim for judicial review fell to be dismissed.

61. Having reviewed these decisions, there can therefore be no viable  claim
   that the applicant in the application before me is permitted  to  advance
   before the Upper Tribunal that this right should be an element  within  a
   fresh claim that removal would violate his human rights.

The respondent's approach to the fresh Article 8 claim

62. The basis for the decision made by the respondent on  7  September  2012
   that the appeal could not  succeed  on  Article  8  grounds  because  the
   applicant did not meet the requirement within the Rules that he had  been
   present in the United Kingdom for  20  years  was,  no  doubt,  a  lawful
   decision under paragraph 276ADE (iii) of  the  Rules  but  it  failed  to
   engage with the 'pure' Article 8 claim arising by operation of s.6 of the
   Human Rights Act, 1998.  The two separate claims were identified  by  the
   Tribunal in MF (Article 8 - New Rules) Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT  393  (IAC).
   Had the respondent's decision-making process ended  there,  it  may  well
   have been open to the Upper Tribunal to  decide  that  the  decision  was
   legally flawed by reason of a failure to apply s.6.

63. This demonstrates the existence of a  principle  available  in  judicial
   review proceedings which is an extension of principles identified in SSHD
   v Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148 and more recently considered by the Tribunal  in
   Ukus  (discretion:  when  reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT  00307(IAC)  where  a
   decision is made that is not in accordance  with  the  law.   If  in  the
   course of judicial review  proceedings  the  decision-making  process  is
   found by the Upper Tribunal to be flawed, it must say so and require  the
   respondent to make a fresh and lawful  decision.   It  forms  a  discrete
   enquiry in the Upper Tribunal's judicial review proceedings.

64. This principle, however, has no application in the present case  because
   the respondent, foreseeing that the original decision did not engage with
   Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  supplemented  her  earlier
   decision with a decision made on 2 April 2013 which, when taken together,
   fully engages in Article 8 issues both within and outside the Rules.

The substance of the human rights claim

65. The fundamental elements of the applicant's submissions in  relation  to
   his human rights claim were that, since  entry  on  21  March  2000,  the
   applicant had established a very strong connection to the United  Kingdom
   and had fully integrated within society, a connection  which  had  become
   progressively stronger over the  years.  The  claimant  asserted  he  was
   living a productive and active life within his community  and  the  wider
   community and, if removed, would find it impossible to  reintegrate  into
   Pakistani society and would be unable to lead a life in any  way  similar
   to that which he has developed here. This productive and active life,  so
   the applicant said, was a great achievement and its  continuation  was  a
   right protected under Article 8. The nature of the private life  that  he
   had built up consisted of strong and close  bonds  with  individuals  and
   families which went far beyond mere friendship.  The  applicant  regarded
   himself as part of the fabric of British society and  living  a  life  in
   accordance  with  Western  norms.  This  arose  because  of  his   active
   membership of the Islamic community to which he contributed significantly
   in teaching Islam and Arabic to Muslims in the South  Wales  and  Bristol
   region. He was highly respected within the community and his service  was
   successful and valuable. It included a  major  role  in  setting  up  and
   ensuring the success of the  Quran  Academy  of  Wales.  It  is  said  he
   contributes most of his time teaching the Quran to adults and children on
   a voluntary basis, greatly benefiting the community. Indeed, his teaching
   extends beyond Wales and Bristol.

66. This  account  of  the  applicant's  activities  was  not  substantially
   challenged by the respondent in her decision. Indeed,  she  identified  a
   large number of individuals from the Muslim community who  supported  the
   application.

67.  However, in a letter of  2  April  2013,  the  respondent  recorded  in
   paragraph 20 that the applicant had provided no evidence in support of  a
   family life in the United Kingdom. Indeed, the applicant has a  wife  and
   children in Pakistan to whom he could  return  and  with  whom  he  could
   resume his family life.  Family ties in Pakistan continue to exist.

68. Whilst accepting that the applicant's assertions to have been an  active
   member of the Muslim community and to have contributed  significantly  to
   it, the respondent noted that the applicant was an  illegal  entrant  and
   that his removal would be lawful in principle subject  to  the  issue  of
   proportionality. It was accepted that the  applicant  had  established  a
   private life in the United Kingdom simply because of the length  of  time
   he had spent here and his connection with the Muslim community.  However,
   the respondent considered that the skills developed by the  applicant  in
   the United Kingdom were readily transferable to Pakistan where  he  could
   maintain the same levels of enjoyment amongst the Muslim community  there
   (whilst maintaining his links with the Muslim  community  in  the  United
   Kingdom which would not be wholly lost). This is unarguably correct.   In
   particular, the respondent took  into  account  the  public  interest  in
   assessing the proportionality of  the  applicant's  removal.  The  letter
   continues,

    30. It is considered that  your  client's  immigration  history  weighs
        heavily in favour of his removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.  Your
        client arrived in the United Kingdom  in  March  2000  having  used
        documentary deception in the form of a Pakistan passport in another
        identity to gain entry into the UK. He failed  to  co-operate  with
        the asylum  decision-making  process  and  additionally  failed  to
        comply with reporting restrictions  for  a  significant  period  of
        seven years. He made further submissions and filed  an  application
        for judicial review in order to frustrate his lawful  removal  from
        the United Kingdom. It  is  considered  that  he  has  deliberately
        breached United Kingdom's Immigration Law and therefore  there  are
        strong policy reasons to insist on his removal.
    31. The Secretary of State  is  entitled  to  weigh  up  the  following
        factors against your client in assessing proportionality:
                . his poor immigration history
                . his failure to comply with asylum processes, without good
                  reason
                .  his  failure  to  put  forward  a  compelling  case  for
                  international protection
                . his blatant disregard for the Immigration  Rules,  having
                  absconded for over seven years

69.  The  applicant  himself  may  well  disagree  with   the   respondent's
   assessment of him. However, it was an assessment that the respondent  was
   entitled to make on the material before her. In addition, the  respondent
   considered the applicant's medical condition. On the basis of  this,  and
   having  herself  rejected  the  applicant's  further   submissions,   the
   respondent concluded that there was  no  realistic  prospect  that  those
   submissions would, when taken together with all the previously considered
   material, lead a First-tier Tribunal Judge, applying the rule of  anxious
   scrutiny, to decide that the applicant should be allowed to stay  in  the
   United Kingdom due to a real risk that his human rights would be breached
   by a return to Pakistan.  It  was  on  this  basis  that  the  respondent
   concluded that the applicant's submissions did  not  amount  to  a  fresh
   claim under paragraph 353.

70. In approaching the application  in  this  way,  it  is  clear  that  the
   respondent considered the terms of  paragraph  353  and  did  so  in  the
   context of the judicial gloss placed upon them  by  the  decision  in  WM
   (DRC) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1495.

71. I am satisfied that the Secretary of State  adopted  the  correct  legal
   approach to her task and reached a  decision  which  cannot  properly  be
   classified as Wednesbury unreasonable. The respondent's decision to  that
   effect that there is no  real  prospect  of  the  applicant  establishing
   before a First-tier Tribunal Judge that his human rights claim,  assessed
   today, would result in the grant of leave  to  remain  as  removal  would
   violate his human rights,  was not perverse or  irrational  or  otherwise
   unlawful.


DECISION

The application for judicial review is dismissed.
The applicant has 7 days from service of the judgment upon him to  file  and
serve reasons  why  he  should  not  pay  the  respondent's  costs  and  the
respondent is, within 7 days thereafter, to file and serve her response.

Costs will then be  determined  on  the  papers  not  earlier  than  7  days
thereafter.








                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
