

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Iqbal (Para 322 Immigration Rules) [2015] UKUT 00434 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle Building, Glasgow              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 May 2015                                |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                        Upper Tribunal Judge MacLeman


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NAVEED IQBAL
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr Sharma of Matthew Coen and Associates Limited



   i)     The effect of the words "are to be refused" in  paragraph  322  of
      the Immigration Rules is to render refusal  of  leave  to  remain  the
      United Kingdom obligatory in cases where any  of  the  listed  grounds
      arises.  The decision maker has no discretion.

  ii)     The doctrine of substantive legitimate expectations is a  nuanced,
      sophisticated one which should not be prayed in  aid  without  careful
      reflection.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 19 March 2015, whereby  the  application  of  the  Respondent,  a
    national of Pakistan aged 36 years,  for  variation  of  his  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom was refused.

 2. The factual matrix is both uncomplicated and uncontentious.   In  brief
    compass, between April 2007 and October 2013  the  Respondent  was  the
    beneficiary of three successive grants of leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom as the spouse of a United Kingdom national. On 13 October  2011
    he was granted limited leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    spouse for a period of two years.  The index decision was  precipitated
    by the Respondent's application for indefinite leave  to  remain  as  a
    work permit holder. The Secretary of  State's  decision  expresses  two
    reasons for refusing the application:

     a) as the Respondent had at no time had leave to enter or remain as  a
        work permit holder he failed to satisfy the conditions of paragraph
        134(i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) of  the  Immigration  Rules  (the
        "Rules"); and


     b) having regard to his conviction on 21 January 2014 of  the  offence
        of selling tobacco to a person aged under 18 years the  application
        was also refused under paragraph 322(1C)(iv) of the Rules.

Relevant Immigration Rules

 3. At this juncture it is convenient to set out the material provisions of
    the Rules.  The subject matter of Part 5 is "Persons seeking  to  enter
    or remain in the United Kingdom for employment".  This is  followed  by
    the separate heading "Work Permit Employment" and a series of  "general
    requirements".  Paragraph 134 is embraced by  the  heading  "Indefinite
    leave to remain for a work permit holder".  This prescribes a total  of
    eight requirements.  It is clear from the syntax and the  repeated  use
    of the conjunctive  "and"  that  all  of  these  requirements  must  be
    satisfied.  The text is as follows:

         "134  Indefinite leave to remain  may  be  granted  on  application
         provided the applicant:

                i) has spent a continuous period of 5 years lawfully in  the
                   UK, of which the most recent period must have been  spent
                   with leave as a work permit holder (under paragraphs  128
                   to 133 of these rules), and the  remainder  must  be  any
                   combination of leave as a work permit holder or leave  as
                   a highly skilled migrant (under paragraphs 135A  to  135F
                   of these rules) or leave as a self-employed lawyer (under
                   the concession that appeared  in  Chapter  6,  Section  1
                   Annex D of the Immigration Directorate Instructions),  or
                   leave as a writer, composer or artist  (under  paragraphs
                   232 to 237 of these rules);

               ii) has met the  requirements  of  paragraph  128(i)  to  (v)
                   throughout their leave as a work permit holder,  and  has
                   met the requirements of paragraph 135G(ii) throughout any
                   leave as a highly skilled migrant;

              iii) is still required for  the  employment  in  question,  as
                   certified by the employer; and

               iv)  provides  certification  from  the  employee  that   the
                   applicant is paid at or above the  appropriate  rate  for
                   the job as stated in the Codes of Practice in Appendix J,
                   or where the applicant  is  on  maternity,  paternity  or
                   adoption leave at the time of  the  application  and  not
                   being paid the appropriate  rate,  the  date  that  leave
                   started and that they were paid at the  appropriate  rate
                   immediately before the start of that leave.

                v) provides the specified documents in paragraph  134-SD  to
                   evidence  the  employer's  certification  in  sub-section
                   (iv),  and  the  reason  for  the  absences  set  out  in
                   paragraph 128A, and

               vi) has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  English
                   language and  sufficient  knowledge  about  life  in  the
                   United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL; and

              vii) does not fall for refusal under the general  grounds  for
                   refusal; and

             viii) must not be in the  UK  in  breach  of  immigration  laws
                   except that any period of overstaying for a period of  28
                   days or less will be disregarded.

 4. The subject matter of Part 8 of the Rules is  "Family  Members".   This
    provides for, inter alia, in paragraph 284, extending a  person's  stay
    as the spouse or civil partner of a person present and settled  in  the
    United Kingdom. The core requirements for a  successful  applicant  are
    that he must possess or have previously been granted limited  leave  to
    enter or remain in certain terms; be married to or the civil partner of
    a person present and settled in the United Kingdom; have  not  remained
    in breach of the immigration laws, disregarding any overstaying  period
    of 28 days or less; intend to live permanently with the  other  partner
    (and vice versa); and have adequate accommodation and  the  ability  to
    maintain themselves and  any  dependents  without  recourse  to  public
    funds.

 5. The third discrete code within the Rules which falls to  be  considered
    is the division within Part 9 which, inter alia, governs the refusal of
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  In the context of  this  appeal
    the relevant provision is paragraph 322,  which  provides  in  material
    part:

         "In addition to the grounds for refusal of extension  of  stay  set
         out in Parts 2 - 8 of these Rules, the following  provisions  apply
         in relation to the refusal of an application for leave  to  remain,
         variation of leave to remain or, where appropriate, the curtailment
         of leave.  Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of  leave
         to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused [are the
         following]: ........


         (1C) .....................


         (iv) they have, within the 24 months prior to the date on which the
             application is decided,  been  convicted  of  or  admitted  an
             offence for which they have received a non-custodial  sentence
             or other out of court  disposal  that  is  recorded  on  their
             criminal record."

Decision of the FtT

 6. Following  receipt  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  and  the
    customary  "one  stop  warning"  notice  under  section  120   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  "2002  Act")  the
    response was made that the Respondent was also seeking an extension  of
    his leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a spouse. He further  made
    a case under Article 8 ECHR.  In its determination, the FtT noted  that
    the hearing of the appeal had previously been adjourned to  afford  the
    Secretary of State  the opportunity to reconsider  the  matter  in  the
    light  of  the  Respondent's  section  120  response.   However,   such
    reconsideration had  not  materialised.   It  was  represented  to  the
    Tribunal that the application for leave to  remain  as  a  work  permit
    holder had been made in error.  In allowing the appeal, the  FtT  found
    that all of the requirements specified in paragraph 284  of  the  Rules
    were satisfied.  Thus, it concluded, the Appellant was entitled  to  an
    extension of his leave to remain as the spouse of a person present  and
    settled in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Judge  further  reasoned  that
    paragraph 322(1C) was applicable only in the  context  of  the  refusal
    decision under paragraph 134 and did  not  apply  to  the  Respondent's
    further,  free  standing  application  under  paragraph  284  and   the
    determination thereof. Therein lies the nub of the grant of  permission
    to appeal to this Tribunal.


    Our Decision

 7. At the stage of the Respondent's appeal to the FtT,  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse him indefinite leave to  remain  as  a  work
    permit holder was no  longer  under  challenge.   Rather,  through  the
    mechanism of the section 120 notice, the FtT  was  required  to  decide
    whether the Respondent was entitled to an extension  of  his  leave  to
    remain as a spouse, under paragraph 284 of the Rules. The FtT proceeded
    to decide in the Respondent's favour.  The  main  question  arising  is
    whether the Tribunal erred in its assessment that paragraph 322(1C)  of
    the Rules did not apply.

 8. As noted above, paragraph 322 is contained in Part 9 of the Rules.   We
    consider that by virtue of its opening words - "In addition  to"  -  it
    supplements the grounds  for  refusal  of  extension  set  out  in  the
    preceding Parts 2 - 8 of the Rules.  It operates in  every  case  where
    there is an application for leave to remain or variation  of  leave  to
    enter or remain.  It is also operative in the context of curtailment of
    leave decisions.  We further consider that the effect of the words "are
    to be refused" is to deprive  the  decision  maker  of  any  choice  or
    discretion.  If any of the seven grounds in the menu which  follows  is
    applicable and is duly established, the application  must  be  refused.
    The decision maker is thus mandated.  This  construction  of  paragraph
    322(1C) is fortified by contrasting  the  language  used  in  paragraph
    322(2) - (11) and paragraph 323.  In  the  former  discrete  code,  the
    terms used are:

         "Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave  to  enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused."

    We have highlighted the last four words since, in  our  judgment,  they
    differ sharply from the injunction in paragraph  322(1C)  contained  in
    the words "are to be refused".  A further contrast of note  arises  out
    of the heading of paragraph 323 of the Rules:


         "Grounds on which leave to enter or remain may be curtailed."

    In each of the two contrasting contexts highlighted, we  consider  that
    the decision maker has a discretion.   By  well  established  principle
    this discretion is to be exercised taking  into  account  all  material
    facts and considerations, disregarding  anything  that  is  immaterial,
    avoiding any fetter of discretion and having regard to  the  underlying
    purpose.

 9.  It follows from the analysis above that the FtT, in our judgment, fell
    into error.  Paragraph 322 was engaged as the Respondent was seeking  a
    variation of his extant leave to remain.  The  variation  being  sought
    was an extension.  The effect of this was to trigger the provisions  of
    paragraph 322(1C).  There is no dispute about the conviction upon which
    the Secretary of State's decision was based in part.  The final element
    of the analysis is that given  the  mandatory  nature  of  the  refusal
    ground thereby engaged, the Respondent's application had to be refused.
     The Judge erred in law in his assessment that  paragraph  322(1C)  was
    not engaged.

10. The FtT conducted an alternative analysis and conclusion.   This  arose
    out of the second ground contained  in  the  Respondent's  section  120
    Notice, which maintained, in the briefest of terms, that the Respondent
    was entitled to leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  family  life
    grounds.    The  FtT  construed  this  as  an  application  under   the
    provisions of S-LTR and  highlighted  specifically  paragraph  EX.1(b).
    The Judge noted that there  had  been  no  formal  application  to  the
    Secretary of State under Appendix FM. The Judge  twice  refers  to  the
    "legitimate expectation" of the Respondent and his spouse of continuing
    family and private life in the United Kingdom.   He  also  adverted  to
    section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act and Article 8 ECHR.  While it is  clear
    from [36] that he purported to allow the appeal under Article  8  ECHR,
    having regard to [32] of the Determination and the opening sentence  of
    [35] it is far from clear whether the  Judge  purported  to  allow  the
    appeal under the Rules also.

11. We consider that the  Judge's  "legitimate  expectation"  reasoning  is
    erroneous in law.  In the field of immigration, a person's expectations
    are shaped primarily by the relevant legal rules. These  are  contained
    in primary legislation and the Immigration Rules.   These  are  replete
    with a mixture of hard  edged  rules  and  discretionary  powers.   The
    correct  analysis,  in  our  judgment,  is  that   the   "applications"
    formulated in the Respondent's section 120 Notice did not, as a  matter
    of law, engage  or  engender  the  substantive  legitimate  expectation
    identified by the Judge. The governing principles in this  sphere  were
    rehearsed recently by this Tribunal in Mehmood (Legitimate Expectation)
    [2014] UKUT 00469, at [13] - [16].  This Tribunal stated, in [15]:

         "The two basic ingredients of what the law has come to recognise as
         a substantive legitimate expectation are satisfied where  there  is
         an unambiguous promise or assurance by a public official  in  which
         the affected citizen reposes trust."

    We  consider  that  the  legal  rules  under  which  the   Respondent's
    applications were to be considered do not have  these  characteristics.
    The doctrine of  substantive  legitimate  expectations  is  a  nuanced,
    sophisticated one which should not be prayed  in  aid  without  careful
    reflexion.   In  the  present  case,  its  invocation   constitutes   a
    misdirection in law.

12. The further infirmities in the alternative analysis and  conclusion  of
    the FtT are the absence of any detailed  examination  of  the  relevant
    provisions of Appendix FM and the lack of analysis of section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act.

DECISION

13. For the reasons elaborated above the decision of the FtT  must  be  set
    aside.  Given the nature of the failings which we  have  identified  we
    consider  remittal  to  a  differently  constituted  FtT  to   be   the
    appropriate course.

14. We add the following observation.  By virtue of the section 120  Notice
    compiled on behalf of the Respondent when pursuing his initial  appeal,
    the FtT found itself in the position of primary decision  maker.   This
    is unsatisfactory.  This  consideration  presumably  explains  why  the
    first listing of the appeal was vacated, when  a  "reconsideration"  by
    the  Secretary  of  State  was  promised.   Regrettably,  it  did   not
    materialise.  This unsatisfactory course of events  was  stimulated  by
    what was acknowledged as  an  erroneous  original  application  to  the
    Secretary of State under paragraph 284 of the Rules.   The  Respondent,
    ever since, has been pursuing his case under  different  provisions  of
    the Rules and Article 8 ECHR. It would  make  manifest  sense  for  the
    parties to agree that the Respondent should, at this stage,  supplement
    and complete his undetermined application  made  via  the  section  120
    mechanism, with a view to the Secretary of State determining  same  and
    rendering the remittal moot.




                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                           Date: 30 May 2015
