
       [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       Moneke (EEA - OFMs - assessment of evidence) Nigeria [2011] UKUT
00430 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 October 2011                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                              TONIA OBY MONEKE
                          FIDELIS CHUKWUALOKA MONEKE

                                   Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent

Representation

For the Appellants:     Ms R Akther, instructed by Time and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This determination should be read in  conjunction  with  Moneke  and  others
(EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00341 (IAC).

In  determining  appeals  regarding  OFM  applications  made   in   country,
Immigration  Judges  should  scrutinise  with  some  care   the   supporting
evidence,  in  order  to  satisfy  themselves  that  the  burden  of   proof
demonstrating eligibility has been discharged.

In the present case, the Upper Tribunal was not satisfied  by  the  evidence
because:

   a) There were substantial gaps in the evidence produced by the appellants
      despite the opportunity afforded to submit  further  material  in  the
      light of our previous decision.


   b) The appellants produced  no  documentary  evidence  to  support  their
      claims: (i) to have been provided  with  financial  support  by  their
      sponsor to meet their essential living needs when the sponsor  was  in
      Germany or before that  in  Nigeria;  (ii)  that  they  lived  in  the
      sponsor's  household   in   Nigeria;   (iii)   that   they   were   in
      apprenticeships with nil earnings  in  Nigeria;  (iv)  the  amount  of
      material support they needed to meet their essential living needs.

   c) The oral evidence was implausible as to material parts and  flawed  by
      inconsistencies.

   d) Both appellants misrepresented their intentions when seeking to  enter
      as visitors.


             DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. On 22 August 2011 we gave our decision and reasons for  setting  aside
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal of  both
      appellants. We directed that we proposed to re-make them after hearing
      evidence. A bundle of material was submitted on  12  September.  On  5
      October, we heard the evidence of both appellants  and  their  sponsor
      Anselem Egboh and heard submissions from Ms Akther and Mr. Melvyn.


   2. At the outset of the hearing a short clip of material was submitted by
      Mr Melvyn of an entry clearance application made by  Tonia  Moneke  in
      2006.  We considered an objection by Ms Akther that it was too late to
      receive this material but, having given her  an  opportunity  to  take
      instructions upon it, we concluded that it was relevant to the  issues
      in the case, and since it consisted of what Tonia Moneke had  said  in
      2006 in support of her application it should not  have  taken  her  by
      surprise, she was in a position to comment on it in cross examination,
      and accordingly could be relied upon.


   3. It is common ground in  the  light  of  the  issues  examined  at  the
      previous hearing, that the burden lies on both appellants  to  satisfy
      us on the balance of probabilities that they qualify for consideration
      as other family members ("OFMs") of their cousin Anselem Egboh  within
      the terms of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
      ("the Regulations") as amended and as we have interpreted them in  the
      light of the Citizens Directive  2004/28/EC  ("the  Directive")  which
      they seek to implement.

   4. It is now established to our satisfaction that Mr. Egboh left  Nigeria
      for Germany in 1997. In October 2002 he obtained  German  citizenship,
      apparently by virtue  of  marriage  to  a  German  national,  and  has
      subsequently exercised Treaty rights as such as an EU citizen  in  the
      United Kingdom. We are prepared to assume that Mr. Egboh is the cousin
      of both appellants as claimed, he being the  son  of  the  appellants'
      mother's brother. He is, therefore, a relative of the appellants;  the
      question is  whether  they  have  satisfied  us  that  they  were  his
      dependants or members of his household.


   5. The appellants advance their case on the principal basis that they are
      dependants of Mr. Egboh within the meaning of  the  Regulations.   The
      case they present is as follows.  The  appellants  and  their  parents
      came from the north of Nigeria and had  a  family  home  at  Nnewi  in
      Anambra state.  The appellants' father owned land and also a  business
      specialising in motor vehicle parts in that area.  All  parties  state
      that in about 1974 when he was aged seven, Mr. Egboh came to live with
      the appellants' family at Nnewi.  He subsequently came to work  as  an
      apprentice in the appellants' father's motors spares business  and  in
      about 1990 when the father was beginning to become unwell he sold  the
      business and donated the proceeds to Mr. Egboh  who  started  his  own
      business.  Mr. Egboh then moved to Lagos, Nigeria and rented  property
      at 6 Ola-Ogsin Street, Ebzite-Metta (West), Lagos until 2006  when  it
      was surrendered to the landlord.  The appellants state  that  in  1993
      when they were aged approximately 17 and  15  respectively  they  both
      moved to Mr. Egboh's rented premises in Lagos and stayed  there  until
      they came to the United Kingdom.  They state that  from  1993  onwards
      Mr. Egboh paid for the premises in which they lived, supported them at
      school and through apprenticeships that both entered into. He was  the
      only or dominant contributor to their essential living needs  and  has
      continued to provide for them in the United Kingdom. Accordingly  they
      both qualify as dependants.


   6. In any event, they qualify as members of Mr. Egboh's household,  since
      they were physically present in the household belonging to  Mr.  Egboh
      for the critical period from October  2002  when  he  became  a  Union
      Citizen until the entry of the appellants into the United Kingdom.


   7. In opposition to this appeal the respondent submits as follows:-


                  i)   The appellants and the sponsor  are  unreliable  and
                     untruthful witnesses.
                 ii)   There is  a  complete  absence  of  any  documentary
                     support for the central assertion of fact relating  to
                     dependency and membership of the  household  and  that
                     absence   is   particularly   surprising   given   the
                     Tribunal's directions following its earlier ruling  as
                     to what needed to be established in this case.
                iii)    There is no reliable evidence  as  to  when  either
                     appellant  entered   the   United   Kingdom   or   the
                     circumstances in which they did so but if each entered
                     as a visitor as they claim then it is apparent that at
                     the time of entry they had no intention  of  returning
                     to Nigeria and such entry was  therefore  obtained  by
                     fraud, irrespective of the subsequent  breach  of  the
                     conditions  of  their  entry  by   remaining   without
                     authority. Such conduct  both  taints  reliability  of
                     their unsupported oral  testimony  and  in  any  event
                     gives  rise  to   discretionary   refusal   of   their
                     application under regulation 17 even if (which is  not
                     admitted)  they  qualified  as  other  family  members
                     (OFMs).
                 iv)    The appellants' account of what they were doing  in
                     Nigeria  before  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom   is
                     inherently implausible.
                  v)    Tonia Moneke's account is directly contradicted  by
                     what  she  stated  were  her  circumstances  when  she
                     applied for visitor entry clearance in April 2006.
                 vi)    There  are  significant  discrepancies  of   detail
                     between the appellants  and  between  them  and  their
                     sponsor.
                vii)     Overall  this  evidence  should  be  rejected   as
                     unreliable and the appellants have  not  substantiated
                     on the balance of probabilities that they qualify  for
                     admission as OFMs.
               viii)    If, contrary to the above,  it  is  concluded  that
                     they  have,  the  case  should  be  remitted  to   the
                     Secretary of State to consider  the  exercise  of  the
                     regulation 17(4) discretion  in  the  light  of  their
                     immigration history.

   8. We can indicate at the outset of this determination that in the  light
      of  our  assessment  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole  we  accept   the
      respondent's submissions.  We are not satisfied  that  the  appellants
      have established on the balance of probabilities that they were either
      the dependents or members of the household of Mr. Egboh prior to their
      arrival in the United Kingdom.   We  accordingly  dismiss  the  appeal
      without remitting it  to  the  respondent  for  consideration  of  the
      exercise of discretion under regulation 17. We now  give  our  reasons
      for doing so.


   9. First, we have examined the witness statements on which the appellants
      rely in the light of the previous witness statements and the record of
      evidence submitted to a First-tier Tribunal. A striking feature of the
      material taken as a whole,  but  more  particularly  the  most  recent
      material, is that there is a complete absence of detail of  the  level
      of support that Mr. Egboh is said to have provided to the  appellants,
      the amount of the rent or other description of the living arrangements
      at the house in Lagos in which they are alleged to have  lived.  There
      is no information about the nature  and  duration  of  the  respective
      apprenticeships that the appellants are alleged to have undertaken  in
      Lagos with a textile worker and electrical firm  respectively.   There
      is no detail as to how much the appellants needed to live on,  whether
      any other family members supported them and  scant  information  about
      how the sponsor sent money from Germany, how often and what for.

  10. We accept that the appellants come from the  north  of  Nigeria.  They
      produced some photographs from 1973/4 of themselves and Mr.  Egboh  as
      children apparently in that area of Nigeria. We  have  no  details  of
      their  education  there  or  standard  of  living.  We   consider   it
      implausible that they would have both relocated to Lagos in 1993 at  a
      young age given that both their parents remained alive at  that  time.
      We accept that the appellants' father died in 2004 of heart disease at
      the age of 69. We do not accept that the appellants were  living  away
      from their family home for 11 years before that event. In his  witness
      statement  the  sponsor  seems  to  indicate  that  he  promised   the
      appellants' father that he would look after them  shortly  before  his
      death but the oral account was that he had done so since 1993. We have
      seen no evidence of a business in Nigeria from 1990 to 1997 that would
      have enabled him to do so, bank statements or anything else by way  of
      support.


  11. Tonia Moneke says that her schooling in Lagos  was  paid  for  by  the
      sponsor. Her claim is that she was still undertaking her West  African
      Educational Certificates (WECA the equivalent of 'O'  Level)  in  June
      2004 when she was aged 29. She has  not  explained  why  she  did  not
      complete this educational stage many years  before.    She  says  that
      during this time she was trained as an apprentice  in  making  clothes
      and textiles with a lady who had a shop in the front of the  apartment
      building that she  occupied  in  Lagos.   She  had  to  pay  for  this
      privilege and she did not receive any wages for it.  She has  produced
      no evidence from this lady and was apparently in  this  apprenticeship
      from October 2002 until she came to the United Kingdom in April  2006.
      It appears to us improbable that a family whose father owned  a  motor
      spares business and land in the north of Nigeria, and who had a cousin
      who was earning money as a well paid production line worker in Germany
      from 1997 would have devoted themselves at all or for so long to  such
      unrewarding activity as she described.

  12. Fidelis Moneke says equally that he was engaged from 1999 to  2005  in
      an apprenticeship at Lagos with an electrical retail goods company  as
      a trainee.  He  says  he  was  not  paid  whilst  undergoing  such  an
      apprenticeship, obtained no  formal  or  informal  qualifications  and
      produced no supporting evidence of any sort of  the  identity  of  the
      company  and  the  period  of  apprenticeship.  He  says  he  was  not
      interested in motor spares that was  his  father's  and  his  cousin's
      business in Nigeria respectively. Again  we  consider  it  implausible
      that a family who had the resources this  one  did  and  the  apparent
      ability to access the wages of a cousin working in Germany would  have
      spent so long in such unrewarding activity.


  13. In Tonia's case the implausible and unsupported account is  undermined
      by her entry clearance application. In the application form which  she
      signed she stated that she was a self-employed  businesswoman  at  the
      address given in Lagos since May 2002.  She describes her business  as
      buying and selling textiles. She now seeks to explain those statements
      on the basis that whilst an unpaid apprentice  to  the  lady  clothing
      worker previously described, she  used to buy  some  textiles  in  the
      market for  turning  into  clothes  and  made  a  modest  profit,  not
      sufficient  to  live  on  when  doing  so.  We  do  not  accept   that
      explanation. She either had a substantial degree of  self  sufficiency
      in Nigeria before coming to this country, or she has lied in her entry
      clearance application.

  14. There are other curiosities arising from her application. She gave her
      permanent home address as an address as 22 Road House, 5 Kado  Estate,
      Abuja. Her correspondence address she indicated should  be  the  same.
      She told us, however, that this was not her  permanent  home  but  the
      address of a cousin that she used for correspondence purposes  as  her
      Lagos address was unreliable in respect of mail delivery. She did  not
      say this in her application form when  the  form  asked  two  separate
      questions. It seems to us improbable that if she was indeed living and
      trading in Lagos she would have  left  communication  on  a  important
      matter to her cousin in Abuja. If she had concerns about  security  in
      Lagos she could have used a post office box in Lagos. Mr.  Egboh  told
      us at one point in his evidence that he used such a post office box in
      Lagos.

  15. The sponsor identified in Ms. Moneke's application form was a  claimed
      uncle, a Mr. Durie, who lived in Barnet.  She  was  thus  not  relying
      upon her cousin Mr. Egboh to support her in her proposed  studies.  By
      inference Mr. Egboh was not in the United Kingdom in 2006. We have not
      heard from Mr. Durie in any form although the appellant accepted  that
      he knew all about her family background in Nigeria.   The  appellant's
      entry clearance application was refused and  on  review  in  September
      2006 the ECO was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  presented
      original documentation as to her  college  and  academic  record.  The
      appellant claims that she  had  sent  original  documentation  to  the
      agency that she was required to use to handle the visa application and
      she assumes that they had not passed on  such  material  to  the  High
      Commission. We do not accept that explanation of the lack of  original
      documents noted by the reviewing officer.


  16. Tonia Moneke had told us that she had visited the United Kingdom  with
      a valid entry clearance in 2003 and came again in 2006 at a time  when
      her student entry clearance was outstanding.   Her  Nigerian  passport
      throughout this period is not available for examination.   She  states
      that she lost it in 2006 or 2007.  The loss was not  reported  to  the
      police and she did not apply for  a  new  one  to  the  Nigerian  High
      Commission until 2008. Having regard to the bureaucracy involved,  she
      did not see the need to do so until she  was  preparing  to  make  the
      present application.  It is alleged that the passport was lost when  a
      bag was stolen.  Her  indifference  to  the  loss  of  such  important
      documentation  for  a  foreign  national  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
      inherently unlikely.  Its improbability was enhanced when we  came  to
      learn from Fidelis Moneke's evidence that the  passport  on  which  he
      claims he entered the United Kingdom as a visitor  in  2005  was  also
      lost on the same occasion as it was in the same bag.  He again did not
      report the loss to the police and he apparently did not  consider  the
      matter significant enough to do so.


  17. Fidelis Moneke in answer to questions by the Tribunal  indicated  that
      before his sister arrived in the United Kingdom he had encouraged  her
      to come here permanently to reside with their  supportive  cousin  the
      sponsor, as he was then doing because he had nothing to go back to  in
      Nigeria.  Tonia Moneke denied the suggestion that she had no intention
      of returning to Nigeria  at  the  time  of  her  visit,  although  she
      accepted that the house in which she had claimed to be living in Lagos
      for the previous thirteen years had been handed over to  the  landlord
      before her departure for the United Kingdom and she would have nowhere
      to return to in Nigeria at the time of her entry.   We  are  satisfied
      that the proper inference from this evidence  is  that  Tonia  had  no
      intention of returning to  Nigeria  when  she  arrived  here  and  any
      representation made that she was only intending a  short  visit  would
      therefore have been false.


  18. There is a problem  of  chronology  between  the  evidence  of  Tonia,
      Fidelis and Mr. Egboh.  Fidelis says he came in 2005 on a  visit  visa
      and overstayed.  He overstayed because he had moved in with his cousin
      Mr. Egboh and that was a change of circumstance. He communicated  with
      his sister before she came in 2006.  Mr. Egboh told us that he did not
      arrive in the United Kingdom  until  2007.   He  said  that  both  his
      cousins were studying or continued being apprentices in Nigeria  until
      that time or shortly before. We have already observed  that  the  fact
      that Tonia did not use Mr. Egboh as a sponsor in her April 2006  entry
      clearance application is some indication that he was not in the United
      Kingdom then. We conclude that whenever they  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom, their presence here had no connection with Mr.  Egboh. It may
      be the case that they have been living with him since about  2008  but
      that would not suffice to make them either dependants  or  members  of
      his household within the Regulations for reasons we have given in  our
      earlier decision. They need  to  demonstrate  eligibility  as  an  OFM
      before arrival in the United Kingdom.


  19. There were further inconsistencies between them about  the  nature  of
      the premises in Lagos.  Tonia said that the  flat  that  she  and  her
      brother lived in was on the first floor with shop premises below;  the
      rent was 40,000 Naira in 2005  paid  annually  and  she  believed  the
      landlord's name was Tunde  Ajemobe.  Fidelis  was  present  when  this
      evidence was given and concurred but felt unable to make  an  estimate
      of how many other apartments there were in the building,  although  he
      said that his flat had three rooms. Mr. Egboh says the  premises  were
      on the ground floor with a shop in front of them. There were no  other
      apartments in the building. He  did  not  remember  the  name  of  his
      landlord although he had been renting the premises  for  some  sixteen
      years from him.  He agreed the rent was 40,000 Naira annually.


  20. Mr Egboh says that throughout his time in Germany he was providing  on
      average 200 Deutschmarks a month or, once  Germany  joined  the  Euro,
      some 150 to 180 Euros and these were sent through  a  friend  who  had
      provided a witness statement but had  not  previously  been  mentioned
      when the matter was before the First-tier Tribunal. The assessment  of
      these sums was made for the first time in  cross  examination  and  as
      already noted the previous witness statement was singularly absent  of
      any such details. Mr. Egboh states that he  used  to  return  annually
      from Germany to Lagos and did so each year in 2002, 2003,  2004,  2005
      and 2006.  When asked where he stayed he said that he did not  usually
      stay in the rented premises when he returned as they were occupied  by
      his cousins though he  visited  them  on  each  occasion.  When  asked
      similar questions, Tonia indicated that Mr. Egboh had visited in  2003
      and she thought again in 2005.


  21. The appellants and  sponsor  contend  that  the  explanation  for  the
      complete absence of any form of any supporting documentation for wages
      in Germany,  remittances  to  Nigeria,  payments  of  rent  in  Lagos,
      payments for  college  studies  in  Lagos,  certificates  of  academic
      achievement in Nigeria, evidence of businesses conducted  in  Nigeria,
      or evidence of apprenticeships of both appellants in  Nigeria  is  the
      African customary ways of doing things. We  do  not  accept  this.  We
      further do not accept Mr. Egboh's account that he lost  all  documents
      to do with his employment and businesses in Germany from 1997 to  2007
      when he left them with a friend who mislaid them. Even  in  a  society
      that may not record all financial transactions, material corroborating
      an account  of  an  extensive  social  history  by  way  of  receipts,
      evidence  of  occupation,  photograph  of  social  activities  in  the
      premises in Lagos and the like, as well as  statements  from  reliable
      informants might have reasonably been expected  where  the  burden  is
      upon the appellants to substantiate the claims they make and where the
      words of Article 10(2)(e) of the Directive contemplate  some  form  of
      official documentation supporting the relationship  be  available:  "a
      document    issued    by    the    relevant    authority    in     the
      country...certifying...".


  22. We have already explained in our previous decision why it is important
      that in OFM applications made in country,  Immigration  Judges  should
      scrutinise  with  some  care  the  existence  of  sufficient  reliable
      information to satisfy them that the burden of proof of  demonstrating
      eligibility has indeed been discharged. Such scrutiny is  particularly
      important where the inference from the immigration history is that the
      appellants are prepared to mislead, and misrepresent their  intentions
      to immigration officials.

  23. In summary, there were substantial gaps in the  evidence  produced  by
      the appellants despite the  opportunity  afforded  to  submit  further
      material in the light of  our  previous  decision.  They  produced  no
      documentary evidence  to  support  their  claims:  (i)  to  have  been
      provided with  financial  support  by  their  sponsor  to  meet  their
      essential living needs when the sponsor was in Germany or before  that
      in Nigeria; (ii)  that  they  lived  in  the  sponsor's  household  in
      Nigeria; (iii) that they were in apprenticeships with nil earnings  in
      Nigeria; (iv) of the amount of material support they  needed  to  meet
      their essential living needs.  Their oral evidence was implausible  as
      to material parts and flawed by inconsistencies. We conclude that both
      appellants misrepresented their intentions when seeking  to  enter  as
      visitors.

  24. We reach a different conclusion from the First-tier judge, because  he
      gave no detailed consideration to the elements the  appellants  needed
      to demonstrate in order to qualify as dependents, and did not have the
      benefit of seeing the account of the witnesses tested as we have  had.
      It  was  unfortunate  and  frankly  unacceptable  that  there  was  no
      Presenting Officer at the First-tier hearing and  there  had  been  no
      submission of material to challenge the appellants' account.  Whatever
      other call on scarce resources there may be,  it  is  of  considerable
      importance that disputed applications are properly tested and opposed.

  25. For all these reasons we are not satisfied with the evidence that  the
      appellants presented to us; they have not made out their case and this
      appeal is dismissed.




                           Signed




                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal,
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber

