
                     [pic]


Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

R (on the application of HN and Others) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department (JR - scope - evidence) IJR [2015] UKUT 00437 (IAC)



                                   Before

                The President, the Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

                                   Between


                       The Queen on the application of

                                 HN, SA, JG,
                                   FK & AB


                                                                  Applicants
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



   i) It is intrinsically undesirable that judicial  review  proceedings  be
      transacted in circumstances  where  material  evidence  on  which  the
      Applicants seek to  rely  has  not  been  considered  by  the  primary
      decision maker.


  ii)  There is a strong  general  prohibition  in  contemporary  litigation
      against rolling review  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  judicial  review
      proceedings. .

 iii) Where a  judicial  review  applicant  is  proposing  to  make  further
      representations to the Secretary of State  in  circumstances  where  a
      new  decision  will  forseeably  be  induced,  it  will  normally   be
      appropriate, to  refuse  permission  or  to  dismiss  the  application
      substantively on the ground that it will be rendered  moot  and/or  an
      alternative remedy remains unexhausted and/or  giving  effect  to  the
      prohibition against rolling review.

  iv) The  principles  rehearsed  above  are  to  be  similarly  applied  to
      applications for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.


   v) Where a draft judgment is circulated in advance of  handing  down  the
      function of parties and their representatives is confined to notifying
      mis-spellings,  formatting  defects,   inadvertent   factual   errors,
      ambiguities of expression and kindred blemishes: Edwards & Ors  R  (on
      the application of) v Environment Agency & Ors [2008] UKHL 22 applied


On this application for permission to apply for judicial review  and  having
conducted  a  "rolled  up"  hearing  and  following  consideration  of   the
documents lodged by the parties and having heard Ms S Naik, Mr  A  Bandegani
and Ms B Poynor, all of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis  Solicitors,  on
behalf of the Applicants and Ms M Glass and  Mr  N  Ostrowski,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department on behalf  of  the  Respondent
at  hearings at Field House, London on 10 March, 22 April and 08, 11 and  12
May 2015, followed by further written submissions initially completed on  05
June 2015 and ultimately completed on 06 July 2015.



                                  Judgment


 Delivered (in draft) on 17 June 2015. Final approved judgment dated 21 July
                                    2015.



McCloskey J

Introduction

This judgment,  to  which  both  members  of  the  panel  have  contributed,
consists of the following  chapters:


   I. These proceedings

  II. "Rolled Up" Order

 III.  Application to amend

  IV.  Tribunal Directions of 23 May 2015

   V. The Evidence

  VI. The Individual Applicants

 VII. The Issues

VIII. Conclusions

  IX. Order and Ancillary Issues








I.    THESE PROCEEDINGS

1.    The subject of removing Afghan nationals from the  United  Kingdom  to
      their home country, while not lacking novelty, has  gained  increasing
      prominence and exposure during the past few  months.   This  has  been
      stimulated by two flights arranged by the  United  Kingdom  government
      for  the  purpose  of  returning  unsuccessful  asylum  claimants   to
      Afghanistan.  These planned flights generated a flurry  of  litigation
      activity, giving rise to orders of both the Court of  Appeal  and  the
      Upper Tribunal  prohibiting  the  removal  of  certain  persons  until
      further order.

   1. The Applicants are five single male adults, of assorted ages,  ranging
      from 19 to 40 years, all nationals of Afghanistan.  They  bring  these
      proceedings against the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
      (the "Secretary of State") arising out of action taken by  the  latter
      to convey all of them by charter flight to  Afghanistan  on  10  March
      2015.  In the case of the fifth Applicant, AB, we  made  an  Order  on
      that date refusing to grant interim relief having  heard  Counsel  for
      the Applicant.  Later on the same date our Order was reversed  by  the
      Court of Appeal.


   2. The challenge brought by AB was one of 14 similar cases  initiated  on
      the same  day,  09  March  2015.   The  following  day,  a  further  7
      comparable challenges followed. All of these challenges  were  related
      to the repatriations to Afghanistan proposed to  be  effected  by  the
      Secretary of State's charter flight on 10 March 2015.   To  summarise,
      on this date:

        a) AB was granted interim relief by the Court of Appeal.


        b) The Upper Tribunal granted interim relief in 16 cases.


      (c)   The Administrative Court granted interim relief in 3 cases.


   3. The next material development was that the Secretary of State arranged
      a further charter flight to Afghanistan, scheduled  to  depart  on  21
      April 2015.   Removal directions were made accordingly.  This was  the
      stimulus for 21 new judicial  review  applications  in  which  interim
      relief was granted.  We took the view that the determination of  these
      applications had, in effect, been dictated by the  Court  of  Appeal's
      Order reversing our decision in AB's case on 10 March  2015.   Interim
      relief was, in consequence, granted  to  a  total  of  14  Applicants.
      Pausing, there were, altogether, 35 live cases, having much in  common
      with each other, at this stage.

   4. From  this  group  five  lead  cases,  including  that  of  the  fifth
      Applicant, AB, were selected. This was reflected in  a  consent  order
      dated 10 April 2015.  This mechanism was deployed in the interests  of
      orderly and efficient case management and with a view  to  inducing  a
      decision of the Tribunal designed to  encompass  all  members  of  the
      group. At that stage it was apparent that, broadly,

      there were two dominant issues in the proceedings,  namely  the  areas
      within Afghanistan to which the litigants were expected to  return  or
      to relocate and the individual characteristics of certain litigants.


   5. As a result of the subsequent withdrawal of four cases by consent, the
      current number of judicial review Applicants is 32. The  evolution  of
      these proceedings outlined above has resulted in the allocation of the
      Applicants to three Schedules.  These are the final Schedule  AB,  the
      consolidated Schedule C and Schedule D.  These Schedules are  appended
      to this judgment

   6. There are certain facts and factors common to all five Applicants:

        a) Each of them entered the United Kingdom unlawfully at  different
           times and claimed asylum unsuccessfully.


        b) The First-tier Tribunal  (the  "FtT")  dismissed  their  ensuing
           appeals.


        c)  Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was   refused
           subsequently.


        d) All of the Applicants are challenging decisions by the Secretary
           of State to remove them to Afghanistan.


        e) Following the initiation of these proceedings and the  grant  of
           interim relief at the first  of  the  two  stages  noted  above,
           namely on 10 March  2015,  further  representations  were  made,
           generating new decisions by the Secretary of State, in all  five
           lead cases, that these did not amount to  a  fresh  claim  under
           paragraph 353 of the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  fresh  impugned
           decisions"). The second to fifth Applicants received  successive
           fresh decisions, on 23 and  31  March/01  April  2015.   In  the
           particular case of the first Applicant, HN, the  decision  which
           he received at  this  stage  was  an  initial  decision.   These
           further decisions of 31 March and 01 April 2015  have  overtaken
           the earlier removal decisions and, following amendment, are  the
           revised target of the Applicants' current challenges.

        f) A singular feature  common  to  all  five  lead  cases  is  that
           following the fresh impugned decisions, during the  currency  of
           these proceedings, further evidence has been generated on behalf
           of all the Applicants and filed, in support  of  their  judicial
           review challenges. Further evidence was also assembled and filed
           on behalf of the Secretary  of  State.   We  shall  examine  the
           significance and implications of these developments infra.

   7. The most recent  country  guidance  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      relating to Afghanistan is AK (Article 15(c) Afghanistan) [2012]  UKUT
      00163.  The Tribunal, while noting that there had been a deterioration
      in the general security conditions prevailing  in  the  country,  held
      that there was an insufficient degree of violence in Afghanistan as  a
      whole to overcome the Article  15(c)  threshold.   The  Applicants  in
      these proceedings make the case that having regard  to  a  substantial
      body of evidence which has materialised since 2012, it is appropriate

      to reconsider the guidance promulgated in AK.




   8. There is some ambivalence in the Applicants' arguments as  to  whether
      these judicial review  proceedings  should  be  the  vehicle  for  the
      formulation of fresh, updated country guidance.   In  principle,  they
      might have sought to make a  case  having  the  following  components:
      that the new country evidence forms part - a significant one - of  the
      material upon which  the  Secretary  of  State  should  properly  have
      decided that the fresh claims threshold was overcome;  that  by  these
      judicial review applications the  unlawfulness  of  the  Secretary  of
      State's decisions will be exposed; and, in  consequence,  it  will  be
      incumbent upon the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  further  decisions
      recognising that these are indeed fresh claims, with the  result  that
      appeals will lie to the FtT which will provide a forum for  presenting
      evidence and ventilating arguments relating to the enduring tenability
      of the decision in AK.   This  would  not,  therefore,  be  a  country
      guidance appeal by stealth. However,  the  Applicants'  case  was  not
      presented in this way.


II.   "ROLLED UP" ORDER

   9. Following the grant of interim relief to 14  Applicants,  as  recorded
      above, these proceedings effectively split into a series of phases:


        i) The initial phase, during which the judicial review applications
           were initiated and interim relief was granted.


       ii) The case management phase which, initially, unfolded between  10
           March and 22 April 2015.


      iii) In parallel with the case management phase,  the  submission  of
           further representations to the Secretary of State on  behalf  of
           all Applicants, including  the  five  lead  Applicants  and  the
           making of fresh decisions in four cases and an original decision
           in the case of the first Applicant, HN


       iv) In parallel with (ii) and  (iii)  and  beyond,  the  progressive
           acquisition of further evidence  on  behalf  of  the  Applicants
           which was filed and upon which they sought to rely.


        v) The intermittent acquisition and filing of further  evidence  on
           behalf of the Secretary of State.


  10. The Tribunal's initial intention was that on the  date  allocated  for
      hearing, 22 April 2015, these cases  would  proceed  as  inter  partes
      permission hearings.  At the commencement of the hearing on this date,
      the Tribunal raised the question of whether these should  properly  be
      combined permission and substantive hearings viz so-called "rolled up"
      hearings.  Submissions were made on behalf of  both  parties.   Having
      considered such submissions, the issue was reserved


      and the presentation of the Applicants' case commenced.  This occupied
      a substantial part of the day and was not  completed.  An  adjournment
      ensued, with the hearings to recommence on 08 May 2015.

  11. On 08 May 2015,  the  Applicants,  without  prior  intimation  to  the
      Respondent or the Tribunal, produced a  substantial  quantity  of  new
      evidence, including an expert's report,  upon  which  they  wished  to
      rely.  It became clear that due to the lateness of  this  development,
      the hearing would have to be vacated.  Bearing in mind the public  law
      character of judicial review proceedings, the Tribunal was  minded  to
      receive the further evidence de bene esse, subject to  the  Respondent
      having an opportunity to reply.  It became clear to  the  Tribunal  at
      this stage that the proceedings no  longer  had  the  character  of  a
      typical  permission  application.   Evidence  had  been  assembled  in
      considerable bulk, the Secretary of State had made fresh decisions  in
      each case, there were  extensive  skeleton  arguments  and  the  legal
      representatives in attendance  numbered  approximately  12  in  total.
      Furthermore, in the interim, the Applicants' solicitors  had  proposed
      the conversion of the proceedings to the "rolled up" variety, to which
      the Respondent's representatives objected. The Tribunal  had  made  no
      ruling on this issue.  Taking into account the aforementioned factors,
      the allocation of a panel of two Judges to deal with the cases and the
      overriding objective, we concluded without hesitation that a rolled up
      order was appropriate.  The Applicants' representatives protested that
      they would need further time to prepare in  consequence.   With  great
      reluctance, a further adjournment was granted, with rescheduled  dates
      of 11 and 12 May 2015.

  12. The further consideration which influenced the Tribunal in making  the
      "rolled up" order was that the substantial commitment of Tribunal time
      and resources which had materialised would not be properly or usefully
      employed in a decision merely granting or refusing permission,  having
      regard to the rules and principles of precedent, the large  number  of
      cases belonging to the group (30+) and the foreseeable  likelihood  of
      further challenges to attempted Afghanistan repatriations.

III.  APPLICATION TO AMEND

  13. On the third day of hearing (11 May 2015) an application on behalf  of
      one of the Applicants to amend the grounds of  challenge  was  served.
      The Tribunal pointed out that, as formulated, this  did  not  identify
      any intelligible public law ground of challenge to  the  Secretary  of
      State's  decision.   We  directed  a   concise,   coherent   pleading,
      rectifying this defect.  On the fourth day of hearing (12 May 2015)  a
      further pleading in  purported  compliance  with  this  direction  was
      produced.  As our exchanges with Counsel for the Applicant made clear,
      the Tribunal continued to struggle with the thrust  of  this  proposed
      new ground. By this stage of the proceedings, the Applicants'  grounds
      had already undergone  significant  amendment,  resulting  in  amended
      grounds dated 15 April 2015.


  14. The thrust of the proposed new ground of challenge, as  understood  by
      the Tribunal, was symptomatic of the organic evolution which  had,  by
      this juncture,

      become one of the hallmarks of these proceedings.  It was  based  upon
      two pieces of documentary evidence, recently materialised, relating to
      the attempts of the Red Cross organisation to trace the family of  the
      Applicant, SA, in Afghanistan.  It was contended that the new evidence
      demonstrated that this Applicant's parents and sister had been  killed
      in hostilities, that family members no longer resided in his home area
      and that, in consequence, the findings of the  FtT  bearing  on  these
      issues were undermined.  The contention formulated was that  had  this
      recently received evidence been available at the FtT stage,  it  would
      have precipitated a finding that this Applicant, being a child without
      family support, was a refugee or, alternatively, that this would  have
      ranked as a minimum as a highly influential consideration in the FtT's
      decision.  The  argument  prayed  in  aid  AA  (Unattended   Children)
      Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC). The legal ground of  challenge
      formulated appeared to be a contention that the Secretary of State had
      failed to discharge her tracing duty under regulation 6 of the  Asylum
      Seekers (Reception Conditions) Regulations 2005.  The second dimension
      of this proposed amended ground was based on the concept of correction
      of historic injustice, giving rise to the contention that this  was  a
      material consideration "to be taken into account in  the  decision  to
      remove now."  [Our emphasis.]  As this summary demonstrates, this  was
      yet another instance of a newly formulated case being played  out  for
      the first time before this Tribunal, rather than the primary  decision
      maker, the Secretary of State.


  15. The application to amend was opposed on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
      State.  Having considered the submissions of both parties' Counsel, we
      pronounced our ruling, refusing  the  application.   Our  reasons  for
      doing so were, in summary:


        a) The application was based on fresh evidence which had  not  been
           considered by the Secretary of State.  It would  be  undesirable
           for the Tribunal to conduct any review of  something  which  had
           not been the  subject  of  consideration  and  decision  by  the
           Secretary of State, the primary decision maker.


        b) It was difficult to see how new evidence of the kind in question
           could properly found a challenge to a decision  under  paragraph
           353 of the Immigration Rules.

        c) The Applicant in question was  seeking  to  advance  a  discrete
           judicial review challenge without  having  first  exhausted  the
           alternative remedy of making his case to the Secretary of State.



        d) The application to amend was unacceptably delayed: the  evidence
           established that the Applicant's solicitors were  in  possession
           of much of the relevant evidence by 23 April 2015 at latest  and
           the failure to give advance notice appeared tactical.

        e) To permit the application would be to prejudice the Secretary of
           State, given its nature and lateness.




        f) To permit the  application  could  jeopardise  the  orderly  and
           expeditious continuation and completion of the proceedings.


        g) The application did not satisfy one of the tests enshrined in  E
           and R v  Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  EWCA
           Civ 49, at [66] & [92], since it was not based on  reliable  and
           undisputed evidence: quite  the  contrary,  the  two  pieces  of
           evidence in question, consisting of letters from the Red  Cross,
           were directly contradictory of each other.


      This ruling having  been  made,  the  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
      Applicants were completed and this was followed by the submissions  of
      Counsel for the Secretary of State.  At the conclusion of  the  fourth
      day of hearing, the Tribunal indicated that the further conduct of the
      proceedings would be dependent upon a direction to be issued  and  the
      parties' responses thereto.




IV.   THE TRIBUNAL'S DIRECTION OF 23 MAY 2015


  16. We reproduce in full the direction which  the  Tribunal  made  on  the
      following day, 23 May 2015:


       "(1) In all of these cases (except one) following the  initiation  of
           these proceedings:


           a.    The Respondent, having received further representations on
                 behalf of all of the Applicants, reconsidered  the  initial
                 impugned decisions and made a fresh,  updated  decision  in
                 each case. One of the decisions was an original  one.   All
                 of these decisions refused  the  Applicants'  claims  under
                 paragraph 353 of the  Immigration  Rules.   These  are  the
                 decisions now under challenge (the "impugned decisions")


           b.     Since  the  impugned  decisions  were  made,  during  the
                 currency of these proceedings  a  substantial  quantity  of
                 further evidence has been generated  bilaterally.   All  of
                 this new evidence has  been  placed  before  the  Tribunal.
                 None of it has been provided  to,  or  considered  by,  the
                 Respondent in a decision making context.  All  of  the  new
                 evidence, to a greater or lesser extent, has a  bearing  on
                 the  two  central  grounds  of  challenge  pursued  by  the
                 Applicants, namely (in a  nutshell)  risk  upon  return  to
                 their  country  of  origin,  Afghanistan  and   an   inter-
                 governmental memorandum of understanding.


      (2)   It appears to the Tribunal that, but  for  the  intervention  of
           these proceedings, all of the new material would inevitably have
           been placed before the Secretary of  State  in  the  context  of
           further  representations  and  submissions  on  behalf  of   the
           Applicants, for the purpose of reconsideration of  the  impugned
           decisions and fresh decisions.  This has not occurred.


      (3)   In the event of any or all of the Applicants  failing  in  their
           judicial review challenges, it seems to the  Tribunal  that  the
           analysis in (2) above applies fully.


      (4)   If any of the Applicants were to succeed in  these  proceedings,
           the relief to be granted would, as requested,  almost  certainly
           be an order quashing the impugned  decision/s.   The  effect  of
           this would  be  to  oblige  the  Respondent  to  reconsider  the
           impugned decision/s substituting a fresh decision or  decisions.
           In this scenario, it appears to the Tribunal that the Applicants
           will inevitably rely upon the new material for  the  purpose  of
           urging more favourable decisions.


      (5)   Taking into account the  Applicants'  duty  of  candour  to  the
           Tribunal and their duty to  co-operate  with  the  Tribunal  and
           considering   further   the   overriding   objective   and   the
           discretionary character  of  judicial  review  proceedings,  the
           Applicants' solicitors are required:


              a) to confirm the correctness of the Tribunal's assessment  in
                 (2), (3) and (4) above; and further, or alternatively,


              b) to provide such other confirmation  and/or  information  as
                 may be appropriate.


        6) In the event of an affirmative confirmation  of  the  Tribunal's
           assessment in (2), (3) and (4) above, the Applicants  solicitors
           should also indicate in writing [not to exceed two A4 pages) the
           grounds upon which it is contended (if  it  be  thus  contended)
           that these proceedings should continue."


      As the terms of this direction indicate, the Tribunal considered  that
      a watershed had been reached in the proceedings.


  17. The purpose  of  the  aforementioned  direction  is,  we  trust,  self
      evident.  Its  timing  was  not  ideal,  in  the  sense  that  in  the
      hypothetical ideal world of litigation a direction of this kind should
      preferably issue before substantive hearings  begin.   However,  given
      the evolution of these proceedings,  summarised  above,  the  Tribunal
      considered that it was appropriate to  issue  the  direction  at  this
      stage.

  18. The response  made  by  the  Applicants'  solicitors  began  with  the
      following significant acknowledgement:

           "The Applicants in the lead cases invite on a pragmatic basis  a
           reconsideration by the SSHD of her impugned decisions  dated  23
           and  31  March  and  01   April   2015,   which   reject   their
           representations as fresh claims, to allow her  to  consider  all
           the material submitted by  the  Applicants  subsequent  to  that
           together with that submitted before."

      It is clear from the remainder of the response  that  the  Applicants'
      representatives did not contest the correctness of the propositions in
      [2], [3] and [4] of the Tribunal's direction (supra).   Their response
      confirmed that there would indeed be "further representations" to  the
      Secretary of State.  Notwithstanding, it was contended  on  behalf  of
      the Applicants that while further representations would be made to the
      Secretary of State, prompting  reconsideration  and  fresh  decisions,
      these proceedings should be stayed and representations were also  made
      about a "timetable for  the  submission  of  further  evidence".   The
      response on behalf of the Applicants  further  contended  that,  as  a
      minimum, this Tribunal should provide  a  substantive  ruling  on  the
      "second head of challenge", which was  paraphrased  as  "the  MOU  and
      Operational Guidance Note [issue]".  This would be linked with further
      case management directions, to include the Applicant's  "formal  reply
      in writing to the SSHD's submissions on this issue".

  19. This was  followed  by  the  Secretary  of  State's  rejoinder.   This
      incorporated a  contention  that  the  Tribunal  should  complete  the
      proceedings "....  on all grounds except that the Tribunal should  not
      consider the material which postdates the  decisions  under  challenge
      save to the extent that the material touches on other issues which the
      Tribunal has to determine". We  interpose  the  immediate  observation
      that  it  is  not  altogether  easy  to  grasp  the  meaning  of  this
      suggestion. The Secretary of State's  submission  further  noted  that
      subsequent to the initially impugned decisions viz those proposing  to
      remove the Applicants from  the  United  Kingdom  on  10  March  2015,
      further  evidence,  in  particular  two  expert  reports  and  country
      evidence, was served on behalf of  the  Applicants,  followed  by  the
      Secretary of State's further decision in each of the five  lead  cases
      on 31 March 2015.  The Applicants' position was that yet another fresh
      decision should be made in the currency of these  proceedings  and  in
      the context of a stay thereof.  The following passage encapsulates the
      Secretary of State's rejoinder:

           "....  The Applicants seek, after weeks of  intense  litigation,
           to stay the almost complete substantive hearing of the  impugned
           decisions in respect of  their  first  and  second  fresh  claim
           applications to make a third/fourth application and  without  at
           this stage the full evidence on which they will rely  and  which
           they seek 14 days to obtain ....


           The proper approach is that the decision  as  to  whether  there
           should be, or not, a further application should be considered by
           the Applicants' advisors once all the new evidence is  available
           and in light of the Tribunal's judgment in respect of their past
           applications."


  20. It was further submitted that the adoption of this course would result
      in the parties receiving the Tribunal's evaluation of the large volume
      of material which was considered by the  Secretary  of  State  at  the
      stage of the post-permission decisions on 31 March and 01 April  2015.
      This course, it was contended, would have the virtue of  obliging  the
      Applicants' representatives to consider the viability of  yet  another
      "fresh claim" to the Secretary of State in the light of the Tribunal's
      judgment.   One  could  reasonably  anticipate,  it  was   argued,   a
      "narrowing" of both the issues and the evidence to  be  considered  in
      any further decision making  process  and  any  ensuing  new  judicial
      review proceedings.  The submission of Ms Glass was that  this  course
      would further  the  overriding  objective.  Finally,  this  submission
      invoked the circumstance of other, pending cases viz the cases of  the
      (almost 30) Applicants who do not have the status of lead  Applicants,
      some of whose cases are the subject of undetermined permission renewal
      applications.


  22. Unsolicited, the Applicants' representatives rejoined to the Secretary
      of  State's  response.  This  took  the  form  of  yet   another   not
      insubstantial written submission.   This  adverted  to  still  further
      recent evidence, in the public domain, postdating the  adjournment  of
      the proceedings on 11 May 2015.  There followed a lengthy rehearsal of
      the circumstances in which various items of new evidence  materialised
      and were deployed in the proceedings subsequent to their initiation in
      early March 2015.  This  submission  contains  the  following  passage
      which, evidently, refers to the adjournment which occurred on  08  May
      2015:


           "....  Following that adjourned permission hearing the SSHD  was
           asked (via her Counsel)  whether  she  wished  to  consider  [Mr
           Foxley's expert report of 07 May 2015] in the context  of  these
           proceedings and if so the Applicants could withdraw their claim.
            The SSHD declined to respond to this but stated in  her  second
           skeleton argument that  she  was  prejudiced  both  by  the  new
           material and by the rolled up  hearing  now  directed  at  short
           notice."


      This submission contains the proposal that the Tribunal should:

              a) adjourn the first  ground  of  challenge,  pending  further
                 claims/representations to the Secretary of  State  and  the
                 outcome thereof; and


              b) determine, at this stage, the second ground of challenge  -
                 but only following still further submissions on  behalf  of
                 the Applicants.

      This is followed by the statement:


           "If any or all of the  fresh  material  is  excluded  from  [the
           Tribunal's] consideration  the  Applicant  will,  as  previously
           observed by the  Tribunal,  place  (and  any  further)  material
           before the SSHD for her consideration in any event  and  she  is
           bound to consider it and further proceedings may ensue."

      This  submission  terminates  with  the  warning  that  still  further
      evidence and "further material submissions" are likely ("may  well  be
      anticipated").

V.    THE  EVIDENCE CONSIDERED

  23. At this juncture, it is  convenient  to  highlight  the  new  evidence
      generated bilaterally following the grant  of  interim  relief  on  10
      March 2015 and, in addition, subsequent to the  further  decisions  of
      the Secretary of State dated 31 March and  01  April  2015.   This  is
      divided into two schedules in  Appendix  2  hereto.   Furthermore,  as
      noted above, there is the distinct possibility of yet another category
      of evidence materialising. In the paragraphs which follow  we  provide
      our resume of the most salient parts of the evidence.








      Dr Schuster and Professor Clayton


  24. One of the main stimuli for the recent flurry of proceedings described
      above is a litigation report dated 04 March 2015 prepared by  Dr  Liza
      Schuster of the City University London, School of Social Sciences.  Dr
      Schuster is  presently  a  guest  researcher  and  lecturer  at  Kabul
      University and her experience of the country dates from  around  2009.
      Her research project  focuses  on  the  aftermath  of  deportation  to
      Afghanistan and, in particular, the impact on those deported and their
      families.  In connection with this project, she  interviewed  the  new
      Afghani Minister for Refugees and Repatriation on  28  February  2015.
      In her ensuing report the following statement  is  attributed  to  the
      Minister:

           "....  He is unwilling to continue operating  the  current  MOUS
           [Memoranda of  Understanding]  until  new  ones  are  negotiated
           because the removing countries are breaching  conditions:  women
           and children and people who are mentally and  physically  unwell
           are being removed, as well as those who cannot  be  returned  to
           their provinces of origin.  The Minister argued that only  those
           who could safely be returned to their provinces of origin should
           be removed ....


           In the Minister's view, only Bamiyan and Panjshir were safe, but
           the roads to Bamiyan are not."

      [Our emphasis.]

      On 26 March 2015 Dr Schuster provided an updated report.  In this  she
      quotes from the opinion of 04 February  2014  expressed  by  Professor
      William Maley, also described as an expert:


           "....   It is essential to  appreciate  that  the  situation  in
           Afghanistan is extremely fluid and assessments of the  situation
           made even a year ago do  not  necessarily  provide  an  accurate
           picture of the situation at the beginning of 2014."

      Dr Schuster continues:

           "The withdrawal of international troops, the prolonged period of
           uncertainty before the formation of the new government following
           the election embolden the insurgents and the beginning  of  2014
           saw a number of spectacular attacks  that  have  continued  into
           2015.  Currently, the Taliban/insurgents are active in 32 out of
           34 provinces and the security forces are having  to  battle  for
           control of many, especially in the south ...  and east ....   It
           makes little sense to single out particular provinces as  almost
           all have seen a sharp decline in security  and  an  increase  in
           attacks and casualties. It is anticipated  that  insecurity  and
           attacks will further increase as usual with  the  start  of  the
           annual spring offensive."

  25. Addressing the years 2013 and 2014, Dr Schuster states:


           "....   While civilian casualties  caused  by  IEDs  [improvised
           explosive devices] also increased to unprecedented  levels  over
           the same period in 2013, deaths and injuries caused by  mortars,
           rocket  propelled  grenades  and  small  arms  fire  in   ground
           engagements jumped dramatically as the frequency  and  intensity
           of these incidents increased in 2014, particularly in areas with
           concentrated civilian populations (such as Kabul).  In 2014, the
           fight is increasingly taking place in communities, public places
           and near the homes of ordinary Afghans, with death and injury to
           women and children in a continued disturbing upward spiral."


      The sources on which Dr Schuster draws include  a  joint  2014  report
      prepared by the  United  Nations  Assistance  Mission  in  Afghanistan
      ("UNAMA") and the United Nations Office of the High  Commissioner  for
      Human Rights ("UNHCHR").  Dr Schuster also draws on the  Human  Rights
      Watch ("HRW") report "Today We Shall  All  Die",  published  in  March
      2015.   This examined in particular  the  culture  of  impunity  which
      leaves  Afghans  unprotected  against  serious  human  rights   abuses
      perpetrated by Government and military  officials  and  their  agents.
      Focusing specifically on the capital city, Dr Schuster summarises  the
      "sharp increase" in the frequency of attacks during 2014, giving  rise
      to substantial civilian deaths and casualties.  She notes that  during
      a 10 year period the population of Kabul increased from 0.5 million to
      around 5  million,  including  hundreds  of  thousands  of  internally
      displaced  persons  ("IDPs").   Addressing  the  topic   of   internal
      relocation,  Dr  Schuster  emphasises  the  critical  role  of  family
      networks in Afghani society.  Such networks perform  the  function  of
      offering support and  employment  opportunities.  Where  they  do  not
      exist, integration into an alien  community  is  extremely  difficult.
      This is due in substantial measure to the elevated levels of  mistrust
      which is one of the  legacies  of  three  decades  of  war.   Securing
      employment  and  accommodation  in  Kabul   is   highly   problematic.
      Furthermore, young men bereft of social  networks  are  vulnerable  to
      recruitment  by  insurgents.   The  report  also   comments   on   the
      limitations of the facilities and  assistance  provided  to  returning
      Afghan nationals  by  the  United  Kingdom  Return  and  Reintegration
      Programme.


  26. The evidence  assembled  by  the  Applicants  includes  a  very  short
      statement of  Professor  Susan  Clayton,  who  has  also  carried  out
      relevant research relating to Afghanistan during a period  of  several
      years.  She suggests that the availability of  accommodation  provided
      by the International Office of Migration ("IOM") is both  limited  and
      variable, while financial allowances  to  returning  nationals  permit
      survival in Kabul only for 2 or 3 days. She corroborates Dr Schuster's
      evidence about the lack of employment prospects in the  city,  largely
      on account of the non-existence of family networks.  She  opines  that
      only some 10% of those returning remain in Kabul longer term; some  10
      - 15% return  briefly  to  their  home  areas  outside  Kabul,  mainly
      temporarily only; and the remaining 75/80% leave the country within  2
      - 3 months.  This assessment is  based  upon  the  Professor's  sample
      group of around 70 unsuccessful asylum claimants who were removed from
      the United Kingdom to Afghanistan.


      UNHCR 2013 Guidelines


  27. In  August  2013  UNHCR  published  its  "Eligibility  Guidelines  for
      Assessing the International Protection Needs of  Asylum  Seekers  from
      Afghanistan". In its overview, this report states:



           "A  non-international  armed  conflict   continues   to   affect
           Afghanistan, posing the Afghan National Security Forces ("ANSF")
           assisted by the International Military Forces ("IMF") against  a
           number  of  Anti-Government  Elements  ("AGEs"),   notably   the
           Taliban.


           Afghans in rural communities perceive AGEs to be  exercising  de
           facto control over areas in many regions of Afghanistan ...   to
           assume effective control of communities ...  or  to  harass  and
           intimidate local residents into supporting them."

      The  report  notes  the  limited  results  achieved  by  some  of  the
      Government peace  and  reintegration  initiatives.   It  provides  the
      following description of the overall security situation:


           "The security situation in  Afghanistan  remains  unpredictable,
           with civilians continuing to bear the brunt of the conflict ...


           With the ongoing security transition, the nature of the conflict
           has changed as AGEs have changed the focus of their attacks from
           the IMF to Afghan targets.  AGE attacks have shown a significant
           increase in targeted killings of local civilian  leaders  and  a
           general  campaign   of   intimidation   aimed   at   controlling
           communities in rural areas.  Moreover the  conflict,  which  had
           previously been concentrated in the south and east, has come  to
           affect most parts of the country ....


           Similarly, while AGEs continue to carry out high profile attacks
           in Kabul, the violence is not limited to Kabul or more generally
           to urban centres."

      The report notes that the "proliferation" of local militias and  armed
      groups is mainly  in  the  north,  north  east  and  central  highland
      regions. Drawing on UNAMA data, it states:


           "UNAMA  started   tracking   civilian   casualties   (comprising
           civilians who are either  killed  or  injured  as  a  result  of
           conflict and other forms of violence) in  2007.  The  number  of
           civilian casualties increased every year between 2007 and  2011.
           UNAMA noted that while the total civilian  casualty  figure  for
           2012 represented  a  4%  decrease  compared  to  2011,  civilian
           casualties in the last half of 2012 increased by 13% compared to
           the same period in 2011.  This upwards trend continued in  2013.
           In the first 6 months of 2013, UNAMA  registered  3852  conflict
           related civilian casualties, an increase of 23% compared to  the
           same period of 2012 and representing a return to the record high
           number of civilian casualties of 2011."

      Targeted attacks on Government employees  and  officials  have  become
      increasingly   prominent,   with   correspondingly    fewer    "ground
      engagements" between AGEs and pro-Government forces.  There  were  698
      documented deaths and 379 documented injuries to  civilians  in  2012,
      increasing by 29% in the first six months of 2013.

  28. By the end of 2012, 670,000 Afghans were reported to live  within  500
      metres of areas contaminated by land mines, affecting more  than  1800
      communities, while undetonated IEDs continued to  have  an  impact  in
      certain areas. There were almost 20,000 incidents initiated by AGEs in
      2012.  Of the 12 provinces with the highest incident rates - 640 - six
      are in  the  south  or  south  eastern  region.   ANSO  described  the
      southern, south eastern and eastern region as forming an  increasingly
      contiguous battle space.  Cross border  shelling  from  Pakistan  also
      continued, with a total of 44 incidents causing 14 civilian categories
      in the eastern region during the first six months of 2013.


  29. In its report, UNHCR describes "an  increasingly  heavy  toll  on  the
      humanitarian situation  in  the  country",  coupled  with  diminishing
      humanitarian access to affected populations who are amongst  the  most
      vulnerable of the country's  citizens.  The  reduced  availability  of
      health care facilities was  highlighted.   The  years  2012  and  2013
      witnessed an increase in the number  of  internally  displaced  people
      ("IDPs") from around  486,000  to  some  575,000.   Such  persons  are
      amongst the most vulnerable groups in  the  country,  particularly  in
      urban areas.

  30. The UNHCR report addresses the specific issue of  internal  relocation
      in Afghanistan, particularly  from  the  perspectives  of  safety  and
      reasonableness.  It highlights the  volatility  and  fluidity  of  the
      continuing armed conflict.  It suggests  that  the  proposed  area  of
      relocation must be "practically, safely and legally accessible" to the
      person concerned.   The  personal  traits  and  circumstances  of  the
      individual must be evaluated, together with  the  security  situation,
      respect for human rights and the possibilities for  economic  survival
      in the area concerned.  UNHCR opines that internal relocation  is  not
      available in "areas affected by active conflict".  A person relocating
      to an urban area (such as Kabul) with  no  assured  accommodation,  no
      livelihood option and bereft of meaningful support networks,  will  be
      in a situation comparable to that of IDPs.  The significance  of  this
      is that IDPs are considered to be among the most vulnerable groups  in
      Afghanistan, many beyond  the  reach  of  humanitarian  organisations.
      UNHCR suggests that internal relocation is reasonable only  where  the
      individual can expect to benefit from meaningful family, community  or
      tribe support in  the  area  of  prospective  residents.   The  report
      continues:


           "The only exception to this requirement of external support  are
           single able bodied  men  and  married  couples  of  working  age
           without identified specific vulnerabilities  ....   who  may  in
           certain circumstances be able  to  subsist  without  family  and
           community support in urban and semi-urban areas  that  have  the
           necessary infrastructure and livelihood  opportunities  to  meet
           the basic necessities of  life  and  that  are  under  effective
           government control."


      The report further suggests that some of those who do not  qualify  as
      refugees under the 1951 Convention  may  be  eligible  for  subsidiary
      protection under Article 15 of the Qualification Directive.








      The 2015 EASO Report




  31. The European Asylum Support Office ("EASO")  Report  of  January  2015
      describes the continuing conflict between the Afghan National Security
      Forces  ("ANSF"),  supported  by  the  International  Military  Forces
      ("IMF") and the AGEs, or insurgents.  This  is  described  in  certain
      quarters as a non-international  armed  conflict.   In  November  2014
      Afghanistan was ranked second only to Syria in the World Security Risk
      Index.  The International Security Assistance Force ("ISAF"),  with  a
      total strength of some  35,000  troops  supplied  by  48  contributing
      nations, operating under the UN Charter and the UN  Security  Council,
      is no longer deployed in Afghanistan, following  a  phased  withdrawal
      between 2012 and 2014.  The closure of the ISAF bases precipitated  an
      end to the work of the Provincial Reconstruction teams.  EASO suggests
      that this has had a significant adverse impact on the  areas  formerly
      secured by the ISAF forces:


           "In those areas, which are now  left  to  the  ANSF,  insurgents
           increasingly take control of territory and attack administrative
           centres  and  security  installations   ....    The   transition
           initiated a new phase in  the  war,  characterised  by  fighting
           between the ANSF and insurgent groups ...


           The overall  trend  is  one  of  decreasing  government  control
           outside the larger towns and  cities,  escalating  violence  and
           more insurgent attacks."


            [Emphasis added.]


      The insurgents, it is reported, operate in fronts of  several  hundred
      fighters.  Their activities have  been  countered  by  ANSF  with  not
      insubstantial success:


           "...  ANSF have repelled most attacks and regained control  over
           district administrative centres and security installations  ....
           More civilians were caught in cross fire and ground engagements.
            However, in some areas, ANSF succeeded in holding the territory
           after the closure of an  ISAF  base,  which  resulted  in  fewer
           civilian casualties ...."


      While the number of security incidents - 11320 - recorded  by  the  UN
      between March and August 2014 reflected an increase in  the  2012  and
      2013 figures, it was lower than in 2011.


  32. The report notes that, according to UNAMA, just  under  5000  civilian
      casualties (some 1600 killed and 3300 injured) were documented in  the
      first half of 2014, a  24%  increase  compared  to  the  corresponding
      period in 2013.  Other figures suggested that the likely total  number
      for the whole of 2014 would be around 10000.  The report states:


           ".....   more  civilians  were  killed  and  injured  in  ground
           engagements, including rockets, mortars and grenades  and  cross
           fire, than any other type of violence [since 2009].  The regions
           where ground engagements and cross fire led to the


           most civilian casualties are the south, south east and east ...


           The vast majority of civilian casualties is attributed to AGEs."

      The second highest cause of civilian casualties continues to be  IEDs,
      sometimes combined with suicide and complex attacks, usually in public
      places.  Once again, the highest casualties  were  in  the  south  and
      south east provinces.  While AGEs remain active in Kabul, the violence
      there has a particular profile, focusing  on  security  personnel  and
      their vehicles and  other  government  officials,  with  the  risk  to
      civilians described as "relatively low".   One  organisation,  UNOCHA,
      estimated that in the year September 2013 to August 2014 151 civilians
      were killed and 234 were injured in Kabul.


ISW 2015 Report


  33. The Institute for the Study of War ("ISW") has published a very recent
      report, in March 2015.  This records that the US military presence  in
      Afghanistan is now reduced to  approximately  10000  troops.  The  so-
      called "draw down" timetable and the US  counter-terrorism  strategies
      are  currently  under  review.   The  report   notes   the   "numerous
      challenges" confronted by ANSF, highlighting:


           "...  The insurgency itself threatens  the  Afghan  government's
           control over terrain. Taliban attack patterns in 2014  were  not
           typical of the previous two years. The  Taliban  conducted  high
           profile attacks on district centres and  security  check  points
           throughout the country in late  2014,  often  with  massed,  co-
           ordinated assaults.  These factors led  to  casualty  rates  for
           both Afghan security forces and Afghan civilians in 2014  higher
           than in any of the last six years ....


           Far from defeated,  the  ongoing  Afghan  insurgency  remains  a
           serious challenge and threatens to reverse hard won prior  gains
           ....


           Second,  the  ANSF  lacks  requisite  capacities  as  a  counter
           insurgent force.  Although  the  ANSF  was  able  to  push  back
           insurgents from seized district centres over the past year,  the
           ANSF may not be able to sustain a sufficient forward presence to
           prevent their return ...


           The  insurgency's  resilience  in  the  face  of  ANSF  clearing
           operations suggests that the ANSF lacks the ability to clear and
           hold terrain decisively.  The fight will protract over the  long
           term, which is a problem at this rate of combat loss."

      Another specific concern identified is the presence  of  Al-Qaeda  and
      other terrorist groups  and  possible  affiliation  with  the  Islamic
      State.  The following analysis is particularly informative:


           "The Taliban's strategy at the local level is to subvert, weaken
           and drive out institutions  of  state  governance,  isolate  the
           Afghan security forces  and  build  parallel  institutions  with
           which to increase its influence across  Afghanistan's  periphery
           ....


           ANSF units are increasingly confined to their bases and security
           check points, unable or unwilling to go out  on  patrol  in  the
           community.  This leaves the Taliban  free  to  provide  its  own
           forms of governance in the countryside.  Such a situation allows
           insurgents to sustain ground attacks on ANSF units."

      The report notes that in 2014 civilian casualties arising from  ground
      engagements in  the  northern,  north  eastern  and  western  regions,
      doubled, in comparison  to  the  2013  figures,  while  those  in  the
      southern region almost tripled.  The report suggests  that  operations
      in 2014 highlighted the  limitations  in  the  ANSF  capabilities  and
      exposed "several key gaps" therein.


  34. The Institute provides the following informative summary:

           "The violence witnessed since late 2014 and so far  in  2015  in
           Afghanistan is not an anomaly, but  indicative  of  a  resurgent
           enemy ...  The insurgency will again to attempt to increase  its
           influence in rural areas ....  by temporarily seizing  a  number
           of vulnerable rural Afghan check points and district centres ...


           The Afghan  Central  Government  too  is  preparing  to  face  a
           difficult spring and summer offensive in 2015 ...."

      The report notes the success of one particular operation conducted  by
      the ANSF, which achieved definite gains in insurgent  heavy  areas  in
      the south of the country.  However, many of the  gains  proved  to  be
      short lived.  There are concerns  that  the  Taliban  will  mount  its
      biggest ever offensive this year.  On the positive side:


           "ANSF still retains the capability to move  units  and  supplies
           along major road networks to  reinforce  urban  centres  against
           large scale Taliban advances.  And with more than 150000 troops,
           the ANA theoretically  has  the  ability  to  field  significant
           numbers of men and equipment ....


           [However] should the Afghan state fail to  provide  an  adequate
           level of protection,  local  communities  would  be  tempted  to
           militarise, creating a breakdown of state authority  that  would
           facilitate the regeneration of trans national  terrorist  groups
           in the country."

      Notably, with the exception of  the  information  summarised  in  [32]
      above, the discrete issue of civilian casualties does  not  emerge  as
      one of the dominant themes, or concerns, of the Institute.

      UNAMA

  35. The relative proliferation  of  recent  reports  includes  the  United
      Nations Assistance  Mission  in  Afghanistan  ("UNAMA")  2014  Report,
      published in February 2015.  We have  already  addressed  this  report
      indirectly, since several of the reports summarised  above  draw  upon
      and reproduce information contained in it.  One of the central  themes
      of the report is the increasing toll of  the  conflict  on  civilians.
      This is reflected in a 22% rise in civilian casualties in 2014.  There
      were 3699 civilians' deaths and injuries to 6849 civilians,  increases
      of 25% and 21% respectively in comparison with  2013.   This  was  the
      highest number of civilian deaths and injuries in a single year  since
      the commencement of systematic recording by UNAMA in 2009.  During the
      six year period beginning on 01 January 2009, there  have  been  17774
      civilian deaths and injuries to 29971  civilians.   One  of  the  main
      causes of these increased casualties is to be noted:


           "Consistent with trends documented in the first  half  of  2014,
           ground engagements increasingly killed  and  injured  women  and
           children ...


           The rise in civilian casualties from ground engagements  largely
           resulted from civilians caught in cross fire between  insurgents
           and  Afghan  security  forces  during  fighting  in  and  around
           populated areas ....


           Anti-Government elements [AGEs] increased their  mobility  in  a
           number of regions and increasingly carried  out  ground  attacks
           against Afghan security forces to hold territory and secure  new
           areas."


      One of the specific causes of the increasing civilian  casualties  was
      the use of indirect fire weapons, namely mortars, by  all  parties  to
      the conflict.  The use of mortars, rockets and  grenades  in  civilian
      populated areas generates a "very high" risk of  civilian  casualties.
      These accounted for  50%  of  civilian  casualties  caused  by  ground
      engagements.


  36. The report further notes an increase in civilian casualties,  for  the
      sixth consecutive year, caused by  "the  indiscriminate  and  unlawful
      use" of IEDs.  This followed ground engagements  as  the  second  main
      cause of civilian casualties in 2014 (28%).  Typically,  these  deaths
      were precipitated by attacks directed against Afghan  security  forces
      in populated  areas.   Compared  with  2013,  the  increase  was  38%,
      entailing 42 deaths and injuries to 126 civilians.  In the year  2014,
      the total  attacks  claimed  by  the  Taliban  resulting  in  civilian
      casualties was 382. Of  these,  some  60%  were  directed  at  various
      elements of the Afghan and international military forces.


  37. The UNAMA evidence is nothing if not current.   It  includes  a  press
      release, dated 12 April 2015, containing the following statement:

           "In the first three months of  2015,  civilian  casualties  from
           ground engagements rose by 8% compared to  the  same  period  in
           2014.  Ground fighting between Pro-Government Forces  and  Anti-
           Government  elements  caused  521   civilian   casualties   (136
           civilians killed and 385 injured)."

      Of these casualties, almost 50% of the deaths and injuries were caused
      by mortar


      and rocket attacks, an increase of 43% compared with the corresponding
      period in 2014.  Increasing casualties among women and  children  were
      noted, attributed to increased ground fighting/ground  engagements  in
      civilian  populated  areas.   The  second  main  cause   of   civilian
      casualties was IEDs.  Increased ground conflict during the forthcoming
      months was predicted.


      The Home Office February 2015 Reports

  38. In February 2015, the Home Office published  its  Country  Information
      and Guidance Report ("CIG")  and  updated  Operational  Guidance  Note
      ("OGN") relating to Afghanistan.


  39. The CIG Report has the expressed purpose of providing guidance to Home
      Office decision makers on the handling of protection  claims  made  by
      nationals of Afghanistan.  This  publication  records  that  in  areas
      controlled by AGEs, no effective state  protection  exists.   This  is
      followed by a suggestion that in Kabul  and  other  cities  and  towns
      controlled by the Government, a willingness  to  offer  protection  is
      unlikely to equate with the availability of effective protection -

           "....  given the structural weaknesses in the  security  forces,
           including a lack of resources, training and adequate  equipment,
           poor vetting of recruits, weak command  and  control  structures
           together with  corruption  and  official  impunity  for  serious
           abuses."


      The report also highlights, in this context, significant  shortcomings
      in the judiciary.  This assessment gives rise to the following  policy
      statement:


           "In  general,  the  state  is  unable   to   provide   effective
           protection, although each case will need to be considered on its
           specific facts."

      It is appropriate to interpose at this juncture the  observation  that
      this assessment of widespread inadequate  state  protection,  even  in
      Government controlled areas, is not reflected  in  any  of  the  other
      reports digested above.

  40. The Home Office CIG draws heavily on other sources, including the EASO
      and UNAMA reports, reflecting the pattern of overlap  and  duplication
      to which we have adverted above.   It  also  draws  on  the  Secretary
      General's report to the  UN  Security  Council,  which  records  a  5%
      decrease in security incidents during the 3  month  period  August  to
      November 2014; a 10% increase during the period  January  to  November
      2014; and a description of the southern,  south  eastern  and  eastern
      regions of the country as the most volatile areas, accounting for  69%
      of incidents.  ANSF consists of the National Army,  the  National  Air
      Force and the National Police, with  some  358000  members  in  total.
      This composite force is supplemented and assisted by  other  groupings
      or  entities  known  as  "Pro-Government  Forces".    The   consistent
      perception and assessment that ANSF, particularly the police  element,
      has engaged in human rights abuses with impunity, corruption, abuse of
      power and extortion is one  of  the  reasons  for  the  evaluation  of
      overall state protection as weak and inadequate.  Finally, the CIG

      adopts the USSD 2013 report which notes:


           "The greatest barrier to movement in some parts of  the  country
           was the lack of


           security.  In many  areas  insurgent  violence,  banditry,  land
           mines and IEDs made travel extremely  dangerous,  especially  at
           night.  Armed insurgents also operated illegal check points  and
           extorted money and goods.  The Taliban imposed  nightly  curfews
           on the local populace in regions where it  exercised  authority,
           mostly in the south east."


      Finally, the report notes the continuing application of AK (supra) and
      H&B v United Kingdom [2013] ECHR 298.


  41.  The  Home  Office  Operational  Guidance  Note  ("OGN")  relating  to
      Afghanistan issued  in  June  2013  was  updated  and  republished  in
      February 2015.  As regards the discrete issue of internal  relocation,
      emphasis  is  placed  on  the  application  of  the   relevant   UNHCR
      eligibility guidelines  [17/12/2010].   These  include  the  following
      significant passage:


           "UNHCR generally considers internal relocation as  a  reasonable
           alternative where protection is available from the  individual's
           own extended family, community or tribe in the area of  intended
           relocation.  Single males  and  nuclear  family  units  may,  in
           certain circumstances,  subsist  without  family  and  community
           support in urban and semi-urban  areas  with  established  infra
           structure and under effective Government  control.   A  case  by
           case  analysis  will,  nevertheless,  be  necessary  given   the
           breakdown in the traditional social fabric of the country caused
           by decades of war, massive refugee flows  and  growing  internal
           migration to urban areas."


      As ever, fact sensitivity and individuality are key considerations.


  42. The final issue addressed in the OGN is that of  enforced  returns  to
      Afghanistan.  This highlights the general policy that such returns can
      properly  take  place,  subject  to  certain  limitations.    Assisted
      voluntary return remains  the  preferred  option.   In  this  context,
      reference is made to the Memorandum of Understanding ("MOU")  executed
      by the United Kingdom,  the  Afghan  Transitional  Administration  and
      UNHCR in October 2002 (supra).  The subject  matter  of  this  MOU  is
      stated to be "Voluntary Return".  The report continues:


           "However, as agreed with the Afghan authorities, from April 2003
           those not choosing voluntary return  and  found  to  be  without
           protection  or  humanitarian  needs  have  been  liable  to   be
           considered for enforcement action although those individuals  or
           groups identified as vulnerable are excluded from the  programme
           of enforced returns."


      In this context, it is noted that in all cases of enforced  return  by
      charter flight from the United Kingdom, those affected:


           ".... are  given  immediate  post-arrival  assistance  including
           temporary accommodation and onward  transportation  if  required
           and [are] offered access  to  a  reintegration  programme  which
           includes vocational training and business support options."


      As noted in [25] & [26] above, the efficacy and  durability  of  these
      assistance measures have been questioned.






      The Inter-Governmental Evidence


  43. This evidence, in summary, bears on the  arrangements/agreements  made
      between the United Kingdom and Afghanistan Governments.   It  consists
      of the aforementioned MOU, some recent "Notes Verbales" ("NVs"),  four
      witness statements and one letter filed on behalf of the Secretary  of
      State.  The first of these statements was generated  pursuant  to  the
      Tribunal's directions in the wake of the Court of Appeal order,  dated
      10 March 2015, reversing its decision refusing to grant interim relief
      in the case of  the  fifth  Applicant,  AB.   By  this  direction  the
      Secretary of State was required to provide evidence relating  to  what
      actually happened upon the arrival in  Kabul  of  the  charter  flight
      which departed the United Kingdom on 10 March  2015.   This  direction
      was motivated, in  the  context  then  prevailing,  by  one  plausible
      interpretation of the then extant  evidence  namely  that  the  Afghan
      authorities would refuse to allow any  passenger  considered  by  them
      vulnerable to disembark, thereby forcing their return  to  the  United
      Kingdom.  This evidence would have an obvious bearing in  the  context
      of any subsequent charter flight repatriation operation.




  44. This direction stimulated the first witness statement  of  one  Robert
      Chatterton Dickson, Charge d'  Affaires  of  the  British  Embassy  in
      Kabul.  To this witness  statement  were  exhibited  a  Memorandum  of
      Understanding and a single NV.  The  witness  statement  is  dated  18
      March 2015.  While  a  further  witness  statement  of  Mr  Chatterton
      Dickson and additional exhibits materialised thereafter, together with
      a  witness  statement  made  by  a  different  deponent,  these   were
      unsolicited in the sense that they were volunteered on behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State rather than required by directions of the Tribunal.
       This brief preface to the Respondent's evidence serves  to  highlight
      again the organic nature of these proceedings.

  45. The tripartite Memorandum of Understanding ("MOU") was executed by the
      United Kingdom, the Afghan Transitional Administration  and  UNCHR  in
      October 2002.  The recitals make reference to co-operation:

           "..... in order to assist the  voluntary,  dignified,  safe  and
           orderly  repatriation  to  and   successful   reintegration   in
           Afghanistan of Afghans now in the United Kingdom who also opt to
           return."

      The MOU embraces Afghan citizens present in  the  United  Kingdom  who
      have


      obtained refugee status or subsidiary  protection  or  have  withdrawn
      their applications for such status  or  have  had  their  applications
      refused.   The  agreement  speaks  of  the  primacy   of   "voluntary"
      repatriation. This theme is re-emphasised by the words  "their  freely
      expressed wish".  It is designed to facilitate


      and  achieve  repatriation  in  conditions  which  are  humane,  safe,
      dignified and sustainable.   Special provision is made for  vulnerable
      persons:


           "The Participants will take  special  measures  to  ensure  that
           vulnerable groups receive adequate  protection,  assistance  and
           care throughout the repatriation and reintegration process.   In
           particular, measures will be taken to ensure that  unaccompanied
           minors are not returned prior to successful  tracing  of  family
           members or without specific and  adequate  reception  and  care-
           taking arrangements having been put in place in Afghanistan."

      The United Kingdom  Government  commits  itself  to  a  basic  medical
      examination of all Afghans prior to their repatriation. By  the  terms
      of the MOU the United  Kingdom  Government  is  further  committed  to
      meeting the  travel  costs  of  each  returning  Afghan  national  and
      offering a "repatriation package" to all, giving special consideration
      to "the needs of women, children and other vulnerable groups".

  46.  The  MOU  is  to  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  four  inter-
      governmental communications in March and April 2015, each in the  form
      of a NV.  The first, dated 10 March 2015,  refers  to  an   agreement,
      evidently of very recent vintage, between the two governments:


           "....  It was agreed that  chartered  British  flights  carrying
           immigrants from the  UK  shall  be  allowed  to  land  at  Kabul
           Airport, unless vulnerable  people  (children,  families,  women
           without  a  male  relative  and  individuals   whose   permanent
           residential  areas  are  insecure)  are  boarded   amongst   the
           returnees."


            [Emphasis added.]


      The second NV, dated 08 April 2015, in effect approves  a  request  of
      the United Kingdom Government to return Afghan nationals by a  charter
      flight scheduled for 22  April  2015,  provided  that  the  passengers
      contain no vulnerable persons. The third NV is  brief,  contains  very
      little of substance or novelty and highlights once again the cohort of
      "vulnerable refugees".  It is dated 13 April 2015, as is  the  fourth,
      which refers to (apparently) a  further  meeting  between  the  Afghan
      Minister and the British Charge d' Affaires and states:


           "....  It  was  agreed  that  the  UK  Government   discontinues
           deporting Afghan vulnerable  people,  such  as  single  mothers,
           children, elders,  individuals  whose  living  areas  are  under
           security risks and abstain from separating family  members  from
           each other."


  47. The MOU and four NVs must be  considered  in  conjunction  with  three
      witness

      statements and one letter of Mr Chatterton Dickson filed on behalf  of
      the Secretary of State.  The first of these is dated  18  March  2015.
      Mr Chatterton Dickson avers that on 01 March 2015 the  charter  flight
      scheduled to  depart  on  11  March  2015  received  "landing  request
      approval" from the relevant Afghan Minister.  Three days later, on  04
      March 2015, the Afghan Government formally
      communicated its wish to reconsider the  terms  of  the  MOU.   It  is
      evident that the first NV, dated 10 March 2015,  was  the  product  of
      high level inter-governmental  activity  and  negotiation  during  the
      preceding days.  Mr Chatterton Dickson's witness statement contains no
      definition of "vulnerable people" and, further,  avers  to  an  inter-
      governmental disagreement as to whether, given the terms of  the  MOU,
      it embraces persons from allegedly unsafe home provinces. Further,  Mr
      Chatterton Dickson's statement refers specifically to  the  cohort  of
      involuntary returnees:


           "On 09 March 2015, during  a  phone  conversation,  the  British
           Prime  Minister,  David  Cameron  requested  President   Ghani's
           agreement to the UK  being  allowed  to  continue  non-voluntary
           returns to Afghanistan whilst MOU discussions took place."


            [Emphasis added.]


  48. Next, Mr Chatterton Dickson addresses events at Kabul  Airport  on  11
      March 2015, describing this operation as "successful".  He  lists  the
      nine provinces  to  which  the  24  returning  Afghan  nationals  were
      travelling.  They received the  conventional  Institute  of  Migration
      ("IOM") briefing, which includes information about a maximum 14  night
      stay at a purpose built  reception  centre  and  onward  travel.   The
      latter option was selected by 21, while three chose  to  stay  at  the
      centre.  Some of those returning were met by family and friends.   The
      following day, Mr Chatterton Dickson was  formally  advised  that  the
      Afghan Government does not have "a co-ordinated position on the  issue
      of international returns" and that any renegotiation of the MOU would,
      therefore, be deferred.




  49. In his second witness statement, which is  dated  17  April  2015,  Mr
      Chatterton Dickson, having exhibited the three NVs, avers:

           "It is  clear  therefore  that  the  Afghan  Government  remains
           committed to accepting returns to Afghanistan and is content for
           the  UK  Charter  to  continue  whilst  the  Afghan   Government
           considers their internal policy position."

      Mr Chatterton Dickson then adverts to a disagreement between  the  two
      Governments regarding the definition of "vulnerable" persons, averring
      that the definition espoused by the UK Government is set  out  in  his
      first statement.  In further averments he indicates that the  attempts
      of the Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs to  achieve  a  co-ordinated
      Afghan Government stance on the subject of returns  continue.   It  is
      suggested that, in the interim, the repatriation of  Afghan  nationals
      from the United Kingdom will continue. This is said to be


      the subject of a "written  assurance",  which  is  not  exhibited.  Mr
      Chatterton Dickson further avers  that  repatriation  from  six  other
      states pursuant to agreements comparable to the MOU continues and that
      this  includes  Afghan  nationals  returning  to  allegedly   insecure
      provinces.  Mr Chatterton Dickson avers, and repeats, that the  Afghan
      Government is agreeable to enforced returns "in  accordance  with  the
      current MOU".  We observe that Mr Chatterton Dickson's


      assertion of a "written assurance" is intelligible if it refers to the
      MOU, in conjunction with the NV, which is how we construe these words.

  50. The third of Mr Chatterton Dickson's witness statements  is  dated  06
      May 2015.  Reflecting the organic character of these  proceedings,  it
      was made:


           "....  in order to update the Tribunal  and  the  Applicants  on
           developments in relation to the  events  set  out  in  my  first
           statement signed on 18 March 2015 and second statement signed on
           17 April 2015."

      This statement  explains  that  whereas  the  Afghan  authorities  had
      authorised the charter flight from the  United  Kingdom  scheduled  to
      land in Kabul on 22 April 2015, the  flight  was  cancelled  at  23:00
      hours on 21 April "...  on the  basis  that  given  the  significantly
      reduced number of people we were able to remove, proceeding  with  the
      flight did not represent value for money for the tax payer  ...."   Mr
      Chatterton Dickson continues:


           "It is worth noting that the Afghan Government did  not  express
           any concerns about the April charter.  The Ministry  of  Foreign
           Affairs provided  permission  on  13  April  2015.  ......   The
           Director General in charge of the Fourth  Political  Directorate
           at the [Ministry] confirmed that Minister Balkhi's statement  on
           security was not an established Afghan Government position on 18
           March and 15 April as set out at paragraphs 16 and 6 of my first
           and second witness statements and confirmed that  the  UK  could
           continue returns under the existing  terms  of  our  [MOU].   In
           addition, the Ministry of  Refugees  and  Repatriation  did  not
           express any concerns with the 57  individuals  on  the  list  of
           returnees provided to them on 19 April 2015.  This included  not
           objecting to the return of individuals from 17 provinces."

      Continuing, Mr Chatterton Dickson avers that  on  22  April  2015  the
      Embassy's First Secretary Migration met  the  aforementioned  Director
      General for the following purpose:


           "... to request a Note Verbale from the [Ministry] which clearly
           set out the Afghan Government's position on returns. [The  First
           Secretary] explained that the recent Notes  Verbales  ....   not
           only contradicted each other but also contradicted the [Director
           General's] verbal assurances on 18 March and 15 April 2015  ....
           [and] ... indicated that this needed to be clarified as a matter
           of urgency."

      This  elicited  the  response  that  repatriation  could  continue  in
      accordance with the


      terms of the MOU and that this would embrace all of the  provinces  of
      Afghanistan. The Director General, it is averred:


           "....  also confirmed that Minister Balkhi's views  on  security
           were not an established Afghan Government position."

      The  Director  General  is  said  to  have  undertaken  to  provide  a
      clarifying NV.  This


      was not forthcoming  and,  soon  afterwards,  he  explained  that  the
      Ministry  had  established  a  Commission  to  "review  the  issue  of
      international returns".  This was accompanied by a reiteration of  the
      commitment that repatriation under the  existing  MOU  would  persist.
      This assurance was repeated subsequently.  Furthermore, it is averred,
      it was repeated by the Afghan Prime Minister at a meeting  on  06  May
      2015.  Embassy officials continued to press  for  a  further  NV.   Mr
      Chatterton Dickson avers, finally, that  four  other  European  States
      have enforced  the  repatriation  of  46  Afghan  nationals  since  28
      February 2015 and that only two of these are from the three  provinces
      declared to be safe in Minister Balkhi's statement, the  remaining  44
      originating from 12 other provinces.  Ditto the  22  Afghan  nationals
      repatriated from the United Kingdom on the charter flight of 10  March
      2015 and five voluntarily returning Afghan nationals subsequent to the
      cancellation of the flight scheduled for 21 April 2015.

  51. Exhibited to Mr Chatterton Dickson's  third  witness  statement  is  a
      letter  from  the  United  Kingdom   Immigration   Minister   to   the
      aforementioned Director General.  This contains the following passage:




           "The UK currently returns only single males who receive arrival,
           travel and reintegration  assistance  and  can  be  successfully
           repatriated ...


           We understand the new Minister of Refugees and Repatriation  has
           expressed concerns about returning individuals  from  'dangerous
           provinces' and concerns about returning 'vulnerable groups'  and
           this has led to several Note Verbale from your  Ministry  asking
           the  UK  to  impose  several  new  return  conditions.   The  UK
           Government is open to discussion  but  we  do  not  believe  new
           conditions can be imposed unilaterally  and  we  would  like  to
           discuss  any  proposed   changes   as   part   of   formal   MOU
           negotiations."


      This is followed by  a  reference  to  the  uncertainty  generated  by
      Minister Balkhi's public statement.   Finally, the  letter  reiterates
      the imperative of receiving "written clarification"  from  the  Afghan
      Government that the repatriation of Afghan nationals from  the  United
      Kingdom to their country of origin can  continue  "under  our  current
      MOU" without any "new return conditions".

  52. Mr Rich,  the  Assistant  Director  of  the  Operational  Support  and
      Certification Unit ("OSCU") of the Home Office, is the author  of  the
      fourth of the Respondent's witness statements.  This is dated 18 March
      2015 and contains the following salient averments:




           "The evidence submitted by the Applicants as to  the  interviews
           which  Dr  Schuser  had  with  the  Minister  for  Refugees  and
           Repatriation is not disputed.   However  ...  the  position  has
           changed since that interview.  Minister Balkhi  ...   has  since
           agreed that the charter would be accepted.


           The Ministry of Foreign Affairs [believes] it made sense to hold
           discussions about a new  [MOU]  after  the  UK  elections.   The
           [Afghan] Director General also confirmed that returns  from  the
           UK could continue in the meantime under the existing MOU."


      The events and litigation developments surrounding the second  of  the
      two recent  flights  to  Kabul,  on  21  April  2015,  postdated  this
      statement.

      The Most Recent Evidence

  53. Notwithstanding the determination of the Tribunal  to  complete  these
      proceedings with  the  maximum  expedition  and  to  provide  a  swift
      judgment, the phenomenon of new  evidence  continued.   Thus,  on  the
      morning of the rescheduled substantive hearing on 08 May  2015  -  see
      [11] and [12] above - the following  new  evidence  was  presented  on
      behalf of the Applicants:


        i.  The  witness  statement  of  a  caseworker  employed   by   the
           Applicants' solicitors documenting a telephone conversation with
           Minister Balkhi and attributing to the Minister a statement that
           repatriation will not be acceptable in the cases  of  "children,
           families, lone females, those from dangerous provinces and those
           with  serious  illness",  coupled  with  a  description  of  the
           provinces of Helmand, Ghazni  and  Kunduz  as  "very  dangerous"
           provinces.


       ii. A witness statement of another caseworker describing a telephone
           conversation on 22 April 2015 and two emails dated  4  May  2015
           with one of those repatriated via the flight on 10 March 2015, a
           person described as a failed asylum seeker now  aged  21  years.
           This person, it is averred, reported that following  arrival  he
           was accommodated in the reception centre for 14  days  whereupon
           he was required to leave and is "currently living on the streets
           and begging". He claims to have  no  family  contacts.  We  have
           highlighted the date of this conversation  for  the  purpose  of
           underlining  the  unacceptability,  in  the  context  of   these
           proceedings, of the caseworker's witness statement being delayed
           for a period of 16 days thereafter.


      iii. The witness statement of a consultant  solicitor  documenting  a
           telephone conversation with an official of the  Afghan  Ministry
           of Refugee and Repatriation on 07 May 2015 to  the  effect  that
           the repatriation of "any families, children, lone females, those
           from dangerous provinces and  those  with  serious  illness"  is
           unacceptable to the Afghan authorities. It  is  further  averred
           that on  06  May  2015,  eight  out  of  nine  Afghan  nationals
           repatriated from Sweden were accepted. The  ninth  was  returned
           "as no

           proper identification checks had been carried out".


       iv. Finally, there is a 58 page document  entitled  "Expert  Report,
           Security Situation in Afghanistan", dated 07 May 2015,  prepared
           by Tim Foxley MBE. This report,  despite  its  bulk,  ends  with
           "health warnings" that it is "preliminary only" given the "tight
           time  frame"  imposed  on  the  author.   There  is   no   clear
           explanation of the timing  or  genesis  of  this  report,  in  a
           context where the proceedings were progressing on a  high  speed
           track and were of two  months  vintage  at  this  stage.  Having
           highlighted these

           significant qualifications, or disclaimers,  we  note  also  the
           vintage and sources of the contents of the report, the  author's
           limited direct contact with the country and his  designation  of
           analyst.  For  these  reasons,  we  consider  that  this  report
           qualifies to be accorded at best minimal weight.


VI.   The Individual Applicants


  54. It is appropriate to recall that the five Applicants were selected, by
      agreement of the  parties  duly  endorsed  by  the  Tribunal,  in  the
      circumstances outlined in [1] - [10] above.  These are five lead cases
      in a context in which a total  of  34  Applicants  have  been  granted
      interim relief. Permission to apply for judicial review has  not  been
      ordered in any of  these  cases.   The  purpose  of  the  exercise  of
      identifying five lead Applicants was to generate a  judicial  decision
      which would, to the maximum extent possible, provide guidance in  and,
      if feasible, effectively  determine  the  other  pending  cases.   The
      individual  features  of  the  cases  of  the  five  lead  Applicants,
      summarised in [55] - [59] infra, are to be considered in this context.
       Furthermore, pursuant to further directions of the Tribunal, the text
      which follows has been agreed by the parties' representatives.


  55. The first Applicant, HN, is aged 22  years.   He  entered  the  United
      Kingdom as a minor, in 2007, aged 14.  He is from Laghman province. He
      has resided here for almost eight years.  The last  judicial  decision
      in his case was on 30 September 2013, when the FtT  decided  that  the
      Applicant was not credible and rejected his evidence  since  his  last
      appeal in 2011. The Judge found he had  a  deep-rooted  resistance  to
      being returned to Afghanistan, and rejected any risk on return.    The
      FtT  found  that  the  Applicant  had  support  in  Afghanistan   (the
      Applicant's own account was of his cousin's family  in  Kabul  and  he
      claimed he had previously resided in Kabul with a neighbour's relative
      for a year before his departure from  Afghanistan).   The  Judge  also
      dismissed the Article 8 appeal.  Mental health was  not  in  issue  in
      this  appeal.   On  20  November  2013  the  Upper  Tribunal   refused
      permission to appeal. This Applicant's challenge asserts a prima facie
      risk of treatment contrary  to  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
      Directive in his home province.  It further  involves  the  contention
      that, in  his  present  condition,  he  cannot  safely  or  reasonably
      relocate to Kabul.   This  contention  is  based  on  certain  medical
      evidence which records a history of  recent  suicide  attempts,  self-
      harming  and  hunger  strike.   The  medical  expert  describes   this
      Applicant as manifesting severe mental health problems, describing his
      condition as "unstable". He too  invokes  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
      Immigration

      Rules, highlighting his age, length of residence, health and the  lack
      of meaningful healthcare in Kabul and linking this  with  his  private
      life rights under  Article  8  ECHR.   He  further  contends  that  he
      qualifies to be considered a vulnerable person within the terms of the
      OGN of February 2015 and that the Secretary of State should  now  give
      consideration to granting him  leave  to  remain  exceptionally  under
      paragraph 353B of the Rules.


  56. The second Applicant, SA, celebrated his 18th birthday on  his  deemed
      date of birth of 01 January 1997.   He  originates  from  the  Baghlan
      province.  On 01 October 2014 the FtT held that while he would  be  at
      real risk of persecution in

      his home area, he could safely and reasonably relocate to Kabul.   The
      first element of his case is  based  on  Article  15(c).   The  second
      involves the contention that he cannot safely relocate  internally  in
      Afghanistan.   The  third,  invoking  paragraph  276ADE(vi)   of   the
      Immigration Rules, is based on the contention that  in  light  of  his
      age, recent separation from Afghanistan and absence of family  support
      in Kabul, there are clearly serious  obstacles  to  his  reintegration
      there.  The fourth element of his challenge is,  invoking  JS  (Former
      unaccompanied child - durable solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  00568
      (IAC), that he is a former looked after child who requires a  "durable
      solution" to any proposed resettlement and, given the absence thereof,
      his removal to Afghanistan  will  breach  his  right  to  respect  for
      private life under Article 8 ECHR.

  57. The third of the five Applicants is JG.  He entered the United Kingdom
      in 2009, aged 19 and is now aged 25.  The FtT accepted that his father
      was a member of the Taliban in charge of nine  or  ten  men  who  died
      fighting in 2009. The FtT also  accepted  that  the  Taliban  possibly
      tried to recruit the Applicant but did not find it credible that  they
      would do so forcibly or that they  would  harm  or  kill  him  if  not
      prepared to join them. Like FK (the fourth  Applicant)  he  originates
      from the Nangahar province.  The last judicial decision  in  his  case
      was on 30 January 2015, when the FtT decided that  the  Applicant  was
      not credible, and found that he was not at risk from the Taliban,  and
      in any event could reasonably and safely relocate  to  Kabul.  He  was
      unrepresented at the appeal. The Judge considered the appeal under the
      SSHD's OGN. The Judge found that the Applicant had a wealthy uncle  in
      Afghanistan who would be prepared to support  him,  and  even  without
      such support  relocation  to  Kabul  was  reasonable.   The  FtT  also
      rejected his Article 8 appeal finding he had  family  in  Afghanistan.
      On 3 February  2015,  the  FtT  refused  permission  to  appeal.   His
      challenge has two dimensions.  The first is  that  there  is  a  prima
      facie risk of Article 15(c) treatment upon returning to his  province.
      The second is that, per paragraph 276 ADE  of  the  Rules,  there  are
      serious obstacles to his integration and/or his  private  life  rights
      under Article 8 ECHR will be infringed having regard  particularly  to
      the insecurity of attempting to travel  to  his  home  area,  the  new
      evidence about the prevailing conditions in Kabul and the  absence  of
      any family there.


  58. The fourth Applicant, FK, is aged 25 years  and  originates  from  the
      Nangahar province, where his family lives. On 11  December  2014,  the
      Applicant claimed

      asylum and was admitted to the Detained Fast  Track  ("DFT")  process.
      The last judicial decision in his case was on 19  January  2015,  when
      the FtT decided that the Applicant was not credible and  rejected  his
      entire account of risk from the Taliban and /  or  Afghan  government.
      The  FtT  also  rejected  the  appeal  under  Article  15(c)  of   the
      Qualification Directive.  In the  alternative,  the  Judge  found  the
      Applicant could relocate to Kabul.  On 27 January 2015  permission  to
      appeal was refused by the FtT. His case is  based  on  the  contention
      that to repatriate him to his home area will generate  a  prima  facie
      risk of treatment contrary to Article 15(c).

  59. The last Applicant, AB, is aged 26 years.  He has been in  the  United
      Kingdom
      since 29 November  2014.   He  hails  from  the  Uruzgan  province  of
      Afghanistan.  On 23 January 2015, having been admitted to the DFT, the
      FtT decided that while he had a well-founded fear  of  persecution  in
      his home area from the Taliban and others, linked to  his  work  as  a
      human rights defender, which was known to others in the  human  rights
      field in other parts of Afghanistan who the Applicant had  encountered
      in the course of his work; his attendance at the London conference  in
      December 2014 was likely to have become  known to people in  his  home
      area; his family received a threatening letter  from  the  Taliban  in
      consequence, and that he  could  safely  and  reasonably  relocate  to
      Kabul.  His family continue to reside in his home area.  His case,  in
      a nutshell, is that having regard to the totality of the evidence  now
      available, the FtT's assessment that  he  can  safely  and  reasonably
      relocate to Kabul is no longer sustainable. While he apparently has no
      family or other support in Kabul, the determination  records  that  he
      had travelled to Kabul previously in connection with his human  rights
      work.

VII.  THE ISSUES

      The Qualification Directive

  60. We have noted the salient features of each of the Applicants and their
      individual circumstances above.  In doing  so  we  have  outlined  the
      legal  contours  of  their  challenges.   The  first  element  of  the
      Applicants' cases, duly developed by Ms Naik in both written and  oral
      argument, is based on the Qualification Directive.  The  primary  case
      made by some of the Applicants is founded  on  Article  15(c)  of  the
      Qualification Directive, while others  invoke  this  protection  in  a
      secondary, or indirect, manner. Article 15(c) provides:


      "Serious harm consists of


      (a)  death penalty or execution;


      (b)  torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment  of  an
           Applicant in the country of origin; and


      (c)  serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person  by
           reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international
           or internal armed conflict."


      Article 15 is applied by Article 2(e) which defines a person  eligible
      for subsidiary protection (described  as  humanitarian  protection  in
      paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules which applies Article 15 using
      the same terminology save for the addition of 'unlawful  killing')  as
      follows:


           "... a third country national ... person who does not qualify as
           a refugee but in respect of whom substantial grounds  have  been
           shown for believing that the person concerned,  if  returned  to
           his or her country of origin ...  would  face  a  real  risk  of
           suffering serious harm as defined in


           Article 15 ... and is unable or, owing to such risk,  unable  to
           avail himself or herself of the protection of the country."

      There are now two decisions of the Court of Justice  of  the  European
      Union (CJEU) which deal with Article 15(c): Case C-465/07  Elgafaji  v
      Straatsscretaris van  Justitie  [2009]  1  WLR  2100,  and  Diakite  v
      Commissaire general aux refugies [2014] WLR(D)  37,  [2014]  EUECJ  C-
      285/12.


  61. In Elgafaji, the ECJ construed Article15(c) as  dealing  with  a  more
      general risk of harm than that covered by 15(a) and (b).

      The essence of the Court's ruling in Elgafaji was:

           "43.          Having   regard   to   all   of   the    foregoing
                 considerations, the answer to  the  questions  referred  is
                 that Article 15(c) of the Directive,  in  conjunction  with
                 Article 2(e) of  the  Directive,  must  be  interpreted  as
                 meaning that: the existence of  a  serious  and  individual
                 threat to the life or person of an applicant for subsidiary
                 protection is  not  subject  to  the  condition  that  that
                 applicant adduce evidence that he is specifically  targeted
                 by  reason  of   factors   particular   to   his   personal
                 circumstances;  the  existence  of  such   a   threat   can
                 exceptionally be considered to  be  established  where  the
                 degree of indiscriminate violence characterising the  armed
                 conflict taking place assessed by  the  competent  national
                 authorities before  which  an  application  for  subsidiary
                 protection is made, or by the courts of a Member  State  to
                 which a decision refusing such an application  is  referred
                 reaches such a high  level  that  substantial  grounds  are
                 shown for  believing  that  a  civilian,  returned  to  the
                 relevant country or, as the case may be,  to  the  relevant
                 region, would, solely on account of  his  presence  on  the
                 territory of that country or region, face a  real  risk  of
                 being subject to that threat."

  62. In Diakite, the Court, having provided a definition of internal  armed
      conflict at [28] reaffirmed in [30] its view  that  for  civilians  as
      such to qualify for protection under Article 15(c) they would need  to
      demonstrate that indiscriminate violence was at a high level:

           "30.  Furthermore, it should be borne in mind that the existence
                 of an internal armed conflict can be a cause  for  granting
                 subsidiary protection only where confrontations  between  a
                 State's armed forces  and  one  or  more  armed  groups  or
                 between  two  or  more  armed  groups   are   exceptionally
                 considered to create a serious and individual threat to the
                 life or person of an applicant  for  subsidiary  protection
                 for the purposes of  Article 15(c)  of  Directive  2004/83
                 because  the  degree  of  indiscriminate   violence   which
                 characterises those  confrontations  reaches  such  a  high
                 level that substantial grounds are shown for believing that
                 a civilian, if returned to the relevant country or, as  the
                 case may be, to the relevant region,


                 would - solely on account of his presence in the  territory
                 of that country or region -  face  a  real  risk  of  being
                 subject to that threat  (see,  to  that  effect,  Elgafaji,
                 paragraph 43)."

      At [31] the Court reaffirmed the view it expressed in Elgafaji at [39]
      that Article 15(c) also contains (what UNHCR has  termed)  a  "sliding
      scale" such that "the more the applicant is able to show  that  he  is
      specifically affected by reason of factors particular to his  personal
      circumstances, the lower the level of indiscriminate violence required
      for him to be eligible for subsidiary protection."   The Court thereby
      recognised that a person may still be accorded  protection  even  when
      the general level of violence is not very high if  they  are  able  to
      show that there are specific reasons, over and above them  being  mere
      civilians, for being affected by the indiscriminate violence.  In this
      way the Article 15(c) inquiry is two-pronged: (a) it asks whether  the
      level of violence is so high that there  is  a  general  risk  to  all
      civilians; (b) it asks that even if there is not such a general  risk,
      there is a particular risk based on the "sliding-scale" notion.

  63. In the United Kingdom, the  leading  decision  of  the  higher  courts
      dealing with Article 15(c) remains QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department [2011]  1  WLR  689.  QD  helpfully  explains  how
      Elgafaji should be applied. In addition we have the guidance  set  out
      in HM and others (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 409 (IAC) wherein,
      at [42]-[45], the Tribunal stated:

           "42.  We recognise that the threat  to  life  or  person  of  an
                 individual need not come directly from armed conflict.   It
                 will  suffice  that  the  result  of  such  conflict  is  a
                 breakdown of law and order which has the effect of creating
                 the necessary risk.  It is obvious that the  risk  is  most
                 likely  to   result   from   indiscriminate   bombings   or
                 shootings.    These   can   properly   be    regarded    as
                 indiscriminate in the sense  that,  albeit  they  may  have
                 specific or general targets,  they  inevitably  expose  the
                 ordinary civilian who happens to be at the  scene  to  what
                 has been described in argument as  collateral  damage.   By
                 specific targets, we refer to individuals or gatherings  of
                 individuals such as army  or  police  officers.  The  means
                 adopted may be bombs, which can affect others  besides  the
                 target,  or  shootings,  which   produce   a   lesser   but
                 nonetheless real risk of  collateral  damage.   By  general
                 targets we refer to more  indiscriminate  attacks  on,  for
                 example, Sunnis or Shi'as or vice versa.  Such attacks  can
                 involve explosions of  bombs  in  crowded  places  such  as
                 markets or where religious processions  or  gatherings  are
                 taking place.

           43.   The CJEU requires us  to  decide  whether  the  degree  of
                 indiscriminate violence characterising the  armed  conflict
                 taking place reaches such a  high  level  as  to  show  the
                 existence for an  ordinary  civilian  of  a  real  risk  of
                 serious harm in the country  or  in  a  particular  region.
                 When we refer below to the "Article 15(c) threshold",  this
                 is what we have in mind. Thus it  is  necessary  to  assess
                 whether the level of violence is such as to meet the test.

             44. In HM at [73] the  Tribunal  decided  that  an  attempt  to
                 distinguish between a real risk of targeted and  incidental
                 killing of  civilians  during  armed  conflict  was  not  a
                 helpful exercise.  We agree, but in assessing  whether  the
                 risk reaches the level required by the CJEU, focus  on  the
                 evidence about the numbers of civilians killed  or  wounded
                 is obviously of prime importance. Thus we  have  been  told
                 that each death can be multiplied up to  seven  times  when
                 considering  injuries  to  bystanders.   This  is  somewhat
                 speculative and it must be obvious that the  risk  of  what
                 has been called collateral damage will differ depending  on
                 the nature of the killing.  A bomb is likely to  cause  far
                 greater  "collateral  damage"  than  an  assassination   by
                 shooting.  But the incidence and numbers  of  death  are  a
                 helpful starting point.

             45. The harm in  question  must  be  serious  enough  to  merit
                 medical treatment.  It is not limited to physical harm  and
                 can include serious mental harm such as, for example, post-
                 traumatic stress disorder.  We repeat and  adopt  what  the
                 Tribunal said in HM at [80]:

                       'In our judgment the nexus  between  the  generalised
                       armed conflict and the indiscriminate violence posing
                       a real risk  to  life  or  person  is  met  when  the
                       intensity of the conflict involves  means  of  combat
                       (whether permissible under the laws of  war  or  not)
                       that seriously endanger  non-combatants  as  well  as
                       result in such a general breakdown of law  and  order
                       as to permit anarchy and criminality occasioning  the
                       serious harm referred  to  in  the  Directive.   Such
                       violence is indiscriminate  in  effect  even  if  not
                       necessarily in aim.  As  the  French  Conseil  d'Etat
                       observed in Baskarathas, it is not necessary for  the
                       threat to life or person to derive from  protagonists
                       in the armed conflict in question: it can simply be a
                       product of the breakdown of law and order.' "


  64. The second legal element in the Applicants'  collective  challenge  is
      constituted by the principle, now firmly embedded in refugee law, that
      the grant of asylum can be lawfully withheld on the basis of  internal
      relocation in  the  claimant's  country  of  origin  only  where  this
      recourse, or solution, is both reasonable and safe: see, for  example,
      Jasim v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 342, per Sedley LJ  at  [16].  The  third
      legal basis of the Applicants' challenges  invokes  the  private  life
      dimension of Article 8 ECHR, in conjunction with paragraph 276 ADE(vi)
      of the Immigration Rules.   The  latter  provides,  under  the  rubric
      "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain  on  the
      grounds of private life", in material part:


           "....  The applicant ...........


           (vi)  Subject to subparagraph (2), is aged 18  years  or  above,
                 has lived continuously in the UK for  less  than  20  years
                 (discounting any period of
                   imprisonment)  but  there  would  be   very   significant
                 obstacles to the applicant's integration into  the  country
                 to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."


      Paragraph (2) disapplies this provision in cases where it is  proposed
      to return a person to a third country pursuant to Schedule  3  to  the
      Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants  etc)  Act  2004:  this
      does not apply to any of the present cases.


  65. The next element of the Applicants'  challenge  has  two  ingredients,
      namely the Secretary of State's policy guidance enshrined in  the  OGN
      (digested in [25] - [26] above) and the MOU.  Reliance  is  placed  on
      paragraph 6.4 of the former, which replicates the agreement  enshrined
      in the MOU that individuals or groups identified as vulnerable will be
      excluded from the programme of enforced returns.  This aspect  of  the
      challenge, duly developed in Ms Naik's submissions,   also  highlights
      the specific provision in the MOU committing the UK Government to take
      into account "the evolving situation in Afghanistan  as  well  as  the
      major challenges involved in ensuring basic services for  all  of  its
      citizens" and the related commitment that the return process  will  be
      phased, orderly and humane, will be accomplished in manageable numbers
      and will take into account  the  availability  of  accommodation  (per
      paragraph 3).


  66. In the particular case of SA  (the  third  Applicant),  who  has  very
      recently attained the age of 18 years, the  status  of  former  looked
      after child is invoked.  This status founds the  contention  that  his
      repatriation  would  contravene  the  "proposition"  in   JS   (former
      unaccompanied child - durable solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  00568
      (IAC) that he is protected from removal  by  Article  8  ECHR,  having
      regard to his teenage status upon arrival in the United  Kingdom,  his
      subsequent placement in care and his current age (18).  Ms  Naik  also
      invoked the principle of durable solutions.

      Paragraph 353, Immigration Rules

  67. Mrs Naik's submissions also dilated on the  Applicants'  challenge  to
      the Secretary of State's certification of their claims under paragraph
      353 of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").  This provides:

           "353. When a human rights or protection claim has  been  refused
           or withdrawn or treated as withdrawn  under  paragraph  333C  of
           these Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is  no  longer
           pending,  the  decision  maker   will   consider   any   further
           submissions and, if rejected, will then determine  whether  they
           amount to a fresh claim. The submissions will amount to a  fresh
           claim if they are significantly different from the material that
           has previously been considered. The  submissions  will  only  be
           significantly different if the content:

     i) had not already been considered; and



              ii) taken together with the  previously  considered  material,
                  created a realistic prospect of  success,  notwithstanding
                  its rejection.

           This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas".

      There are well settled principles governing the test for a fresh claim
      and the Secretary of State's clearly unfounded certification  thereof.
      In brief compass, the threshold to  be  overcome  has  been  variously
      described as "modest" and "not very high";  a  realistic  prospect  of
      success equates with a prospect which is merely  more  than  fanciful;
      the question is whether on  any  legitimate  view  of  the  facts  the
      applicant's claim could succeed before an immigration  Judge;   regard
      must be had to the standard of proof which an immigration Judge  would
      apply; correct self-direction is essential viz the Secretary of  State
      must ask herself  the  proper  question  (the  "Tameside"  principle);
      anxious scrutiny must be applied; and, finally, in the  generality  of
      cases, a decision made by the Secretary of State under  paragraph  353
      will be vulnerable to judicial review only on the ground of Wednesbury
      irrationality.  These principles are uncontentious.

      The Secretary of State's Riposte


  68. We distil the submissions of Ms Glass on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
      State on all issues to the following main contentions:


              i. Particular regard must be had to the recent  determinations
                 of the FtT in the  Applicants'  cases.   This  involves  in
                 particular  acknowledging  the  lack  of  novelty  in   the
                 suggestion  that  relocating  to  Kabul  is  not  safe   or
                 reasonable, in circumstances where recent country  evidence
                 was judicially considered.


             ii. The lawfulness of the  Secretary  of  State's  most  recent
                 decisions withstands scrutiny by reference to the  standard
                 of rationality.


            iii. The Secretary of State's decisions are consistent with  the
                 recognition in the most  recent  UNHCR  guidelines  of  the
                 internal relocation of single able bodied men  and  couples
                 of working age to  urban  areas  that  have  the  necessary
                 infrastructure and livelihood  opportunities  to  meet  the
                 basic necessities of life.


             iv. Professor Clayton's brief report does not arguably  justify
                 a departure from the country guidance promulgated in AK.


              v. The statements of Minister Balkhi have been  considered  by
                 the Secretary of State and must not be viewed in  isolation
                 from other evidence and events, including  the  efficacious
                 repatriation of 24 Afghans from nine provinces pursuant  to
                 the charter flight of  11  March  2015.   Furthermore,  his
                 statements are not supported by UNHCR.

             vi. The Secretary of State reasonably concluded that, given its
                 limitations,  Dr  Schuster's  report  did  not  warrant   a
                 departure from

                 the assessment of risk in AK.  Furthermore, Dr Schuster did
                 not suggest that breaches of  Article  3  ECHR  or  Article
                 15(c) of the Qualification Directive would be occasioned by
                 repatriation.  More fundamentally, the Secretary  of  State
                 rationally concluded that Dr Schuster's assessment  of  the
                 issue of relocation to  Kabul  suffers  from  a  series  of
                 intrinsic limitations and does not justify a departure from
                 AK.

            vii. Focusing on the standard of rationality to  be  applied  to
                 the Secretary of State's most recent decisions, the current
                 country  evidence  falls  well  short  of  sustaining   the
                 Applicant's challenges.


           viii. Those Applicants who invoke the "very significant obstacles
                 to integration" criterion in Rule 276ADE(vi), in  advancing
                 claims under Article 8 ECHR, did  not  make  this  case  in
                 their  further  submissions  to  the  Secretary  of  State.
                 Furthermore, as regards the Applicant  HN,  his  Article  8
                 private life claim has  been  rejected  in  two  successive
                 appeals.


             ix. As regards the Applicants, HN and SA, both of  whom  assert
                 mental  health  problems,  the   supporting   evidence   is
                 extremely limited and, in the  case  of  SA,  there  is  no
                 medical evidence.


              x. The relevance of the MOU is confined to the context  within
                 which interim injunctive relief was granted.   Furthermore,
                 the MOU does not give rise to legal rights and  obligations
                 and, even if it does, these must be confined to the parties
                 thereto.

            xi. The  OGN  does  not  have  the  status  of  a  Home  Office
                repatriation or removals policy.  Rather, its  function  is
                to provide guidance to case workers  and  decision  makers.
                In any event, it does not erect any policy obstacle to  the
                enforced return to Afghanistan of failed asylum applicants.
                 Furthermore, it contains no definition of "vulnerable". In
                this  context,  the  MOU  defines  only  one  category   of
                vulnerable persons, namely unaccompanied minors  satisfying
                certain requirements.  None of the  Applicants  are  within
                this category.

  69. The final element of the submissions of Ms  Glass  has  the  following
      components:


      (a)   The Applicant is forced to argue  the  hopeless  case  that  the
      meaning of vulnerable in the SSHD's OGN is not the  SSHD's  view,  nor
      even by reference to the MOU, but instead  by  reference  to  the  new
      Afghan Minister Balkhi's recent opinion of who is  vulnerable  as  set
      out in the recent  Note  Verbales.  It  should  be  noted  that  these
      opinions  were  given  in  the  context  of  the  Afghans  seeking  to
      renegotiate the MOU,  they were not an agreed Afghan Government policy
      position  and  the  Minister's  views  are  not  accepted  by  the  UK
      government, as detailed by the first and second witness statements  of
      the Charge D'Affaires of the British Embassy.

      (b)   Moreover, Minister Balkhi's views as to  vulnerable  groups  are
           irreconcilable with the various NVs.  In particular:


              i) Previous Afghan  government  communications  had  requested
                 that the MOU be reconsidered and proposed the suspension of
                 all repatriations; and


            ii) the first NV  (noted  in  [46]  above)  defined  vulnerable
                people as set out.


      (c)   Minister Balkhi's views on vulnerable groups are not the  agreed
           views of the Afghan government, which has indicated  that  there
           is no consensus, and that they need time to  agree  an  internal
           position. Minister Balkhi's opinions are contradicted by  events
           in Kabul, in particular the successful return of 24 Afghans from
           nine provinces via the charter flight  accepted  by  the  Afghan
           authorities on 11 March 2015. They are also contradicted by  the
           position of  the  Director  General  in  charge  of  the  Fourth
           Political Directorate at the Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Mr
           Zia, who confirmed to the UK Charge D'Affaires on 18 March  2015
           that there was no consensus  within  the  Afghan  government  on
           international returns and that, in the meantime, the UK  returns
           could continue under the terms of the current MoU. On  15  April
           2015, Mr Zia again confirmed to the First Secretary Migration at
           the British Embassy in Kabul, in  similar  terms,  that  returns
           under the MoU could continue.


      (d)   Thus, the Applicants' case that  the  OGN  /  MOU  render  their
           removal unlawful is unarguable. Finally, Ms Glass  submits  that
           the invocation of the  exceptional  circumstances  rubric  under
           Immigration Rule 353B fails to identify any ascertainable public
           law misdemeanour, much less an arguable one.


VIII. CONCLUSIONS


      Overview


  70. In the circumstances outlined in extenso in chapters I  -  VII  above,
      the fundamental question which arises is: what can, and  should,  this
      Tribunal properly and usefully decide, or declare?  We consider  that,
      broadly, there are two basic competing  considerations.   On  the  one
      hand, there is  the  overriding  objective,  the  ingredients  whereof
      include in particular the substantial investment of judicial time  and
      resources in the conduct of these  proceedings  and  the  exercise  (a
      progressive  one)  of  preparing  this  judgment;   the   considerable
      investment of time and resources by all the  parties;  the  factor  of
      public funding;  the  large  number  of  litigants;  and  the  evident
      inevitability of further attempted exercises  of  repatriating  Afghan
      nationals from the United Kingdom to their  country  of  origin,  with
      resulting challenges.  On the other side of the scales, there

      is the well established principle, expressed  in  various  ways,  that
      judicial review remedies are discretionary; the court or tribunal will
      not conduct a moot; the purpose of judicial review proceedings  is  to
      provide real, practical and  efficacious  results  and  remedies;  and
      remedies such as a quashing order will not "beat the  air"  (see,  for
      example, R (McPherson) v  Ministry of Education [1980] NI 115, at 121,
      per MacDermott LCJ). Related to this is the  intrinsic  undesirability
      and unattractiveness of judicial review proceedings being  played  out
      in circumstances where material evidence produced by the  parties  has
      not been considered by the primary decision  maker,  especially  where
      this  will,  as  a  matter  of  virtual   inevitability,   result   in
      reconsideration and ensuing fresh decisions.  In  these  circumstances
      we ask ourselves:  how to square the circle?

  71. At this juncture, we refer to the appendices to  this  judgment  which
      encapsulate, at a glance,  the  evolution  recounted  above.  We  also
      highlight certain key facts.  First, the decisions of the Secretary of
      State impugned by the Applicants in these proceedings  were  based  on
      evidence which  has,  subsequently,  evolved  significantly.   Second,
      further, updated decisions on the part of the Secretary of  State  are
      now inevitable. Third, these decisions will be the product of the  new
      (ie post - 01 April 2015) evidence, the further representations  which
      will be made on behalf of all of the Applicants  and  such  additional
      evidence as  may  have  materialised  since  the  adjournment  of  the
      hearings  in  these  proceedings  on  12  May  2015  and/or  may   yet
      materialise. It is common case that the Secretary  of  State  will  be
      obliged to consider all  of  the  new  evidence  and  representations.
      This,  we  pause  to  observe,  is  a  public  law  duty.   In   these
      circumstances, we must decide whether  judicial  adjudication  of  the
      Applicants' challenges on the basis of all  the  evidence  amassed  is
      appropriate, in circumstances where the proper course is  plainly  for
      the Secretary of State to make further, updated decisions,  with  such
      consequences as may materialise.

  72. Balancing the various interests identified above and bearing  in  mind
      that this is a "rolled up" hearing, we  have  concluded,  not  without
      hesitation,  that  these  judicial  review  applications   should   be
      determined substantively. While this conclusion is marginal in nature,
      the factors which tip the balance favouring this course are the  heavy
      investment of judicial and lawyers' resources to date, the high number
      of litigants involved, both directly and indirectly and the  potential
      for judicial adjudication of the main issues in these  proceedings  to
      influence future events and decisions, to limit the areas  of  dispute
      and to save costs, given  the  predictable  scenario  of  the  parties
      continuing to join issue in the context of fresh  decision  making  by
      the Secretary of State.

  73. Conscious of the judicial review character of  these  proceedings,  we
      consider that we have a discretion whether to consider the totality of
      the evidence.  Consistent with the approach adopted by  the  House  of
      Lords in R  v  Secretary of State for the Home  Department,  ex  parte
      Launder [1997] 1 WLR 839 (per Lord Hope at 860 - 861  especially),  we
      have decided to exercise this discretion  in  favour  of  taking  into
      consideration all  of  the  evidence  assembled.   This  will  enhance
      achievement of the aims just identified. Furthermore, this  course  is
      preferable to the rather impracticable option urged  by  Ms  Glass  of
      adjudicating on all the

      issues but doing so only on the basis of the  pre-decisions  evidence.
      This would limit the utility of the Tribunal's judgment.  Furthermore,
      the mental acrobatics involved in this course would  be,  to  say  the
      least, challenging.

  74. We are mindful that, in the paradigm judicial  review  challenge,  the
      evidence considered  by  the  court  or  tribunal  in  exercising  its
      supervisory jurisdiction will be confined to the  material  considered
      by the decision maker.  However, it is consistent with  the  character
      of the judicial review jurisdiction that this is not an absolute  rule
      or  principle,  as  the  decision  in  Launder   illustrates.    Other
      illustrations  include  R   v   Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home
      Department, ex parte Turgut [2001] 1 All ER 719, where the determining
      factor in  the  Court  of  Appeal's  preparedness  to  consider  fresh
      evidence was the Article 3 ECHR dimension.  It has been clearly stated
      that the reception of fresh evidence principles enunciated in Ladd   v
      Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489  are  not  applicable  in  judicial  review
      proceedings: see E v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]
      QB 1044, at [81], and Haile  v  Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2002] IMM
      AR 170, at [25].  We consider it far from coincidental  that  many  of
      the cases in which this flexible approach to evidence has been adopted
      have a fundamental rights or asylum context.

  75. We are also mindful of  the  oft  repeated  admonition  that  judicial
      review is an unsuitable vehicle  for  resolving  disputed  facts.   It
      seems to us that the correct formulation of  this  principle  must  be
      that, as a general rule, the forum of judicial review  proceedings  is
      frequently less suitable than others for resolving disputed issues  of
      fact.  It is undeniable that, in  this  respect,  the  classic  inter-
      partes model with its adversarial  rules  and  traits,  which  include
      "live" evidence and cross examination, has clear advantages.  However,
      once again, as decisions such as  Anufrijeva   v   London  Borough  of
      Southwark [2004] 2 WLR 603  illustrate,  this  is  not  an  inflexible
      principle.  Thus, while, per Lord Lowry, oral evidence and  disclosure
      "are not part of the  ordinary  stock  in  trade  of  the  prerogative
      jurisdiction" (R  v Inland  Revenue  Commissioners,  ex  parte  Coombs
      [1991] 2 AC 283, at 302), we consider that the fact  sensitive  nature
      and litigation sensitive context of the individual case must always be
      examined.  Furthermore, the related principle that in judicial  review
      the Respondent's (or Defendant's)  evidence  is  to  be  taken  as  it
      stands, namely in preference to that of the  Applicant  (or  Claimant)
      where they are in conflict with each other, does  not  nowadays  apply
      with the same force of yesteryear.  As was observed by Nolan LJ  in  R
      v  Secretary of State for the  Department  of  Environment,  ex  parte
      London Borough of Islington [1997] JR 121, at 128:

           "Disputed questions of fact do not normally  arise  in  judicial
           review cases, but they can of  course  arise  and  they  may  be
           crucial."

      We consider that the following formulation of Richards J captures  the
      true principle:


           "In each case the Court has to make a judgment on the  basis  of
           the factual material before it. There  are  often  gaps  in  the
           evidence.  That is something with


           which the Court has to cope as best it can."

      See London Borough  of  Islington   v   Camp  [2004]  LGR  58  at  66.
      Moreover, the  effect  of  the  whips  and  scorns  of  time  and  the
      effervescent evolution of the common law is that the notional paradigm
      judicial review case is  somewhat  less  prevalent  nowadays  than  in
      earlier eras, as the present proceedings graphically illustrate.


  76. We have referred above to the  litigation  context.   In  the  present
      case, relevant features of the litigation context include the  reality
      that some of the material evidence takes the form of the reported oral
      statements of persons, Afghan Government Ministers in particular,  who
      will probably not be available for cross examination (if  such  course
      were  ordered)  in  any  conceivable  circumstances.    It   is   also
      appropriate to take into  account  that  tribunal  judges  have  ample
      familiarity with the tasks of resolving contentious factual issues and
      making findings of fact. We are further aware that none of the parties
      to these proceedings, all of them represented by experienced  Counsel,
      has suggested that in the forum of this litigation the Upper  Tribunal
      is in any way ill equipped  to  make  evaluative  assessments  of  the
      evidence and, where necessary or appropriate, to find  facts.  Indeed,
      the final submissions of all parties positively espouse  this  course,
      albeit in somewhat contrasting terms.

  77. The  Tribunal  shall  proceed  accordingly.  In  doing  so,  we  would
      highlight that we have  rehearsed  all  the  evidence  in  extenso  in
      chapter V above and we have,  with  the  assistance  of  the  parties,
      identified all of the key facts bearing on the  individual  Applicants
      in chapter VI.  In performing this exercise we have identified certain
      key issues, to which we now turn.


      Minister Balkhi's Statements

  78. This forms a lynchpin of the Applicants' challenges.  We have reviewed
      the evidence bearing on this discrete issue and refer to our digest of
      it in [24] and [54]  above.   As  a  starting  point  we  accept  that
      Minister Balkhi spoke the words attributed to him.  We must  view  his
      statements in the full surrounding context and  within  the  landscape
      formed by all the evidence.  Minister Balkhi is the  Afghani  Minister
      for Refugees and Repatriation.  We note, firstly,  that  when  he  was
      interviewed by Dr Schuster he was newly appointed.  This  chimes  with
      later, more detailed, evidence  from  Afghan  government  members  and
      representatives about the lack of a settled government position on the
      topic of the repatriation of Afghan nationals.  We consider it  likely
      that Minister Balkhi seized the opportunity to broadcast a hard  line,
      in the context of the  obvious  reality  that  Afghanistan  remains  a
      struggling country with significant economic and other problems and  a
      grossly over populated capital, Kabul.  We take judicial notice of the
      fact that repatriation involves a drain on  limited  resources.   Thus
      the discouragement of would be repatriating countries is  a  far  from
      surprising strategy.

  79. We further take into account that Minister  Balkhi  was  expressing  a
      personal

       opinion.  This is clear from the terminology of Dr Schuster's report:



           "He is unwilling .........  in the Minister's view ......"


           [Our emphasis.]

      This assessment is readily made  from  the  text.   It  is  reinforced
      substantially by later evidence.  We refer particularly to the witness
      statements of Mr Chatterton  Dickson  and,  especially,  the  accounts
      therein of  discussions  with  other  Afghan  government  members  and
      representatives.  Furthermore, subsequent events  confound  the  words
      spoken by Minister Balkhi, namely the undisputed  evidence  of  actual
      repatriations and how these unfolded on  the  ground.   This  evidence
      establishes clearly, inter  alia,  that  Afghan  nationals  have  been
      repatriated to provinces which Minister Balkhi had effective  declared
      "off limits".   It  establishes  equally  clearly  that,  contrary  to
      Minister Balkhi's claims, the MOU, as elucidated and  supplemented  by
      the surrounding  NVs,  has  continued  to  govern  repatriations.   We
      consider it probable that one of the motivations stimulating  the  NVs
      was to provide clarification and assurance designed  to,  inter  alia,
      quash or eliminate the  Minister's  statements.   Furthermore,  taking
      into account his government portfolio, we find that  given  subsequent
      events Minister Balkhi himself has retreated from the stance which  he
      adopted at the beginning of the events under scrutiny.

  80. We note also the absence of any  corroboration  of  Minister  Balkhi's
      statements.  For  example,  they  are  not  supported  by  UNCHR.  His
      statements are further confounded by  the  contents  of  the  NVs.  We
      consider that, ultimately, the  statements  of  Minister  Balkhi  were
      those of an isolated and unauthorised voice,  at a particular point in
      time, ploughing a lonely furrow which the author has since  abandoned.
      This analysis is reinforced by the most recent statement attributed to
      the Minister in a telephone conversation with a member of the firm  of
      solicitors representing the Applicants: see [53](i) above.    In  this
      statement the Minister specifically highlighted three of the provinces
      of Afghanistan as very dangerous. This stands in marked contrast  with
      his statement at the beginning of this discrete saga, when he  claimed
      that only two of the thirty four Afghanistan provinces were safe.   We
      consider the evolution in his personal stance clear.

      The MOU Issue


  81. This is a second key aspect of the  Applicants'  challenges.   At  the
      outset, we highlight that it differs in character from  the  "Minister
      Balkhi" issue, since, while  it  requires  the  Tribunal  to  evaluate
      certain segments of evidence, it also entails the  detached,  clinical
      exercise of construing certain  documents,  namely  the  MOU  and  the
      related NVs.  This is a pure issue of law  and  the  evidence  bearing
      thereon is, at this juncture, static and  complete.   We  characterise
      this a pure issue of law because it is trite that the construction  of
      any document is a question of law for the court or tribunal concerned:
      see In Re McFarland [2004] UKHL 17 at [24], per Lord Steyn.   In  this
      instance, the primary  document  to  be  construed  is  the  MOU.   We
      consider it appropriate to exclude from this purely objective

      exercise  the  subjective  claims  and  assertions  contained  in  the
      Secretary of State's witness statements and related  exhibits.   While
      materials of this  kind  might  be  admissible  in  other  documentary
      construction contexts, we consider that given their unilateral, self -
      serving and ad hoc nature they must be disregarded  in  this  discrete
      context.

  82.  It is trite that the MOU and the related NVs are to be  construed  in
      the context to which they belong.  These documents are the product  of
      high level inter-governmental diplomatic  negotiations  and  activity.
      They   are   mechanisms   designed   to   facilitate   the   practical
      implementation  of  arrangements  between  States.   Though   somewhat
      analogous thereto, they are  not  to  be  equated  with  international
      treaties  or  conventions.   They  have  an  unmistakably   precarious
      dimension, as  the  evidence  in  these  proceedings  confirms.   This
      assessment  is   fortified   by   the   appellation   "Memorandum   of
      Understanding".  We consider this  to  be  a  species  of  inter-state
      arrangements which is to  be  construed  with  a  suitable  degree  of
      breadth and flexibility.

  83. The Tribunal's resolution of this issue is to  some  extent  bound  up
      with its determination of the  "Minister  Balkhi"  issue.   The  first
      assessment which we make of the MOU is that its text has clearly  been
      supplemented, or varied, by the practice of the two signatory  States.
      The main variation of this species is that while the terms of the  MOU
      do not embrace involuntary returning Afghan  nationals,  it  has  been
      consistently applied to this  group.   Thus,  as  it  has  evolved  in
      practice, the MOU encompasses both voluntary and involuntary returning
      Afghan nationals.

  84. The next issue to which we turn is that of  vulnerable  persons.   The
      term employed in the text is "vulnerable groups".   This  is  not  the
      subject of any attempted exhaustive definition.  Rather,  while  there
      is some description, this is inclusive  in  nature.   The  groups  who
      expressly fall within  this  inclusive  definition  are  unaccompanied
      minors, women and children.  The words "other vulnerable  groups"  are
      undefined and unparticularised.

  85. We consider that the legal effect of the several NVs is to  supplement
      and elucidate the terms of the MOU. The NVs merge with the MOU. By the
      first NV  a  more  expansive  definition  of  "vulnerable  groups"  is
      introduced, under the banner of "vulnerable people":

           "..... Children, families, women without  a  male  relative  and
           individuals  whose  permanent  residential  areas  are  insecure
           .........."

      The inclusive nature of this definition is highlighted by the  absence
      of any repeated reference to "unaccompanied minors", whose  protection
      against enforced repatriation continues to be found in the MOU.   Some
      further expansion of the definition of vulnerable persons is contained
      in the third NV, which employs the language "vulnerable  people,  such
      as single mothers, children, elders  [and]  individuals  whose  living
      areas are under security risks".  Herein one finds the first  explicit
      reference to "single mothers"  and  "elders".   The  words  "such  as"
      perpetuate the
      theme of inexhaustive definition.


  86. The open textured language and inexhaustive terms of the definition of
      vulnerable people contained in the MOU and supplementing NVs  has  the
      potential to give rise to debate  in  individual  cases.    Thus,  for
      example, a physically or mentally handicapped adult would be  expected
      to contend that they are exempted  from  repatriation  on  account  of
      their  specific  vulnerability.   Furthermore,  while   the   language
      includes the word "families", it is not difficult to  conceive  of  an
      individual family which may not be considered vulnerable -for example,
      a unit consisting of two healthy parents aged in the bracket 45-60 and
      two healthy, able bodied children  aged  in  the  range  20-35.  These
      reflections serve to highlight that every case will be unavoidably and
      intensively fact sensitive.  Furthermore, by its very nature, the  MOU
      is capable of evolving with the passage of time, as events during  the
      past three months have demonstrated.  That it is not set in  stone  is
      further reinforced by the clear evidence of a bilateral commitment  of
      the two Governments concerned to reconsider its terms.  This,  in  our
      estimation, is properly analysed as  a  continuation  of  an  exercise
      already begun.

  87. Having construed the MOU we turn  to  examine  its  legal  status  and
      effect. We have begun this exercise in [81]-[82] above.   We  consider
      that the MOU is to be viewed, fundamentally, as a species of agreement
      between two sovereign States. Those to whom it applies are not parties
      to this agreement.  Accordingly, they cannot rely  on  the  MOU  as  a
      source of rights which they can assert or obligations  owed  to  them.
      Furthermore, it is trite that the MOU does not  limit  or  dilute  the
      international obligations of the United  Kingdom  Government  deriving
      from the Refugee Convention, the Qualification Directive and the ECHR.
       The issue of risk upon return is neither addressed  nor  governed  by
      the MOU.  Rather, this issue, which is one of mixed fact and  law,  is
      to be evaluated and determined on a case by case basis by reference to
      the  aforementioned  international  instruments  and   all   available
      material evidence.

  88. We consider that the MOU is, at heart, a bilaterally agreed  mechanism
      regulating the practical implementation of the repatriation of  Afghan
      nationals from the United Kingdom to their country of origin. It is  a
      cocktail of highbrow principles and the purely prosaic. It enshrines a
      series of norms and principles to be applied by the two Governments to
      the repatriation exercise. It is not overly  prescriptive.   It  is  a
      relatively high level instrument, with its espousal of governing norms
      and principles and its lack of dense detail.  It is  clearly  designed
      to provide the two governments with a workable,  viable  and  flexible
      tool to achieve the aims of efficacious repatriation and, in the words
      of one of the recitals, the "dignified, safe and orderly  repatriation
      to and successful integration in Afghanistan", which is clearly one of
      its overarching purposes.

  89. Given our assessment of the legal character of the MOU,  the  question
      arises to what extent, if any, individuals  can  seek  to  invoke  its
      terms. We consider that the MOU  is  not  simply  a  bilateral  inter-
      governmental agreement.  Rather, it  is  also  an  expression  of  the
      policy of the United Kingdom Government relating to the

      repatriation of Afghan nationals.  As such, it has  the  status  of  a
      material consideration which, as a matter of public law, must be taken
      into account in the
      case of every proposed repatriation. This we consider to have been the
      primary public law obligation imposed on the  Secretary  of  State  in
      making the impugned decisions.

  90. As regards other possible  legal  effects,  mindful  of  the  confined
      nature of the challenge in these proceedings, we confine ourselves  to
      some general observations.  It  is  conceivable  that  the  MOU  could
      feature in a challenge based on the common law principle  of  equality
      of treatment, sometimes framed as the  "like  cases  must  be  treated
      alike" maxim: see, for example, R (G) v Barnett LBC [2004] 2  AC  208,
      at [46].  It  is  also  conceivable  that  the  asserted  inconsistent
      application, or indeed its non-application, in a given case of the MOU
      could found an irrationality challenge.

  91. In addition, there may be scope for asserting a substantive legitimate
      expectation  based  on  the  terms  of  the  MOU,  in  particular  its
      provisions  (as  supplemented)  relating  to  vulnerable  persons  and
      groups.  Challenges of  this  kind  have  featured  in  the  analogous
      context of  immigration  policies.  See,  for  example,  R  (Saadi)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] 1 WLR  356,  at  [7]
      especially (per Lord Phillips MR),  R v Secretary of Statement for the
      Home Department, ex parte Popatia [2001] Imm AR 46,  R v Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department, ex parte Ahmed [1999] Imm AR 22 (at 36-
      37 especially), Minister for Immigration and  Ethnic  Affairs  v  Teoh
      [1995] 183 CLR 273 and Thomas v Baptiste [2000] 2 AC  1.   In  all  of
      these cases the principle that  the  assumption  of  an  international
      treaty obligation by the Executive is capable  of  giving  rise  to  a
      legitimate expectation is acknowledged.  So far as we are  aware,  the
      issue  of  whether  this  principle  extends   to   inter-Governmental
      agreements such  as  the  MOU  has  not  been  authoritively  decided.
      Subject to more extensive argument in an appropriate case, there is no
      evident reason why it should not.

  92. For the avoidance of any doubt, we make clear that the  possible  uses
      and significance of the MOU in judicial review  proceedings  canvassed
      above will have to  await  future  judicial  decision  in  appropriate
      cases.   None of them arises for decision in the present proceedings.

  93. We find no evidential basis for concluding that the MOU was not  taken
      into account by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  making  the  decisions
      impugned in the present cases.  Insofar as  the  Applicants  make  the
      contrary case, the burden of demonstrating this, a  pure  question  of
      primary fact or inference, has not been discharged.  Indeed, any  such
      assertion is positively confounded by both the content and date of the
      first NV of 10 March 2015:  see  [46]  supra.   In  Counsel's  written
      submissions the Applicants advance the following case:


           ".... Where there is in prospect a change  of  policy  which  is
           likely to materially affect the returns of those who  fall  into
           the categories identified above as 'vulnerable' ..... To  remove
           such persons prior to that is unlawful  and  unreasonable  where
           that issue goes to protection/ECHR claims and/or


           demonstrates   that   the   'safety   valve'   of    exceptional
           circumstances under paragraph 353B [Immigration Rules] ought  to
           be properly addressed."

      Having  measured  this  submission  against  conventional  public  law
      standards, we consider that there is no illegality or irrationality in
      decisions to repatriate appropriate Afghan nationals in  circumstances
      where the two governments are committed to discussing the  possibility
      of a revised MOU.

      The Paragraph 353 Challenge

  94. We have rehearsed above, in [67], the basic principles bearing on this
      aspect of  the  Applicant's  challenge.   This  being  a  "rolled  up"
      hearing, we remind ourselves that the threshold to be surpassed is not
      the modest one of arguability.  The statements attributed to  Minister
      Balkhi and the case made based on the MOU are two of the  cornerstones
      of the Applicants' challenge under paragraph 353 of the Rules.  Having
      regard to the evaluation and conclusions set forth above, two  of  the
      main pillars of the Applicant's challenge are without substance.   The
      other elements of this challenge are rehearsed in Chapter V above: the
      expert evidence, the UNCHR 2013 Guidelines,  the  various  reports  of
      international agencies, the Home Office 2015 Country  Information  and
      Guidance publications and the sundry witness statements  generated  on
      both sides.

  95. Self evidently, the Secretary of State's decisions in these cases fall
      to be reviewed by the Tribunal by reference to the evidence extant  on
      31 March and 01 April 2015,  when  the  latest  decisions  were  made,
      applying the  principles  rehearsed  above  and,  in  particular,  the
      threshold of irrationality.  In substance, we prefer the arguments  of
      Ms Glass (summarised in [69]  -  [70])  on  this  issue.   Within  the
      limitations of a judicial review challenge and the hearing  which  has
      taken place we find no warrant for departing from the current  country
      guidance promulgated in AK.  In particular, we find that the  evidence
      falls short of satisfying the stringent Article 15(c) test.

  96. The Tribunal is equipped to make a further, ex post facto,  assessment
      of the impugned decisions having regard to the post-decision  evidence
      which it has received.   This  includes  evidence  of  the  successful
      repatriation of Afghan nationals from the  United  Kingdom  and  other
      countries to  a  series  of  provinces.   In  this  context  we  refer
      particularly to the evidence digested in [50] above, which we  accept.
      This evidence reinforces our conclusion that the impugned decisions of
      the Secretary of State are unimpeachable on the  grounds  advanced  by
      the Applicants.

  97. We are alert to the  factor  of  new  evidence  in  the  case  of  the
      Applicant SA and our ruling refusing  the  application  to  amend  his
      grounds, based thereon: see [14]-[16]  above.   Thus  we  consider  it
      inappropriate to adjudicate on the discrete "durable solutions" aspect
      of his challenge and his reliance upon Article 8  ECHR.   Our  general
      findings and conclusions above should be considered in this  light  in
      his particular case.  We have  also  considered  it  inappropriate  to
      consider the challenge of those Applicants who base their case in part
      on paragraph 276

      ADE or paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules since this case was not
      made to the Secretary of State and, in consequence, has not  been  the
      subject of decision by the executive.

IX    ORDER

      Dismiss

  98. Mindful of the modest threshold of arguability,  particularly  in  the
      context of challenges to decisions made under  paragraph  353  of  the
      Immigration Rules, we conclude that permission to apply  for  judicial
      review should be granted to these five lead Applicants and we  dismiss
      their applications substantively. As regards the other Applicants,  we
      dismiss their permission applications. Having considered the  parties'
      further oral and  written  submissions,  we  determine  the  ancillary
      matters in the following way.





      Interim Relief

  99. All of the Applicants were the beneficiaries of interim relief in  the
      form of an order prohibiting the Secretary of State from taking  steps
      designed to remove any of them from the jurisdiction  pending  further
      order.  When judgment was handed down in draft on 17  June  2015  this
      order was extended to 26 June 2015.  On 25 June all of the  Applicants
      made an application seeking a further extension of the  order.   By  a
      letter of the same date it was represented, in terms, on behalf of the
      Secretary of State  that  removal  directions  were  not  imminent  in
      respect of any of the Applicants, in  circumstances  where  the  final
      approved version of this judgment remained outstanding.  [In  passing,
      this circumstance materialised for the purely prosaic reason that both
      members of the panel were on leave during the two weeks following upon
      the hand down in draft.]  It was  also  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State that the grant of further interim relief  would  be
      inappropriate  given  that  the  judicial  review  claims   had   been
      dismissed.   Given  these  considerations,  the  Order  of   a   panel
      comprising Dove J and Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum  was  to  refuse  the
      interim relief applications.  This  disposed  of  the  interim  relief
      issue.

      Further Applications

 100. The Order made orally on  17  June  2015  incorporated  the  following
      elements: the draft judgment handed down remained under the  editorial
      control of the Tribunal, with the approved final judgment to follow in
      due course; the substantive applications for judicial  review  of  the
      five lead Applicants were dismissed and the permission applications of
      all other Applicants were dismissed, with liberty to  apply  (included
      as a precautionary measure of fairness); the interim injunctive relief
      was extended to midnight on 26 June 2015; a timetable was set for  any
      application for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  and  any
      response of the Secretary of State thereto; and, finally, the lead

 101. Applicants were ordered to pay the Respondent's costs, subject to  any
      submissions in writing to be made in  accordance  with  the  timetable
      directed.

 102. This elicited a response on behalf of the  Applicants  which  included
      eleven
      formal applications filed on 24 and 25 June 2015.  These  applications
      were purportedly made pursuant to the liberty to  apply  facility.  We
      shall describe the moving parties as the "LTA" Applicants.   Three  of
      the LTA Applicants are members of Schedule AB.  The other eight belong
      to  Schedule  C.   All  eleven  LTA  Applicants  seek  a  species   of
      reinstatement of their individual cases upon which we elaborate infra.




 103. As appears from [1] - [22] above,  the  procedural  history  of  these
      proceedings has a number of singular features.   These  are  reflected
      in, inter alia, the three Schedules to which  all  of  the  Applicants
      have been allocated from time to time.  From these schedules five lead
      cases were selected.  This exercise was  undertaken  by  the  parties'
      representatives and its outcome was  presented  to  the  Tribunal  for
      approval, which was duly granted and recorded in an order.   As  noted
      in [5] above:


           "This mechanism was deployed in the  interests  of  orderly  and
           efficient case management and with a view to inducing a decision
           of the Tribunal designed to encompass all members of the group."


      As the litigation progressed, the stance adopted on behalf of  all  of
      the Applicants in response to the Tribunal's direction of 23 May  2015
      is noteworthy: see  [17]  -  [22]  above.   The  approach  which  this
      Tribunal ultimately determined to adopt is rehearsed in  [70]  -  [77]
      above. As we have stated, this approach was dictated by,  inter  alia,
      the large number of litigants in these proceedings - see [70] and [72]
      - and certain other factors, including in  particular  "the  potential
      for judicial adjudication of the main issues ...  to influence  future
      events and decisions, to limit the areas of dispute and to save costs,
      given the predictable scenario of the parties continuing to join issue
      in the context of fresh decision making by the Secretary of State." In
      [71], we debated whether  judicial  adjudication  of  the  Applicants'
      challenges  on  the  basis  of  all  the  evidence  amassed  would  be
      appropriate "...  in circumstances where the proper course is  plainly
      for the Secretary of State to make further,  updated  decisions,  with
      such  consequences  as  may  materialise.   This  is  linked  to   the
      unequivocal acknowledgment on behalf of the Applicants that there will
      be further representations to  the  Secretary  of  State  designed  to
      elicit fresh decisions: see [19] above.


 104. When handing down judgment in draft on 17 June 2015,  the  observation
      was made that it appeared to the Tribunal that unless  it  had  lapsed
      into some very serious misconception the exercise of the  facility  of
      liberty to apply would seem inappropriate, having regard  particularly
      to the matters highlighted in the preceding paragraph.   Against  this
      background the aforementioned eleven applications  have  materialised.
      The eleven LTA Applicants are,  at  this  belated  stage,  effectively
      seeking to retreat from the  elaborate  case  management  arrangements
      which were made, consensually, for the purpose of processing all

      32  judicial  review  applications  together  and  are  in   substance
      airbrushing the written concession -  unambiguous  and  unavoidable  -
      made  on  their  behalf  that  there  will   inevitably   be   further
      representations to the Secretary of State and ensuing fresh decisions.
       These Applicants now seek to have their individual  cases  considered
      and determined by the Tribunal.  Or  do  they?  Not  quite.  The  most
      striking feature of their applications is that while  they  appear  to
      seek adjudication of their  judicial  review  permission  applications
      they  simultaneously  request  the  deferral  of   such   adjudication
      indefinitely to enable further  representations  to  be  made,  to  be
      followed by fresh decisions by the Secretary of State and amendment of
      their judicial review claims if so advised.


 105. The impropriety of  this  proposal  is  stark.  We  consider  what  is
      proposed by these eleven Applicants inappropriate  for  the  following
      reasons.   First,  it  is  irreconcilable  with  the  consensual  case
      management  arrangements  made.    Second,   given   the   unambiguous
      concession that fresh representations will be made to the Secretary of
      State with a view  to  eliciting  new  decisions,  we  consider  these
      applications a misuse of the process of the  Upper  Tribunal.   Third,
      the judicial review applications initiated by  these  Applicants  have
      been rendered moot given the indelible fact that there will be further
      representations to the Secretary of State and new decisions.   Fourth,
      these applications are manifestly irreconcilable with  the  overriding
      objective. Fifth, an alternative remedy,  namely  the  opportunity  to
      procure a more  favourable  decision  from  the  Secretary  of  State,
      remains unexhausted.  Finally, what is proposed contravenes the strong
      general prohibition in contemporary litigation against rolling  review
      by the court or tribunal. We are satisfied that  the  process  of  the
      Upper Tribunal should not be invoked for the purpose sought  in  these
      circumstances.

 106. While we are mindful that there are some variations among  the  eleven
      LTA applications, each having its individual context, we  consider  it
      unnecessary to dilate on these in adjudicating upon the  applications.
      For the reasons elaborated above we dismiss these applications.




      Costs


 107. As noted above, the Order made by the Tribunal upon handing down  this
      judgment in draft was that the Applicants pay the Respondent's  costs,
      subject to any written submissions in accordance  with  the  timetable
      directed.  It is represented, unchallenged, on behalf of the Secretary
      of State that following the hearing on this date the liability of  the
      Applicants  to  pay  the  Respondent's  costs  was  conceded  and  the
      Tribunal's  provisional  Order  was  acknowledged.    The   associated
      correspondence was forwarded to the Tribunal.  Notwithstanding, on the
      following  two  dates,  18  and  19   June   2015,   the   Applicants'
      representatives sought to resile from this concession.   They  did  so
      without seeking to  vary  the  Tribunal's  timetable  directions.   In
      handing down judgment the Tribunal dealt with the issue of costs in  a
      free standing way.  This issue was not  embraced  by  the  liberty  to
      apply  provision:  and  the  contrary  is  not  suggested.   In  these
      circumstances the Tribunal is not seized of a valid costs  application
      on behalf of

      the Applicants.


 108. Further and in any event, we reject the additional  costs  submissions
      on behalf of the Applicants on their merits.  The  general  rule  that
      costs follow the event  is  a  strong  one.  Nothing  to  warrant  its
      displacement  in  this  case  has  been  demonstrated.   All  of   the
      applications have been dismissed and this  occurred  in  circumstances
      where all of the 32 Applicants subscribed  consensually  to  the  case
      management mechanism reflected in the Order identifying the five  lead
      Applicants.  We take into account that the inter-partes  dimension  of
      these  proceedings  has  been  largely  confined  to  the  five   lead
      Applicants.  We are also mindful of the usual practice regarding costs
      at the permission stage.  On balance, we decide that there  should  be
      an order for costs against the five lead Applicants,  coupled  with  a
      public funding element if appropriate.  We make no orders as to costs,
      save to reflect public funding status, as regards the others.


 109. We note the discrete issue pertaining to the costs in respect  of  the
      Court of Appeal "hearing" (evidently a  telephonic  exercise)  on  the
      evening of 21 April 2015, when costs were reserved. We  were  informed
      that  this  particular  judicial  intervention  had  the   effect   of
      cancelling the charter flight scheduled to depart to Afghanistan.  The
      Tribunal is unclear of the circumstances in which  this  materialised.
      However, we are satisfied that further investigation of this  discrete
      issue would be both unnecessary and manifestly disproportionate.   The
      net effect of any successful appeal, or application, by any of the  32
      Applicants to the Court of Appeal was to secure the grant  of  interim
      injunctive relief and  the  remittal  of  all  issues,  including  the
      reserved costs, to the Upper Tribunal. We have  been  shown  no  order
      suggesting otherwise.  None of the parties contests  our  jurisdiction
      to determine this discrete issue.

 110. It would appear that the appeals, or  applications,  were  brought  ex
      parte. Furthermore, it is undisputed  that  the  ingredients  of  this
      unusual context included the circumstance of no anterior order of  the
      Upper Tribunal refusing interim relief and the pursuit  of  relief  on
      behalf of  certain  persons  whose  identities  were  unknown  to  the
      lawyers.  Ultimately, all 32 judicial review applications having  been
      dismissed by this  Tribunal,  whether  by  refusal  of  permission  or
      substantively, any suggestion that the  Respondent  should  pay  these
      discrete costs of the Applicants concerned is a bold one.   We  concur
      with the submission on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
      pragmatic, reasonable and proportionate course is to make no Order  as
      to costs inter-partes regarding this discrete matter.


 111. Accordingly, we order that the Upper Tribunal  Orders  that  the  five
      lead Applicants pay the Respondent's costs of these proceedings, to be
      assessed in default of agreement and giving effect to  the  assessment
      provisions of section 26(1) of the Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment
      of Offenders Act 2012.As regards the other Applicants we make no order
      as to costs inter-partes and we make the appropriate order as  regards
      any of these Applicants who are publicly funded.




      Permission to Appeal


 112. The application for permission to appeal  suffers  from  the  manifest
      flaw that it does not engage with the applicable test, which  requires
      that either an important point of principle or practice or some  other
      compelling reason warranting the grant of permission is raised. Having
      considered the grounds broadly, and in bonam partem, we conclude  that
      this test is not satisfied. These are intensely fact  sensitive  cases
      belonging to a unique litigation  context.  Permission  to  appeal  is
      refused accordingly.


 113. We would add that the application for permission to appeal is also, as
      a  minimum, a dubious invocation of the process of  the  Tribunal  for
      the reasons highlighted and summarised in [104] above.  We  take  this
      opportunity to restate what was articulated firmly  and  unequivocally
      when judgment was handed down  in  draft  on  17  June  2015.   Viewed
      panoramically, the proper forum for any further engagement between any
      of the Applicants and the  Secretary  of  State  is  that  of  further
      representations to the Secretary of State and fresh decisions  by  the
      latter.  Neither the Upper Tribunal nor, in our judgement,  the  Court
      of Appeal has any  role  in  this  process.  We  wish  to  state  this
      emphatically.


      Draft judgments

 114. As regards the proper practice in the matter of circulation  of  draft
      judgments, the Tribunal draws attention to  the  cautionary  words  of
      Lord Hoffman in Edwards & Ors R (on the application of) v  Environment
      Agency & Ors [2008] UKHL 22 at [66]:


           "On 23 January 2008 the hearing in this appeal was concluded. On
           Friday  4  April  2008,  after  the  members  of  the  Appellate
           Committee  had  prepared  drafts  of  the  speeches  which  they
           proposed to deliver, the solicitors to the parties were notified
           that judgment would be given on 9 April. In accordance with  the
           practice of  the  House,  copies  of  the  draft  speeches  were
           provided in confidence with a request that  counsel  check  them
           for "error and ambiguity". On Monday  7  April  the  appellant's
           solicitors notified the Judicial Office that  they  proposed  to
           submit a memorandum pointing out errors  in  the  judgments  but
           that it could not be  submitted  until  the  following  morning.
           Judgment therefore had to  be  postponed  until  16  April.  The
           memorandum when  it  arrived,  consisted  of  27  paragraphs  of
           closely typed submissions referring to  three  directives  which
           had not been mentioned in the appellant's lengthy submissions to
           the House and repeating other arguments which had  already  been
           considered. It contains nothing  which  causes  me  to  wish  to
           change the views expressed in my draft speech. In my opinion the
           submission of such a memorandum is an abuse of  process  of  the
           procedure of the House. The purpose of  the  disclosure  of  the
           draft speeches to counsel is to obtain their help in  correcting
           misprints,  inadvertent  errors  of  fact  or   ambiguities   of
           expression. It is not to enable them to reargue the case."

 115. In this case  the  draft  judgment  was  circulated  to  the  parties'
      representatives on 16 June 2015.  This elicited a response  from  both
      parties.  The response on behalf

      of the Secretary of State was confined to highlighting misprints, mis-
      spellings  and  kindred  faults.   The  response  on  behalf  of   the
      Applicants sought, in effect, to re-argue aspects of  their  case  and
      proposed the extensive rewriting of  various  passages  in  the  draft
      judgment.  The  proposed   rewriting   of   the   judgment   continued
      energetically  until  the  eve  of  final  promulgation.   The   grave
      misconception underlying this reaction is betrayed in the single  word
      "analysis".  At the hand down hearing which ensued the  following  day
      and in subsequent communications,  this  was  the  word  used  by  the
      Applicants' representatives to describe the  exercise  in  which  they
      were engaged.  We trust  that  the  above  quotation  will  cure  this
      fallacy.

 116. It is also timely to draw attention to the impending publication of an
      Upper  Tribunal  Practice  Note  pertaining  to  the  topic  of  draft
      judgments and associated matters.  To date, as all  practitioners  are
      aware, the Upper Tribunal has given effect to the Administrative Court
      practice.  A specially tailored Upper Tribunal Practice Note will come
      into operation in the very near future.




            Signed :
                       [pic]
      The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
      President of the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber

      Dated:       21 July 2015
























Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).


                                 APPENDIX 1


 FINAL "SCHEDULE AB" APPLICANTS FOLLOWING SEALED CONSENT ORDER OF 6 MAY 2015
                    SETTLING MATTER OF GHH (JR/2856/2015)
|                |APPLICANT       |DOB             |CLAIM NO        |
|1.              |HN (LEAD 1)     |01.01.1993      |JR/2778/2015    |
|2.              |NRS             |28.05.1991      |JR/2812/2015    |
|3.              |JN              |18.03.1976      |JR/2784/2015    |
|4.              |SA (LEAD 2)     |01.01.1997      |JR/2813/2015    |
|5.              |AR              |05.10.1992      |JR/2838/2015    |
|6.              |AB              |01.01.1982      |JR/2786/2015    |
|7               |JG (LEAD 3)     |01.01.1990      |JR/2781/2015    |
|8.              |LMA             |06.10.1994      |JR/2780/2015    |
|9.              |ST              |01.01.1982      |JR/2779/2015    |
|10.             |FK (LEAD 4)     |01.01.1990      |JR/2793/2015    |
|11.             |DT              |01.01.1990      |JR/2859/2015    |
|12.             |MN              |02.01.1978      |JR/2588/2015    |
|13.             |AKK             |01.01.1991      |JR/2858/2015    |
|14.             |SM              |07.10.1990      |JR/2860/2015    |
|15.             |AK              |01.01.1990      |JR/2885/2015    |
|16.             |AB (LEAD 5)     |16.07.1988      |JR/2772/2015    |




 CONSOLIDATED "SCHEDULE C" APPLICANTS FOLLOWING GRANTS OF INTERIM RELIEF ON
                                21 APRIL 2015

|                |APPLICANT       |DOB             |CLAIM NO        |
|1.              |FM (LEAD)       |18.03.1995      |JR/4389/2015    |
|2.              |LT              |01.01.1990      |JR/4515/2015    |
|3.              |WM              |19.01.1996      |JR/4531/2015    |
|4.              |EM              |01.01.1996      |JR/4519/2015    |
|                |                |(disputed)      |                |
|5.              |MAH             |27.04.1985      |JR/4523/2015    |
|6.              |LSH             |01.09.1994      |JR/4522/2015    |
|7.              |JM              |01.01.1994      |JR/4518/2015    |
|8.              |HK              |01.01.1982      |JR/4514/2015    |
|9.              |SUO             |01.01.1986      |JR/4524/2015    |
|10.             |MKA             |05.06.1994      |JR/4521/2015    |
|11.             |RUM             |30.05.1976      |JR/4525/2015    |
|12.             |HMS             |01.01.1994      |JR/4516/2015    |
|13.             |NMP             |01.01.1976      |JR/4575/2015    |
|14.             |AHN             |01/09/1994      |JR/4572/2015    |




                   "SCHEDULE D" AS LODGED ON 21 APRIL 2015
|                |APPLICANT       |DOB             |CLAIM NO        |
|1.              |AM              |01.01.1987      |JR/4577/2015    |
|2.              |NMP             |01.01.1976      |JR/4575/2015    |
|3.              |HM              |23.03.1993      |JR/4579/2015    |
|4.              |AHN             |01/09/1994      |JR/4572/2015    |

Please note that applicants AM and HM no longer formed part of the
consolidated Schedule and applications continued separately





                                 APPENDIX 2


|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|SCHEDULE 1                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|SCHEDULE OF NEW EVIDENCE GENERATED BILATERALLY FOLLOWING GRANT OF |
|INTERIM RELIEF ON 10 MARCH 2015                                   |
|                                                                  |


   1. UNHCR, 'UNCHR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing  the  International
      Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers  from  Afghanistan'  of  06.08.2013
      (UNHCR Guidelines 2013);

   2. Home Office, "Country Information and Guidance - Afghanistan:  persons
      supporting or perceived to support the government and/or international
      forces, February 2015" (SSHD's Risks from  Supporting  the  Government
      Report, 2015);

   3. UNAMA: Afghanistan annual report: Protection  of  civilians  in  armed
      conflict, February 2015 (UNAMA report, 2015);

   4. Institute for the Study of War (ISW) The Taliban resurgent: threats to
      Afghanistan's security, by Lauren McNally and  Paul  Bucala  of  March
      2015;

   5. First Witness Statement of Robert Chatterton Dickson  dated  18  March
      2015;

   6. Expert Report by Dr Liza Schuster dated 26 March 2015;

   7. Expert Report by Professor Susan Clayton dated 23 March 2015;

   8. RCD1: Information Note on UK returns and  reintegration  Programme  to
      Afghanistan (undated);

   9. RCD2:Tripartite MOU between the UK and Afghan  government,  and  UNHCR
      dated 12 October 2002;

  10. Note Verbale: Ministry of foreign Affairs (Western Europe Desk)  dated
      10 March 2015;

  11. Witness Statement of Mark Rich dated 18 March 2015.


|                                                                  |
|SCHEDULE 2                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|SCHEDULE OF NEW EVIDENCE GENERATED BILATERALLY SINCE 31 MARCH 2015|
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |


   1. EASO Report dated January 2015

   2. OGN policy guidance re-issued February 2015

   3. Second witness statement of Robert Chatterton Dickson dated 17 April
      2015;

   4. Note Verbale of Afghanistan Embassy in London dated 13 April 2015;

   5. Note Verbale of Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs dated 13 April
      2015;

   6. Note Verbale dated 8 April 2015;

   7. Third witness statement of Robert Chatterton Dickson dated 6 May 2015

   8. Robert Chatterton Dickson's letter to the Tribunal dated 10 May 2015
      enclosing Note Verbale of Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs dated 9
      May 2015

   9. Two page UNAMA update dated 12 April 2015

  10. Original untranslated and Appellants' translations of the April Notes
      Verbales served on 7 May 2015

  11. Report of Mr Foxley dated 7 May 2015

  12. Witness statement of Jamie Bell dated 7 May 2015

  13. Witness statement of Nasir Ata dated 7 May 2015

  14. Witness statement of Bahar Ata dated 7 May 2015

  15. Red Cross and Asylum Welcome correspondence regarding the Applicant SA
      dated 10 April 2015; 23 April 2015, and 7 May 2015

  16. Country report "Research on IDPs in urban settings-Afghanistan" dated
      May 2011





