
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

NA and VA (protection: Article 7(2) Qualification Directive) India [2015]
UKUT 00432 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle Building, Glasgow       |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 May 2015                         |                          |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


                                   Between

                                     NA
                                     VA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellants: Ms L Irvine, Advocate, instructed by Drummond Miller LLP
Respondent: Mr J Komorowski, of Counsel, instructed by the Advocate General




    The word "generally" in Article 7(2) of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC
    (the Qualification Directive) denotes normally or in the generality  of
    cases.  Thus the  operation  of  an  effective  legal  system  for  the
    detection, prosecution and punishment of acts constituting  persecution
    or serious harm and access to such system by the claimant may not, in a
    given case, amount to protection. Article 7(2) is  non-prescriptive  in
    nature.  It prescribes neither minima nor maxima.  The duty imposed  on
    states to take "reasonable steps" imports the  concepts  of  margin  of
    appreciation and proportionality.



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

 1. The origins of these conjoined appeals lie in a decision made on behalf
    of the Secretary of State for the Home Department  (the  "Secretary  of
    State"), dated 18 January 2013, whereby it was determined that  neither
    of  the  Appellants,  who  are  of  Pakistani  and  Indian  nationality
    respectively and are husband and  wife,  qualifies  for  the  grant  of
    asylum or humanitarian protection.  The Appellants' ensuing appeals  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  (the "FtT") were dismissed. Given the atypical
    and  protracted  history  of  these  appeals,  we  requested   that   a
    comprehensive chronology be prepared. The response of  the  Appellants'
    representatives was  prompt  and  efficient  and  the  chronology  thus
    compiled is appended to this decision.



The Protection Claims

 2. Certain facts are uncontroversial, while others have  been  established
    by the findings of the FtT.  It is unnecessary to rehearse all of  them
    in extenso. The  Appellants  are  married.  The  first  Appellant,  the
    husband, is a national of Pakistan. He was the subject of  an  arranged
    engagement to be married to his first cousin in 2000, when he was  aged
    13 years. In September 2010 he entered the United Kingdom in accordance
    with a student visa which was subsequently extended, followed by a Tier
    1 Post-Study Work visa valid until 20 September 2013. His father  works
    in the oil industry and his brother works for  the  Pakistani  security
    services.  One of his uncles is involved in the Pakistan Muslim League.
    In 2012 one of this Appellant's  cousins  was  killed  in  a  so-called
    "honour killing" because he wished to marry a girl of lower caste.

 3. The second Appellant, of Indian nationality, had a similar  immigration
    path in the United Kingdom, having entered initially in  January  2009.
    In March 2012 the Appellants became engaged and  the  second  Appellant
    converted to Islam.  This occurred because the  first  Appellant  could
    not contemplate marrying anyone other than of the  Muslim  faith.  Both
    Appellants concealed the engagement  from  their  respective  families.
    They lived together from May 2012 and  were  married  on  06  September
    2012.  When they informed their families of this  event  thereafter,  a
    hostile reaction materialised.  The  second  Appellant's  father  is  a
    retired member of Parliament and a  current  political  activist.  Both
    Appellants were told by their families that they had brought  dishonour
    upon them and, in the case of the first Appellant, dishonour  upon  his
    former fianc�e also. They were warned that  they  would  be  killed  in
    consequence.



The Impugned Decisions

 4. In the refusal decisions the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the
    Appellants are married to each other and have  a  loving,  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  The threats  by  both  parties  to  kill  the
    Appellants were also accepted.  The Secretary of State considered  that
    the second Appellant would, as a matter of reasonable  probability,  be
    able to enter and  reside  in  Pakistan  as  the  Indian  spouse  of  a
    Pakistani  national.   The  next  question  considered  was   that   of
    sufficiency of  protection.   The  Secretary  of  State,  having  cited
    certain country guidance decisions of this Tribunal, noted  that  while
    there is no general insufficiency of state protection in Pakistan,  the
    individual circumstances of the Appellants  had  to  be  considered  in
    assessing whether there was a well founded fear of persecution.  Having
    noted the salient elements of their protection claims, the Secretary of
    State  concluded  that  the  Appellants   had   failed   to   establish
    insufficient or inefficacious state protection  in  Pakistan.   It  was
    considered, in  the  alternative,  that  the  Appellants  could  safely
    relocate internally within Pakistan.  The  prospects  of  the  putative
    persecutors locating the Appellants  within  Pakistan  were  considered
    remote.

 5. Next, the  decision  maker  assessed  the  Appellants'  claims  in  the
    separate context of risk on return  to  India.   The  first  evaluative
    assessment made was that, being the spouse of an Indian  national,  the
    first Appellant would probably be able to enter and  reside  in  India.
    Having  considered  certain  pieces  of   country   evidence,   various
    developments and improvements in the Indian justice  and  legal  system
    were noted.  This gave  rise  to  a  conclusion  that,  notwithstanding
    deficiencies in the police forces and  judiciary,  the  Appellants  had
    failed to demonstrate either an inability or an  unwillingness  on  the
    part of the Indian authorities to protect them.  It was considered,  in
    the alternative, that relocation within India was a  reasonable  option
    for the Appellants.

 6.  While  it  will  be  necessary  to  examine  certain  aspects  of  the
    determination of the FtT in a little detail in due course, it  suffices
    to record at this juncture that, in substance,  the  dismissal  of  the
    Appellants' appeals entailed an endorsement of the main elements of the
    Secretary of State's decision.



Appeal To This Tribunal

 7. The appeal to  this  Tribunal  has  two  main  dimensions.   The  first
    involves a question of principle relating to the  correct  construction
    of Article 7 of the  Qualification  Directive.  The  second  is  appeal
    specific, concerning certain aspects of the decision of the FtT.





The Qualification Directive Issue

 8. Council Directive 2004/83/EC prescribes certain minimum  standards  for
    the qualification and status of third country nationals,  or  stateless
    persons, as refugees or otherwise in need of international  protection.
    The key provision of the Directive in the context  of  this  appeal  is
    Article 7 which, under the rubric "Actors of Protection", provides

         "1.      Protection can be provided by:

             (a) the State; or

             (b)  parties   or   organisations,   including   international
             organisations, controlling the State or a substantial part  of
             the territory of the State.

         2. Protection is generally provided when the  actors  mentioned  in
         paragraph 1 take reasonable steps to  prevent  the  persecution  or
         suffering of serious harm, inter alia, by  operating  an  effective
         legal system for the detection, prosecution and punishment of  acts
         constituting persecution or serious harm,  and  the  applicant  has
         access to such protection.

         3. When assessing whether an international organisation controls  a
         State  or  a  substantial  part  of  its  territory  and   provides
         protection as described in paragraph 2, Member  States  shall  take
         into account any guidance which may be provided in relevant Council
         acts."

    This provision of the Directive  has  not  been  fully  and  faithfully
    transposed into domestic law by Article 4 of the Refugee or  Person  in
    Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006  (the
    "2006 Regulations"), by reason of the  omission  of  the  words  "inter
    alia" in regulation 4(2), which provides :

         "Protection shall be regarded as generally provided when the actors
         mentioned in paragraph(1)(a)  and  (b)  take  reasonable  steps  to
         prevent the persecution or suffering of serious harm  by  operating
         an effective  legal  system  for  the  detection,  prosecution  and
         punishment of acts constituting persecution or  serious  harm,  and
         the person mentioned in paragraph (1) has access to such protection
         ".

    This gives rise to the question of law addressed below. In passing, the
    wording in the recast Qualification Directive (2011/95/EU) mirrors that
    of its predecessor, in Article 7(2).[1]

 9. We summarise the rival arguments, which were  of  conspicuous  ability,
    thus.  On behalf of the Appellants, Ms Irvine formulated the  issue  of
    principle in terms of whether a general sufficiency of protection  that
    includes and is limited to  a  system  of  detection,  prosecution  and
    punishment of crime is compliant with Article 7 of the Directive.   She
    drew  attention  to  the  recognition  in  the  UNCHR   Handbook   that
    persecution is not confined to state actors but ".... may also  emanate
    from sections of the population  that  do  not  respect  the  standards
    established by the laws of the country  concerned".   Conduct  of  this
    kind  constitutes  persecution  where  the  acts  concerned  "...   are
    knowingly tolerated by the authorities or if the authorities refuse, or
    prove unable, to offer effective protection".  Ms Irvine submitted that
    the measures specified in Article 7(2) of the Directive are, by  virtue
    of the words "inter  alia",  inexhaustive.  Thus  it  is  necessary  to
    enquire whether, in the generality, the  state  system  under  scrutiny
    provides any other safeguards, such as an effective witness  protection
    programme or a womens' refuge.  The operation  of  an  effective  state
    legal system which includes the essential elements  of  the  detection,
    prosecution  and  punishment  of  crime  may  not  equate  to  adequate
    protection in a given case. Irrespective of whether further  mechanisms
    exist, it will still be necessary, under domestic  law,  to  apply  the
    "Osman" test (Osman v United Kingdom [2000] 29 EHRR 245).

10. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Komorowski  compared  the  law
    before and after the advent of the Qualification Directive,  submitting
    that there is no difference in substance between the two.   He  further
    submitted that notwithstanding the omission of the words  "inter  alia"
    in regulation 4(2) of  the  2006  Regulations,  there  is  no  material
    distinction between this provision and Article 7(2) of  the  Directive.
    The proper  construction  of  regulation  4(2)  is  that  it  does  not
    prescribe an exhaustive  list  of  measures,  by  virtue  of  the  word
    "generally", with the result that the omission of "inter alia" makes no
    difference.

11. It is appropriate to highlight some of the judicial  decisions  bearing
    on these issues.  The decision in Horvath v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2001] 1 AC 489 is to the effect  that  there  are  two
    fundamental tests to be satisfied  in  order  to  qualify  for  refugee
    status, namely the "fear test"  and  the  "protection  test".   In  the
    present appeal, the focus is on the second of these tests.   The  close
    association between the Horvath formulation  and  regulation  4(2)  was
    acknowledged by the AIT in IM (Sufficiency of Protection) Malawi [2007]
    UKAIT 00071, at [50], having noted the omission of  the  phrase  "inter
    alia":

         "The wording of this subparagraph is unmistakably  defeasible.   It
         is not stated that the taking of [the specified steps] will  amount
         to provision of adequate protection in every case, although  it  is
         said that it will in the generality of cases."

    In Haddadi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [Appeal  Number
    00TH02141] there is emphasis on  the  general  circumstances/individual
    circumstances axis, one of the axioms of refugee law.  Thus it  is  not
    sufficient to  demonstrate  inefficiencies  or  deficiencies  in  state
    protection in the abstract since these must always be  related  to  the
    individual case.

12. The provision and operation  of  a  state  system  for  the  detection,
    prosecution and punishment of crime is  an  internationally  recognised
    norm  of  long  standing.   An  informative  illustration  of  measures
    extending beyond and additional  to  this  provision  is  found  in  AB
    (Protection - Criminal Gangs - Internal Relocation) Jamaica  CG  [2007]
    UKAIT 00018, where the  persecution under consideration related to  the
    activities of an organised criminal gang  and  the  threat  which  this
    posed to the Appellant.  The Tribunal stated in [153]:

         "As far as the ability  of  these  gangs  to  operate  ........  is
         concerned ..........There is a considerable section of the evidence
         indicating that the major criminal  gangs  .........  do  have  the
         wherewithal to carry  out  revenge  attacks  or  reprisal  killings
         against persons whom they have a serious and specific  interest  in
         targeting.  Counterposing that, however, is  very  strong  evidence
         indicating that they have failed to get their  way  in  respect  of
         anyone who has been admitted into the  state's  Witness  Protection
         Programme .........




         [155]    Nevertheless, we recognise that apart from the safety  net
             of this programme, there does appear to be a  protection  gap.
             For persons targeted by gangs who are not reasonably likely to
             be  admitted  into  this  programme  .........   the  evidence
             ..........  strongly points to them not being able  to  secure
             protection from the authorities through the  range  of  normal
             protective functions carried out by the authorities  -  unless
             they  can  internally  relocate  without  being  at  risk   of
             detection by their persecutors."

    Additional measures may also include relevant provisions of  a  state's
    civil law system:  MacPherson  v   Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2001] EWCA Civ 1995, where Sedley LJ stated, at [21]:

         "What matters is that protection should be practical and effective,
         not that it should take a particular form.  Indeed to insist on the
         latter might very well be to frustrate  the  former.  What  perhaps
         matters more is the standard  of  protection  which  the  state  is
         expected  to  afford.   The  higher  the  standard,  the  less  the
         individual will have to establish in order to  show  non-compliance
         with it."

    Finally, we note  that  in  MN  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] CSOH121 while the deputy judge adopted the  mechanism
    of reading the words "inter alia" into  regulation  4(2)  of  the  2006
    Regulations (at page 9), the specific issue  which  we  are  addressing
    does not appear to have arisen.

13. We consider that the distance separating the parties on the "inter alia
    issue" is slight.  In our judgement, the effect of the inclusion of the
    phrase "inter alia" in regulation 7(2) is  to lay emphasis on the  word
    "generally".   This  word,  an  unpretentious  member  of  the  English
    language, denotes, uncontroversially, normally or in the generality  of
    cases.  Thus it contemplates that the specific  measures  which  follow
    might  not,  in  an  individual  case,  be  sufficient  to   constitute
    "protection".  It follows that the  operation  of  an  effective  legal
    system  for  the  detection,  prosecution  and   punishment   of   acts
    constituting persecution or serious  harm  and  (our  emphasis)  access
    thereto  by  the  applicant  may  not,  in  a  given  case,  amount  to
    protection.   We  agree  with  Mr  Komorowski  that,  as  a  matter  of
    construction, Article 7(2) yields this construction with or without the
    phrase "inter alia".   It  follows  that  there  is  no  deficiency  of
    transposition in regulation 4(2) of the 2006 Regulations.

14. Thus the central theme of the  language  of  Article  7(2),  which  was
    doubtless chosen with care and intent following the  usual  process  of
    representations, negotiations and deliberations among Member States, is
    that it is non-prescriptive in nature.  The word  "generally"  and  the
    phrase "inter alia", in tandem, have  certain  other  effects.   First,
    they clearly confer choice, or  discretion,  on  the  state  concerned.
    Article 7(2) does not compel a state to devise any particular  measures
    of protection.  Second, Article  7(2)  prescribes  neither  minima  nor
    maxima.  Thus it is conceivable that, in certain states, practical  and
    effective protection could be provided  by  measures  and  arrangements
    which, viewed through the lens of an advanced first world  country,  do
    not equate to an effective legal system for the detection,  prosecution
    and punishment of acts constituting persecution  or  serious  harm  and
    access thereto by the  individual.  For  example,  a  measure  of  pure
    deterrence or prevention based on fear  of  clan  or  family  reprisals
    might have to be reckoned in a given context. This is  consistent  with
    the intrinsically individual nature of each case and the fact sensitive
    context to which the judicial inquiry will be directed.

15. There is a further effect of the language used which is also worthy  of
    comment.  Article 7(2) speaks of "the actors mentioned in paragraph 1".
     These are not confined to  state  agencies.  In  principle,  it  seems
    unlikely that in many countries of the world the measures following the
    words "inter  alia"  will  be  devised  or  provided  by  "parties"  or
    "organisations" of the kind envisaged. As a result, measures which  may
    appear unfamiliar, unconventional or  unorthodox  in  developed  states
    may, in principle, constitute, or contribute to,  effective  protection
    against persecution.  This is illustrated in the recent decision of the
    Upper Tribunal in MOJ and  Others  (Return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
    [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) where, in considering the issue of  sufficiency
    of  protection,  the  Tribunal  identified  what  it  described  as  an
    "apparatus of protection" for civilians, composed of assorted elements:
    the armed forces, the police force, the district police composed mainly
    of dominant clan members, the "nuclear family",  armed  private  guards
    and  a  functioning  central  government:  see  [358]-[363].  This   is
    consistent with the UNHCR Handbook, at [65]. Thus, to instance  another
    illustration, the availability of womens' shelters in Pakistan  guarded
    by armed bodyguards should  be  considered  in  assessing  the  overall
    system of protection.

16. The further feature of Article  7(2)  of  the  Qualification  Directive
    worth  highlighting  in  the  present  context  is  the   standard   of
    "reasonable steps".  This imports the familiar concepts  of  margin  of
    appreciation and proportionality (cf Re Officer L,  infra).   Moreover,
    it forges a direct link between this measure of EU law  and  the  ECHR,
    specifically Article 2 of the latter and the "Osman" principle (infra).



17. The "reasonable steps" required to provide effective protection  could,
    in principle, embrace a broad array of measures.  Thus,  while  in  the
    present case the emphasis is on the need  for  an  efficacious  witness
    protection model, other measures may  be  required,  depending  on  the
    individual  context:  for  example,  home  security;  enhanced   police
    protection;  simple  warnings  and  security  advice  to   the   person
    concerned; the grant of a firearms licence; or, in extremis,  what  has
    come to be known in the United Kingdom as a comprehensive  "relocation"
    package, which  may  involve  a  change  of  identity,  accompanied  by
    appropriate financial  and  logistical  support.  In  law,  context  is
    everything: per Lord Steyn in R (Daly) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2001] 2 AC 532. Furthermore, we  would  highlight  the
    related principle that the claimant must provide clear  and  convincing
    evidence of the inability of his  home  state  to  provide  efficacious
    protection to its citizen. This stems from the underlying rationale  of
    international protection as a surrogate, coming  into  operation  as  a
    last resort: see Canada (Attorney General) v Ward [1993] 2 SCR 689.




    The Osman Test

18. It is common case that where the persecution asserted is  a  threat  to
    life, the Osman test must, as a matter of  domestic  law,  be  applied,
    given that Article 2 ECHR is one of the Convention rights protected  by
    the Human Rights  Act  1998.   The  decision  of  the  ECtHR  in  Osman
    concerned the positive  duty  on  state  authorities  to  protect  life
    derived from Article 2.  There was  no  dispute  that  this  obligation
    extends beyond the state's primary duty to secure the right to life  by
    devising  effective  criminal  law  provisions  and   appropriate   law
    enforcement machinery for the prevention, suppression and punishment of
    offences.  The Court's starting point was that:

         ".....  Article 2 of the Convention may also imply in certain  well
         defined circumstances a positive obligation on the  authorities  to
         take preventive operational measures to protect an individual whose
         life is at risk from the criminal acts of another individual."

    See [115].  The Court continued, in [116]:

         "For the Court, and bearing in mind the  difficulties  involved  in
         policing modern societies, the unpredictability  of  human  conduct
         and the  operational  choices  which  must  be  made  in  terms  of
         priorities and resources, such an obligation must be interpreted in
         a way which does  not  impose  an  impossible  or  disproportionate
         burden on the authorities. Accordingly, not every claimed  risk  to
         life can entail for the authorities  a  Convention  requirement  to
         take operational measures to prevent that risk from  materialising.
         Another relevant consideration is  the  need  to  ensure  that  the
         police exercise their powers to control  and  prevent  crime  in  a
         manner which fully respects the due process  and  other  guarantees
         which legitimately place restraints on the scope of their action to
         investigate crime and bring offenders  to  justice,  including  the
         guarantees contained in Articles 5 and 8 of the Convention."

    The Court then framed the principle, or test, of reasonableness:

         "In the opinion of the Court where there is an allegation that  the
         authorities have violated their positive obligation to protect  the
         right to life in the  context  of  their  above-mentioned  duty  to
         prevent and suppress offences against the person (see paragraph 115
         above), it  must  be  established  to  its  satisfaction  that  the
         authorities knew or  ought  to  have  known  at  the  time  of  the
         existence of a real and immediate risk to the life of an identified
         individual or individuals from the criminal acts of a  third  party
         and that they failed to take measures within  the  scope  of  their
         powers which, judged reasonably, might have been expected to  avoid
         that risk. The Court does not accept the Government's view that the
         failure to perceive the risk to life in the circumstances known  at
         the time or to take preventive measures to avoid that risk must  be
         tantamount to gross negligence or wilful disregard of the  duty  to
         protect life (see paragraph 107 above). Such a rigid standard  must
         be considered to be incompatible with the requirements of Article 1
         of the Convention and the obligations of Contracting  States  under
         that Article to secure the practical and  effective  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms laid  down  therein,  including  Article 2
         (see, mutatis  mutandis,  the  above-mentioned  McCann  and  Others
         judgment, p. 45, � 146). For the Court, and having  regard  to  the
         nature of the right protected by Article 2, a right fundamental in
         the scheme of the Convention, it is sufficient for an applicant  to
         show that the authorities did not do all that could  be  reasonably
         expected of them to avoid a real and  immediate  risk  to  life  of
         which they have or ought to have  knowledge.  This  is  a  question
         which can only be answered in the light of all the circumstances of
         any particular case."

    The duty to take  case  sensitive  and  specific  preventive/protective
    measures arises only where two conditions are satisfied.   The first is
    that there must be a  real  and  immediate  risk  to  the  life  of  an
    identified person or persons from the criminal acts of a  third  party.
    The second is that the relevant state agencies knew or  ought  to  have
    known of this risk.

19. While the Osman test has been considered at the highest judicial  level
    in the United Kingdom and the jurisprudence has developed, inter  alia,
    in the definition of what constitutes "a real and immediate risk" - see
    Re Officer L (Northern Ireland) [2007] UKHL 36, which also examined the
    state's common law duty to protect a witness -  it  is  unnecessary  to
    elaborate on  these  decisions  in  the  present  context.   The  Osman
    question raises no point of novel principle in this appeal.  Rather, it
    is confined to the consideration  of  whether  the  decision  at  first
    instance is vitiated by a material error of law.  To this we shall  now
    turn.



This Appeal

20. There is, regrettably, some uncertainty about the scope of this appeal.
     This is  attributable  at  least  in  part  to  its  unusual  history,
    rehearsed in the Appendix hereto.  The materials  bearing  particularly
    on this issue include the "Variation of Grounds  of  Appeal"  document,
    the  interlocutor  of  Lord  McEwan  dated   08   January   2014,   the
    incorporation in the latter of the "Robinson" principle, the grounds of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT"), the grounds of appeal to
    this Tribunal and the grant of permission to appeal.   In  the  unusual
    circumstances enveloping these proceedings we are inclined to  adopt  a
    broad approach to this issue.

21. The main thrust of the submission of Ms Irvine was that the  FtT  erred
    in law in its treatment of the sufficiency of protection  and  internal
    relocation issues which, in the present context, merge to a significant
    extent.  We review  the  decision  of  the  FtT  bearing  in  mind  the
    Appellant's core contention, namely that state protection in both India
    and Pakistan is ineffective in the absence of  an  efficacious  witness
    protection scheme and internal relocation does not provide a  solution.



22. The most recent Home Office "Country Information and Guidance" relating
    to Pakistan, published in October 2014, contains the following  passage
    (at 2.8.18):

         "The US Department of State reported that the judiciary  was  often
         subject to intimidation from outside influences, such  as  fear  of
         reprisal in terrorism or blasphemy cases  ..............  the  same
         report also  noted  reports  persisting  about  corruption  in  the
         judicial system ................

         Lower Court Judges lacked independence .............

         Lower Courts remained corrupt, inefficient and subject to  pressure
         from  prominent   wealthy,   religious   and   political   figures.
         Government  involvement  in  judicial  appointments  increased  the
         Government's control over the Court system.  According to reporting
         by the United States Institute for Peace  'the  witness  protection
         system in Pakistan is almost non existent.  Consequently, those who
         testify against powerful criminals and militants in  Court  receive
         no security'".

    The  FtT  considered  the  alternative  scenarios  of  the   Appellants
    returning to and settling in either Pakistan or India.

23. As regards the scenario of returning to and/or settling in  India,  our
    analysis of the determination of the FtT is as follows:

    (a)    The Judge specifically  acknowledged  certain  evidence  of  the
         shortcomings  and  obstacles  in  the  attempts   of   the   Indian
         authorities to prosecute the perpetrators of  honour  killings  and
         their accomplices.

    (b)    The Judge also acknowledged deficiencies in  the  Indian  police
         force, attributable mainly to inadequate  infrastructure,  lack  of
         training, insufficient resources and "rampant corruption".

    (c)    The Judge was undoubtedly correct to identify these shortcomings
         in the state system.  However, having done  so,  the  Judge  placed
         emphasis on the factors of determination to improve  and  political
         will.  In doing so, no consideration was given to the  question  of
         whether these factors counterbalanced the acknowledged deficiencies
         in state protection to any extent. While the Judge found that state
         protection is adequate,  we  consider  this  to  be  insufficiently
         reasoned, given the deficiencies  identified.   Furthermore,  while
         there is some emphasis in the Judge's assessment on prosecution, no
         consideration is given to  the  related  issues  of  detection  and
         punishment.  Furthermore, the Judge does not engage at all with the
         question of whether some additional  measure  or  measures  may  be
         required in the particular circumstances.

    (d)    Moreover, it is not clear whether the Judge  was  assessing  the
         issue of a reasonable degree of  likelihood  of  harm  or  that  of
         sufficiency of state protection.

    Based on our analysis above, we conclude that there are errors  of  law
    in the FtT's consideration of the Appellants' persecution claim in  the
    context of the return to/settlement in India scenario.




24. As  regards  the  alternative  scenario  of  returning  to/settling  in
    Pakistan, our analysis of the determination of the FtT is as follows:

    (a)    On the issue of sufficiency  of  state  protection,  the  Judge,
         founding exclusively on the country guidance  decision  of  KA  and
         Others (Domestic Violence - Risk on Return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT
         216 (IAC), at [212], stated:

             "From that, I conclude that there  is  a  willingness  by  the
             Pakistani authorities against honour killings  and  action  is
             taken by them."

         [sic]

         The passage in question documents  improvements  in  the  Pakistani
         system in  the  specific  areas  of  legislation,  prosecution  and
         punishment.

    (b)    However, the Judge considered  only  the  "willingness"  of  the
         Pakistani authorities to take appropriate action.  No consideration
         is given to either the efficacy of the available  measures  or,  as
         required by Article 7(2) of the Directive,  the  access  which  the
         Appellants would have thereto.  Nor is any consideration  given  to
         the key question of protection  of  the  Appellants  and,  in  this
         context, the decision fails to engage  with  the  country  evidence
         quoted in [18] above.

    (c)    In addition, while the Judge gives  some  consideration  to  the
         individual circumstances of the Appellants, there is no  assessment
         of the nature of the threats to them.

    (d)    Finally, the  Osman  test  does  not  feature  anywhere  in  the
         decision.

    Given our analysis above, we conclude that there are errors of  law  in
    relation to the FtT's consideration of the return to Pakistan scenario.



25. We cannot be confident that a dismissal of the Appellants'  appeals  to
    the  FtT  would  have  resulted  irrespective  of  the  errors  of  law
    identified above.  In our estimation they are clearly material.



Conclusion

26. On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated above:

    (a)    We set aside the decision of the FtT.

    (b)    While it appears appropriate for the Upper  Tribunal  to  remake
         the  decision,  consideration  will  be  given  to   the   parties'
         submissions, to be received within 14 days of promulgation  hereof,
         relating to this discrete issue, coupled with the mechanics of  the
         remaking exercise and,  in  particular,  the  need  for  a  further
         hearing.



                                                                       [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                         Date:  12 June 2015
            N A &V A v SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                 CHRONOLOGY



|16 September 2008|The First Appellant applies for a student  |
|                 |visa to travel to the UK. This is refused. |
|                 |The First Appellant appeals to the         |
|                 |First-tier Tribunal.                       |
|31 December 2008 |The Second Appellant applies for a student |
|                 |visa to travel to the UK. This is granted. |
|January 2009     |The Second Appellant arrives in the United |
|                 |Kingdom on a visa valid from 2 January     |
|                 |2009. Her leave is subsequently extended.  |
|4 May 2009       |The First Appellant's appeal against the   |
|                 |Respondent's refusal of Entry Clearance as |
|                 |a student is dismissed by Immigration Judge|
|                 |Wood.                                      |
|20 July 2009     |The First Appellant re-applies for a       |
|                 |student visa to travel to the UK. This is  |
|                 |granted.                                   |
|August 2009      |The First Appellant arrives in the United  |
|                 |Kingdom on a visa valid from 9 August 2009.|
|                 |His leave to remain is subsequently        |
|                 |extended.                                  |
|21 December 2012 |The Appellants both claim asylum. Both have|
|                 |extant leave at the time.                  |
|18 January 2013  |The Appellants' asylum claims are refused. |
|                 |The Appellants' lodge an appeal against the|
|                 |refusal of leave to remain.                |
|11 March 2013    |Determination of First-tier Tribunal       |
|                 |("FtT") Judge Mozolowski dismissing the    |
|                 |Appellants' appeals.                       |
|15 March 2013    |The Appellants submit an application to the|
|                 |FtT for permission to appeal.              |
|16 April 2013    |The Appellant's application for permission |
|                 |to appeal is refused by FtT Judge Frankish.|
|13 May 2013      |The Appellants submit an application to the|
|                 |Upper Tribunal ("UT") for permission to    |
|                 |appeal. The grounds argued in the          |
|                 |application to the FtT are renewed.        |
|22 May 2013      |The Appellant's application for permission |
|                 |to appeal is refused by UT Judge Spencer.  |
|11 June 2013     |A pre-action letter is sent by Gray & Co.  |
|                 |to the Respondent's Litigation Unit.       |
|                 |Proceedings for judicial review of the     |
|                 |decision of the UT refusing permission to  |
|                 |appeal are raised.                         |
|4 January 2014   |The Second Appellant discovers she is      |
|                 |pregnant.                                  |
|8 January 2014   |The procedural first hearing on the        |
|                 |petition takes place at which the 'Eba'    |
|                 |test is addressed. Lord McEwan finds the   |
|                 |petition raises an important point of      |
|                 |principle and appoints the petition to a   |
|                 |substantive first hearing.                 |
|13 February 2014 |A hearing takes place before Lord Glennie  |
|                 |on the petitioner's opposed motion for     |
|                 |transfer of the case to the Upper Tribunal |
|                 |in terms of s.20(1)(b) of the Tribunals,   |
|                 |Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and RCS    |
|                 |58.11. The motion is granted and the       |
|                 |decision reported as NA, VA, Petitioners   |
|                 |[2014] CSOH 27.                            |
| September 2014  |The Appellants' daughter A is born.        |
|24 October 2014  |A hearing before Deputy President Ockelton |
|                 |and UT Judge Deans on the transfer of the  |
|                 |case to the UT takes place. The UT is not  |
|                 |satisfied it should determine the question |
|                 |of reduction of its own decision, and      |
|                 |considers that the matter of reduction     |
|                 |should be dealt with by the Court of       |
|                 |Session before the case could proceed to a |
|                 |substantive hearing on the appeal.         |
|2 December 2014  |A motion is enrolled for the prayer of the |
|                 |petition seeking reduction of the UT       |
|                 |decision of 22 May 2013 to be granted.     |
|9 December 2014  |The interlocutor of 13 February is recalled|
|                 |and the prayer of the petition is granted  |
|                 |reducing the decision of the UT of 22 May  |
|                 |2013. The matter is subsequently appointed |
|                 |to a substantive hearing before the UT for |
|                 |29 May 2015.                               |
|22 December 2014 |A letter is sent by Drummond Miller to the |
|                 |UT enclosing certain paperwork relative to |
|                 |the Court of Session proceedings and a     |
|                 |paper apart entitled "variation of grounds |
|                 |to appeal".                                |
|9 January 2015   |Permission to appeal is granted by Deputy  |
|                 |President Ockelton "in light of the note of|
|                 |the Lord Ordinary". The amended grounds are|
|                 |permitted to be argued.                    |



-----------------------
[1] In the recast Qualification Directive, Article 7(2) commences with the
words "Protection against persecution or serious harm must be effective and
of a non-temporary nature". The UK has not opted in to the recast
Qualification Directive.

