




R (on the application of AS (by his  litigation  friend  Francesco  Jeff)  v
Kent County Council (age assessment;  dental  evidence)  [2017]  UKUT  00446
(IAC)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London
                                         Heard on 6, 7, 8, 12 & 13 June 2017

                                   Between

                     The Queen on the application of as
                  (BY HIS LITIGATION FRIEND FRANCESCO JEFF)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                             KENT COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE rintoul

                               - - - - - - - -

Mr I Wise QC and Ms T Buchanan, instructed by Osbornes Solicitors appeared
on behalf of the Applicant.

Mr J Holbrook, instructed by Kent County Council Legal Department appeared
on behalf of the Respondent.




                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 1. The application of the benefit of the doubt is  nothing  more  than  an
    acknowledgement that age assessment cannot be concluded  with  complete
    accuracy, absent definitive documentary evidence, and is in the case of
    unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  children  who   may   also   have   been
    traumatised, unlikely to be  supported  by  other  evidence.   On  that
    basis, its proper application is  that  where,  having  considered  the
    evidence, the decision maker concludes there is doubt as to whether  an
    individual is over 18 or not,  the decision-maker should conclude  that
    the applicant is under 18.


 2. The benefit of the doubt  is not of use where a specific  date  or  age
    has to be determined  except  insofar  as  it  requires  a  sympathetic
    assessment of the evidence as  indicated  in  R  (CJ)  v  Cardiff  City
    Council [2011] EWCA Civ 1590.


 3. Human teeth develop as an individual progresses through  childhood  and
    into adulthood; that much is clear. How, and to what extent, the stages
    of that development are indicative  of age (and the extent to which  it
    can been assessed by a dental examination) is a matter  of  significant
    debate as was noted in R (on the application of ZM and SK) v The London
    Borough of Croydon (Dental age assessment) [2016] UKUT 00559 (IAC).


 4. In addition to the issues considered by ZM & SK the Mandibular Maturity
    Markers (MMMs), Root Pulp Visibility  (RPV)  and  Periodontal  Ligament
    Visibility (PLV) are unreliable.


JUDGE Rintoul:  The applicant has applied  for  a  judicial  review  of  the
respondent's decision of 21 January  2016  that  his  date  of  birth  is  7
September 1998.  The applicant seeks first a  declaration  that  he  was  15
years  and  2  months  of  age  at  the  time  of  the  age  assessment   or
alternatively that he is not the assessed age or, in the  alternative,  that
the respondent withdraw the age assessment.


 2.  While  age  assessment  determinations  are  findings  of  fact,  this
    application raises specific issues of wider importance:


        a. the reliability of dental assessments of the type considered  in
           R (on the application of ZM and SK)  v  The  London  Borough  of
           Croydon (Dental age assessment) [2016] UKUT 559 (IAC);


        b. the use of photographs in age assessment determinations;


        c. the proper scope of the benefit of the doubt in age assessment.


 3. The applicant's case is  that  he  is  from  Sherkheil  village,  Tagab
    district, Kapisa province, Afghanistan.  He has  two  younger  brothers
    and his father was a commander in the police.   Approximately  a  month
    before he left Afghanistan his father was kidnapped by the Taliban  and
    the family were later told that he had been killed.  The  Taliban  came
    looking for him and a decision was taken to leave the country  for  his
    own safety.  His cousin, the son of his maternal  uncle,  arranged  for
    him to be taken out of Afghanistan by an  agent.   He  was  brought  to
    Europe via Turkey, Hungary (where he was fingerprinted) and France.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 September 2015 and  was  taken  into
    the care of the respondent county council.  He claimed asylum but since
    the commencement of proceedings, that application was refused and it is
    understood that an appeal against the decision has been lodged.





Chronology


    7 October 2015    CHIN observation records applicant taken into care of
                                 Kent at Appledore Reception Centre


    5 & 6 November 2015    First age assessment


    26 January 2016   UKBA screening interview


    21 April 2016 Application lodged


    5 October 2016    Permission granted - transfer to Upper Tribunal


    15 December 2016  First order of Judge Coker


    10 February 2017  Second order of Judge Coker granting permission  that
                                 Professor  Roberts  be  instructed  as   a
                                 single joint expert to advise  in  writing
                                 on a dental estimate, the applicant having
                                 consented to a dental examination


    9 March 2017  Third order of Judge Coker  granting  permission  for  an
                                 expert report by Professor Cole


    23 February 2017  Further assessment by Rose Corby and Melissa Carter


    23 February 2017  Dental age assessment report


    27 April 2017 Substantive asylum interview


    12 May 2017   Asylum application refused


Procedural History


 4. There has  been  a  substantial  number  of  orders  and  interlocutory
    applications made in this case.  These relate primarily to the  request
    for disclosure of material and in respect of the instruction of  expert
    witnesses.  Of  particular  note  in  addition  to  the  above  is  the
    application made by the respondent firstly to have  disclosure  of  the
    applicant's dental records which was  granted  and  for  the  terms  of
    Professor Roberts' instructions to be changed such that  he  be  solely
    the expert instructed  by  the  respondent  (hereafter  "Kent").   That
    application was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 3 May  2017.




 5. Although Kent sought initially to challenge that decision, at a hearing
    on 10 May 2017, the matter was resolved by way  of  consent  such  that
    Professor Roberts was to be instructed  by  the  respondent  alone  and
    provision was made for further questions to be put to  Professor  Cole.
    It should be noted that the hearing in this matter had  initially  been
    scheduled to commence on 10 May 2017 but owing to difficulties with the
    interpreter who had been booked, the hearing had been abandoned.


The Parties' Cases


 6. The parties' respective positions have varied significantly during  the
    course of  the  proceedings.   Initially,  as  can  be  seen  from  the
    statement of facts and grounds the challenge was essentially  that  the
    initial age assessment was flawed and unreliable in that:-


      1. the assessors did not give the applicant  an  opportunity  to  deal
         with the points adverse to his case at a time that the decision was
         only provisional and/or at all;


      2. the written age assessment failed to include all  and/or  the  real
         reasons why the applicant's age was not accepted;


      3. that the assessors erred in their consideration of the applicant in
         concluding that he was not  credible;


      4. that the manner of questioning was unfair; and


      5. there are a number of obvious inaccuracies in the age assessment.


 7. These were then detailed in grounds of quite extraordinary length.


 8. The respondent's initial defence was that the claim was without  merit,
    there being  no  reasonable  basis  for  asserting  that  the  multiple
    professional social/support workers were all wrong in their  assessment
    at various points in time that the applicant is the age assessed.   The
    response to that defence took issue with those assertions.


 9. Kent's position, however, changed significantly as is set  out  in  its
    statement of case dated 3 April 2017 which postdates the assessment  by
    Ms Corby and Ms Carter and also by Professor Roberts.  This assessment,
    that the applicant is 24� years of age, is based on the  assessment  of
    Rose Corby putting him in the age range of 22 to 26 years with  a  most
    likely age of 24 and the evidence of Patrick Shier putting  him  in  an
    age range consistent with Professor Roberts'  assessment.   Kent  avers
    that on this calculation the applicant was at least 18  when  he  first
    came into contact with Kent on 7 September 2015.


10. Kent's contentions as set out in the statement of case are [5]:-


        a. the judicial review grounds were irrelevant to the  fact-finding
           exercise;


        b. the benefit of the doubt in  favour  of  the  asylum  seeker  is
           irrelevant;


        c. Professor Roberts' evidence is reliable; and

   d. the applicant was born before 7 September 1997.


The Law:

(i)     Age is an issue of fact for the Court

11. In R (A) v London Borough of Croydon [2009] UKSC 8, the  Supreme  Court
    held that the question of whether an individual was a child or not was,
    upon challenge by judicial review, one of fact for the decision of  the
    Court itself. Baroness Hale said at paragraph [27]:


         "[...the question whether a child is in need requires a  number  of
         different value judgements]. But the question whether a person is a
         "child" is a different kind of question. There  is  a  right  or  a
         wrong answer. It may be difficult to determine what that answer is.
         The decision-makers may have to do their best on the basis of  less
         than perfect or conclusive evidence.  But  that  is  true  of  many
         questions of fact which regularly come before the courts. That does
         not prevent them from being questions for the  courts  rather  than
         for other kinds of decision makers."


12. Lord Hope, in his concurring judgment, said at paragraph [51]:


         "It seems to me that the question whether or  not  a  person  is  a
         child... is a question of fact which must ultimately be decided  by
         the court. There is no denying the  difficulties  that  the  social
         worker is likely to face in  carrying  out  an  assessment  of  the
         question whether an unaccompanied asylum seeker is or is not  under
         the age of 18.  Reliable  documentary  evidence  is  almost  always
         lacking in such cases. So the process has to be one of  assessment.
         This  involves  the  application  of  judgment  on  a  variety   of
         factors..."

(ii) No burden of proof

13. In R (CJ) v Cardiff City Council [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1590  at  paragraph
    [21], Pitchford LJ stated:


         "It seems to me that once the court is invited to make  a  decision
         upon jurisdictional fact it can do no more than apply  the  balance
         of probability to the issue without resorting  to  the  concept  of
         discharge of a burden of proof."


    and at paragraph [23]:


         "Where the issue is  whether  the  claimant  is  a  child  for  the
         purposes of the Children Act it seems to me that the application of
         a legal burden is not the correct  approach.  There  is  no  hurdle
         which the claimant must overcome. The court will decide whether, on
         a balance of probability, the  claimant  was  or  was  not  at  the
         material time a child."

(iii)    Court's general approach to evidence in age assessment cases

14. In R (AM) v Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council  (AAJR)  [2012]  UKUT
    00118 (IAC), the  Vice  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  stated  at
    paragraph [15]:


         "In the present case the evidence is wide ranging. It may therefore
         be appropriate to make some general observations about  the  impact
         of evidence of various sorts and from various sources in this  type
         of case. First, we think  that  almost  all  evidence  of  physical
         characteristics is likely to be of  very  limited  value.  That  is
         because, as pointed out by Kenneth Parker J  in  R  (R)  v  Croydon
         [2011] EWHC 1473 (Admin) there is  no  clear  relationship  between
         chronological  age  and  physical  maturity  in  respect  of   most
         measurable aspects of such maturity."

    He also said at paragraph [19]:

         "...we find it difficult to see that  any  useful  observations  of
         demeanour or social interaction or maturity  can  be  made  in  the
         course of a short interview between an  individual  and  a  strange
         adult. There may of course be  cultural  difficulties  in  such  an
         interview but there are the ordinary social difficulties as well."

    and at paragraph [20]:

         "The asserted expertise of a social worker conducting an  interview
         is  not  in  our   judgement   sufficient   to   counteract   those
         difficulties. A person such as a teacher or even a  family  member,
         who can point to consistent attitudes, and a number  of  supporting
         instances over a considerable period of time, is  likely  to  carry
         weight that observations made in the artificial surroundings of  an
         interview cannot carry."

    The Vice President concluded at paragraph [23]:

         "Finally, we should note that, as the task of age assessment is for
         the court or the Tribunal,  it  is  important  that  the  court  or
         Tribunal be given the material to perform that task. When  all  the
         material available has been gathered  in,  the  judicial  decision-
         maker will need to reach a final conclusion on it... In  order  for
         that to be done, the judicial decision-maker needs to have the  raw
         evidence. It needs to be told  the  range  of  ages  to  which  the
         evidence appears to point. It needs to be advised as how to  select
         an age within that range..."

(iv) Age assessment disputes - "Merton" principles and AS minimum standards

15. In R (B) v London Borough of Merton [2003] EWHC 1689  (Admin),  Stanley
    Burnton J held at paragraph [36]:


         "The assessment of age in borderline cases is a  difficult  matter,
         but it is not complex. It is not an issue which  requires  anything
         approaching a trial, and judicialisation of the process  is  in  my
         judgment to be avoided. It is a  matter  which  may  be  determined
         informally, provided safeguards of minimum standards of inquiry and
         of fairness are adhered to."

    and at paragraph [37]:

         "It is apparent from the foregoing that, except in clear cases, the
         decision maker cannot determine age solely  on  the  basis  of  the
         appearance of the applicant. In general, the  decision  maker  must
         seek to elicit the general background of the  applicant,  including
         his family circumstances and history, his  educational  background,
         and his activities  during  the  previous  few  years.  Ethnic  and
         cultural information may also be important. If there is  reason  to
         doubt the applicant's statement as to his age, the  decision  maker
         will have to make an assessment of his  credibility,  and  he  will
         have to ask questions designed to test his credibility."


16. In R (AS) v Croydon LBC [2011]  EWHC  2091  (Admin),  HHJ  Thornton  QC
    (sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge) stated at paragraph [17]:


         "The relevant minimum standards to be expected of  such  assessment
         interviews were originally set out by Stanley Burnton J in  Merton.
         The relevant standards are now commonly called  "Merton  compliant"
         standards  and  they  are  used  as  the  starting  point  for  any
         assessment of the fairness and  reliability  of  a  disputed  local
         authority age assessment."


    and at paragraph [18]:


         "Beyond the very useful general guidance given in the Merton  case,
         there is no formalised Central Government Guidance as to how  local
         authorities should conduct age assessments..."

    and at paragraph [19]:

         "The minimum standards that are to be expected of an age assessment
         are not, therefore, clearly defined and the same standards are  not
         universally adopted or applied. The current  appropriate  standards
         for application in age assessment  cases  were  considered  by  the
         Court of Appeal in FZ v Croydon LBC [2011] EWCA Civ 59. Taking that
         decision and  the  Merton  decision,  which  was  approved  in  FZ,
         together, the relevant  standards  applicable  to  the  defendant's
         assessments that were undertaken in this case may be summarised  as
         follows:


         (1) An appropriate adult should accompany the child and  should  be
         present during the interview.


         (2) A full and careful explanation should be given to the child  of
         the nature of the assessment and its purpose and of the role of the
         assessing social worker. A careful check should be made  to  ensure
         that  there  is  full  understanding  between  the  child  and  the
         interpreter and  that  the  interpreter  is  skilled  in  both  the
         language  and  dialect  of  the  child  and   has   experience   of
         interpreting in the kind of situation created by the age assessment
         process.


         (3) The interview should be conducted in a structured,  fair,  non-
         adversarial, non-stressful and informal manner and an informal  but
         full note of the questions and answers should be taken  by  one  of
         those present.


         (4) The assessors should pay attention to the level  of  tiredness,
         trauma, bewilderment and anxiety  of  the  child  and  his  or  her
         ethnicity, culture and customs should be a key focus throughout the
         assessment.


         (5) The assessors must take a history from the child. All  relevant
         factors should be taken into account including, but not limited to,
         physical appearance and behaviour. The objective is to undertake  a
         holistic assessment.


         (6) Each interview should, if  practicable,  be  conducted  by  two
         assessors  who  should  have  received  appropriate  training   and
         experience for conducting age assessment interviews  on  young  and
         vulnerable children.


         (7) The assessors should establish as much rapport as possible with
         the child (a process known as "joining"), should ask open-ended non-
         leading  questions  using,  as  appropriate,  circular  questioning
         methods. The assessors should be mindful of the child  having  been
         "coached" and that the child may have had to  answer  questions  on
         relevant  topics  several  times  previously  thereby   unwittingly
         blurring the possible accuracy of the answers. Giving the child the
         benefit of the doubt should always be the standard practice.


         (8)  The  assessors  should  give  the  child  a  fair  and  proper
         opportunity to answer any potentially adverse findings at  a  stage
         when an adverse decision is no more than provisional to  so  as  to
         enable him  or  her  to  provide  any  appropriate  explanation  or
         additional facts which might counter or modify such findings.


         (9) The conclusions reached by the assessors  should  be  explained
         with reasons which, although they may be brief, should explain  the
         basis of the assessment and any significant adverse credibility  or
         factual finding.


         (10) The reasons should be internally  consistent  and  should  not
         exhibit  any  obvious  error  or  inadequate  explanation  for  not
         accepting any apparently credible and  consistent  answers  of  the
         child."

(v)  Benefit of the doubt

17. The applicant contends that he is entitled to the benefit of the doubt.
    The relevant case law is set out in the reply to the grounds at [10]  -
    [12] supported by quotations which are selective. What was said in A  v
    LB Croydon; WK v Kent CC [2009] EWHC  939  (Admin)  per  Collins  J  at
    paragraph [9] is:


         "...Since there is no scientific  proof  available  and  the  final
         decision involves the exercise of a judgment, it is never  possible
         to be sure that the decision in a given case, particularly where an
         individual is close to 18, is factually correct. But perfection  is
         unattainable and the approach adopted by  the  Secretary  of  State
         that, if the decision maker is left in doubt, the  claimant  should
         receive the benefit of that doubt is undoubtedly proper."


18. The applicant also seeks to rely on R (CJ) v Cardiff CC [2011] EWCA Civ
    1590 at paragraphs [21] and [23] where Pitchford LJ said:


         "[21] It seems to me that once the  court  is  invited  to  make  a
         decision upon jurisdictional fact it can do no more than apply  the
         balance of probability  to  the  issue  without  resorting  to  the
         concept  of  discharge  of  a  burden  of  proof.  In  my  view,  a
         distinction needs to be made between a legal burden  of  proof,  on
         the one hand, and the sympathetic assessment  of  evidence  on  the
         other. I accept that in evaluating the  evidence  it  may  well  be
         inappropriate to expect from the claimant  conclusive  evidence  of
         age in circumstances in which he has arrived unattended and without
         original identity  documents.  The  nature  of  the  evaluation  of
         evidence will depend upon the particular facts of the case.


         ....


         [23] ...The court will decide whether, on a balance of probability,
         the claimant was or was not at the material time a child. The court
         will not ask whether the  local  authority  has  established  on  a
         balance of probabilities that the claimant was an adult;  nor  will
         it ask whether  the  claimant  has  established  on  a  balance  of
         probabilities that he is a child."


19. This does not, contrary to the applicant's submission, mean that  if  a
    decision-maker concludes a child is between 15 and 17,  application  of
    the benefit of the doubt would lead to a decision that he or she is 15.




20. We consider, on reviewing the case law, that application of the benefit
    of  the  doubt  is  nothing  more  than  an  acknowledgement  that  age
    assessment cannot be concluded with 100%  accuracy,  absent  definitive
    documentary evidence, and is  in  the  case  of  unaccompanied  asylum-
    seeking children who may also have been  traumatised,  unlikely  to  be
    supported by other evidence.  On that basis, its proper application  is
    that  where,  having  considered  the  evidence,  the  decision   maker
    concludes there is doubt as to whether an individual is over 18 or not,
    then in those circumstances, the decision-maker  should  conclude  that
    the applicant is under 18.


21. Thus, the benefit of the doubt  is not of use where a specific date  or
    age has to be determined except insofar as it  requires  a  sympathetic
    assessment of the evidence as indicated in CJ v Cardiff.


The Evidence


(i) Dental assessment


22. Human teeth develop as an individual progresses through  childhood  and
    into adulthood; that much is clear. How, and to what extent, the stages
    of that development are indicative of age (and the extent to  which  it
    can been assessed by a dental examination) is a matter  of  significant
    debate as was noted in ZM & SK. We take that decision as  our  starting
    point  in  evaluating  the  merits  of  dental  examinations  in   age-
    assessment.


23. As did the Upper Tribunal in ZM & SK, we consider it necessary  to  set
    out some of the background to how teeth develop in humans. What follows
    is a summary of what is said in ZM & SK at paragraphs [14] - [27]:

      i. Human teeth emerge individually and develop gradually. This can  be
         observed by x-ray, the standard  means  being  a  dental  panoramic
         tomograph.


     ii. Human teeth pass through several stages of development. The  system
         used by Professor Roberts and many others is derived from  a  paper
         by Demirjian and others, which identified 8 stages lettered A-H;


    iii. Individual teeth attain different stages at different  speeds;  The
         third molars   are the last to emerge  and  normally  the  last  to
         achieve full maturity at stage H. The permanent  lower  left  third
         molar is LL8 (lower left, 8th tooth from the  front)  according  to
         the British Dental Journal nomenclature.


     iv. A tooth which has not reached stage H is somewhere on its  road  to
         doing so, but a tooth which has reached stage H  is  fully  mature;
         and if all the teeth in an individual have reached stage H ("mature
         dentition"), no further development in the 8-stage process can take
         place.


      v. Until mature dentition is reached, it  is  possible  to  provide  a
         description indicating which (if any) of  the  teeth  have  reached
         stage H and, in addition, listing those teeth  which  have  reached
         other and if so what stages. Because a stage earlier than H is both
         achieved and lost, it is possible, by comparison with the database,
         to generate information about the ages between which the  stage  in
         question typically occurs  in  the  tooth  in  question.  The  more
         immature teeth there are in the mouth, the more information can  be
         generated in this way and, it is said, the  more  accurate  is  the
         prediction of the age of an individual of unknown age.


     vi. As the number of immature teeth decreases and more attain stage  H,
         the results of this test lose accuracy.


    vii. This method is not applicable when all the teeth have reached stage
         H: the dentition is mature  and  will  remain  mature  whether  the
         individual is 17, 37 or 87. Further, because of the  way  in  which
         the  data  is  assembled,  that  is  to  say,  typically,  by   the
         examination of individuals at  unplanned  stages  of  their  dental
         development, there is no way of  knowing  how  long  an  individual
         showing mature dentition has been in that  state.  The  tooth  that
         most recently achieved stage H may have done so six months  ago  or
         two years ago or (in the case of an older individual) twenty  years
         ago.


   viii. What can be done is to record the ages  of  those  whose  tomograph
         shows completely mature dentition. This provides a  record  of  the
         lowest possible age at which dental  maturity  was  reached.  In  a
         large database, however, these data can usefully be  compared  with
         the ages of those who were  at  the  last  stage  before  completed
         dental maturity, that is to say, with one tooth only at stage G. In
         the result, data for the attainment of stage H in all teeth, or  in
         the lower left third molar,  which  is  regarded  as  a  diagnostic
         sample, have been collected for a number of populations.


     ix. There is difficulty in determining whether those data can  properly
         provide probabilistic estimates  of  the  chronological  age  of  a
         person of unknown age who is  dentally  mature,  even  more  so  in
         assessing the probability of the individual in question being  more
         or less than 18 years  old  not  merely  because  of  the  inherent
         dangers of calculating the facts from  probabilities,  but  because
         the data collected do not have a Normal Distribution.


      x. One method of deriving an estimate of probability from data of this
         sort is by a process of censoring, which attempts  to  confine  the
         data used in the analysis to data which might  properly  contribute
         to it. The symmetry or assessable skewness of a Normal Distribution
         demands that appropriate censorship criteria are used at  both  the
         upper and the lower ends of the age range.  There  is  considerable
         dissent between experts, apparent in the present  applications,  as
         to how censoring should properly  be  done  and  whether  Professor
         Roberts' method is effective or accurate.


     xi. While it is assumed that no development takes place beyond stage  H
         consideration has been given to  determining  whether  teeth  which
         have reached stage H show any  further  signs  of  maturation.  The
         result has been the identification of  three  separate  "mandibular
         maturity markers". The examinations have  been  confined  to  cases
         where the lower left third molar has attained stage H.  It  is  not
         clear  whether  the  markers  described  are  dependent  upon   the
         achievement of stage H or whether any of them may  be  observed  in
         relation to earlier Demirjian stages.


    xii. The three proposed mandibular maturity markers are as follows: -


          1. Root Canal  Width  ("RCW").  This  marker  proceeds  upon  the
             assumption that following the attainment of stage H, the width
             of the root canals, as perceived on the tomograph, narrows  in
             each tooth. Three stages 1- 3 of A to C are identified.


          2. Root Pulp Visibility ("RPV"). This is based on an analysis  of
             the appearance of the root pulp in the lower left third  molar
             and is divided into 4 stages, referred to by Professor Roberts
             as A to D. It is  on  his  evidence  not  clear  whether  this
             phenomenon is a result of dental change, or of maturation  and
             perhaps greater opacity of the mandible.


          A study of this marker was first published by Olze and  others  in
             2010[1]   ("Olze")  A  further  examination   of   root   pulp
             visibility  was  published   by   P�rez-Mongiovi   ("hereafter
             "Mongiovi"and others in 2015[2]).


          3. Periodontal Ligament Visibility ("PLV"). The x-ray  visibility
             of the periodontal ligament or membrane reduces  progressively
             as the tooth (again,  in  particular,  the  lower  left  third
             molar) settles  into  position.  Radiographically,  a  visible
             ligament  appears  as  a  space  between  the  tooth  and  the
             mandible. Professor Roberts identifies the stages as  A  to  D
             but in the pioneering paper on this topic, again by  Olze  and
             others[3]  the stages are 0, 1, 2, 3 and the definition is  in
             descriptive rather than numerical terms

24. Having evaluated the evidence before him, the Vice-President concluded:



      i. The fact that all teeth are mature  in  the  sense  that  all  have
         reached Demirjian stage H is a sign of chronological  maturity  but
         is not a reliable indicator of whether an  individual  is  more  or
         less than 18 years old. The use of the Demirjian stages below stage
         H does appear to  be  more  reliable  in  the  prediction  of  age,
         particularly in the lower teens.


     ii. None of the three mandibular maturity  markers  so  far  identified
         appears yet to have attained  such  acceptance  in  the  scientific
         community that  it  can  be  accepted  as  a  reliable  pointer  to
         chronological age in the late teens in males.

25. Two main issues arise from the above analysis:


        a. Interpreting the data  in  respect  of  achieving  Stage  H:  is
           Professor Roberts' methodology effective or  accurate?  And,  is
           "censoring" of data appropriate?


        b. Whether the three proposed Mandibular Maturity Markers  ("MMMs")
           are a valid basis for  assessing  age  once  Stage  H  has  been
           achieved?


26. An issue common to the above is the extent to which ethnic  origin  may
    result in different results:  for example, there is evidence that teeth
    mature at  different  rates  in  different  populations;  in  Caucasian
    populations  maturity  appears  to  be  earlier  than  in  Han  Chinese
    populations.


27. It was primarily for these reasons that the applicant sought permission
    to adduce the expert evidence of a medical statistician, Professor Cole
    whose evidence is  also  relevant  to  the  issue  of  the  statistical
    validity of Professor Roberts' work.


28. In addition to producing reports, the experts have,  through  questions
    put to them, refined their opinions.  Although the issue  of  censoring
    of data was raised in ZM & SK  that  was  no  longer  pursued.  Rather,
    Professor Cole advised the use of a technique known as Probit analysis.




29. Probit analysis is a technique whereby the curved or s-shaped curve  on
    the graphs showing the data of dental maturation is transformed into  a
    straight line.  This straight line can then be extended  by  regression
    to predict values for, in this case ages, which the data does not exist
    owing to the lower and higher age range cut-offs. Thus, where  a  study
    was undertaken with a range of individuals from, say, 16 to 19, a graph
    can be produced with a  line  indicating  predicted  values  for  those
    outside that age range.


30. Professor Cole's view is that the appropriate  statistic  to  use  when
    considering stage H is the median age of attainment, that is   the  age
    when  half  of  the  population  has  achieved  that  stage,  which  is
    established by Probit analysis.


31. Professor Cole also advised that it would be useful when comparing  the
    data, to undertake a "kappa analysis". This is a technique by  which  a
    mathematical formula is applied to the data from different  researchers
    which produces a value between 0 and 1. The purpose of the analysis  is
    to identify the reliability of different data collectors when observing
    various phenomena such as the stages reached in the MMMs. It  seeks  to
    take coincidence out of the calculations.


32. Accordingly, and in the light of the observations made in ZM & SK,  the
    focus of Professor Roberts' evidence in this appeal has been to address
    the criticisms made in that decision; the evidence of Professor Cole is
    more directed to the issue of whether  Professor  Roberts'  conclusions
    are statistically sound and/or reliable.


(ii) Professor Roberts


33. Professor Roberts' evidence is set out in his witness  statement  of  7
    February 2017, 16 May 2017 and  4  June  2017.   He  also  adopted  the
    assessment made on 23 February 2017 and the  skeleton  produced  by  Mr
    Holbrook dated 31 May 2017.  He also  continued  to  rely  on  his  own
    paper, Lucas et al, "Dental Age Estimation: A Test  of  Reliability  of
    Correctly Identifying a Subject over 18 Years of  Age  Using  the  Gold
    Standard of Chronological Age as  a  Comparator"  Journal  of  Forensic
    Sciences 2016[4]  ("the Gold Standard Report") as well  as  an  extract
    from the Encyclopaedia of Forensic and Legal Medicine entitled  "Dental
    Age Estimation:  Theory and Practice"[5] ("the Encyclopaedia Chapter").




34. Professor Roberts accepted that the respondent is no longer relying  on
    part 2 of his second statement entitled "censoring" but  did  stand  by
    what he said at page D89 in respect of age of  attainment  and  current
    age although he accepted Kent were not  relying  on  this.   He  denied
    resiling from what he had said and that he no longer used attainment of
    stage H except as a trigger for consideration of MMM.   He  said  that,
    when asked about the assessment of the applicant, the  observations  on
    the stage of development were redundant and did not  apply,  adding  it
    was a small part of the evidence relied upon.


35. Professor Roberts accepted that the Gold Standard  Report  had  in  its
    abstract stated the assignment to above or below the 18-year threshold,
    in the age range 17 years to 19 years, could be wrong on up to  50%  of
    occasion but considered it  inappropriate  to  refer  to  that  in  the
    Encyclopaedia chapter.  He accepted that the Encyclopaedia had not been
    updated but did accept that techniques and processes had evolved  since
    it had been written.  He accepted also that when he  had  said  in  the
    report on the applicant that "all the information required for  a  full
    understanding of the anatomical statistical and theoretical aspects  of
    dental age estimation are covered in the Encyclopaedia Chapter," he had
    overstated the case.


36. Professor Roberts' report records that the applicant's lower left third
    molar is at stage H, meaning that it had completely  formed.   On  that
    basis it is recorded that the probability that he is under 18 years  is
    20.7% the corollary being that the probability that he is over 18 years
    is 79.3 % using the UK-Caucasian dataset.


37. It is noted that following ZM and SK the use of LL8H[6]  alone  is  not
    enough to justify an assessment and noted there is strong  evidence  of
    ethnic differences such as the  Chinese  dataset  indicating  a  99.09%
    chance of a subject with LL8Hm being over 18  but  it  is  acknowledged
    that there is no reference data for Afghan nationals. He accepted  that
    caution would be needed before extrapolating the above data directly to
    Afghan nationals.


38. Professor Roberts accepted that he should in his report on AS have said
    "the bulk" of the evidence not "all" but said that this  was  simply  a
    semantic difference.  He said that it would have been inappropriate  in
    the Encyclopaedia chapter to refer to doubts and that if writing it now
    he would adjust it adding that what he had said as at February 2017 was
    correct and that he and Dr Lucas were willing to  change  their  minds;
    this is an area which was moving very fast.


39. Professor Roberts said that he did not recall when he became  aware  of
    the range within which there is uncertainty referred  to  in  the  Gold
    Standard Report adding that it takes time for ideas post-publication to
    become accepted.


40. Professor Roberts considered that the Vice-President's comments in ZM &
    SK at [64] were overzealous and  that  even  when  a  report  has  been
    written, the result is nonetheless tentative and needs to  be  accepted
    by colleagues.


41. In ZM & SK at paragraph [65], the Vice-President wrote:


        "I should say also that, at  the  hearing,  Professor  Roberts  was
        clear that he no longer uses the attainment of stage H in all teeth
        as a measure of age: instead, the attainment  of  stage  H  in  all
        teeth is simply the  borderline  between  the  use  of  the  simple
        average method (available if not all teeth have  reached  stage  H)
        and the mandibular maturity markers when  all  teeth  have  reached
        stage H."


42. Professor Roberts said that he no longer reports stage  H  as  a  stage
    and, if this is present, goes on to consider the MMM.  He said that  he
    had not told  the  Vice-President  he  did  not  use  stage  H  in  the
    assessment but had done so only as a threshold  to  consider  the  MMM.
    Professor Roberts also accepted that  there  were  differences  between
    African populations and those in the UK and between the  UK  population
    and the Han Chinese. He said that the variation was minimal,  the  data
    might have been collected differently.  He agreed that there  would  be
    potential for uncertainty in this area.


43. Much of the cross-examination was in fact directed towards showing that
    Professor Roberts was not a reliable witness.


44. Professor Roberts accepted that they had no idea of  whether  ethnicity
    affected RPV or PLV.  He said that their methodology was objective  but
    that the interpretation was difficult.  He said they do not provide  an
    actual assessment of age but when asked if  they  believed  that  their
    results were better than social workers, said that was a matter for the
    Tribunal to decide.


45. It was put to Professor Roberts that he had been four years out in  his
    assessment of the age of SK (whose decision JR/3413/2016 was put to him
    - a decision of UTJ Blum).  He added that  SK  had  not  developed  3rd
    molars which made assessment  difficult.   Professor  Roberts  accepted
    that his witness statement [B15]  had  been  intended  to  address  the
    concerns raised in ZM & SK at paragraph [70].


46. In response to what had been said at paragraphs 60, 72 and 73, he  said
    that they had validated their methodology.


47. Asked about the report which appears at B15/B20, he said that it should
    not be there.  It had been adduced in error.


48. Asked about the issue of root canal width, Professor Roberts said  that
    they would have used it but they were not able to  in  this  case.   Mr
    Holbrook said that Kent did  not  rely  on  this.   Professor  Roberts,
    however, thought that it was reliable (see witness statement at 53).


49. Asked to respond to Professor Cole's comments in his report of 31 March
    2017 that there had been no work to date on MMM  in  any  other  ethnic
    group apart from  Caucasians  and  that  thus  applying  them  to  non-
    Caucasians involves making a series of untestable assumptions, he  said
    that it was reasonable to apply the assumptions to other ethnic  groups
    in the absence of any other evidence.


50. Asked about a pattern of progression between stages A to D, he said  he
    did not know if there is progression and that they had to  assume  that
    this was so.  He accepted there is ethnic variation in development.  He
    said it was not a wild guess to assume  extrapolations  could  be  made
    from Caucasians and this had been the subject of validation.   He  said
    that the validation study was multi-ethnic.


51. Commenting on the data of Root Pulp Visibility, he said that the sample
    data for Olze is different from that of Mongiovi.  He noted that dental
    development across Europe appears to be different  and  that  this  may
    account for the difference between the Olze and Mongiovi reports as the
    age threshold appeared to be different.


52. Commenting on the kappa values, he said that these appeared to be  very
    high here, because there have been only four categories.   The  purpose
    of kappa values is to attempt to take account of the chance of  results
    being identical.


53. On re-examination Professor Roberts says that there was  a  progression
    from stage H to stages A through to D of RPV and  also  PLV.   He  said
    other people were working on this but it is still a work in progress.





(iii) Professor Cole


54.  Professor  Cole  said  that  it  was  dangerous  to  assess  age  from
    developmental markers, given the wide range of variation in  those.  He
    said it was fundamentally unscientific to seek to  determine  age  from
    observation of physical characteristics as a result.


55. When asked about a Probit  analysis,  he  explained  that  this  was  a
    measurement which allowed a straight line method for predicting results
    from a graph plotting a range of values which was unbounded.  He had  a
    number of criticisms of Professor Roberts' work.  He was in  particular
    concerned about the apparent validation exercise [D81/D97] pointing out
    that as the age range of the group was recorded as 16 to 26 there could
    be nobody aged 29 (as appeared to be the case) and there were six other
    inconsistencies identifiable.


56. He considered that the kappa values identified  in  Professor  Roberts'
    work were extremely high  and  he  questioned  them,  considering  they
    appeared to be less in the other papers.


57. When cross-examined by Mr Holbrook, Professor Cole said that dental age
    assessment was fundamentally unscientific and that it was fundamentally
    flawed although he later rode back from this assertion with respect  to
    stage H.  He accepted that the Demirjian H stages are clearly stages of
    development and  that  the  MMM  might  be  developmental  markers  but
    although one would expect to  see  evidence  of  progress  between  the
    stages, this is not so.  He said that there was no longitudinal  study.
    He said again there was no evidence of progress between stages.


58. Professor Cole was also asked about his papers written  on  the  issue,
    including published letters in which  he  had  responded  to  Professor
    Roberts. He said he had not chosen the title of  the  article  entitled
    "hot potato".  He also said that he had not in his 2008 paper  referred
    to the absence of probit analysis as that had not been referred to, but
    he confirmed that it ought to be used, but  it  is  unhelpful  where  a
    person's age is unknown as you can quote the probability that they were
    under 18 when stage H was attained, but they will  certainly  be  older
    and to an unknown extent.


59.  While Professor Cole accepted that any error in the figures given  for
    the applicant under Professor Roberts's analysis  was  in  his  favour,
    that was not relevant, given that on either basis only a probability of
    when stage H had been achieved could be identified.


60. Asked about his research paper, 'The evidential value of  developmental
    imaging for assessing age of majority'[7] , he stated that it would not
    be correct to extrapolate from the  sample,  to  an  individual.  While
    accepting that the table showed that in the case of  Japanese,  Chinese
    and Koreans, achievement of Demirjan Stage H  was  100%  indicative  of
    having reached age 18, it could not be inferred that the  same  applied
    to Afghan nationals.


61. Re-examined, he said he did not have a political axe to grind, and  was
    not a campaigner.


Are Professors Cole and Roberts entitled to give opinion evidence?


62. The respondent submitted that we should have regard to Kennedy v Cordia
    [2016] UKSC 6, and that this raised  concerns  about  Professor  Cole's
    ability to give opinion evidence.


63. At paragraph [44] of Kennedy v Cordia the Supreme  Court  set  out  the
    considerations to be adopted in addressing opinion evidence.

        "[44].    In Bonython the court was addressing opinion evidence. As
        we have said, a skilled person can give expert factual evidence
        either by itself or in combination with opinion evidence. There are
        in our view four considerations which govern the admissibility of
        skilled evidence:
              (i) whether the proposed skilled  evidence  will  assist  the
              court in its task;
              (ii)     whether the witness has the necessary knowledge  and
              experience;
              (iii)    whether the witness  is  impartial  in  his  or  her
              presentation and assessment of the evidence; and
              (iv)     whether there is a reliable  body  of  knowledge  or
              experience to underpin the expert's evidence."

64.  We  are  satisfied,  having  considered  their  testimony,  that  both
    Professors Roberts and Cole's evidence have assisted us.  We  are  also
    satisfied that both have the  necessary  knowledge  and  experience  in
    their relevant areas of  expertise,  forensic  dentistry,  and  medical
    statistics. For the reasons set out below, we do  not  consider  either
    lacks the necessary degree of impartiality.


65. We are satisfied that there is, in the light of  Professor  Cole's  CV,
    and evidence, supported by the publications cited, a reliable  body  of
    knowledge in medical statistics. It is of  note  that  he  has  over  a
    period of many years been involved in the compilation of data  relating
    to development and growth in humans.


66. Further, and in any event, we observe first that the rules of  evidence
    applicable in the Upper Tribunal do not prohibit the giving of  opinion
    evidence (other than by an expert), albeit that little weight could  be
    given to opinion evidence not coming from an expert.

Analysis of the Expert Evidence

67. At its core, the difference between the two experts is as to the use of
    data in assessing probability. Professor Cole's primary  contention  is
    that given the wide  variability  of  developmental  factors  in  human
    populations, it is unsafe to apply them


68. This is best illustrated by the following examples.


69. Suppose we take a box containing 100 balls, 75 of which are red, 25  of
    which are blue. One is taken out. The rules of probability  demonstrate
    that there is a 75% chance of it being red and 25% of it being blue but
    without other evidence such as seeing it, we do not know which  it  is.
    The evidence of the number of balls and the application of the rules of
    probability only permits a finding as to the chance of the  ball  being
    red or blue; it does not permit a finding that it is red or blue.  That
    can only be determined by other evidence such as looking at it.


70. If, however, the box contained 100 red balls, then the probability of a
    ball withdrawn from it being red is 100%, but a probability  assessment
    is irrelevant in such a case as, by a matter of  logic,  the  ball  can
    only be red; that is established by the evidence of the box  containing
    only red balls. Other possibilities are excluded.


71. Suppose then a set of 10,000 balls, all of which are black apart from a
    sole red ball. It is easy to say that the chance  of  that  ball  being
    drawn is very unlikely. More importantly, even if a sample of 1000 at a
    time were taken, the chances of the red ball being in  that  sample  is
    only 10%.


72. These are, however, closed sets. That is, there is a  fixed  number  of
    balls, and the numbers of each colour are known.  With  any  such  set,
    even if more complexity such as the number of colours or the number  of
    each is changed, the chance of drawing a ball of  a  particular  colour
    can be calculated with certainty.


73. Suppose, however, that we do not have a closed set. We have a  pool  of
    1000 balls, and we know that there are only two  colours  of  balls  in
    that pool.  Samples can be taken and  statistical  methods  applied  to
    provide more or less reliable probabilities of the  colour  of  a  ball
    drawn, or as to the numbers of each colour.


74. Professor Cole does not suggest that  one  cannot  extrapolate  from  a
    closed set to a larger population, but questions  the  statistical  and
    scientific validity of doing so when there are both wide variations  in
    human development, such as the age  at  which  Stage  H  develops  and,
    because although it is  known  that  those  values  vary  among  ethnic
    populations, the extent of that variation is not known and thus  cannot
    be allowed for in any calculations.


75. Professor Cole's principal concern is, as we understand it, that if the
    age of a young person is known, one can from  data  compiled  on,  say,
    height, give a range of height within which that person is  likely  be,
    but what is not permissible, given the size  of  that  range,  and  the
    interplay of other factors, such as ethnicity, is to seek to  determine
    accurately the  age  of  a  person  from  his  or  her  height  or  any
    developmental factor.


76. The datasets considered by the authors of the various papers  shown  to
    us were closed sets. The number in each was known, as were their  ages,
    as was whether, for example, Stage H had been reached. On  that  basis,
    as  Professor  Cole  said  in  his  evidence,  when  asked  about   the
    possibility of an individual Hispanic being a particular age, he  could
    give a probability, but only for a person from that dataset.


77. The applicant submits that Professor Roberts' methodology is flawed for
    the reasons set out in ZM & SK and that these errors identified  cannot
    be rectified on the basis of the evidence produced in  this  case.   Mr
    Wise QC submitted that Professor  Cole's  evidence  is  compelling  and
    undermines Professor Roberts' methodology and, it  is  submitted,  that
    Professor Roberts' methodology is unreliable as is his credibility.


78. Professor Roberts' report relies on three factors.


      1. that the lower left third molar had Demirjian stage  H,  indicating
         the probability that he was over 18 years is 79.03 percent;


      2. that his RPV was observed as being at stage B,  giving  the  likely
         age of 22.77 years; and


      3. that his PLV was at stage D giving him a likely age of 23.61 years.




79. The applicant makes the point that Professor Roberts says  that  he  no
    longer relies on stage H as an indicator of likely age.


80. The respondent does, however, seek to rely on this as evidence  on  the
    basis that this is not challenged by Professor Cole and  that  even  on
    Professor Cole's basis, disregarding  the  issue  with  ethnicity,  the
    effect of Probit analysis applied to this case showed that  the  median
    age of attainment of stage H falls from 20.2 years to about 19.5  years
    and the probability of being an 18 year old fell from about 20% to 10%.
     Thus, the likelihood of him being stage H whilst he is at the  claimed
    age of 16.5 was slim.  It is also submitted that in any event Professor
    Roberts' treatment of stage H is insignificant  in  comparison  to  the
    conclusions he draws from the MMMs which are strongly indicative of him
    being over 18.


81. Mr Holbrook submitted that on any view of  the  Stage  H  data  and  in
    particular the Probit analysis, it was not likely that the applicant is
    the age claimed, there being little chance that he  is  under  18.   He
    said that Kent did still rely on that part of Professor Roberts' report
    from which he had distanced himself, it being for Kent to seek to  rely
    on evidence as it was the party, not the expert.


82. Mr Wise submitted that the ethnicity  of  the  subject  was  likely  to
    introduce an unknown error.  It was submitted  there  was  no  evidence
    that the evidence for Caucasians  could  properly  be  extrapolated  to
    those of Afghan origin.


83. We consider that there is nothing in the  materials  to  show  that  we
    should depart from the conclusion reached in ZM and SK that the stage H
    data is unreliable.  While we noted that once the Probit  analysis  was
    undertaken that gave a likely age for the applicant as  slightly  older
    than on the basis of the analysis initially undertaken, that,  however,
    does not advance the respondent's case; the reality  remains  that  the
    Stage H analysis can only say that he has achieved dental maturity, not
    when. It can provide a probability that he is older than  claimed,  but
    that is not sufficient evidence. Further, the evidence shows that there
    is a variance in the achievement of dental  maturity  across  different
    ethnic populations.





MMM Markers


84. We are satisfied that, in addition to the issues considered by ZM & SK,
     RPV and PLV are unreliable for the reasons set out below.


85. Kent's  case  is  that  MMMs  can  be  determinative  or  least  highly
    suggestive of a subject being an adult. It  is  of  note  that  in  the
    assessment by DARLinG [8] on 23 February, 2017 that the  applicant  had
    achieved an RPV stage B and a PLV stage D.   In response  to  questions
    put by the applicant on 18 March 2017, Professor Roberts  set  out  how
    those stages would have been interpreted  according  to  the  different
    published papers by Olze  (cited above)(Germans) and  Sequeira,  Perez-
    Mongiovi , Teixeira A, Calda IM and others[9]  ("Caldas")  (Portuguese)
    as well as by Lucas[10] on whom DARLing/Professor Roberts rely.


    AS's minimum age of


   i) Olze         26.20 (as indicated by PLV)


  ii) Caldas       19.10 (as indicated by PLV)


 iii) Lucas        18.67 (as indicated by PLV)


    Similarly, there is in respect of RPV a wide range of minimum ages from
    17.71 (DARLinG/Lucas) to 22.40 (Olze).


    On the basis of these data the mean age for achieving stage  B  in  RPV
    and stage D in PLV was


   i) Olze             28.10 (RPV), 33.70 (PLV)


  ii) Caldas           21.90(RPV), 26.90 (PLV)


 iii) DARLinG/Lucas    22.61 (RPV), 23.37 (PLV)


86. It is noticeable that there is  a  very  wide  variance  by  using  the
    different published data, but equally we note  that  Professor  Roberts
    was of the view that owing to the different study designs,  age  ranges
    and small numbers, it was unwise to over analyse the details.


87. The maximum ages for males identified at Stages  0-3/A-D  in  males  by
    Lucas, Mongiovi, and Olze, were, as  is  submitted  by  the  applicant,
    similar and were located close to the cut-off point chosen by each team
    of researchers:

        a. Lucas maximum ages Stages A-D (cut-off point 25.99 years)
              i. RPV - 25.49, 25.93 25.96, and 25.19[11] .
             ii. PLV - 22.8, 25.43, 25.43, and 25.93[12]
        b. Sequeira maximum ages Stages 0-3 (cut-off point 31 years for RPV
           and 30.99 years for PLV)
              i. RPV - 30.0, 28.7, 30.6, and 30.7 [13]
             ii. PLV - 20.4, 30.6, 30.6, and 30.7[14]
        c. Olze maximum ages Stages 0-3 (cut-off point 40 years)
              i. RPV - 39.1, 40.0, 40.2, and 40.6[15] .
             ii. PLV - 24.0, 26.4, 40.6, and 40.5[16] [MB/9/3].

88. Aside from any difficulties in the analysis of the  data,  there  is  a
    fundamental problem. As Mr Wise submitted, whilst it is well known that
    an individual progresses gradually through  the  Demirjian  development
    stages there is insufficient evidence that the same occurs with the RPV
    or PLV stages.  In particular, as Professor Cole observed there are  no
    longitudinal studies of RPV or PLV. That is, there is no evidence  base
    taken from examining the same individual at different ages to ascertain
    whether the stages progress.  It  is,  we  note,  remarkable  that  the
    achievement of the various stages of RPV appear  very  much  higher  in
    terms of the median in the Olze study which included individuals up  to
    the age of 40 when compared to the figures generated by Lucas et al who
    used a different age range.  While there is in that paper at section  4
    a consideration of issues of methodology, there is also  an  indication
    of differences in the approach to categorising the different stages. It
    is, consequently, not possible to attach  statistical  significance  to
    the data from DARLinG, Olze or Caldes.


89. We do not consider that this is an issue in  which  Professor  Cole  is
    stepping outside the area of  his  expertise.  Rather,  in  noting  the
    absence of the longitudinal study,  he  is  identifying  why  the  data
    presented is, from a medical/statistical point of view, unreliable.  As
    he explains in his response to Kent's questions about his criticism  of
    Professor Roberts' assertion that his criticism  of  RPV  studies  were
    matters of clinical judgment, only radiological appearance was  such  a
    matter; ethnicity, size of sample age range and  age  are  relevant  to
    data interpretation. We consider also that it was open to him  to  note
    that DARLinG  assessors  had,  in  Professor  Robert's  statement,  had
    difficulty in matching Olze's descriptions  with  RPV  and  PLV  stages
    indicating a possibility that  different  stages  of  development  were
    being assessed.  The same observations apply to PLV.


90. We consider that Kappa values are relevant in the consideration of  the
    evidence put forward by Caldes, Olze and DARLinG.  It  is  a  means  to
    identifying whether there could be errors in the data  collection.   It
    is also of note that DARLinG and  implicitly  Kent  accepted  that  the
    absence of Kappa values from the Olze RPV paper is a weakness as it  is
    with the PLV paper.


91. There is also the difficulty in that, although Professor  Roberts  uses
    stage H  as  a  trigger  for  considering  MMMs,  it  appears  that  an
    individual may display an MMM without being in stage H as appears  from
    the validation  study  attached  to  his  second  statement.  Professor
    Roberts referred to this as an error, stating


         "there is one non-stage H individual who should be excluded  (whose
         PLV appears  to  have  been  recorded).   Clearly  a  typographical
         error."


92. While it would, clearly, be dangerous to rely on  a  single  incidence,
    equally it is unclear why Professor Roberts is sure this is a recording
    or typographical error.


93. Whilst it is clear that Professor Roberts did seek to rely on the  data
    attached to the skeleton argument, he did accept that there  may  be  a
    question as to whether there is progression through MMMs but  that  the
    same criticism could not be made of whether the  minimum  age  for  the
    occurrence of the initial stage arose.


94. Mr Wise relied also on Professor Roberts' first witness statement as to
    why MMMs are unreliable.  It was, as we observed, unclear if there  was
    evidence other than that obtained from a Caucasian  population.   There
    appears to be no  indication  from  the  data  of  Olze  or  Caldas  of
    consideration of anything other than a Caucasian population.


95. We consider that none of  Mr  Holbrook's  submissions  rebut  Professor
    Cole's criticisms  of  Professor  Roberts'  methodology.  Indeed,  Kent
    accepted Professor Cole's conclusions as to the DARLinG data  regarding
    Stage H.


96. We find no  merit  in  the  submission  that  Professor  Cole's  method
    strengthens Kent's case because it shows  (disregarding  the  issue  of
    ethnicity) that the probability is of the applicant  being  older  than
    claimed.


97. Regardless of whether or not the MMMs are Stage H dependent, there is a
    serious gap in Professor Roberts' evidence because there is no data  on
    how MMMs present in Stage H individuals aged below 17.16.  The youngest
    male in any of the Olze, Caldas, or Lucas tables is 17.16.  However, it
    is known that a subject can be in Stage H  as  young  as  15.47.   This
    means that the Tribunal simply does not know  what  a  person  of  AS's
    claimed age (approximately 16 years 5 months at the time of the  dental
    examination) would look like in terms of MMMs.


98. We accept Professor Cole's evidence that there are different levels  of
    validation  and  this  validation  is  at  the  lowest  level  that  is
    validation by the researchers themselves.  Further,  and  as  Professor
    Cole noted, there are a number of difficulties with the results.


99. At paragraphs 59 to 60  of  his  second  witness  statement,  Professor
    Roberts sets out results in respect of RPV and PLV, covering  85  males
    aged between 16 and 26"  [D97-98].   There  are,  however,  significant
    difficulties with these, as identified by the  applicant  as   although
    said to be the results for males aged 16 to 26, 5 of the 8 maximum ages
    are over 26 (26.04, 29.65, 24.23, 29.65, 26.04, and 26.03).   Professor
    Roberts sought to explain this by saying the data needed cleansing  but
    it was not good professional research practice to analyse and clean the
    data whilst  a  study  is  progressing.   This  does  not  explain  why
    Professor Roberts signed a statement to say that the table recorded the
    results for 85 males whose age ranged between 16 and 26 .


100. Further, one individual in the RPV table is said to be "Not  stage  H".
    This person is aged 24.44, which is three years older than  the  oldest
    male previously recorded in the DARLInG dataset as  being  pre-stage  H
    (21.64 [E47]).  If so, it is surprising that such  as  result  was  not
    remarked upon. That said, in contrast to the RPV table, the  PLV  table
    records 0 individuals as being "Not stage H".   This  is  inexplicable,
    given that the tables purport to record the same 85 individuals.


101. The minimum age in the RPV table is 16.32 but the minimum  age  in  the
    PLV table is 18.04, again despite the fact that the tables  purport  to
    record the same 85 individuals.


102. Whilst it may well be, that there is a requirement for  data  cleansing
    to be continued, nonetheless it does  cast  significant  doubt  on  the
    reliability of the data.  We consider that, at best, the issue of  MMMs
    is a developing area and it is work in progress.  We therefore  endorse
    what was said in ZM and SK.


103. We consider further that, as the applicant submits, there is a lack  of
    sufficient scientific consensus on the Olze, Caldas  and  other  papers
    and that these do  not  provide  the  unequivocal  support  claimed  by
    Professor Roberts who in his second witness statement  at  [54]  stated
    that :


         "all three groups of researchers were clear on the diagnostic value
         of RPV and PLV for young adults" [D96].


104. It was put to him in cross-examination that the  Caldas  paper  on  RPV
    expressly states that  "the  accuracy  of  predictions  for  the  group
    younger than 21 years of age was low, meaning that this methodology may
    not be suitable for age estimation" [MB/18/1] and "using the  different
    stages of pulp visibility as an age marker may not be suitable,  as  it
    may produce ethically unacceptable errors by claiming that a person  is
    older than they really are" [MB/18/5].  This was particularly true  for
    males, for whom it was said "other markers should be used" [MB/18/5].


105. Professor Roberts' evidence was that this only applied to  the  21-year
    threshold and that for the 18-year threshold it was helpful because the
    minimum values were all  over  18  years.  This  explanation  fails  to
    recognise that the sample used in the study did not include  any  males
    under the age of 18.  It was therefore inevitable that the minimum  age
    for any stage was over 18: far from proving that no male under  18  was
    identified, the authors did not look at any males under 18.


106. We accept that to some extent, Professor Roberts seeks  to  cast  doubt
    on and distance himself from the Olze and Caldas papers.  In his  first
    witness statement, he argued  that  the  inclusion  of  the  Olze  data
    rendered the sample  report  provided  to  the  Tribunal  in  ZM  &  SK
    inaccurate.  He gave several reasons for why the Olze data  was  likely
    to be unreliable and made it clear that going forward he would  not  be
    relying on the Olze data (paragraphs 15-28  [B20-22]  and  19-22  [B22-
    24]).  In his written replies to Kent's questions,  he  criticised  the
    Caldas papers as well as the Olze research.   Kent  had  asked  him  to
    state what age and age range he would have given AS had his  data  been
    drawn from data published by "a) Olze, b) Perez-Mongiovi, c)  Sequeira,
    d) "any other reputable source" but he refused to do so, stating:

         "It is inappropriate to provide figures using the data  from  Olze,
         Perez-Mongiovi,  or  Sequeira.   It  is  because  there  are   some
         questions about the design of the research used in these  projects,
         particularly the  different  age  ranges  that  were,  in  part,  a
         motivation for the research led and conducted by Dr Victoria  Lucas
         and myself.  Today (8th March 2017), as regards g)[17] there is  no
         other research publication known to GR."

107. We note that it is still the case that there  is  no  data  for  dental
    development in Afghan nationals.  As Professor Roberts  accepts,  there
    is strong evidence about the differences in development and this is  so
    particularly in respect of MMMs. Professor Roberts himself accepts that
    "there is strong evidence of ethnic differences" in  respect  of  tooth
    development [E14].  In his oral evidence, he appeared to be seeking  to
    confine this to Tooth Dental Stage, yet in his first witness  statement
    at [18(i)] and [22(i)] he cited  ethnic  differences  as  a  reason  to
    distinguish the Olze papers on RPV and PLV.


108. There is in any event other evidence showing that ethnicity may  affect
    the development of MMMs.  In the Caldas paper on PLV, the authors noted
    that "Differences between studies in different populations are evident,
    suggesting that specific  population  standards  should  be  used  when
    applying this technique".  The same conclusion was drawn by  Caldas  in
    respect of RPV.


109. Whilst we note Mr Holbrook's submissions that the  likelihood  is  that
    any difference on account of  ethnicity  is  likely  to  be  small  and
    irrelevant, that is not a matter which is relevant to assessing whether
    or not this is reliable evidence.  Further, contrary to what  is  said,
    there is evidence certainly in this regard that some populations  reach
    development stages earlier. In the report entitled  "Comparative  study
    on the effect of ethnicity on wisdom  tooth  eruption"  from  Olze  and
    Others[18], 2007 it is noted that a study pairing  American  white  men
    and  women  and  the  black  African  population  showed  that   dental
    development in the latter was faster (see Chagula[19]).  Another  study
    indicated that the upper wisdom teeth of  black  Americans  emerge  3.7
    years earlier and the lower wisdom teeth 5.6 years earlier  than  white
    Americans.  Similarly, studies of  South  African  men  indicated  they
    developed earlier, the conclusion being that "according  to  our  study
    results, we conclude that forensic age assessments should be  based  on
    population specific reference data".


Reliability


110. The applicant submits that Professor Roberts is an  unreliable  witness
    and that despite stating that he has learned from ZM & SK, he  has  not
    done so and has continued to present his  evidence  either  relying  on
    unreliable data, or failing  to  mention  difficulties.   Attention  is
    drawn to several factors.


   i) The continued use of attainment of  stage  H  as  a  measure  of  age,
      contrary to what he had said in ZM & SK at [65];


  ii) Inconsistencies in the value of using Root Canal Width ("RCW")  as  an
      indicator of age;


 iii) Overstating the value of the Encyclopaedia Chapter;


  iv) Reliance on a validation study which (as set out above) contains  many
      inaccuracies;


   v) failing or refusing to recognise that he had erred  in  continuing  to
      produce reports relying on Stage H even when he knew that  method  was
      unreliable in a significant proportion of cases;


  vi) Resiling from a large part of his report.


111. We deal with these in turn.


112. We noted that in oral evidence Professor  Roberts  denied  that  giving
    probabilities in his report on AS that he was under or  over  18  as  a
    result of being in Stage H was a measure of age and that it was just  a
    "threshold assignment". We do not accept this.  He  could  have  simply
    noted that AS was at Stage H then proceeded to consider the MMMs.   The
    fact that Professor Roberts does not suggest what specific age AS might
    be does not make this any less an assessment of probable age.


113. With respect to RCW we note that in his second  witness  statement,  at
    [D96] Professor Roberts stated that it was perhaps too early  to  start
    using it, yet in, SK v Croydon (JR/2414/2016)  he had produced a report
    (dated 2nd November 2016) relying solely  on  RCW.   Further,  in  oral
    evidence in this case he stood by that SK report. That is inconsistent,
    and not what we would expect  from  an  expert  witness.   It  is  also
    troubling that he said that in this case he would have used RCW had the
    image been of sufficient quality.


114. It is also of note with regard to evidence presented in  earlier  cases
    that in ZM & SK, Professor Roberts relied on a sample report  which  he
    now accepts in his first witness statement  was  inaccurate.  While  we
    would not agree with the applicant that  this  amounts  to  seeking  to
    mislead, it is equally worrying that this could have occurred.


115. There is a degree of exaggeration in the covering letter sent with  the
    report in this case which stated that:


         "All the information required  for  a  full  understanding  of  the
         anatomical, statistical  and  theoretical  aspects  of  Dental  Age
         Estimation are covered in this encyclopaedia chapter".


116. Professor Roberts accepted that he should not have said  "all"  and  it
    is worrying that the chapter presented as reliable a  method  which  is
    now known to be wrong in 50% of cases between 17 and 19. We  found  the
    explanation for that given in oral evidence to  be  unsatisfactory.  We
    accept that there is a time delay in publishing articles, but we do not
    accept that it was right not to have drawn attention to difficulties in
    assessment.


117. Before us, Professor Roberts sought  to  rely  on  a  validation  study
    which, as noted above, contains significant errors. It may well be,  as
    he said, work in progress but it is of concern that it was put  forward
    as evidence to the Tribunal in a witness statement.


118. We consider  that  there  is  here  a  pattern  in  Professor  Roberts'
    conduct. There is a strong tendency to overstate the value of  research
    he has undertaken and his methodology. This extends to overstating  the
    weight of the validation of his work,  an  exercise  which,  as  became
    clear in oral evidence, was far from satisfactory.


119. Further, and of greater concern, is the  significant  evidence  of  him
    giving assurances about future conduct when faced with the flaws in his
    methodology yet failing to put them into practice.


120. We regret to say that we  did  not  on  this  occasion  find  Professor
    Roberts to be a reliable witness. Nor do we find that MMMs are  of  any
    use in assessing age.


The Age Assessments


(i) The first assessment


121. The report concluded that the applicant was 17  years  old,  his  birth
    date being fixed at 7 September 1998.  This was based on  an  interview
    carried out on  6  November  2015.   It  was  noted  that  he  appeared
    physically older than 15, and seemed independent, his interaction  with
    peers suggesting he is older, and that staff  believed  him  to  be  17
    years of age.  It is also recorded that they believed him to be  within
    the age range of 17 to 19, and giving him the  benefit  of  the  doubt,
    assessed him at the lower age of the range, taking the date of birth as
    7 September 1998 as he believed his date of arrival in the UK  was  his
    15th birthday.


122. The assessors observed a lack of obvious signs  of  mourning  over  the
    loss of his father, and a lack of any information given  about  village
    life or his community, his description of his  life  coming  across  as
    existing in a vacuum, yet his behaviour in going missing and going  out
    into  the  community  appeared  inconsistent  with  this,  as  was  his
    assertiveness.





(ii) The second assessment


123. As noted above, the respondent conducted an  additional  assessment  on
    the applicant on 9 February 2017.  That interview  was  conducted  with
    the assistance of an interpreter; there was also an  appropriate  adult
    present.  What occurred in that meeting is set out in her statement and
    also in the notes of the interview prepared by Melissa Carter.


124. Rose Corby noted ([9]) that she had  taken  account  also  of  the  age
    assessment completed on 6 November 2015 and additional observations  by
    the  on-site  support  workers,  Danielle  Weston  and   Dave   Ansell.
    Contained within the witness statement are photographs of the applicant
    taken on 8 September 2015 when  he  arrived  at  Appledore;  around  24
    August 2016 and on 23 February 2017.  Full size blow-ups of these  were
    provided at the hearing.


125. Rose Corby stated that her initial  impression  of  the  applicant  was
    that he was significantly over the age of 18 having adult features such
    as a prominent Adam's apple, defined  jaw  line  and  developed  muscle
    tone.  She also observed signs of aging such  as  lines  on  his  neck,
    forehead and jowl lines beginning to show, and that his skin was losing
    lustre.  She also observed  old  acne  scarring  which  had  completely
    healed.  She noted that the  skin  looked  weathered  and  not  smooth,
    discounting the possibility that premature skin aging was  due  to  his
    living outside as he said that he spent all his time indoors.


126. Rose Corby concluded ([12]) that the applicant presents as  older  than
    the claimed age and would fit more appropriately to be an  age  between
    22 to 26 based on his physical appearance and demeanour and taking into
    account the collated photographs of young people and young adults  aged
    from 14 to 26 appended to the report.  She stated:


         "If you compare the last two or so  sets  of  AS  photos  with  the
         appropriate age sets in the album, this shows  that  comparing  his
         face with those in the photographs of age known young  adults,  you
         can see that he has more in common with those in the age ranges  of
         22 to 26 and over and my best estimation is that he falls into  the
         age of 24."


127. Rose Corby noted ([13]) the applicant appeared to  have  difficulty  in
    estimating ages particularly when asked about his parents and  that  it
    seemed  strange  that  he  was  unable  to  know  about   the   general
    significance of age within  his  community,  that  is,  whether  it  is
    something that others are likely to know about or not.  She noted  that
    in contrast to this  ([15])  that  he  had  spoken  about  his  younger
    brothers and was clear that one was 7 and  one  was  5  when  he  left,
    clarifying that there were discussions where  his  mother  would  speak
    about their ages which she found implausible if he had  been  told  his
    age only when he was leaving.  She noted that the ages might have  been
    written in the Holy Koran but does not know whether or not that was so,
    concluding that he had used the discussions to provide  false  evidence
    of his claimed age ([16]).


128. Rose Corby noted that the applicant appeared to  be  coping  very  well
    with social situations and the learning and behavioural expectations of
    a college environment, being remarkable progress for someone  who  said
    he had not been allowed out, only socialised with his younger  brothers
    and had never been to school, albeit that he had  said  in  an  earlier
    assessment that he played with other children from a local mosque.  She
    noted also that a decision had been taken that he would not attend  the
    school further away from the house due to the risks from the Taliban.


129. Rose Corby  considered  ([18])  that  the  applicant  was  deliberately
    trying to  come  across  as  young  but  was  not  familiar  with  what
    information he should provide about his level of self-care skills to be
    consistent with the  claimed  chronological  age  as  that  was  not  a
    significant part of his culture.  She  concluded  ([18])  that  he  was
    trying to minimise his capabilities and responsibilities in the  family
    home with a view to indicating that he was younger than his  true  age,
    raising doubt of the credibility of the  picture  he  had  provided  of
    family life and his childhood experience.  She again concluded that the
    account given of how and when he was allowed to stay at home alone  was
    not plausible and  was  evidence  of  the  applicant  manipulating  his
    account.  She noted also ([20]) that  he  appeared  to  be  seeking  to
    distract  from  questioning,  providing   further   evidence   of   his
    manipulating his answers.  She did not find it credible ([21]) that the
    applicant would not have sought more stimulation than he had  said  and
    the activities described were unlikely to  have  satisfied  him  as  an
    adolescent.  She noted ([21]) he again appeared to  be  distracted  and
    not answering questions, concluding that he did not want to give a true
    account of his activities.  She noted also ([23]) that he did not  give
    the impression of someone who had led such  a  sheltered  childhood  as
    described and ([25]) that he was deliberately trying to  give  a  false
    impression of his development in his family in Afghanistan.


130. Turning to the applicant's journey to the  United  Kingdom  ([26])  she
    noted that his account was not as detailed as young  people  are  often
    able to provide ([27]) resulting in it not being possible  to  build  a
    timeline of his journey and that he said he had known that it was three
    months long because others on the journey had counted the days but that
    there is no way of knowing if it was  the  same  travelling  companions
    from start to finish and there are doubts about  the  accuracy  of  the
    estimate.  She noted also ([29]) that he had been at  points  sarcastic
    when answering questions on this matter.


131. Turning to the applicant's education in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  was
    noted that he attends Bexley College three days a  week  and  from  the
    support workers Danielle Weston and Dave Ansell, that he had  come  far
    with education since arriving in  2015,  his  English  having  improved
    massively and that he could hold a  conversation  easily  although  his
    understanding of time is more questionable.  It is noted also that  his
    attendance at college is good; his  attitude  to  staff  and  behaviour
    during lessons is very good, that he completes his  work  and  that  in
    December 2016 he had exams where he was assessed at  entry  level  one,
    English Speaking Board (International) describing this course as  being
    "aimed  at  candidates  who  have  very  good  literacy  knowledge   or
    experience in English".  It transpired during cross-examination she had
    identified the wrong test.


132. Rose Corby noted that he appeared to be  able  to  travel  around  with
    relative ease ([37]) and that he was seeking to minimise  his  capacity
    to undertake tasks for himself, especially domestic  tasks  ([38])  and
    that there are concerns that he is dishonest about money and how he  is
    spending it ([39]), appearing willing to deceive professionals who  are
    offering support around money  which  he  is  requesting;  that  he  is
    showing confidence,  independence and making decisions for himself  and
    is not seeking the support of adults when he is determined in  what  he
    wants such as purchasing larger items.


133. Rose Corby noted ([41]) that social work assistant  Patrick  Shier  had
    attended on 6 and 9 March 2017 to offer support with independent living
    skills including budgeting and he appeared to be resistant to this.  It
    was noted also that he appears to have  made  a  financial  arrangement
    with a friend to purchase an iPhone at �400, arranging to  pay  a  lump
    sum and the rest in instalments  showing  advanced  money  skills.   He
    appears also to have laughed when Patrick  Shier  and  Danielle  Weston
    challenged him as to why he had lied about Danielle lending  him  money
    ([42]).  She noted also ([42]) that the applicant did appear to be able
    to undertake domestic skills contrary to what he had told them and that
    he appeared to want to be a family because he  thought  he  would  have
    homemade meals made for him  and  help  with  his  education  and  also
    appears to expect a carer to be there all the time ([43]).


134. It was noted also that he expresses concerns about ill  health  stating
    that he is still in pain despite having had a kidney removed  some  six
    or seven months earlier.


135. Rose Corby considers ([49]) that it was very unusual that the topic  of
    the applicant's age would come up casually just before he left home and
    that his mother would be so specific about it - stating that he was  14
    years and 9 months old and that his  journey  was  three  months  long,
    saying that when challenged he said that his mother had  actually  said
    he would soon be 15 ([50]).  She concluded at [52]:


         "He also added that his mother might have got the  information  she
         gave him from the Holy Koran but he did not see her  check  and  he
         does not even know if the date is actually written  in  the  family
         Koran and so there is nothing to substantiate this.  It came across
         more as  though  AS  was  just  desperately  looking  for  ways  to
         substantiate his claimed age."


    At [53] he said that his mother never spoke about his age  or  date  of
    birth on any other occasions.


136. Rose Corby noted ([55]) the applicant's  overall  attitude  was  making
    lots of complaints, that he was unable to explain what he had done  for
    himself.  She stated that in her view AS's experience of life in the UK
    is not matching up to his unrealistic hopes, the easiest  option  being
    to blame others for putting him in the wrong situation.  She noted also
    that there were moments ([57]) when he became sarcastic in his answers,
    behaving in a sophisticated mature way which was inconsistent with  the
    uneducated background and lifestyle he claimed to have had  [57].   The
    conclusions are as follows:

         "59. For the following reasons I did not believe much of AS's
         account and concluded that he was being dishonest about it with a
         view to supporting a claimed age that is much younger than his true
         age:


      a) The information about how he knows his date of birth is unreliable,
         implausible, inconsistent and vague
      b) AS continues to make complaints about his health concerns and  that
         no-one is helping him, however recent information from his  support
         workers shows that he has been supported to seek  numerous  medical
         opinions and only two weeks previously was examined by  the  doctor
         who could find no problems. During the assessment he therefore  was
         giving a false impression on his needs, particularly in relation to
         their impact on the review process

      c) AS is making good progress in managing the  behavioural,  cognitive
         and social expectations of his education placement. This would seem
         unlikely given the isolated childhood experience he  has  described
         during the assessment and raises doubt over the authenticity of his
         account.

      d) AS's account is that as a child he was able to stay  at  home  with
         his much younger brothers, however he was dependent on  his  mother
         in relation to personal hygiene and he  claims  his  mother  washed
         him. In my view this is improbable and it is more  likely  that  AS
         has tried to minimise his level of independence and skill  when  he
         was living in Afghanistan to try and support a younger claimed age.

      e) In the UK, AS said in the meeting that he wants to live  in  foster
         care and also in contradiction said to his allocated social  worker
         Ben Holbrook that he wants to live in  a  house  by  himself.  This
         indicates that he wants to have the domestic support of  carers  to
         cook for him but the freedom of living alone. AS is aware that  his
         placement is informed 'by his age and therefore  this  gives  clear
         motivation for the information he has provided in his assessment to
         be shaped by a desired age rather than from memory.

      f) I do not accept  that  it  is  plausible  that  AS's  mother  would
         regularly  discuss  his   younger   brothers   ages   in   everyday
         conversation but had never mentioned AS's age, unless she  did  not
         actually know AS's age. In this scenario, it  is  unrealistic  that
         she would have told him that he was 14 years and 9 months old,  and
         AS has given conflicting accounts  on  whether  she  actually  said
         this, or whether she actually gave a more general answer. It  seems
         more likely to me, that AS had decided that he wanted  his  claimed
         date of birth to be 15 years old on arrival so that he could access
         a foster placement for at least a year, and that he then calculated
         the age he would have been on arrival and then said that his mother
         told him this.

      g) It comes across as too coincidental that AS's mother estimated  his
         age so precisely that would mean he was exactly  15  years  old  on
         arrival, given that young  people  who  do  not  know  his  or  her
         specific birthday but just an age will usually be given a  birthday
         of 1 January. At his arrival this could have  made  him  15  and  9
         months (if the immigration officers had to allocate a date of birth
         in accordance with a claimed age) rather than what he claimed which
         was 15 years old exactly.

      h) AS's demeanour when he was being challenged  was  defensive,  rude,
         sarcastic and distracted.

      i) It also comes across as too coincidental that AS's  date  of  birth
         came up in conversation for the first time just before he left when
         it had never been discussed  before,  despite  his  brother's  ages
         being regularly discussed.

      j) It comes across as though AS is now in a power struggle because  he
         is adamant that he will  not  cook  for  himself,  although  he  is
         capable. He sees the best way out of this is to be in  foster  care
         and have his meals cooked for him

      k) AS physically presents as someone who is fully developed and is now
         showing signs of aging such as lines on his face

      l) AS continues to express that he needs a lot of support  around  him
         all of the time, however he seems more than happy to  take  himself
         out unaccompanied to visit friends around Kent and  go  to  college
         and to purchase �400 mobile phones on a payment plan."


137. In her second witness statement dated 3 May 2017 Rose Corby  refers  to
    the photographs collated as "typical photos of age" [3] because on  the
    whole they show pictures typical of 14, 16,  18  etc.  year  olds,  and
    states:-


         "4.  These typical photos and the following commentary on them  are
             intended to explain to the Tribunal how visual appearance  and
             demeanour/behaviour is indicative of age for  subjects  around
             the world in the 16 to 24 age bracket."


138. The witness statement then sets out  certain  features  and  how  those
    appear in those aged 14 to 18.  These are then compared with those aged
    over 20 and finally how they related to the applicant.  The features of
    acne, Adam's apple, eyebrows, facial hair, facial shape, jaw line  skin
    lines and jowls, skin under the eyes, muscle tone, are then  addressed.




139. Turning to demeanour/behaviour, she noted that  the  age  assessors  in
    November 2015 observed the act that he held strong  eye  contact  which
    could be perceived as passive aggressive; he gave a long,  fixed  glare
    and when asking questions did not show signs of emotion.  She  did  not
    consider it would be the behaviour of a typical 15 year old.  She noted
    also in her  interview  in  March  2017  AS  did  not  demonstrate  the
    behaviour of a 16 year old but his behaviour was  consistent  with  the
    assessment of him being 22 or older.


140. Rose Corby then goes on to give her overall view on age.


141. In cross-examination Rose Corby confirmed that the interview  with  the
    applicant had taken place  over  approximately  three  hours  including
    breaks.  She said she had continued to observe him during breaks.


142. Rose Corby explained that the delay of  two  months  in  preparing  the
    statement was due to a long period of analysis which had been going  on
    during which she had read through the notes.  She said that there  were
    no longer any notes of hers in existence as she had used  those  notes,
    expanding upon them, to create her statement.  She confirmed  that  the
    report had been the subject of discussions between herself and  Melissa
    Carter and also with their line manager, Rita Boboye.  She said it  was
    her understanding that it would not have been possible given that court
    proceedings had commenced, to have a full "Merton" assessment.


143. She also referred to undertaking a "pro forma" by  which  she  meant  a
    specific form which would have been sent to  the  Home  Office  and  it
    would have been necessary to advise the applicant that  his  legal  age
    might change if this had been done.


144. Rose Corby was asked about the letter from Kent  Legal  Services  dated
    24 March 2017.  She confirmed that it was a review not  a  reassessment
    and it had been done in accordance with the ADCS guidelines.  She  said
    that they had applied what they thought was relevant  in  order  to  be
    fair but that they had not said to the applicant that she could  change
    his age as it was not appropriate to say that the outcome could  change
    the legal date of birth as  she  had  understood  it.   She  said  that
    contrary to what was said in the letter as Merton and  ADCS  compliance
    were different.  She accepted  that  there  was  a  theme  of  fairness
    underpinning "Merton".  She considered that it had  been  fair  as  the
    applicant had had the opportunity with  legal  support  to  answer  any
    point that had been written in the statement.  It was put to  her  that
    this was not correct.  She had been giving an  opinion  rather  than  a
    "minded to refuse" analysis.  It was put to her that the  exercise  was
    not Merton compliant.


145. Asked about the observations made by Danielle Weston and  Dave  Ansell,
    she said she had not spoken to them but that there had been  electronic
    communication.


146. It was also put to Rose Corby that her view was at odds  with  that  of
    Dave Ansell.


147. She said that in her  experience  the  role  of  an  age  assessor  was
    different; it involved collecting as much detail as possible  and  that
    the view of an age assessor might be different from a key worker.   She
    said that they had asked Dave Ansell and Danielle Weston for a view and
    their views had been included in the statement.  She said that she  had
    not had the email referred to [D11] but if it had come to her it  would
    be in her report.  It was put  to  her  that  this  was  part  of  AS's
    statement which she said she had read  though  she  had  not  seen  the
    attachments.  She accepted she had  missed  it  but  denied  that  this
    showed this was an unfair process.  She did not answer whether, had she
    seen the letter from Dave Ansell, it would have  prompted  her  to  ask
    more questions as support workers like him have a different  role  from
    age assessors.  They spend a lot of time with  young  persons  and  can
    find it difficult to keep the same objectivity as an age assessor.


148. Cross-examination then turned  to  the  photographs  of  the  applicant
    which Rose Corby said had been provided by the children's services  and
    were available on the electronic file.


149. Rose Corby said  they  had  tried  to  make  the  process  as  fair  as
    possible.  It was put to her that she had not  said  in  her  statement
    that Melissa Carter was part of  the  process,  her  witness  statement
    stating only that she agreed with Rose Corby.  She did however say that
    the witness statement she had produced was a joint effort and that  she
    had used "I" as it was a witness statement from her.


150. Rose Corby  was  asked  to  explain  the  delay  between  visiting  the
    applicant and the witness statement which was only signed  on  4  April
    2017.  She explained that she would have made notes of interview  which
    were then converted into the witness statement and  so  there  were  no
    original "notes" left as they had now all been  incorporated  into  the
    witness statement.  She accepted this scenario was out of the  ordinary
    and it was not correct to say that the whole statement had been written
    on 4 April 2017.  She said they had discussed their observations in the
    office.


151. Rose Corby said that Melissa Carter had also observed the lines on  the
    applicant's neck and it is her  experience  that  post-puberty,  it  is
    necessary to look for subtle differences indicative of age change.  She
    accepted that she was beginning to  talk  outside  of  her  remit  when
    discussing whether Adam's apples became more prominent, but  considered
    that it was an indicator of aging and development.


152. Discussion then turned to the issue of jaw line.  Rose Corby said  that
    her comparisons regarding the jaw line were not confined to  experience
    of white males, that she was relying on her broad experience of working
    with other young people from  Afghanistan.   Asked  about  the  age  of
    puberty she said that it ranged between 12 to 13 for males but it could
    be younger or older.


153. She said that she  did  believe  that  the  applicant  had  shown  acne
    scarring (witness statement page 10).  She had seen it on  the  earlier
    day of the hearing but  not  today.   She  said  that  they  were  more
    prominent in February, that people can change their experience and  can
    mask scars.  She said in  her  experience  young  people  went  through
    stages of acne infection.


154. Asked about referring to the applicant's  skin  as  weathered  and  not
    smooth, she said that it was an indicator that someone was not a  child
    though she accepted that if somebody had spent their life out of  doors
    it might be different and that in conducting a holistic age  assessment
    if someone had spent their life out of doors this would have been taken
    into account as indeed would be a long journey but that was not said in
    this case.


155. Asked about the photographs which formed part of the evidence, she  had
    been given a booklet of these by her team manager.  She said she cannot
    be sure but she thought they may have come from the  legal  department.
    She said it was in a yellow folder.  She said that they  represented  a
    general cross section typical for people  of  that  age  group.   Asked
    about the links to the photographs, it was put to  her  that  she  knew
    full well that all the guidance and case law counselled against looking
    at physical appearance, she replied that physical appearance could  not
    be excluded.  She said that she felt in this case the photographs are a
    tool to try  the  points  she  had  made.   She  said  that  using  her
    experience the photographs were typical.  She confirmed that photo four
    on page F214 was typical of a 16-year-old.  She said that she had  been
    given the booklet early on in the process.  She was not aware  of  them
    being used in any other age assessment.  She denied that these were  ex
    post facto justifications and accepted she had not seen a  booklet  put
    together like this for training.  She said that  neither  she  nor  her
    colleague would have  done  anything  unethical.   She  said  that  she
    described the photographs as typical, drawing on her  experience.   She
    said that she considered that the photograph of the person on E227  was
    like the applicant although he has a full  beard  (the  applicant  does
    not).  She also considered that photograph two was like him  concerning
    the eyes.  She accepted that the applicant does not have  a  moustache.
    (Note to self: the photograph has a  receding  hairline.)   She  denied
    that she was "reverse engineering" her conclusions and it was difficult
    to say whether or not the applicant had a receding hairline.


156. It was put to her that the photograph album was a faulty tool  but  she
    did not accept that.  She said that the photograph booklet was  a  tool
    used to illustrate her observations but did not know who  it  had  been
    provided for.


157. Rose Corby confirmed that the applicant appeared to have  a  number  of
    soft skills such as when going to school that  one  must  stay  in  the
    lesson, exercise discipline and so on, which a lot of people  who  have
    not been to school before struggled to adapt to.  She said she had  not
    asked the college about him but had looked at the  records.   She  said
    that the description he had given of  his  upbringing  in  Afghanistan,
    being very isolated with  few  social  relationships  which  were  very
    limited and not going to school was quite extreme but he had  adjusted.




158. Asked about the applicant's personal education plan and  the  reference
    to the course at which he was attending being aimed at  candidates  who
    have very good literacy, knowledge or experience of English,  she  said
    this was gleaned from evidence provided  to  her.   She  was  happy  to
    accept that in fact the course was aimed at a lower level, it  being  a
    slightly different course.  She denied that this was "all of  a  piece"
    but she did not recall who had looked up the information.  She did  not
    accept that this had coloured her assessment.  This was due to the many
    discrepancies in  his  account.   She  said  that  the  course  he  was
    attending was provided to people who were 7 to 8 but that  age  related
    to the level of those whose main language was English.


159. Rose Corby said that she would have  expected  the  applicant  to  have
    shown more creativity in his behaviour  and  explain  what  he  did  to
    create stimulation.  She said that this account of how he had lived was
    inconsistent with him becoming sarcastic and with his attitude.


160. She did not accept that what she  was  saying  was  pejorative  ([29]).
    She was unable to confirm whether Dave Ansell had ([35]) said that  the
    applicant's English had  improved  massively  and  had  come  far  with
    education.


161. Asked about her second witness statement  at  paragraph  [17]  she  had
    said that she could not comment on the applicant's ability to speak  or
    understand English.  She explained that she had been able to  refer  to
    this in her first witness statement as this  was  based  on  what  Dave
    Ansell had said and that she had used  an  interpreter  to  communicate
    with the applicant.  She said that she had needed an interpreter to  be
    "Merton compliant".


162. Asked about paragraph 38 of her witness  statement  in  which  she  had
    said that there  was  conflicting  information  about  the  applicant's
    attitude and ability to do things for himself, she said that  at  times
    he said he was unable to do simple things yet other times was  able  to
    do things such as travel with relative ease.


163. Rose Corby denied trying to paint the applicant in a bad light,  adding
    that she had drawn on her experience and information supplied.  It  was
    put to her it was not ethical to come  to  such  a  conclusion  without
    putting these points to the applicant and she was satisfied  the  point
    raised was fair.  Asked about the evidence at [42] that  the  applicant
    had entered into a financial arrangement with a friend to buy an iPhone
    for �400, arranging to pay a lump sum and the rest in instalments,  she
    said she did not know whether he had actually gone ahead with this.


164. She said that when referring to the applicant being "quite  derogatory"
    she said that she had said this because the applicant had said that  he
    did not celebrate birthdays.  She accepted this did not appear  in  the
    notes of the interview  [F201],  adding  that  what  she  had  said  at
    paragraph [59(a)], that the information about how the  applicant  knows
    his date of birth is unreliable, implausible,  inconsistent  and  vague
    comes from her analysis, confirming that Melissa Carter had  also  used
    these same adjectives.  She did not  accept  that  Kent  had  wanted  a
    reassessment to be done to show that he was older.  It had simply  been
    done to get an update.  She said it was not fair to say  that  she  had
    been fed information from outside to get the result.  It  was  she  who
    came up with the new date in consultation with her manager.


165. In re-examination, Rose  Corby  was  asked  about  the  photographs  of
    people who appeared in the booklet of typical ages.  She was  asked  at
    various times to explain why they  were  typical  of  the  given  ages,
    adding that the applicant had various features which confirmed this.


166. We then heard evidence from Melissa  Carter  who  adopted  her  witness
    statements.


167. In cross-examination, she confirmed that the statement  of  Rose  Corby
    had been a joint  effort  and  she  did  not  recall  any  disagreement
    although there had been discussions.  She  said  that  Rose  Corby  was
    senior to her.  Asked why they did not just do an age assessment in the
    usual way she said that this  was  what  they  had  been  told  to  do,
    apparently this coming from the legal department.  She said  that  they
    had followed the guidance and it was fair.  She said that she  had  not
    been asked to use photographs before or since, that age assessment  was
    a continually developing area.  The photographs had  been  provided  by
    managers but she did not know from where.  She was asked to explain why
    if her statement was dated 28 March 2017 she said  she  had  seen  Rose
    Corby's witness statement yet it was dated 4 April 2017.  She said that
    she had seen a draft.


(iii) Patrick Shier


168. We then heard evidence from  Patrick  Shier  who  adopted  his  witness
    statement.  He said that he had described the  applicant's  English  as
    "perfect".   He  says  normally  asylum  seeking  children  needed   an
    interpreter which he had never needed with the applicant except when he
    was obliged to do  so  in  interviewing  the  applicant  after  he  had
    absconded.  He said he had first got to know him at Appledore where  he
    had worked until Christmas and again came in contact with AS in October
    2016.  In cross-examination, when asked about the applicant  absconding
    he said that he had told the support worker who  had  been  present  on
    that occasion to ask for the CCTV cameras at the shopping centre to  be
    looked at.  He said he knew the shopping centre in question and that it
    had not been possible for the applicant, as far as  he  knew,  to  have
    left and that the  applicant's  story  about  being  forgotten  in  the
    toilets could not be true.  It was put to him that nobody else had said
    that the applicant's English was perfect  and  that  his  results  from
    Bexley College indicated to the contrary.  He said that he did not know
    about how well the applicant was able to read but that his speaking was
    good.  He said that he had been told by other social workers.  He  said
    that  he  had  never  needed  an  interpreter  when  dealing  with  the
    applicant.  He referred to the CHIN document [Volume 3, F1].   He  said
    that he had assessed the applicant at 17 on arrival and  said  that  he
    thought that he could have been as old as 21 but he could not  give  an
    exact date nor was he expected to do so.


169. He confirmed that, as with the other young men, he  had  been  given  a
    razor but could not recall whether he used it or not as  they  did  not
    enter the young people's rooms.  He said  that  he  had  stuck  by  his
    observation that the applicant had shown a five o'clock shadow, that is
    what he believed to be the case.  In  respect  of  the  second  witness
    statement he explained that he had spoken to Danielle Weston about  the
    applicant's phones.  He said that she had been told by Edward Taylor of
    the applicant's solicitors not to  provide  the  information.   He  had
    obtained the information about the telephone numbers from her.


170. In re-examination he said that he had only  estimated  the  applicant's
    age as he was not qualified to give an opinion on  an  exact  age.   He
    said that his conclusion was based on the applicant's behaviour, adding
    that the applicant had  been  an  accomplished  pool  player  from  the
    beginning and also played football well.


171. He said he had gone by the youngest age he had observed  in  Appledore.
    In response to our questions Mr Shier said that he had been supervising
    the applicant who was one of about 44 boys and young men all day, every
    second day during the time he had been in Appledore which was a  period
    of several weeks.

(iv) Cliff Wheeler

172. We then heard evidence from Cliff Wheeler who confirmed that  he  is  a
    social worker's assistant.  He adopted his witness statement.  He  said
    that he had met the applicant on a couple  of  occasions  when  he  was
    charged with taking him to and from various appointments.  Asked why he
    thought the applicant's demeanour to  be  manipulative,  he  said  that
    during the conversation the applicant kept turning around what  he  was
    saying, trying to discuss his kidney problems and the pain he  suffered
    as a result.


The Applicant's Evidence


173. The applicant's evidence is set out in his witness  statements  and  in
    his oral evidence.  In his first witness statement the  applicant  said
    that he grew up in Afghanistan, either helping at home or visiting  the
    mosque.  He said he could not recall what age he started to attend  the
    mosque but when travelling to and from that he would  play  games  with
    other boys in  the  village.   He  also  helped  his  mother  at  home,
    including helping look  after  his  younger  brothers.   He  said  that
    relatives would only rarely visit the house  but  when  they  did  they
    would ask his age and so his mother would discuss the ages of  him  and
    his two brothers but he did not always pay attention to  this  when  he
    was younger but did recall her telling him on the day he left  that  he
    was 14 years and 9 months old.


174. The applicant said that his father was  a  commander  fighting  against
    the Taliban and was often away from home.


175. About  a  month  before  he  left  Afghanistan,  one  of  his  father's
    bodyguards told the family that the Taliban had taken his  father  from
    the post where he had been working.  The Taliban came to take him twice
    over the next few days and he  thought  that  is  why  his  mother  had
    arranged  with  his  maternal  uncle  and  cousin  for  him  to   leave
    Afghanistan.  With the assistance of an  agent  he  was  taken  out  of
    Afghanistan.  They ill-treated him during the journey which he  thought
    took about three months including about a month spent in  "the  jungle"
    in Calais and that he believes that he was 15 years old when he arrived
    on 7 September 2015.


176. Since his arrival the applicant has had to have a  kidney  removed  and
    is still  in  pain.   He  has  not  been  able  to  contact  family  in
    Afghanistan.  He also said during the age assessment  he  was  in  some
    pain and became nervous when they told him he was 17 years old  because
    he was 15.  He said that he thought he had told the truth.


177. The applicant also said that he has mental health problems.


178. In his second witness statement the applicant said that  he  wished  to
    add that he recalls going to a mosque aged 13 and 14 to learn the Koran
    and that the mullah had told him that when he turned 15 it would become
    obligatory for him to start praying and  fasting.   He  had  also  been
    pressured to learn the Koran.  Exhibited to that witness statement is a
    letter from David Ansell and a letter from his teacher.


179. In his third witness statement the applicant sets out  the  details  of
    the phones he has owned including the purchase of a second hand  iPhone
    4 which he had used to make phone calls using WhatsApp.   This  is  why
    there were few phone calls disclosed in his bills.


180. Commenting on the witness statement of Cliff Wheeler  he  said  he  did
    not recall missing  appointments  and  that,  contrary  to  Mr  Wheeler
    thinking that he looked over 18 when he saw him in  September  2016  he
    was just 16 and does not think he looks older than his age.  He  denied
    being manipulative or ordering people around.


181. He said that Ben Holbrook's statement contained a number of  errors  in
    that the applicant is doing an entry level  1  course  not  a  level  2
    course in English for Speakers of Other Languages and that  he  is  not
    that comfortable using public transport.  He said that contrary to what
    Ben Holbrook says he is struggling a lot with reading and  writing  and
    could only speak a few words of English when he arrived having  learned
    these from people in Calais.  He  said  he  is  not  likely  to  go  to
    Bluewater Shopping Centre on his own as he has difficulty understanding
    things.


182. In response to Patrick Shier's statement he said that he did  not  have
    an aggressive and  domineering  attitude  whilst  at  Appledore  though
    accepted he did sometimes misbehave.  He said that contrary to  Patrick
    Shier saying that his English is perfect, he said he thinks his English
    is bad and that he faces a lot of difficulties on  a  daily  basis  and
    recently failed a test.  He said that he did not think he looked  older
    than his age and that when he uses public transport he is  given  child
    tickets so people must think he looks like a child.  He denied having a
    facial five o'clock shadow, only going to the barbers once a month  for
    a haircut and a shave, only growing patches of facial hair on his  chin
    and sides of his head.


183. Responding to Rose Corby's statement he said that he did not  think  he
    had a prominent Adam's apple, defined  jaw  line  or  developed  muscle
    tone.  He said he did have a line on his forehead  but  did  not  think
    this was because he was older than 16, that his body is still changing.
     He said he has never really had any spots and does not  think  he  has
    any  scarring.   He  denied  being  dishonest  and  he  had  not   been
    inconsistent.


184. In cross-examination, when asked how many people lived in his  village,
    the applicant said he had not counted them; asked to guess, he said  he
    did not know, nor was he able to estimate  the  number  of  houses.  He
    could not say whether there were more or less  than  100  or  if  there
    could have been as many as 1000.   He  said  his  house  did  not  have
    electricity, and water was fetched from a well.   He  said  that  there
    were two or three shops in the village, and that there was a mosque.


185. Asked if there was a school in his village, the applicant said  he  had
    not seen one. Asked if he had friends, he said  that  there  were  boys
    with whom he went to the mosque. He had not asked them if they went  to
    school, nor how they spent their day.


186. It was put to him that children are  naturally  curious,  and  he  said
    that some may be.  He said that the boys with whom he had gone  to  the
    mosque did not tell him what they were going to  do  when  not  at  the
    mosque. He said that they may have gone to school but that he  did  not
    know.


187. Asked to explain why he had been able to confirm  in  his  initial  age
    assessment that there were children  in  the  village  who  did  go  to
    school, he said he  had  told  then  that  there  may  have  been  such
    children, but could not explain why that had not  been  recorded.    It
    was put to him that during his age assessment he had  said  there  were
    not many houses, and that there was a school; he said that he  had  not
    calculated the number and that he may have said there was a  mosque  he
    attended.  Questioned further, he maintained he had meant there  was  a
    mosque, and then that there  might  have  been  a  school  outside  the
    village.  He denied being quite well educated.


188. The applicant said he had learned a few words  in  English  during  the
    time he had spent in Calais but that this was very limited.  He said he
    did recall being collected by a social worker (Mr Kelly) and driven  to
    a residential care centre.  He denied saying he  grew  up  knowing  his
    age. He said he had been asked his age and said 15, as his  mother  had
    told him he was 14 years and 9 months when he had  left  Afghanistan  3
    months earlier.  He said that is what he had told Mr Kelly but did  not
    recall saying that he grew up knowing his age.


189. It was put to the applicant that his English was not that  limited.  He
    did not accept that. He said also that he had not told Mr Kelly that he
    had learned English at school.  He  said  his  English  was  not  of  a
    standard to say that, and did not know what he said. He said  he  would
    not have known how to say his skin was itchy, or that he had wanted  to
    go on Facebook and that he had been able to say "yes" to questions.  He
    asked how he could have given all the answers if he had  little  or  no
    English.


190. The applicant recalled that he  had  had  met  Ben  Holbrook  while  at
    Appledore but did not accept his comment that  he  spoke  English  well
    while at Appledore but did accept that it improved there.


191. The applicant confirmed that he had seen  Patrick  Shier  at  Appledore
    and had spoken to him sometime but did not agree that his  English  was
    "perfect" and that his English is not that good.


192. The applicant said that his father had been a police commander and  his
    post had been attacked by the Taliban. He  said  one  of  his  father's
    bodyguards had told his mother that the  father  had  been  taken;  his
    mother told him of that a few days later, and that he had been presumed
    dead. She had later told him he is dead.  Asked to explain why during a
    home visit on 25 August 2016 he had he had said he thought  his  father
    was dead, he said that had said his mother told him that.


193. Asked his mother's age when he left, he said 30  to  40.  He  explained
    saying she was about 60 when asked on 6 November 2015 as being  due  to
    being asked too many questions and being stressed. He  denied  she  and
    his father were about 60, and confirmed his siblings were 5 and 7 years
    of age. He said his mother had told him their ages, and when neighbours
    had visited she had told them the ages.


194. The applicant was asked if he was curious about his age, replying  that
    when he was 13-14, the Imam at the mosque had told him he would soon be
    15 and would have to say the prayers like an adult. He  said  that  his
    mother had told him to say, if anyone asked him, that he  is  14  years
    and 9 months of age.   He did not know why it had been relevant at that
    time.  Asked if his mother had never told him his age before,  he  said
    she may have told other people. He then went on to describe being given
    presented such as clothes, on the basis  that  he  was  told  this  was
    because he was 13 or 14. It was not a birthday celebration as such, and
    had started when he was about 12.  He said it was not  correct  to  say
    that he grew up knowing his age.


195. It was put to him that in the initial age assessment  he  had  said  he
    had not known his age until he left Afghanistan. He  replied  that  his
    parents had told him from 12 onwards.   Asked whether he had been  told
    "you are 14 years and nine months", or as was recorded elsewhere,  that
    he would soon be 15, he said his mother had said  both.  He  said  that
    although his mother had  spoken  of  his  siblings  ages  she  had  not
    mentioned his.


196. The applicant said the date of birth 1 January 2000 had  been  assigned
    to him by the Home Office.


197. Asked about his  age  now,  the  applicant  said  he  would  be  17  in
    September, and denied being 24.  The applicant did not accept that  his
    mother had told him an age which was younger than she knew him to be so
    that he would get better treatment.


198. The applicant said he had not contact with family in  Afghanistan,  and
    had an appointment with the Red Cross soon. He said that his health and
    being in and  out  of  hospital  was  the  reason  for  the  delay.  No
    appointment with the Red Cross had yet been fixed. It was  put  to  him
    that the social workers had arranged this, and he  had  asked  for  the
    appointment to be cancelled.  It was put to him that  he  was  avoiding
    making contact.


199. It was also put to him that he had said his mother has a mobile  phone,
    and that he had said he did not know her number.  He denied  that.   He
    said that R S (F153) is his maternal uncle's son, and  did  not  accept
    that he had told the social worker taking  him  to  Appledore  that  he
    could contact him.   He denied contacting his  cousin.   He  also  said
    that what had been recorded during the review  meeting  on  5  February
    2016, at which an interpreter had been present, that he was in  contact
    with his mother, was not correct.


200. In re-examination, the applicant said that he had not  previously  seen
    the documents prepared by social  workers  for  Kent,  nor  had  anyone
    translated them for him.  He said that he attends  Bexley  College  and
    had recently failed an exam in reading at Entry Level 1.


Analysis of Kent's Evidence


201. Although the applicant's witnesses gave evidence after the experts,  we
    consider that that it is, in this  case,  more  appropriate  to  assess
    first the evidence from the professional witnesses relied upon by Kent.


202. It is remarkable that in this case Kent do not  seek  to  rely  on  the
    first age assessment conducted by  Ben  Holbrook  and  Anita  Budai,  a
    social worker of considerably greater experience  than  either  Melissa
    Carter or Rose Corby. That assessment, carried out  in  November  2015,
    assessed the applicant to be 17 with a date of  birth  of  7  September
    1998.  On Kent's case, as now put, that assessment was out by  as  much
    as six years.


203.  The circumstances of the review conducted by Rose  Corby  and  Melissa
    Carter are unusual; it was accepted in  evidence  by  Rose  Corby  that
    there  had  been  no  intention  to  carry  out  a  "Merton"  compliant
    assessment yet correspondence between the parties  indicates  that  the
    intention  of  the  review  was  that  if  a  significantly   different
    conclusion might be reached, they would advise a fresh  assessment.  We
    do not, however, draw any adverse conclusions from this.


204. It is submitted  by  the  applicant  that  the  review  undertaken  was
    unfair, and that Rose Corby had, in particular, acted unfairly,  taking
    the most negative view possible of the applicant and  failing  to  take
    into account evidence from others, such as David Ansell which was  more
    favourable.


205. The respondent submits that the interview  and  review  was  fair,  and
    objectively carried out. It is  accepted  that  it  was  not,  strictly
    speaking, "Merton" compliant, but that it is reliable, and, apart  from
    the dental evidence, it is  the  best  objective  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal.


206.  Before  analysing  the  evidence  of  Rose  Corby,  we   consider   it
    appropriate to consider the  booklet  of  photographs  which  has  been
    produced. Most of  paragraphs  [2]  to  [13]  of  Rose  Corby's  second
    statement relates to the booklet.


(i) The Photographs


207. The respondent seeks to rely on the booklet of photographs said  to  be
    of males typical of their  ages,  arranged  by  age  groups.   We  take
    judicial note of the fact that the human population is in excess  of  7
    billion, and it follows that there must be many millions, if  not  tens
    of millions of young men who fall into the age groups identified in the
    selection. We do not know who compiled the selection, or  the  criteria
    by which they selected the individuals as  being  "typical".   That  in
    itself is a word  which  requires  further  consideration.  It  is  not
    legally defined and we see  no  reason  to  depart  from  the  ordinary
    meaning of the  word  that  is  having  the  distinctive  qualities  or
    characteristics of a particular type  of  person  or  thing.   It  thus
    presupposes that the distinctive qualities or characteristics, in  this
    case of males of a certain age, are identifiable. We have been provided
    with no reliable  evidence  that  this  is  so.  Further,  unless  such
    characteristics are identifiable, it is not possible to  state,  except
    in an entirely subjective manner, that an individual is a  typical  16,
    18 or 20-year-old male.


208. The respondent relies on an example of a  well-known  journalist  often
    taken to be much younger than he is. This, we consider, reinforces  the
    strong thrust of the case law and guidance that little  weight  can  be
    attached to physical appearance.


209. We consider that these observations apply even more so  to  photographs
    which are not three-dimensional.  How photographs are lit, the type  of
    the exposure, the quality of the camera and other  factors,  not  least
    including the clothing a person wears can  affect  significantly  their
    appearance, to such an extent that we question why it could  ever  have
    been thought that the compilation of an album of photographs could have
    assisted anyone.


210. Further, the stated purpose of the collection is not at all clear,  nor
    is its provenance.  It is telling that neither Rose Corby  nor  Melissa
    Carter could give any example of it being used  elsewhere,  or  in  any
    other age assessment process.  It  is  also  telling  that  Rose  Corby
    accepted it  from  management  without  question,  despite  the  strong
    strictures and guidance militating against attaching weight to physical
    features.


211. There is simply no evidence, other than  that  which  arose  in  cross-
    examination of Rose Corby, that it was seen as  potentially  useful  to
    the Tribunal as a means by which  Rose  Corby  could  identify  certain
    features such as a prominent  Adam's  apple,  as  being  typical.  This
    response has all the hallmarks of desperation to  justify  use  of  the
    booklet in the full knowledge that this was unfair  and  unprofessional
    in an age assessment.  We wish to make it clear, that if that  was  the
    true intention (which we doubt), it failed; we found the booklet to  be
    of no evidential use whatsoever.


212. In submissions, Mr Holbrook gave further reasons for  the  use  of  the
    collection of photographs: that they were useful for  benchmarking  age
    assessment, and that without proper benchmarking,  (and  by  extension,
    exposure to adolescents and young people of known age) it is  easy  for
    social workers involved in age assessment to make errors.


213. There is, however, insufficient evidence that such benchmarking by  use
    of photographs is necessary, desirable or even professionally mandated.
    There is no proper evidence identified that over time,  social  workers
    involved in age assessment, are more likely to assess young  people  as
    younger  or  for  that  matter  older  than  they  are;  Mr  Holbrook's
    metaphorical yardstick would presumably extend in both directions.   It
    is also somewhat strange that this justification is  put  forward  when
    the evidence is that it is only in the  assessment  of  this  applicant
    that photographs have been used in this way.


(ii) Rose Corby


214. Accordingly, insofar  as  Rose  Corby's  evidence  is  drawn  from  the
    booklet of photographs we attach no weight  to  it.  If  anything,  her
    reliance on it diminishes her  credibility.  Her  second  statement  in
    consequence adds little; it has all the hallmarks of an ex  post  facto
    justification for her earlier testimony.


215. We reject the applicant's submission  that  Rose  Corby's  evidence  is
    wholly unfair. Still  less  do  we  accept  the  unnecessarily  emotive
    submission  that  Kent's   witnesses   have   attempted   a   character
    assassination of the applicant.


216. There are, however, as noted above, matters upon which Rose  Corby  was
    mistaken: the level of English being studied, and  there  is  also  her
    failure properly to consider Dave Ansell's evidence.  While we conclude
    that these errors could have arisen from pressures of  time  and  work,
    and were not deliberate, nonetheless the issue of competence in English
    was a significant  factor.   We  note,  however,  that  she  sought  to
    diminish the significance of the material missed. She similarly  sought
    to diminish the significance  of  the  error  about  the  course  being
    followed.


217. There is another aspect of Rose Corby's  evidence  which  troubles  us.
    When asked about acne scarring, and it being apparent  that  there  was
    none on the applicant's face while he sat in court, having  said  there
    was some before, she began to give evidence about  how  people  conceal
    scarring using cosmetic products.   We formed the  distinct  impression
    that she was seeking to blame the applicant (and to cast aspersions  on
    him) on the basis of little or no evidence.  This fits into  a  pattern
    of seeking to deflect any suggestion of fault on her part onto  others,
    as with her attitude to the omissions noted  in  the  paragraph  above.
    This is not what we would expect from a professional witness.


218. It was submitted that there  are  instances  in  Rose  Corby's  witness
    statement at  [14],  [21]  and  [22]  where  she  summarises  what  the
    applicant had said (recorded in the notes of the  meeting  prepared  by
    Melissa Carter) in an inaccurate way, casting doubt on  the  applicant.
    These are instances where the age of consent  is  said  to  have   been
    mentioned by the applicant, omitting the whole of answers about whether
    he found having to live indoors boring and omission of a direct  answer
    about whether he was proud of his father.


219. While it is necessary to summarise what was said, equally that must  be
    done fairly in order to avoid creating a misleading  impression.  Given
    that what  was  omitted  were  direct  answers  to  questions  and  the
    criticism of the applicant  is  not  answering  direct  questions,  the
    impression given is misleading. A single instance of  this  might  have
    occurred by accident, yet there is not just one instance, but  several.
    Further, this is a witness statement we were told had  been  worked  on
    over a period of weeks. We do not, in the circumstances, consider  that
    this mischaracterisation of the evidence  was  inadvertent  and  it  is
    misleading, casting significant doubt on Rose  Corby's  professionalism
    and reliability as a witness.


220. Taking these factors together, and viewing all of the evidence  in  the
    round, we did not find  Rose  Corby  to  be  a  reliable  or  objective
    witness.


(iii) Melissa Carter


221. It is difficult to attach  much  weight  to  the  evidence  of  Melissa
    Carter independent from that of  her  colleague  Rose  Corby.   It  is,
    however, of significant concern that she signed  and  dated  a  witness
    statement stating that she had seen and approved Rose Corby's statement
    when that must, given its date, still have been in draft form.


(iv) Cliff Wheeler


222. Mr Wheeler saw the applicant for a limited period while taking  him  to
    and from appointments. It is, we consider,  difficult  to  attach  much
    weight to his evidence as to the applicant's age, given  that  he  said
    only that the applicant could have been 17 in September 2016, and  when
    pushed said only that the oldest he could be is "18 plus."


(v) Patrick Shier


223. Of all the witnesses from whom we heard oral  evidence,  Patrick  Shier
    had spent the most time with the applicant,  having  been  on  duty  at
    Appledore Reception Centre for a period of several  weeks,  interacting
    with the applicant and observing him on a daily basis.  We found him to
    be a candid witness  whose  evidence  was  direct  and  to  the  point.
    Contrary to what is submitted by the applicant, we do not consider that
    he tried to row back from his statement  on  7  October  2015  that  he
    considered the applicant to be 17. His evidence is, in any event,  that
    he "would assess" the applicant as 17. That was, in effect  a  snapshot
    at a point when the applicant had just been  inducted.  As  is  evident
    from the material provided, age  assessments  should  be  done  over  a
    period of time to allow reflection and a  holistic  assessment  of  the
    individual.


224. We do not consider that Patrick Shier could be  said  to  have  crossed
    the line into being an advocate. The submission that he  is  impartial,
    and has attempted a character assassination, has more than  a  hint  of
    hyperbole. We do not consider, having  observed  him  giving  evidence,
    that his use of two exclamation marks in an email, or any other part of
    his testimony could rationally form the basis of submission that he  is
    unreliable. His evidence was clear and forthright unlike  the  evidence
    of Rose Corby or Melissa Carter.


225. Accordingly, we consider that we can attach weight to  Patrick  Shier's
    evidence, and we find him a reliable witness of fact, albeit  that  his
    description  of  the  applicant's   English   being   perfect   is   an
    exaggeration. We accept, naturally,  that  he  is  not  expert  at  age
    assessment but he has significant  experience  in  working  with  young
    people.


The Applicant's Evidence


226. In assessing the applicant's evidence we bear in mind that he may be  a
    minor, and have therefore approached his testimony on the basis that he
    should be treated as vulnerable  person.  We  note  also  that  he  was
    fasting for Ramadan, and was permitted breaks during his evidence.   No
    additional adjustments were requested by his representatives.


227. As outlined above, there are a number of apparent discrepancies in  the
    applicant's  evidence.   That  much  is  accepted  by  the  applicant's
    counsel, but they submit that the inconsistencies do not go to the core
    of the claim, and that the basic themes in respect  of  his  childhood,
    his family, the loss of his father, his departure from Afghanistan, and
    his  journey,  have  remained  the  same.   It  is  submitted  that  he
    maintained his account over lengthy cross-examination, and that  it  is
    entirely credible.


228. Further, it is submitted that his evidence is the most direct  evidence
    of his age available to the Tribunal given  that  the  other  witnesses
    are, estimating his age on other evidence.


229. Much of the cross-examination of the applicant focussed on what  he  is
    recorded as having said during interactions with various social workers
    outside the formal age assessment process.   We bear in mind that  what
    is recorded does not purport to be a verbatim record of  questions  and
    answers. Further, the dates on which the reports of  the  conversations
    were finalised are in several cases some time after the date  on  which
    it is said they took place.


230. We would not have expected the applicant's evidence  to  be  completely
    consistent; in our experience, each retelling of an event is likely  to
    vary given the passage of time, and imperfect recall. Given  also  that
    on many occasions interpreters have  been  used,  the  danger  of  over
    reliance on  small  discrepancies  which  may  arise  from  nuances  is
    greater.


231. That said, we consider that the applicant's inability  when  questioned
    to describe the size of his village, and not knowing even if there  was
    a school in the village, undermines his credibility.  Further,  he  has
    been inconsistent as to whether there was a school or not.  We  do  not
    accept that this is a minor discrepancy, or can otherwise be explained.
     We found the applicant when questioned about both of these  issues  to
    be evasive when saying that he had not counted the  houses  or  seen  a
    school, yet this was a village in which he had lived  for  all  of  his
    life until he left Afghanistan.   We  find  that  this  undermines  his
    reliability.


232. We find that the applicant has also  been  inconsistent  about  whether
    and when he knew of his age. In the initial assessment, he said that he
    had not been told his age before leaving Afghanistan, but  in  evidence
    before us that from 12 onwards he had been given clothes on  the  basis
    of him being 12, 13 or 14.  That  does  not,  we  consider,  constitute
    birthday celebrations, as submitted by Mr Holbrook. While there  is  no
    real indication that it was on the precise anniversary  of  his  birth,
    the description of what occurred does not sit well  with  the  evidence
    from the applicant recorded  in  his  interview  with  Rose  Corby  and
    Melissa Carter that birthdays are not celebrated, but  it  does  accord
    with what is recorded by Mr Kelly, that the applicant had said  he  had
    grown  up  knowing  his  birthday.   We  do  not   accept   that   this
    inconsistency  is  properly  explicable,  and  again,  reliability   is
    undermined.


233. We do not accept that the respondent has accepted that the  applicant's
    mother told him he was 14 years and 9 months of age. That was simply  a
    question put to him in cross-examination.  His evidence on  this  issue
    has, however, been inconsistent between whether he simply overheard his
    mother discussing his age with his uncle, and  being  told,  expressly,
    that if he was asked by anyone he should say  he  is  14  years  and  9
    months old.


234. Further, we find it inconceivable that he knew the rough  ages  of  his
    siblings which his mother had discussed with neighbours, yet  that  his
    age had not been discussed. This  part  of  the  applicant's  testimony
    appears to  have  been  fabricated  to  account  for  him  knowing  his
    siblings' ages, it being initially his evidence that he had  not  known
    his age until shortly before he left Afghanistan.


235. In fairness to the applicant, we consider that  no  adverse  inferences
    can be drawn from the slight differences in whether he knew his  father
    is dead, and the sequence of events in which his mother was told  by  a
    bodyguard, and then told him what had happened. The difference here  is
    effectively between "I believe" and "I know" because  of  what  I  have
    been told. Such subtle distinctions can easily be misinterpreted.


236. We do, however, find that the applicant has been  inconsistent  in  his
    evidence of whether he is in contact with his mother.  While we bear in
    mind the dangers of relying on the documents produced by Kent, as noted
    above, that does not mean that we cannot attach weight to them.


237. The applicant was provided  with  an  interpreter  at  the  meeting  in
    February 2016 when he told staff that he is in contact with his mother.
    While it is, we concede, possible that he said he was not  in  contact,
    we note  equally  his  evidence  on  25  August  2016,  again  with  an
    interpreter, that she has a mobile phone  and  we  do  not  accept  his
    explanation for the inconsistency.


238. The evidence of Mr Kelly is relevant  to  this  issue  also.  While  we
    accept that no interpreter was present, and that the applicant may well
    have been tired, it  is  the  nature  of  the  conversation  which  was
    recorded shortly thereafter which concerns us as much as what was said.
    While we note that Mr Kelly was not called to give evidence, we find no
    reason why he would have recorded the conversation if it had not  taken
    place in the manner stated; he had not reason to do so.


239. It is as much the fact that  the  applicant  knew  about  Facebook  and
    wanted to contact a cousin to  tell  his  mother  he  is  ok  which  is
    relevant as the fact that he was able to say this in English. We reject
    the applicant's explanation, in cross-examination,  that  he  had  just
    said "yes" in response to leading questions. It is  wholly  implausible
    that such detailed leading questions about a cousin and Facebook, and a
    computer, could have been put.  Nor do we accept that he had  indicated
    by gestures that he was itchy, rather than saying so, as none  of  this
    explains why Mr Kelly would have  recorded  in  some  detail  what  the
    applicant had said during the journey to Appledore.  While  Mr  Kelly's
    evidence was not tested in cross-examination, nonetheless  we  consider
    that  we  can  attach  weight  to  it.  The   account   is   relatively
    contemporaneous and there is no reason for him  not  to  have  recorded
    what he was told.


240. We do not accept the submissions of the applicant that it was  possible
    that  much  of  the  information  in  Mr  Kelly's  report  arose   from
    suggestions made by him, or that the applicant simply assented to them.
    Still less is there any merit in the  entirely  speculative  submission
    that the evidence may have been gleaned from information gleaned at the
    police station.


241. Further, we do not accept that because the pathway plan  was  withdrawn
    that reliance on the note of 25 August 2016 that preceded it should  be
    disregarded. The challenges to the plan set out in  the  letter  of  27
    September 2016, extending to several pages do not in reality  challenge
    what the applicant is recorded as saying; rather, the attack is on  the
    interpretation of what he said and it is  alleged  that  the  plan  was
    being used to attack and undermine his character.  In  any  event,  the
    reason given for its withdrawal was that it was incorrectly worded  and
    did not represent the proper  care  and  support  being  given  to  the
    applicant.


242. We accept that the notes were not read back to  the  applicant  at  the
    time, but that is not a sufficient reason to  disregard  them.  It  was
    open to the applicant to have commented on them in a witness  statement
    as he did with other parts of the respondent's evidence including  that
    of Ben Holbrook who was  not  called  to  give  evidence.    While  the
    applicant prays in aid Ms  Johnson's  evidence  that  there  are  "huge
    problems"   with    local    authority    record-keeping    and    that
    misinterpretations happen, that is little more than anecdote  and  does
    not engage with the specifics of the documents in question.


243. The evidence of the applicant's competence in English is  inconsistent,
    but it is of note that both Mr Kelly  and  Mr  Shier  record  in  their
    initial observations that he spoke  English  to  some  extent,  if  not
    actually quite well. That is confirmed also  by  Ben  Holbrook  in  his
    statement at [25].


244. In contrast, the evidence from the college he has attended indicate  he
    is not able to pass tests in written English even at a basic level  but
    there is not much indication of his spoken English.


245. Taking all of these factors together, and viewing  the  evidence  as  a
    whole,  we  find  that,  notwithstanding   the   applicant's   possible
    vulnerability, and that he may be a child, that he is not a reliable or
    credible witness. On the contrary, we are satisfied  that  he  has  not
    told us the truth about the circumstances of his village or his family,
    and that his testimony as to his age is unreliable and not credible.


The Applicant's Witnesses


246. As noted above, we heard the applicant's  witnesses  prior  to  hearing
    evidence from Kent's witnesses.


247. In assessing the evidence of MY and AK, we find that it adds little  to
    the evidence of the applicant. While we agree it is unlikely that  they
    would gravitate towards men in their early twenties, it is notable that
    MY describes the applicant as very immature (but not in  comparison  to
    what), and comments that the applicant was  unhappy  with  the  DOB  of
    01/01/2000 at [4] but says nothing about what he  himself  believes  or
    why.


248. AK says that the applicant looks like a child [3] and  behaves  like  a
    child, he does not qualify "child" by reference to any age group, given
    that it could cover up to 18.


249. While it is submitted that their evidence is that they  clearly  regard
    the applicant as the same age  as  themselves,  that  is  not  what  is
    recorded in their witness statements; that  is  a  speculation  by  the
    applicant's counsel. We find that their evidence adds nothing of weight
    to that of the applicant.


250. Helen Johnson is Head of Children's Services at  the  Refugee  Council.
    She met the applicant at his house, and was of the view that there  was
    nothing in the applicant's appearance or behaviour that made her  doubt
    his claimed age. She did not agree with Rose Corby's observations about
    the applicant, and was of the view that his  behaviour  was  consistent
    with being a child who is coping  badly  with  his  situation  and  not
    helping himself.


251. Helen Johnson accepted in cross-examination  that  she  was  not  in  a
    position to  carry  out  a  "Merton  compliant"  assessment.  She  also
    accepted that, apart from a short period using an interpreter over  the
    telephone to check some points, her conversation with the applicant had
    been conducted in English.


252. We found much of Mr Holbrook's cross-examination, except as it  related
    to those two issues, to be of little or no assistance.


253. We cannot attach weight to the photographs adduced by  Kent.  There  is
    simply no basis for that assertion  that  they  are  "typical"  of  the
    individuals at the age stated. There is, in fact,  nothing  to  suggest
    that they were representative as opposed to skewed, and worryingly,  as
    Mr Holbrook accepted, several of the photographs are distorted by being
    stretched vertically or horizontally. We are, frankly,  concerned  that
    such inadequate evidence could have been thought capable of bearing any
    weight whatsoever.


254. We were invited, as was Helen Johnson, to consider photographs  of  the
    applicant taken some months apart.  It is difficult  to  assess  these.
    There is insufficient evidence that the lighting  conditions  were  the
    same, and given natural  shadowing,  we  do  not  consider  if  it  was
    possible to discern either that there had been changes or  no  changes.
    We bear in mind also that the applicant  had  been  unwell  and  had  a
    kidney removed between the taking of some of these photographs.


Conclusions


255. For the reasons set out above, we do not consider that we can  rely  on
    Professor Roberts' report, nor do  we  consider  the  evidence  of  the
    applicant to be reliable or credible.  As noted above, we do  not  find
    the evidence of MY and AK  to  assist  that  of  the  applicant.  Helen
    Johnson's  evidence  is  of  little  or  no  value  in  assessing   the
    applicant's age.


256. We do not find the evidence of Rose Corby to be reliable, nor  that  we
    can rely on the evidence of Melissa Carter for the reasons given above.




257.  The respondent no longer seeks to rely on the initial age  assessment,
    and has not  sought  to  defend  it  in  submissions.  That  is  hardly
    surprising, given that their case is now that  the  applicant  is  many
    years older than initially assessed.


258. While the respondent has not sought to rely  on  the  evidence  of  Ben
    Holbrook, his evidence is still evidence before us, and which  we  take
    into account. His evidence is still that the applicant is  most  likely
    aged 19, giving a date of birth in 1998.  It is of  note  that  he  was
    part of the initial assessment team, and also has worked with him since
    January 2017.


259. The assessment that the applicant is now most likely 19  is  consistent
    also with the evidence of Patrick Shier who did  give  evidence  before
    us.


260. Taking all of this into account,  we  consider  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence of Patrick Shier,  as  supported  by  Ben  Holbrook  that  the
    applicant is 19 years of age.  Doing the best we can with the  evidence
    we have, we conclude that the  applicant's  date  of  birth  is,  on  a
    balance of probabilities, 7 September 1998. He is, as a consequence, at
    the date of our decision 19 years of age.






    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

    11                            September                            2017



        -----------------------
[1] Olze A et al, "Evaluation of radiographic visibility of the root pulp
in lower third molars for forensic age estimation in living individuals".
International Journal of Legal Medicine 2010; 124: 183-186.
[2] Perez-Mongiovi et al, "The radiographic visibility of the root pulp of
the third lower molar as an age marker", Forensic Sci Med Pathol [2015]
11:339-344
[3] Olze A et al, "Assessment of the radiographic visibility of the
periodontal ligament in lower third molars for the purpose of forensic age
estimation in living individuals". International Journal of Legal Medicine
2010b; 124: 445-448.
[4] Volume 61, Issue 5 September 2016 Pages 1238-1243  DOI 10.1111/1556-
4029.1313
[5] Encyclopaedia of Forensic and Legal Medicine 2nd Edition, G Roberts, V
Lucas and F McDonald  OI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800034-2.00007-0
[6] That is, the lower left 8th tooth from the front - see paragraph 23
(iii) above.
[7] Annals of Human Biology. Vol 42, Issue 4, 2015
[8] DARLinG is Dental Age Research London Information Group, the group
consisting of Professor Roberts and Dr Victoria Lucas
[9]  Sequeira et al "Age estimation using the radiographic visibility of
the periodontal ligament in lower third molars in a Portuguese population"
J Clin Exp Dent. 2014: 6[5]: 546-50.
[10] Dental Age Estimation: Periodontal Ligament Visibility (PLV)-pattern
Recognition of a Conclusive Mandibular Maturity Marker Related to the Lower
Left Third Molar at the 18-Year Threshold VS Lucas et al. Int J Legal Med
131 (3), 797-801. 2016 Nov 03.

[11] Dental Age Estimation-Root Pulp Visibility (RPV) patterns: A reliable
Mandibular Maturity Marker at the 18 year threshold. / Lucas, Victoria S.;
McDonald, Fraser; Andiappan, Manoharan; Roberts, Graham. Forensic Science
International, Vol. 270, 01.01.2017, p. 98-102
[12] Dental Age Estimation: Periodontal Ligament Visibility (PLV)-pattern
Recognition of a Conclusive Mandibular Maturity Marker Related to the Lower
Left Third Molar at the 18-Year Threshold VS Lucas et al. Int J Legal Med
131 (3), 797-801. 2016 Nov 03.
[13] The radiographic visibility of the root pulp of the third lower molar
as an age marker Perez-Mongiovi, Teixeira and Caldas, Forensic  Sci Med
Pathol 920150 11:339-344
[14] Sequeira et al "Age estimation using the radiographic visibility of
the periodontal ligament in lower third molars in a Portuguese population"
J Clin Exp Dent. 2014: 6[5]: 546-50.
[15] Evaluation of the radiographic visibility of the root pulp in the
lower third molars for the purpose of forensic age estimation in living
individuals. Olze  Solheim T, Schulz R, Kupfer M, Schmeling A. Int J Legal
Med (2010) 124:183-186
[16] Assessment of the radiographic visibility of the periodontal ligament
in the lower third molars for the purpose of forensic age estimation in
living individuals. Olze  Solheim T, Schulz R, Kupfer M, Schmeling A. Int J
Legal Med (2010) 124:445-448


[17] It appears that this should be a reference to "d)" as the reference  to
g) does not make sense.
[18] Comparative study on the effect of ethnicity on wisdom tooth eruption"
A. Olze P. van Niekerk, T. Ishikawa, B. L. Zhu, R. Schulz, H. Maeda &
A. Schmeling  International Journal of Legal Medicine November 2007, Volume
121, Issue 6, pp 445-448
[19] Op cit at note 6

