


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MST and Others (national service - risk categories) Eritrea CG [2016]  UKUT
00443 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10 & 20 June 2016        |                                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H H STOREY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between


                                     MST
                                     MYK
                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)


                                 Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                 Respondent

                                     And

                UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES


                                 Intervener




Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Knafler, QC, Ms A Benfield, Mr T Hussain,
                    instructed by Immigration Advice Service, Fountains
                    Solicitors and Roelens Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr B Rawat, Mr R Harland, instructed by Government
                    Legal Department
For the Intervener:    Ms L Dubinsky and Mr T Pascoe instructed by Baker &
                    McKenzie LLP/UNHCR



Country guidance

1. Although reconfirming parts of the country guidance given  in  MA  (Draft
evaders - illegal departures - risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT  00059  and  MO
(illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011]  UKUT  00190  (IAC),  this
case replaces that with the following:

2. The Eritrean system of military/national service remains  indefinite  and
since 2012 has expanded to  include  a  people's  militia  programme,  which
although not part of national service, constitutes military service.

3. The age limits for national service are likely  to  remain  the  same  as
stated in MO, namely 54 for men and 47 for women except  that  for  children
the limit is now likely to be 5 save  for  adolescents  in  the  context  of
family reunification. For peoples' militia the age limits are likely  to  be
60 for women and 70 for men.

4. The categories of lawful exit have not  significantly  changed  since  MO
and are likely to be as follows:

           (i)   Men aged over 54

           (ii)  Women aged over 47

           (iii) Children aged under five (with some scope for  adolescents
               in family reunification cases

           (iv)  People exempt from national service on medical grounds

           (v)   People travelling abroad for medical treatment

           (vi)  People travelling abroad for studies or for a conference

           (vii) Business and sportsmen

           (viii)      Former freedom fighters (Tegadelti) and their family
               members

           (ix)  Authority representatives in leading positions  and  their
               family members

5. It continues to be the case (as in MO) that most Eritreans who have  left
Eritrea since 1991 have done so illegally. However, since there are  viable,
albeit still limited, categories of lawful  exit  especially  for  those  of
draft age for national service, the  position  remains  as  it  was  in  MO,
namely that a person whose asylum claim has not been found  credible  cannot
be assumed to have left illegally. The  position  also  remains  nonetheless
(as in MO) that if such a person is found to have left Eritrea on  or  after
August/September 2008, it may be that inferences can  be  drawn  from  their
health history or level of education or their skills profile as  to  whether
legal exit on their part was feasible, provided that such inferences can  be
drawn in the light of adverse credibility findings.  For  these  purposes  a
lengthy period performing national service is likely to enhance  a  person's
skill profile.

6. It remains the case (as in MO) that failed asylum  seekers  as  such  are
not at risk of persecution or serious harm on return.

7.   Notwithstanding   that   the   round-ups    (giffas)    of    suspected
evaders/deserters,  the  "shoot  to  kill"  policy  and  the  targeting   of
relatives of  evaders  and  deserters  are  now  significantly  less  likely
occurrences, it remains the case, subject to three  limited  exceptions  set
out in (iii) below, that if a person of or approaching  draft  age  will  be
perceived on return as a draft evader or deserter, he or  she  will  face  a
real risk of persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment contrary to  Article
3 or 4 of the ECHR.



      (i) A person who is likely to be perceived as a  deserter/evader  will
      not be able to avoid exposure to such real risk merely by showing they
      have paid (or are willing to pay) the diaspora tax and/have signed (or
      are willing to sign) the letter of regret.

      (ii) Even if such a  person  may  avoid  punishment  in  the  form  of
      detention and ill-treatment it is  likely  that  he  or  she  will  be
      assigned to perform (further) national service, which,  is  likely  to
      amount to treatment contrary to Articles 3 and 4 of the ECHR unless he
      or she falls within one or more of the three  limited  exceptions  set
      out immediately below in (iii).

      (iii) It remains the case (as in MO) that there are persons likely not
      to face a real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  notwithstanding
      that they will be perceived on return as draft evaders and  deserters,
      namely:  (1)  persons  whom  the  regime's  military   and   political
      leadership perceives as having given them valuable service (either  in
      Eritrea or abroad); (2) persons who are trusted family members of,  or
      are themselves part of, the regime's military or political leadership.
       A further possible exception, requiring a more case specific analysis
      is (3) persons (and their children born  afterwards)  who  fled  (what
      later became the territory of) Eritrea during the War of Independence.



8. Notwithstanding that many Eritreans  are  effectively  reservists  having
been discharged/released from national service and unlikely to face  recall,
it remains unlikely that they will have  received  or  be  able  to  receive
official confirmation of completion of national  service.  Thus  it  remains
the case, as in MO that "(iv) The general position adopted  in  MA,  that  a
person of or approaching draft and not medically unfit who  is  accepted  as
having left Eritrea illegally is  reasonably  likely  to  be  regarded  with
serious  hostility  on  return,   is   reconfirmed,   subject   to   limited
exceptions..."

9. A person liable to perform service in the people's  militia  and  who  is
assessed to have left Eritrea illegally, is not likely on return to  face  a
real risk of persecution or serious harm.

10. Accordingly, a person whose asylum claim has not  been  found  credible,
but who is able to  satisfy  a  decision-maker  (i)  that  he  or  she  left
illegally, and (ii) that he or she  is  of  or  approaching  draft  age,  is
likely to be perceived  on  return  as  a  draft  evader  or  deserter  from
national service and as a result face a real risk of persecution or  serious
harm.

11. While likely to be a rare case, it is possible that  a  person  who  has
exited lawfully may on forcible return face having  to  resume  or  commence
national service. In such a case there is a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
serious harm by virtue of such service constituting forced  labour  contrary
to Article 4(2) and Article 3 of the ECHR.

12. Where it is specified above that there is a real risk of persecution  in
the context of  performance  of  military/national  service,  it  is  highly
likely that it will be persecution for a Convention reason based on  imputed
political opinion.


TABLE OF CONTENTS



GLOSSARY



INTRODUCTION                                       Paragraphs 1



The true meaning of country guidance                                4

The country guidance issues                                   10

Existing country guidance                                           15

Strasbourg cases on Eritrea                                   23

Decisions    of    national    courts    and    tribunals     on     Eritrea
24

The legal issues                                              25

The appellants                                                26

Procedural matters                                                  28



A. EVIDENCE AND SOURCES                                       30



1. Background evidence                                        31

UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the                      31

     International Protection Needs for

     Asylum-seekers from Eritrea, 20 April 2011

Eritrean Ministry of Information publication: "UNHCR                32

     Eligibility Guidelines: Factual Findings or

     Recycled Reformation", 17 December 2015

Danish Fact-Finding Mission (DFFM) Reports,                   35

    25 November and 16 December 2014

Landinfo, 23 March 2015 and 16 April 2015 and May 2016              45

UN Commission of Inquiry Reports 5 June 2015 and 8 June 2016        49

EASO Country of Origin Information Report,                    57

     Eritrea Country Focus, May 2015

US State Department Country Reports on Human Rights Practices,      59

     chapter on Eritrea, 2014 and 2015

Amnesty International, Report on AA, 22 September 2015,             63

     and the "Just Deserters" Report, December 2015

Lifos Reports on Eritrea, 23 November and 15 December 2015          74

Swiss Visits, January 2016 and March 2016                           77

Human Rights Watch Reports                                    80

UK government materials                                             83

The new versions of Home Office CIGs, 4 August 2016                 102

Academics and journalists                                     125

Bisha Mines materials                                               142



2. Expert evidence of Professor Kibreab (PK) in summary form        147

B. ASSESSMENT: THE GENERAL ISSUES                        148


1. Law



The relevance of existing country guidance                          148

The  status  of   UNHCR   Eligibility   Guidelines   and   position   papers
155

The status of experts in country guidance cases                     159



2. Methodology and Sources



General Observations                                                161

Anonymity of sources                                          163

Fact-finding mission reports: general                               165

Fact-Finding Missions and the Eritrean context                      168

The Danish Fact Finding Mission (DFFM) Report                       172

The UK Fact Finding Mission (UKFFM) materials                       192

The two Amnesty International Reports                         202

     (AI Report on AA and "Just Deserters"), the two

     UNCOI Reports of 2015 and 2016 and the

     witness statement from Elizabeth Chyrum

The UNCOI Reports 2015 and 2016                               209

Witness statement of Elizabeth Chyrum                         224

The Home Office Country Information and Guidance (CIG)        225

     publications on 4 August 2016



C. ASSESSMENT OF THE EVIDENCE OF PROFESSOR KIBREAB 228



D. FINDINGS ON MAIN GENERAL ISSUES                            241



The general situation                                         242

National Service                                              247

People's Militia                                              260

Submissions                                                   265

Our assessment                                                280

Enforcement and Punishment                                    280

Conditions                                                    284

Eligibility and duration                                            287

Exemptions                                                    291

Demobilisations/ discharges and release                       297

Eligibility     for      national      service      and      exit      visas
    308

Submissions                                                   311

Our assessment                                                316

The 2 per cent tax and letter of regret                             329

Submissions                                                   329

Our assessment                                                333

Failed Asylum Seekers                                         335

Illegal exit by those perceived on return to be draft-evaders  or  deserters
    338

Submissions                                                   338

Our assessment                                                344

Forcible Returns                                              357

Submissions                                                   358

Our assessment                                                360

Draft evaders and deserters                                   368

National   service   as   slavery   or   servitude    or    forced    labour
371

Article 4 and Article 3                                             376

Article 4: the legal framework                                      378

The threshold test                                                  390

The Eritrean Context: the ILO background                            399

Slavery and servitude: our assessment                               402

Forced or compulsory labour: our assessment                         416


Conclusions                                                   431



E. ASSESSMENT: THE APPELLANTS                                 433


APPENDICES                                                Pages



APPENDIX I: THE EVIDENCE RELATING TO THE APPELLANTS      172

APPENDIX II:     ERROR OF LAW DECISIONS FOR APPELLANTS   186

APPENDIX III:    THE EVIDENCE OF PROFESSOR KIBREAB       207

APPENDIX IV:     SCHEDULE OF BACKGROUND EVIDENCE         231


GLOSSARY

AI          Amnesty International

AIR         Asylum Interview Record

CEACR  Committee  of  Experts  on  the  Application   of   Conventions   and
           Recommendations

CIG         Country Information and Guidance

CIPU        Country Information and Policy Unit

CMR         Case Management Review

COI         Country of Origin Information

COIS        Country of Origin Information Service

CPIT        Country Policy and Information Team

CSLT        Country Specific Litigating Team

DFFM  Danish Fact-Finding Mission Reports

DIS         Danish Immigration Service

DL          Discretionary Leave

EASO        European Asylum Support Office

ECtHR European Court of Human Rights

FCO         Foreign and Commonwealth Office

FLC         Forced Labour Convention

HRW         Human Rights Watch

HRCE  Human Rights Concern - Eritrea

IAGCI       Independent Advisory Group on Country Information

ICC         International Criminal Court

ICCPR International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

ICG         International Crisis Group

ICRC        International Committee of the Red Cross

ICTY        The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia

IHRL        International Human Rights Law

ILO         International Labour Organisation

MoFA        Eritrean Ministry of Foreign Affairs

NGO         Non Government Organisations

NCEW  National Confederation of Eritrean Workers

NUEW  National Union of Eritrean Women

NUEYS National Union of Eritrean Youth and Students

OCHA  UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

OHCHR UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights

OGNs  Operational Guidance Notes

PFDJ        People's Front for Democracy and Justice

PM          People's militia

SLM         Swiss State Secretariat

UKFFM UK Fact-Finding Mission

UNCOI       UN Commission of Inquiry

UNHCR UN High Commissioner for Refugees

USSD        US State Department

WYDC  Warsai Yikealo Development Campaign



                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

   1. A new country guidance case on Eritrea  confronts  greater  challenges
      than usual because of the fact that presently views about  the  nature
      and extent of the risk awaiting Eritreans faced with  forcible  return
      to their country are extremely polarised. On  one  side,  there  is  a
      solid phalanx of reputable bodies and individuals including the United
      Nations Commission of Inquiry (UNCOI),  UNHCR,  Amnesty  International
      (AI) and Human Rights Watch (HRW) who contend or imply that we  should
      maintain or extend the risk categories identified by the  Tribunal  in
      its  existing  country  guidance  in  MA  (Draft  evaders  -   illegal
      departures - risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059 and MO (illegal  exit
      - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC). Ranged  on  this
      side are those representing the appellants who are joined by UNHCR  as
      intervener in arguing that the situation in Eritrea has  worsened.  In
      support of this view UNHCR among others points out that in  the  first
      10 months of 2014, the number of Eritrean asylum seekers  arriving  in
      Europe nearly tripled, from 13,000 the previous  year  to  37,000.  In
      2014 Eritreans were the second largest group after Syrians apprehended
      at European Union external borders trying to  enter  in  an  irregular
      manner and the second largest group of asylum seekers in the  European
      Union. Many of the fatalities in the Mediterranean  were  said  to  be
      Eritrean.  They  consider  that  this  increase   reflects   worsening
      conditions in Eritrea.

   2. On the other side of the divide, there are  mainly  government  bodies
      concerned  with  Country  of  Origin  Information  (COI)  and  certain
      academics and journalists. They do not dispute that there continues to
      be deep concerns about the human  rights  situation  in  Eritrea,  but
      maintain that positive changes have taken  place  there  which  entail
      that the views of the abovementioned  bodies  greatly  exaggerate  the
      risk on return for ordinary Eritreans.  One such  academic,  Dr  Tanja
      M�ller,  has  criticised  what  she   terms   "the   one   dimensional
      interpretation of Eritrea by a powerful human rights lobby that  seeks
      to monopolise what the world  should  know  about  Eritrea  -  and  to
      morally condemn those who do not fall in line". In an  article  posted
      on 7 December 2014, she  takes  issue  with  this  interpretation  for
      portraying Eritrea:

            "as a dictatorship where it  is  simply  impossible  to  live  a
           normal life in any way  and  where  therefore  people  flee  and
           endure horrific abuses while  on  the  way-either  during  their
           clandestine crossing  of  the  border,  or  once  out  by  human
           traffickers ultimately related to the long arm of  the  Eritrean
           state. This narrative, advanced by  organisations  like  Amnesty
           International or Human Rights Watch, is not being recognised  by
           anybody who actually visits Eritrea or for example volunteers to
           teach at one of its colleges as a young  academic,  based  at  a
           prestigious UK university has recently done for three months."

   3. Compounding the strong disagreements over what is actually the present
      situation  in  Eritrea,  there  are  strong  disagreements  over   the
      methodology of sources relied on by all three parties.  Doubtless what
      makes this additional dimension  of  disagreement  so  acute  is  that
      Eritrea has historically been reluctant to allow independent  NGOs  or
      human rights monitoring bodies including the UN Commission of  Inquiry
      to operate in the country and as a result almost all  of  the  sources
      about what is going  on  in  the  country  are  based  on  information
      obtained indirectly, e.g. by  members  of  the  Eritrean  diaspora  or
      academics who have networks of individuals inside  the  country.  This
      state of affairs is one of the reasons why both in MA and MO  and  now
      in this case particular focus has  been  placed  on  the  evidence  of
      Professor Kibreab  (PK).  One  of  the  triggers  for  the  Tribunal's
      decision to undertake fresh country guidance was the decision taken by
      the Danish Immigration Service (DIS) in 2014 to try  and  rectify  the
      relative lack of direct information from inside Eritrea by  conducting
      a Fact-Finding Mission to the country.  The  publication  in  November
      2014 of this mission's report, "Eritrea - Drivers and Root  Causes  of
      Emigration, National Service and the Possibility of Return: Country of
      Origin  Information  for  Use  in  the  Asylum  Determining   Process"
      (hereafter "DFFM Report") and the subsequent reliance on it by,  inter
      alia, the  UK  Home  Office,  sparked  intense  controversy  in  which
      concerns about methodology have featured prominently.  The  appellants
      and the Intervener UNHCR have voiced similar concerns about a UK Fact-
      Finding Mission (hereafter "UKFFM") carried out in February 2016.

The true meaning of country guidance

   4. Before turning to  the  task  of  essaying  new  country  guidance  on
      Eritrea, we address one general matter about the meaning  of  "country
      guidance" in the United Kingdom context.

   5. During the hearing we raised with the respondent our concern about the
      emergence within Home Office country  publications  of  references  to
      "country....guidance".

   6. We drew attention to the witness statement of Mr Martin  Stares  dated
      24 March 2016 which explained that the Country Policy and  Information
      Team (CPIT) was formed in March 2014 by bringing together the  Country
      Specific Litigating Team (CSLT) and the Country of Origin  Information
      Service (COIS). The CSLT and COIS had themselves been formed  in  2008
      as a result of a split in the  Country  Information  and  Policy  Unit
      (CIPU). His statement attests that:

           "[o]ne of the key  reasons  for  bringing  CLST  and  COIS  back
           together was to promote greater coherence between  the  guidance
           the Home Office provided to caseworkers (primarily  through  the
           use of Operational Guidance Notes (OGNs))  and  the  country  of
           origin  information  which  informed  and  underpinned  it.   On
           occasions, for example, due to competing priorities  within  the
           two distinct teams, the  respective  products  on  a  particular
           country were not updated in tandem. "

   7. The CPIT team's purpose is described by Mr Stares as being "to provide
      relevant, reliable, up-to-date country of origin information  as  well
      as advice and guidance on handling country specific cases  to  support
      accurate, high quality, consistent and  timely  decision-making".   At
      para 20 he states that "[t]he process of  obtaining  country  guidance
      information can be summarised as follows: [9 steps are then set out]."



   8. We would observe, as we did  in  the  hearing,  that  the  concept  of
      country guidance is a long-established part of the UK legal system and
      Practice Directions identify "country guidance" as an emanation of the
      Upper Tribunal (formerly the AIT and IAT). The country guidance  cases
      of the Tribunal have a high  profile  on  European  and  international
      websites reporting recent cases and case law, e.g.  UNHCR's  Refworld.
      The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) - accepted as a supervisory
      supranational court by 47 European countries  -  in  particular  makes
      frequent reference to the Tribunal's country  guidance  cases.  It  is
      entirely legitimate of the Home Office to issue not  just  Country  of
      Origin information but also policy and  operational  guidance  setting
      out the position of  the  UK  government.  The  fact  that  the  Upper
      Tribunal ("UT") (unlike the Home Office)  is  not  in  a  position  to
      update its guidance on different countries regularly  only  underlines
      the need for the executive to identify its own position on  a  regular
      basis so that caseworkers can  make  decisions  based  on  the  latest
      evidence. It is most unfortunate, however, that it has now dropped the
      adjective "operational" (as in "Operational Guidance Note") and paired
      the term "guidance" with country "information". This  new  terminology
      runs a real risk that members  of  the  public  and  overseas  readers
      (including courts and tribunals) might mistakenly think that "CIG"  is
      an emanation of a UK executive body, not of the UK judiciary. When for
      example a reader outside the UK studies what was said in para 1.3.8 of
      the March 2015 CIG about the existing Tribunal country  guidance  case
      of MO ("[c]onsequently, the guidance outlined in MO  above  should  no
      longer be followed") and in the September  version  of  the  same  CIG
      (that "MO is too prescriptive about everyone being at risk and/or  the
      exceptions appear to be wider than those listed"),  he  or  she  could
      scarcely be blamed if they wrongly gleaned that this was the  position
      under the law of the United Kingdom and if they failed  to  appreciate
      that the Home Office has no legal competence to decide whether or  not
      a UT  country  guidance  case  is  to  be  followed  or  not.   It  is
      disconcerting to note in this regard that the March 2015 CIG at  1.3.4
      also contains a misrepresentation of the MO guidance  in  that  it  is
      stated that "Eritreans who left illegally are no longer considered per
      se to be at risk of harm or mistreatment amounting to  persecution  on
      return". That was never the position set out in MO: see [133].  Absent
      statutory instruction, the production of "country guidance" is  solely
      a matter for the Tribunal and the courts.  No  adverse  comment  could
      have been made  if  these  statements  had  been  accompanied  by  the
      qualification that MO was no longer to be followed by  caseworkers  or
      had made clear that in the absence  of  a  more  up  to  date  country
      guidance case, caseworkers were entitled to take the  view  that  more
      recent evidence enabled them not to follow MO in full or in part.  But
      bald  utterances  lacking  qualifications  of  this  kind  court  real
      confusion. Given that the term "country guidance"  is  an  established
      term to describe judicial  guidance,  we  deprecate  any  adoption  of
      terminology that confuses this important fact.

   9. Responding to our raising of this matter during the hearing, Mr  Rawat
      said that the term used by the Home Office was not "country  guidance"
      but "country information and guidance". However, as  can  be  glimpsed
      from our quotation above from para 20 of Mr Stares' witness statement,
      this leaves open that wherever information is not the  relevant  issue
      the Home Office is referring to "country  guidance".  We  express  our
      hope that consideration will be given to terminology that maintains  a
      proper demarcation of the role of the executive and judiciary  in  the
      area of evaluation of country conditions and  risk  in  the  field  of
      international protection.



The country guidance issues

  10. At case management hearings  in  the  last  quarter  of  2015  it  was
      directed that the issues to be determined by the Upper  Tribunal  (UT)
      in these appeals were:

           "(i) The extent to which MO (illegal  exit-risk  on  return)  CG
           [2011] UKUT 190 (IAC) and MA (draft evaders; illegal departures;
           risk)  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  properly   reflect   current   country
           conditions and/or risk on return.

           (ii) The factors likely  to  affect  the  risk  faced  by  those
           returning to Eritrea. Relevant  factors  (actual  or  perceived,
           singly or in combination) might include (a) unlawful  exit;  (b)
           age; (c)  matters  arising  from  military  conscription,  draft
           evasion  or  desertion  including  exemption  on  mental  health
           grounds; (d) returning  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker;  (e)  the
           approach of the Eritrean Authorities to the assessment of mental
           health difficulties for the purpose of exemption for someone who
           is otherwise eligible for National Service.

           (iii)  The  evidence  required  to  support  a  claim  and   the
           circumstances in which inferences might be drawn.

           (iv) The weight to be attached to the background  material  and,
           in particular, the Danish fact-finding mission reports  and  the
           evidence of Professor Kibreab [PK].

           (v) Whether in the cases of MST and TM, the First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge made an error on a point of  law.  (It  will  be  for  the
           Tribunal to decide how the error on a point  of  law  is  to  be
           determined.)"

  11. As regards (iii) and (iv) above, they are matters which  were  covered
      extensively in submissions and will be addressed  specifically  later,
      but we do not regard them as being  country  guidance  issues  stricto
      sensu, since deciding what the relevant evidence is and what weight to
      attach to background country material are rather necessary preludes to
      deciding such issues; they are not the issues themselves. Further,  as
      we shall expand on below, in some respects  they  raise  legal  rather
      than country guidance issues. With the benefit of hindsight, it is now
      clear that, pertinent as the DFFM Report  and  PK's  evidence  remain,
      they were an incomplete snapshot even of key items of evidence at that
      time; and since then there have  been  others,  for  example,  the  AI
      Report of December 2015,  "Just  Deserters:  Why  Indefinite  National
      Service in Eritrea has created a Generation  of  Refugees"  (hereafter
      "Just Deserters" Report) and the two UNCOI Reports of 2015  and  2016,
      reports which merit specific consideration just as much.

  12. In submissions regarding (iv) above,  the  respondent  proposed  that,
      rather than being excised, it be modified to read "[t]he  approach  to
      the assessment of background source material on Eritrea".  Whilst  the
      clashes between the parties over the issue of sources and  methodology
      are important enough to be dealt with in a separate section below,  we
      remain of the view that to identify it as a country guidance issue  as
      such would shift proper focus away from findings on country conditions
      to the methodology underlying such findings. Findings  on  the  latter
      are called for and specific findings will be made on the  DFFM  report
      and PK's evidence (and other key items of evidence); but  we  will  no
      longer include them in our list of country guidance issues.

  13. In relation to (v), the UT on 24 March 2016 found that in the case  of
      MST the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  and  so  his  case  came
      before us on the same  basis  as  AA  and  MYK,  namely  (as  will  be
      identified in a moment) for a decision to be re-made on their appeals.
      As regards TM, it was decided by the UT on 24 March  2016  that  there
      was no error of law and that  his  case  would  be  severed  from  the
      country guidance cases.

  14. In the appellants'  and  UNHCR's  skeleton  arguments  a  new  country
      guidance issue was proposed, namely whether  the  Eritrean  system  of
      military  service  amounted  to  slavery,  servitude  or   forced   or
      compulsory labour contrary to Article 4 ECHR. In proposing this  as  a
      further issue, these parties highlighted relevant findings on it  made
      by the two recent UNCOI Reports. Given that it was an issue thrown  up
      by recent evidence in the case and that the respondent has  had  ample
      opportunity to address it in subsequent rejoinders, we treat the above
      list of issues (so far reduced to (i), (ii)) as being supplemented  by
      a new (iii) as follows:

           "(iii) Whether the Eritrean system  of  military  service  gives
           rise to a real risk on return of exposure to treatment  contrary
           to Article 4 ECHR."

Existing country guidance

  15. The most recent country guidance  case  on  Eritrea  is  the  2011  UT
      decision in MO. This  reaffirmed  with  some  modifications  the  2009
      country guidance decision of MA. MA in turn supplemented  and  amended
      IN (Draft evaders - evidence of risk) Eritrea CG [2005]  UKIAT  00106,
      KA (draft-related risk categories updated)  Eritrea  CG  [2005]  UKAIT
      00165, AH (Failed asylum seekers -  involuntary  returns)  Eritrea  CG
      [2006] UKAIT 00078 and WA (Draft-related risks updated - Muslim Women)
      Eritrea CG [2006] UKAIT 00079.

  16. In the headnote to MA, it was stated:

           "1. A person who is  reasonably  likely  to  have  left  Eritrea
           illegally will in general be at real risk on return if he or she
           is of draft age, even if the evidence shows that he or  she  has
           completed Active National Service, (consisting of 6 months in  a
           training centre and 12  months  military  service).  By  leaving
           illegally  while  still  subject  to  National  Service,  (which
           liability in general continues until the person ceases to be  of
           draft age), that person is reasonably likely to be  regarded  by
           the authorities of  Eritrea  as  a  deserter  and  subjected  to
           punishment which is persecutory and amounts to serious harm  and
           ill-treatment.

           2. Illegal exit continues to be a key factor in  assessing  risk
           on return. A person who fails  to  show  that  he  or  she  left
           Eritrea illegally will not in general be at real risk,  even  if
           of draft age and whether or not the authorities are  aware  that
           he or she  has  unsuccessfully  claimed  asylum  in  the  United
           Kingdom."

  17. In GM (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2008]
      EWCA Civ 833 the Court of  Appeal  upheld  the  approach  in  MA  that
      illegal exit by an Eritrean applicant of or approaching draft age  who
      was not medically unfit, could not be assumed where  that  person  had
      been found wholly incredible. In relation to one  of  the  appellants,
      MY, who was a 17 year old girl, Laws LJ, with whom  Dyson  LJ  agreed,
      said this at [53]-[55]:

           "53. ... The fact (if it be so) that  it  is  reasonably  likely
           that any 17 year old girl from Eritrea, about whom nothing  else
           relevant is known, left the country illegally  does  not  entail
           the conclusion that this particular 17 year old girl did so. The
           reason is that the probability that a particular person  has  or
           has not left illegally must depend on the  particular  facts  of
           her case. Those facts may produce a conclusion  quite  different
           from that relating to illegal exit by members of such a class of
           persons about whose particular circumstances, however, the court
           knows nothing more than their membership of the class. There may
           indeed be a general probability of illegal exit  by  members  of
           the class; but the particular facts may make all the  difference
           ...

           54. The position would only be otherwise if the general evidence
           was so solid as to admit of only  fanciful  exceptions;  if  the
           court or tribunal concluded that the 17 year old must have  left
           illegally whatever the particular facts.

           55. Is that the position here? I do not think that  it  is.  The
           categories of persons found by the AIT in MA (largely founded on
           Dr Kibreab's [PK]  evidence)  to  be  candidates,  or  promising
           candidates, for exit visas,  were  not  held  to  be  closed  or
           watertight ... It is also  notable  that  the  AIT's  conclusion
           about the chances of a young male obtaining a visa is  expressed
           (paragraph 357) in terms of unlikelihood only. Moreover  I  read
           paragraph 449, cited by Buxton LJ at paragraph  13,  as  showing
           that the AIT in MA itself considered  proof  of  an  appellant's
           particular  circumstances  to  be   an   important   factor   in
           determining whether the appellant left Eritrea illegally."

  18. In MO, the UT  explained  at  [3-4]  that  except  for  one  point  of
      clarification it did not seek to re-examine the guidance given by  the
      Tribunal in MA on the issues of the nature of  military  and  national
      service in Eritrea, demobilisation and risk on return to  persons  who
      are or would be perceived as draft evaders or deserters.

  19. In MO at [133 iv] the UT modified the guidance given in MA in  respect
      of limited exceptions who it considered would not be at risk on return
      as follows:

           "(iv) The general position adopted in MA, that a  person  of  or
           approaching draft age (i.e. aged 8 or over and still  not  above
           the upper age limits for military service, being  under  54  for
           men and under 47 for women)  and  not  medically  unfit  who  is
           accepted as having left Eritrea illegally is  reasonably  likely
           to be regarded with serious hostility on return, is reconfirmed,
           subject to limited exceptions in respect of (1) persons whom the
           regime's military and political leadership perceives  as  having
           given them valuable service (either in Eritrea or  abroad);  (2)
           persons who are trusted family members  of,  or  are  themselves
           part of,  the  regime's  military  or  political  leadership.  A
           further  possible  exception,  requiring  a  more  case-specific
           analysis, is (3) persons (and their  children  born  afterwards)
           who fled (what later became the territory of) Eritrea during the
           war of independence."

  20. On the issue of illegal exit, the UT in MO at [133 iii]  modified  the
      guidance given in MA as follows:

           "(iii) The general position concerning illegal exit  remains  as
           expressed in MA, namely that illegal exit  by  a  person  of  or
           approaching draft age and not medically unfit cannot be  assumed
           if they had been found wholly incredible.  However,  if  such  a
           person  is  found   to   have   left   Eritrea   on   or   after
           August/September 2008, it may be, that inferences can  be  drawn
           from their health history or level of education or their  skills
           profile as to whether legal exit on  their  part  was  feasible,
           provided that such inferences can be drawn in the light  of  the
           adverse credibility findings."

  21. The reference to August/September 2008 arose because of the Tribunal's
      finding in MO that at this time there was  credible  evidence  of  the
      Eritrean authorities suspending exit visa facilities albeit the  UTIAC
      recorded that the facility had  been  re-opened  "on  a  more  limited
      basis" ([113-114]).

  22. The UT in MO at  [133(v)]  also  nuanced  the  guidance  given  in  MA
      regarding failed asylum seekers as follows:

           "(v) Whilst it also remains  the  position  that  failed  asylum
           seekers as such are not generally at real risk of persecution or
           serious harm on return, on present evidence the  great  majority
           of such persons are  likely  to  be  perceived  as  having  left
           illegally and this fact, save for very limited exceptions,  will
           mean that on return they face a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
           serious harm."

Strasbourg cases on Eritrea

  23.  In  many  country  guidance  cases  the  Tribunal  attaches  singular
      importance to lead cases of the ECtHR dealing with country  conditions
      and risk categories in the relevant country. In the case  of  Eritrea,
      however, the searches undertaken by the parties  (confirming  our  own
      understanding) revealed that there have been very few such  cases.  It
      may be this is a reflection of the fact that in the past  decade  very
      few forcible returns have been undertaken by European countries.  None
      of the cases identified are recent, which  in  itself,  reduces  their
      potential value for us as source of evidence and judicial evaluation.

Decisions of national courts and tribunals on Eritrea

  24. Our attention has not been drawn to  any  national  cases  decided  by
      courts and tribunals applying much the same EU asylum law  as  do  we;
      this again may be because of the policy adopted by most EU governments
      of not enforcing returns.

The legal issues

  25. In the course of submissions it  became  apparent  that  there  was  a
      dispute between the parties over  several  legal  issues,  namely  the
      significance of UNHCR guidelines; the significance of previous country
      guidance;  the  role  of  expert  evidence;  methodology  of   sources
      (including anonymity of sources); and the  proper  test  for  deciding
      risk on return contrary to Article 4  ECHR  which  prohibits  slavery,
      servitude and forced labour. In the event we decided we could  resolve
      all but the last by reference to established case law.

The appellants

  26. As the Tribunal has said on many  occasions,  every  country  guidance
      case has two dimensions, general  and  individual.  The  general  one,
      which is what defines  it  as  such,  is  the  assessment  of  country
      conditions in relation to risk on return. But  the  vehicle  for  such
      assessment is always the individual appeal or appeals and in this case
      we are tasked with deciding the three appeals  of  MST,  MYK  and  AA.
      Their evidence, of course, informs the wider body of evidence we  have
      to consider regarding country conditions, but it is convenient for  us
      to set out our conclusions upon their particular cases separately,  in
      the last part of our decision.

  27. The evidence of the appellants is set out in some detail  in  Appendix
      I.  This includes their written evidence and, in the case of  MST  and
      MYK, their oral evidence before us (AA did not  give  oral  evidence).
      The bare elements of their claims can be summarised as follows:

        1) MST, who was aged 27 at the hearing before us, submits  that  he
           is at risk on return because he left Eritrea illegally and  will
           be viewed as a deserter.  He will be forced back  into  national
           service on return.

        2) MYK, who was aged 31 at the hearing before us, submits  that  he
           is at risk on return because he left Eritrea illegally and  will
           be viewed as a deserter.  He will be forced back  into  national
           service on return.

        3) AA, who was aged 29 at the hearing  before  us,  is  a  paranoid
           schizophrenic. He submits that he  will  be  forced  to  undergo
           national service on return notwithstanding his mental health.

Procedural matters

  28.  The  case  management  stages  of  this  case  brooked  a  number  of
      difficulties which required treatment by a series of Directions and an
      Interlocutory decision now reported as  MST  and  Others  (disclosure-
      restrictions- implied undertakings Eritrea) [2016] UKUT  00337  (IAC).
      It is not necessary for us to deal with these again in  this  decision
      and we have decided that in assessing the evidence of PK we  will  not
      treat as adverse to him his failure to comply with  agreed  deadlines.
      We  would  however  underline  that  in  view  of   the   difficulties
      encountered during the CMR stages of this case, the President  of  the
      UTIAC will be reviewing whether it  is  necessary  to  amend  existing
      Presidential  guidance  to  include  an  express  warning  about   the
      possibility of an order being made against representatives for  wasted
      costs in the event of default arising out of avoidable delays  on  the
      part of an instructed expert. As this case amply demonstrates, country
      guidance cases can involve a great deal of preparation,  industry  and
      effort from the parties and a considerable investment of time  on  the
      part of the Tribunal. They can encompass (as does this case)  judicial
      decision-making likely to have very significant implications  for  the
      processing of many asylum claims in the UK and beyond.  It  cannot  be
      allowed that scheduling of such cases is sabotaged by a  lack  of  due
      diligence on the part of experts.

  29. Although a limited number of other procedural  matters  arose  in  the
      course of the hearing before us, it is not necessary to  say  anything
      about them in this decision, there being agreement between the parties
      as to their resolution.

A.       EVIDENCE AND SOURCES

  30. We have chosen to structure this decision  so  that  we  identify  and
      discuss the most relevant evidence at the same  time  as  we  seek  to
      decide key issues, a task which has been made much easier  for  us  by
      the careful and detailed submissions made  by  the  parties  regarding
      relevant background evidence  and  sources.   It  will  help  lay  the
      foundations  for  our  ensuing  assessment,  however,  if  we  briefly
      identify the main reports and  sources  identified  to  us.  For  this
      purpose we shall adopt a chronological order, except where  there  are
      closely-related reports or items which  are  most  conveniently  dealt
      with together.  The Home Office and Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
      materials are dealt with separately towards the end  of  this  section
      since they include up-datings and have been the specific focus of  the
      appellants' submissions arguing that the  Home  Office  was  wrong  to
      issue policy statements saying that MA and MO were  no  longer  to  be
      followed in certain respects by caseworkers.

1.        Background evidence

UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines  for  Assessing  the  International  Protection
Needs for Asylum-seekers from Eritrea, 20 April 2011

  31. In MO, the Tribunal had before  it  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  on
      Eritrea  dated  April  2009.  In  April  2011  UNHCR  issued   updated
      Guidelines which remain in place. Its list of "risk profiles" reads as
      follows:

           "UNHCR considers that individuals  with  the  profiles  outlined
           below require a particularly  careful  examination  of  possible
           risks.  These risk profiles, while not  necessarily  exhaustive,
           include (i) persons  avoiding  military/national  service;  (ii)
           members of political opposition groups and  Government  critics;
           (iii) journalists and  other  media  professionals;  (iv)  trade
           unionists and labour rights activists; (v) members  of  minority
           religious  groups;  (vi)  women  and  children   with   specific
           profiles; (vii) lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
           (LGBTI) individuals; (viii) members of certain  ethnic  minority
           groups; and (x) victims of trafficking."

Eritrean   Ministry   of   Information   publication:   "UNHCR   Eligibility
Guidelines: Factual Findings or Recycled Reformation", 17 December 2015

  32. Although over  four  years  later,  it  is  convenient  to  note  this
      publication emanating from the Eritrean government attacking the  2009
      and 2011 UNHCR Guidelines for "sloppy,  cut-and-paste  desk  research"
      characterised, it was said, by "wholesale regurgitation of  prevalent,
      negative literature on Eritrea from biased and  politically  motivated
      entities".

  33. The report goes on to deny that forcible returns from Libya and  Egypt
      had resulted in any ill-treatment, asserting that  the  government  in
      fact exercised clemency to them.  In response to the  UNHCR  statement
      that  "[f]or  some  Eritreans,  being  outside  the  country  may   be
      sufficient cause on return to be subjected to scrutiny, reprisals  and
      harsh treatment", this publication states:

           "No Eritrean is subjected to harassment  simply  because  he/she
           lives abroad.  The fact is even those  who  have  asylum  papers
           come back to their  country  periodically  for  family  reunion,
           vacation and  other  personal  matters.   Eritrea's  tourism  is
           largely based on the Diaspora who visit their country in  summer
           as well as during the Christmas,  Easter  and  Independence  Day
           celebrations.  More than 85,000 Eritreans come back for vacation
           every year and this number is greater on special  occasions,  as
           will be the case in 2016 when Eritreans will celebrate next  May
           its Independence Silver Jubilee...."

  34. UNHCR has confirmed in writing to this Tribunal that UNHCR's  position
      remains as set  out  in  the  2011  Guidelines,  stating  that  before
      updating them UNHCR would ideally wish to have full information  based
      on  full  access  to  the  country.   UNHCR  also  confirmed  that  in
      collaboration with the  government  of  Eritrea  it  extends  assisted
      protection and assistance to an average of 2,450 Somali refugees based
      in a camp in Massawa and also has open  technical  collaboration  with
      the government on issues of mixed migration that have an asylum nexus.

Danish Fact-Finding Mission (DFFM) Reports,  25  November  and  16  December
2014

  35. As already noted, on 25 November 2014,  the  DIS  published  its  DFFM
      Report. This report was said to be based on  three  2014  fact-finding
      visits by Danish officials  to  London,  Ethiopia  and  Eritrea.   The
      report comprises a 20 page report (which where  appropriate  we  shall
      call its "main  body")  and  54  pages  of  annexed  interview/meeting
      transcripts.

  36. The main body of the report is  organised  into  five  parts,  part  4
      dealing with National Service and part 5 with Return to  Eritrea.   In
      4.8 under the heading 'Consequences  for  evasion/desertion  from  the
      national service', it is said that:

           "... [PK], ......, also stated that over the past two  or  three
           years, the government's attitude towards NS  [national  service]
           seems to be more relaxed.  It is now possible  for  evaders  and
           deserters who have left Eritrea illegally to return if they  pay
           the two per cent tax and sign the apology letter at an  Eritrean
           Embassy.  Finally, [PK] was aware of a few  deserters  from  the
           national service who have visited Eritrea and  safely  left  the
           country again."

  37. The report explains that in view of the fact that existing reports  on
      Eritrea were to a large extent based on sources outside  the  country,
      it was decided there was a need for updated and first-hand description
      of the conditions on the ground.  It states that in order  to  prepare
      and plan the missions to Eritrea and Ethiopia, the DIS conferred  with
      other immigration authorities in Europe as well as with PK.  It states
      that in Eritrea and Ethiopia the delegation consulted  representatives
      of  Western  embassies,  UN  agencies,  international   organisations,
      international non-governmental organisations,  local  non-governmental
      organisations,  a  well-known  Eritrean  intellectual  as  well  as  a
      representative from the Eritrean  government.   To  the  best  of  its
      knowledge,  avows  the  main  body  of  the  report,   the   consulted
      interlocutors represented  "a  broad  spectrum  of  competent  sources
      knowledgeable on the relevant issues in Eritrea".

  38. On the same day the DIS announced that on account of  this  report  it
      was changing its policy so that  "illegal  exit  will  not  in  itself
      amount to persecution or grant the right to international protection".



  39. In early December 2014, PK publicly  disassociated  himself  from  the
      report.  He said to  the  Danish  newspaper  Politiken  that  "I  felt
      betrayed, I demand my name be taken off the report".  He said that his
      views had been misrepresented and  that  the  Danish  authorities  had
      "basically ignored a lot of facts and hand-picked a few that  fit  the
      conclusion".

  40. On 2 December, AI condemned the report as "completely absurd".   David
      Bozzini,  a  renowned  expert  on  Eritrea,  publicly  supported  PK's
      criticisms.  On 9 December 2014, two of the report's  researchers,  Mr
      Olsen and Mr  Olesen,  publicly  criticised  the  report.  (We  should
      mention at this point that the  evidence  in  this  case  includes  an
      unsigned 6-page "Statement on Danish Eritrea Report"  from  these  two
      persons, dated 28 April 2016,  which  gives  their  account  of  their
      involvement in the report and its aftermath.)

  41. On the same day the DIS ostensibly backtracked,  announcing  that  the
      Danish authorities would continue to recognise as  refugees  Eritreans
      fearing persecution as a result of their illegal exit and/or desertion
      or draft evasion and that  "this  might  well  involve  providing  the
      benefit of the doubt to the asylum-seeker" and  that  it  expected  to
      recognise such asylum claims in "many cases".

  42. On 16 December 2014, the DIS published a new Appendix Edition  of  its
      25 November report leaving in all of PK's  contributions  but  showing
      them as crossed out.

  43.  The  above  summary  does  not  mention  all  the  organisations  and
      individuals who came forward to voice criticisms of the  DFFM  Report.
      Their number included UNHCR who in December issued a three page  Note,
      welcoming the decision  of  the  DIS  to  produce  a  COI  Report  but
      expressing a number of concerns as regards the methodology used in the
      report. It stated that the main body of the report made selective  use
      of information provided by interlocutors,  including  statements  that
      could not be traced to these interlocutors' statements as reviewed and
      cleared by them. It objected to the lack of  proper  understanding  of
      the regulatory framework for the  media,  NGOs  and  other  actors  in
      Eritrea. In later materials, UNHCR has criticised the DFFM Report  for
      treating its sources in Asmara as a "multitude of independent sources"
      rather than as one  source  with  the  additional  understanding  that
      members of the international community in Asmara have limited  freedom
      of movement.  On  17  December  HRW  published  an  analysis  entitled
      "Denmark: Eritrea Immigration Report Deeply Flawed". The Danish  press
      media carried many articles on the controversy that had  engulfed  the
      report and the responses of various governmental and political  actors
      in Denmark.

  44. On 16 September 2015 the Danish Parliamentary  Ombudsman  published  a
      report on the Eritrean case. His report makes clear that he was  given
      access to all relevant information held by the DIS and the government.
      Whilst  criticising  the  public  pronouncements  made  by  government
      sources about the DFFM Report and finding that the general public  had
      been left with a very unclear view of  what  the  basis  was  for  the
      completely conflicting statements from the DIS on 25  November  and  9
      December, he found  no  breach  of  the  applicable  law.  His  report
      mentions that Mr Olsen and Mr Olesen had referred the matter to him on
      27 January 2015  asking  him  to  "go  into  the  case  regarding  the
      employment  law  warnings  they  had  received  and  the   facts   and
      circumstances  around  what  became  of  the  fact-finding  report  on
      Eritrea". Despite further noting that the personnel matters concerning
      these two had been settled (upon the service warnings  given  to  them
      having been revoked), his investigation addressed a number of  issues,
      including "was pressure put on staff of the DIS to paint a  favourable
      picture of conditions in Eritrea which were not  actually  how  things
      were?".  He concluded that the decision to set up the  DFFM  was  both
      objective and lawful and  that  it  "strived  to  ensure  as  broad  a
      composition of sources as was possible". He declared that "I  have  no
      reason to believe that the DIS wished to give the conclusions  in  the
      report an untenable expression or put pressure on its staff with  this
      purpose in mind". Equally he was satisfied that "serious  doubts  have
      been raised as to how the authorities deal with  the  case,  including
      questions about improper political intervention in dealing with asylum
      cases". On 25 November he confirmed that he stood by his report.

Landinfo, 23 March 2015 and 16 April 2015 and May 2016

  45.  On  23  March  2015,  Landinfo,  the  Norwegian  Country  of   Origin
      Information Centre, which is an independent body within the  Norwegian
      Immigration Authorities, published two reports, one entitled "Eritrea:
      National Service", and the other entitled "Response: Reactions towards
      returning asylum seekers".  The National Service Report explained that
      Landinfo had made four trips to Eritrea in the past  four  years,  the
      last completed in January 2015.  This report emphasised  that  because
      of the difficulties  in  obtaining  information  from  sources  inside
      Eritrea it had to rely on Eritreans outside their country.  The report
      noted that there was no evidence as yet that the  Eritrean  government
      had implemented its  [2014]  promise  to  limit  national  service  to
      eighteen months. It stated that the upper age limit  for  conscription
      to national service had increased since the border war; however, women
      were increasingly exempt because of marriage, giving  birth  or  on  a
      religious basis. Eritreans who evade national service were said to  be
      probably exposed to arbitrary punishments from local  commanders,  and
      there had been indications that Eritreans  performing  their  national
      service in military units have been more subject  to  punishment  than
      Eritreans in the civilian sector. In the "Reactions towards  returning
      asylum seekers" document, Landinfo addressed  the  claim  made  by  AI
      among others that the act of submitting an asylum application as  such
      will lead to adverse treatment on return because such persons are seen
      as  traitors.  It  noted  that  there  was  very  little  certain  and
      verifiable information regarding this. It noted that PK  had  said  in
      2012 that he did not have specific examples of what  has  happened  to
      returned asylum  seekers.  After  reviewing  the  known  evidence,  it
      concluded that "[w]e do not currently  have  an  empirical  basis  for
      saying that an application for asylum as such will lead  to  reactions
      from the Eritrean authorities".

  46. On 15 April 2015 Landinfo issued a "Response: Eritrea: Exit visas  and
      illegal exit". It stated that the vast majority  of  those  who  leave
      Eritrea do it illegally. The categories of those who could obtain exit
      visas were limited and there can be additional difficulties for  close
      family members of people who have left the country illegally and  have
      been critical of the government or lack documentation. Landinfo stated
      that its  "impression"  was  that  the  authorities  assess  Eritreans
      returning home based on circumstances such as those surrounding  their
      departure, national service status, any political activity  in  exile,
      their network in Eritrea and the payment of the diaspora tax.  "It  is
      probably the reasons behind the departure that can lead  to  reprisals
      on returning home  and  not  the  illegal  departure  in  itself."  It
      considered that persons who had restored their relationship  with  the
      authorities by signing the retraction [repentance] letter, paying  the
      2 per cent tax in exile and  who  do  not  participate  in  activities
      critical of the government  were  likely  to  be  less  vulnerable  to
      reprisals from the authorities. A good network  and  contacts  in  the
      government apparatus and the party were also probably useful.

  47. We should perhaps note here that in  the  Review  of  UK  Home  Office
      Country Information and Guidance - "Eritrea: National (incl. Military)
      Service" (version 2.0e, September 2015) and  "Eritrea:  Illegal  Exit"
      (version 2.0e,  September  2015),  the  review  prepared  by  Dr  John
      Campbell criticises not  only  the  DFFM  Report  but  the  (pre-2016)
      Landinfo reports also.

  48. The new versions of the Home Office CIGs published on  4  August  2016
      include a number of  references  to  a  Landinfo  thematic  report  on
      Eritrea dated 20 May 2016. We have taken account of  the  contents  of
      those references.

UN Commission of Inquiry Reports

(A/HRC/29/CRP.1), 5 June 2015 (2015 UNCOI Report)

  49. In this Report the Commission explains that it had been set up by  the
      Human Rights Council under resolution 26/24. It describes Eritrea as a
      country characterised by human rights abuses, some of which may amount
      to crimes against humanity.  At [26] of the summary report  it  states
      that "Eritreans are fleeing severe human rights violations and are  in
      need of international protection". At [46] of the same summary  report
      it states that Eritreans who attempt to leave the country are seen  as
      traitors.

  50. As regards its methodology, the Commission states that although unable
      to visit Eritrea it obtained first-hand testimony  by  conducting  550
      confidential interviews with witnesses residing  in  third  countries.
      It also received 160 written submissions.  At  [34]  of  the  detailed
      report  it  states  that  in  order  to  establish   the   facts   and
      circumstances of  alleged  violations  and  taking  into  account  the
      impossibility to access Eritrea,  it  decided  to  collect  first-hand
      testimonies and accounts of victims and  witnesses  of  alleged  human
      rights violations "from Eritrean refugees,  asylum  seekers,  migrants
      and other members of the Diaspora".

  51. On the issues related to national service, the three main  conclusions
      of the detailed report were:

           "1. [T]reatment  of  apprehended  draft  evaders  and  deserters
           during detention often amounts to torture,  cruel,  inhumane  or
           degrading punishment ([1389]).

           2. People attempting to leave - or who have  previously  left  -
           the country illegally are regarded  as  "serious  offenders  but
           also as traitors" ([431])  and  "with  a  few  exceptions  [are]
           arrested, detained and subjected to ill-treatment  and  torture"
           ([444]).

           3. That conditions of national service are characterised by lack
           of adequate food, access to water, access to hygiene  facilities
           and adequate accommodation during military training and service,
           such  conditions  constituting  cruel,  inhuman   or   degrading
           treatment ([1391])."

  52. At [61] of the summary report the UNCOI writes that:-

           "National service as implemented  by  the  Eritrean  authorities
           involves the systematic violation of an array of human rights on
           a scope and scale seldom witnessed elsewhere in the world".

  53. At [1397] of the detailed report it states that:

           "The indefinite  duration  of  national  service:  its  terrible
           conditions and treatment including arbitrary detention, torture,
           sexual and gender-based  violence,  forced  labour,  absence  of
           leave and the ludicrous pay; the implications this  has  on  the
           possibility of any individual to form a family,  have  a  family
           life and to have favourable conditions of  work,  make  national
           service an institution where slavery-like practises occur."

(A/HRC/32/CRP.1), 8 June 2016 (2016 UNCOI Report)

  54. In June 2016 the Commission published a further report, releasing  its
      detailed findings on 8 June. It noted that its further report arose as
      a result of the Human Rights Council in its  resolution  29/18  having
      extended  its  mandate  for  one  year  "to  investigate   systematic,
      widespread and gross violations of human rights in Eritrea with a view
      to ensuring full accountability, including where these violations  may
      amount to crimes against humanity". Its two principal conclusions were
      first  that  during  the  period  under  review  there  had  been   no
      improvement with respect to the most critical human rights  violations
      in Eritrea documented  in  its  first  report;  and  second  that  the
      Commission had reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  crimes  against
      humanity, namely enslavement,  imprisonment,  enforced  disappearance,
      torture, other inhuman acts, persecution, rape and murder,  have  been
      committed in Eritrea since 1991.

  55. The 2016 UNCOI Report notes that in response to its call for responses
      it received almost 45,000 written submissions, "the vast  majority  of
      which were critical of the first  report  of  the  Commission".  In  a
      communication of 20 June responding to a  question  the  Tribunal  had
      raised during the hearing, Ms Dubinsky relayed confirmation  from  the
      Commission  that for its 2016 report "the Commission  of  Inquiry  has
      interviewed 123 witnesses since the issuance of [its] first report  in
      June 2015, many of them individuals who left  Eritrea  in  the  period
      2014-2016".  In response to further directions addressed to UNHCR, the
      UT received a letter dated 15 August 2016 from the Special  Rapporteur
      on the situation of human rights in Eritrea and who was  a  member  of
      the Commission, explaining why the Commission had concluded  that  the
      information provided in the 44,267 written submissions did not have  a
      bearing on the information  provided  by  "the  more  than  833  other
      sources of information".

  56. Observing that the "campaign critical of its  first  report  was  well
      organised", that most critics had not read the report and appeared  to
      rely on erroneous understandings or deliberate misinformation and that
      it had evidence that some letters had  been  submitted  involuntarily,
      the Commission concluded that the submissions did  not  undermine  the
      findings described in its first report.

EASO Country of Origin Information Report, Eritrea Country Focus, May 2015

  57. This Report highlights the difficulties  of  access  to  relevant  COI
      about Eritrea, which has led to reports on sensitive issues having  to
      rely largely on  sources  outside  Eritrea.  It  notes  that  the  few
      available  reports  based  on  research  in  Eritrea  mainly  drew  on
      government  statements  and  anecdotal  knowledge   of   international
      representatives, and not on first-hand information.  "This  difficulty
      was demonstrated in recent polemics regarding the Danish  fact-finding
      report". The EASO Report describes itself as being based  on  publicly
      available  reports  of  COI   units,   UN   agencies,   human   rights
      organisations,  solicitors,  officials,  NGO  papers,  government  and
      diaspora media.  It states that it has been completed with information
      obtained from interviews, e.g. during information gathering  missions.
      We shall refer later to what this report  has  to  say  about  certain
      topics, that of lawful exit categories in particular. We mention  here
      that at 3.8.2, in a section headed "Punishment for returning deserters
      and draft evaders", the EASO Report states that there have been no new
      empirical findings since 2008 and therefore the  punishment  currently
      imposed on deserters and draft  evaders  is  difficult  to  establish.
      "However, most sources state that punishment is imposed arbitrarily on
      an extra-judicial basis without regard for the laws".  It  notes  that
      there have been many instances of overland repatriations from Sudan in
      recent years but that there is no information available on the fate of
      those repatriated after their return.  Reference  is  made  to  a  HRW
      Report 'Sudan: Stop Deporting Eritreans', 8 May 2014  and  a  UN  News
      Centre, 'UN refugee agency warns Sudan over forced return of  Eritrean
      asylum seekers', 4 July 2014. The Report adds:

           "Some of the respondents contacted in Eritrea  during  Denmark's
           and Norway's fact finding missions in late 2014 and  early  2015
           believed that deserters and draft evaders were  held  in  prison
           for several weeks or months  and  were  then  reassigned  to  NS
           [national service]. However, several of the experts consulted in
           2013 and 2014 by Norway, the Netherlands  and  Denmark  believed
           that repatriated  deserters  and  draft  evaders  may  still  be
           subjected  to  interrogation  and  mistreatment...The   Eritrean
           leadership has stated on several occasions that those  returning
           to the country will not be punished as long  as  they  have  not
           committed offences but it has not yet been  made  clear  whether
           desertion, draft  evasion  or  illegal  exist  are  regarded  as
           offences....".

  58. At 6.4.4 the Report states that "[t]he Eritrean authorities claim that
      people who have left the country illegally may return without fear  of
      punishment after they have  paid  the  diaspora  tax  and  signed  the
      repentance form, but they may be sent to a  six-week  training  course
      'to enforce their patriotic feelings'".

US State Department Country Reports on Human Rights  Practices,  chapter  on
Eritrea, 2014 and 2015

Chapter on Eritrea 2014 (25 June 2015)

  59. The USSD Report covering 2014 stated that refusal to perform  military
      or militia service, failure to enlist, fraudulent evasion of  military
      service, and desertion were punished by lengthy imprisonment or  other
      harsh arbitrary forms of punishment.   The  report  stated  that  "the
      government did not demobilise many conscripts  from  the  military  as
      scheduled and forced some  to  serve  indefinitely  under  threats  of
      detention, torture, or punishment of their families".

  60. As regards exit visas, the same report stated that during the year:

           "the government imposed new restrictions.  Authorities generally
           did not give exit  visas  to  children  ages  5  or  older.   In
           September members of the civilian militia were told that any men
           or unmarried women in the civilian militia would  be  unable  to
           get an exit visa until further notice.   Categories  of  persons
           most commonly denied exit  visas  included  men  under  age  54,
           regardless of whether they had completed the military portion of
           NS [national service]  and  women  younger  than  age  47.   The
           government did not generally grant exit permits  to  members  of
           the citizens militia, although some whom authorities demobilised
           from national service or who  had  permission  from  their  zone
           comrades were able to obtain them.  Authorities arrested persons
           who tried to cross the border and leave without exit  visas.   A
           shoot-to-kill policy was in effect for those attempting to cross
           the border to exit the country without authorisation.

           To prevent emigration, the government generally  did  not  grant
           exit visas to  entire  families  or  both  parents  of  children
           simultaneously. Some parents avoided  seeking  exit  permits  to
           children approaching the age of eligibility for national service
           due to concern that they would be denied permission  to  travel,
           although other adolescents were granted exit  permits.   In  the
           past diaspora males  who  visited  the  country  reported  being
           required to pay a two per cent  tax  on  foreign  earned  income
           before being given exit visas.  This was not commonly enforced."

Chapter on Eritrea 2015 (13 April 2016)

  61. The USSD Report covering 2015 is in similar terms, with some updating,
      including numerous references to the 2015 UNCOI Report.  In section  7
      it states:

           "Forced labour occurred.  Despite the 18 month limit on national
           service under the law, the government did  not  demobilise  many
           conscripts from the military as scheduled  and  forced  some  to
           serve indefinitely  under  threats  of  detention,  torture,  or
           punishment  of  their  families,  persons  performing   national
           service could not resign or  take  other  employment,  generally
           received no promotions or salary  increases,  and  could  rarely
           leave the country legally because  they  were  denied  passports
           and/or exit visas.  Those conscripted into the national  service
           performed standard patrols and border monitoring in addition  to
           labour such as agricultural, terracing, construction and  laying
           power lines.  In its  examination  during  the  year  of  forced
           labour in the country,  the  ILO  Conference  Committee  on  the
           Application of Standards noted discussion "relating to the large-
           scale and systematic practice of imposing compulsory  labour  on
           the population for an indefinite period within the framework  of
           the national service program  which  encompasses  all  areas  of
           civilian life and  was  therefore  much  broader  than  military
           service."

  62. The report also deals with foreign  travel  and  exit  visas  and  the
      following is stated; "Authorities generally did not give exit visas to
      children ages five  and  older.  Some  parents  avoided  seeking  exit
      permits for children approaching the age of eligibility  for  national
      service due to concern they themselves would be denied  permission  to
      travel,  although  some  adolescents  were   granted   exit   permits.
      Categories of persons most commonly denied  exit  visas  included  men
      under age 54, regardless of whether they had  completed  the  military
      portion of national service, and women younger than  30,  unless  they
      had children."

Amnesty International, Report on  AA,  22  September  2015,  and  the  "Just
Deserters" Report, December 2015

Report on AA, 22 September 2015

  63. AI produced a report for the case of AA dated 22 September 2015.

  64. In addition to dealing with the particular case  of  AA,  this  report
      expressed its concern that the present Home Office  CIGs  [see  below]
      continued to be flawed particularly because they continued to rely  on
      the DFFM Report as their  primary  justification  for  their  guidance
      positions.  The report contains a specific critique of various aspects
      of the DFFM Report,  particularly  its  reliance  on  two  sources,  a
      regional NGO based in Asmara and a well-known  Eritrean  intellectual,
      both of whom it said were likely to be pro-government.  It  considered
      that diplomatic sources in Asmara were "highly likely to be  prevented
      from obtaining relevant information and therefore risk speaking beyond
      what their actual evidence above would support."  It stated  its  view
      that Eritrean national service amounts to a system of forced labour in
      its own right.

  65. In this report AI also takes issue with what it considers  to  be  the
      implication that "there is something inherently unreliable about human
      rights information sourced from nationals external  to  their  country
      who may or may not ultimately  be  seeking,  or  who  have  previously
      sought, international protection in a western country".   This  report
      emphasises that if  there  are  reasons  to  be  sceptical  about  the
      veracity of a source's account, these are considered and  investigated
      to the greatest possible  extent  before  a  decision  is  made  about
      whether or not to rely on the information being provided.

  66. The report then explains and summarises the  recent  research  it  did
      which was subsequently published as "Just Deserters" (see below).

  67. The remaining parts of the report are devoted to assessment of medical
      fitness for national service conscription and availability  of  mental
      health services.

"Just Deserters" Report, December 2015

  68. In  December  2015,  AI  published  its  study  "Just  Deserters:  Why
      Indefinite National Service in Eritrea has  created  a  Generation  of
      Refugees".

  69. The report stated that AI conducted face-to-face  interviews  with  72
      Eritreans who had fled from Eritrea between July 2014 and  July  2015.
      Corroborating information  was  also  taken  from  a  further  fifteen
      interviews with Eritreans who had left Eritrea illegally in  2013  and
      2014.

  70. This report repudiates what  it  describes  as  the  attempt  by  "the
      authorities in several countries where Eritreans have claimed  asylum"
      to refute the notion that those who flee national service  have  valid
      grounds for claiming international protection.  Contrary to  the  view
      of these authorities  that  there  had  been  an  improvement  in  the
      experience of national service conscripts and other Eritreans, AI said
      it found "no discernible changes in national service practices  as  of
      November 2015".  In AI's view national service remains the key  factor
      causing people to flee Eritrea and a high number of people  who  leave
      are unaccompanied minors:-

           "Children are walking alone, often without telling their parents
           to another country, to avoid a life of perpetual  forced  labour
           on  low  pay  with  no  genuine   education   or   viable   work
           opportunities through which they or their families could live."

  71. The categories of those required to do national  service  is  said  by
      this report to have been expanded by the introduction  since  2013  of
      the "People's Army".  Men  as  old  as  67  have  been  re-conscripted
      through this system.

  72. The "Just Deserters" Report observes that:

           "The experiences of  people  caught,  arrested  and  arbitrarily
           detained for attempting to leave the country  is  indicative  of
           the likely treatment failed asylum-seekers  will  face  if  they
           were forcibly returned to Eritrea.  There is a  high  likelihood
           that  anyone  of  approximately  national  service  age  who  is
           returned to Eritrea would  be  subject  to  arbitrary  detention
           without  charge;  as  is  the  widespread  pattern,  would  face
           possible torture or other ill-treatment to  extract  information
           on how and with whom they left the country  and  then  would  be
           conscripted or returned to indefinite national service.   It  is
           possible  that  some  would  avoid  such  a  fate,  but  as  the
           implementation of punishment is  arbitrary,  the  risk  must  be
           considered to apply in every case."

  73. The report also highlights that the International Labour  Organisation
      (ILO), commenting on Eritrea  as  a  party  to  ILO  Conventions,  has
      underlined that the large-scale and systematic  practice  of  imposing
      compulsory labour on the population within the framework  of  national
      service  in  Eritrea  is  incompatible  with  ILO  Conventions,  which
      prohibit the use of forced  and  compulsory  labour  as  a  method  of
      mobilising and using labour for purposes of economic development.

Lifos reports on Eritrea, 23 November and 15 December 2015

Subject report People's Army in Eritrea, version 1.0, 23 November 2015

  74. Lifos is the Swedish Migration Agency's database for legal and country
      of origin information.

  75. Having set out  known  information  about  the  People's  Army,  Lifos
      comments that the People's Army is now established throughout  Eritrea
      although it is likely  that  it  has  been  implemented  in  different
      degrees around the country depending on local and regional conditions.
       The upper age limit seems in practice to  be  around  70.  Women  are
      involved to a lesser extent. The unpopularity of the People's Army was
      demonstrated when many stayed away from the reserve  training  in  the
      autumn of 2014 but by the beginning of  2014  many  people  no  longer
      dared to refuse. It was  unclear  to  what  extent  people  have  been
      punished. By the introduction of the People's Army the Eritrean  state
      has in principle mobilised the entire adult population.

Country Report Eritrea, 15 December 2015 version 1.0

  76. This further report by Lifos  finds  the  human  rights  situation  in
      Eritrea to be one that "remains deeply  troubling".  The  most  common
      violations are said to include  indefinite  service  in  the  national
      service, forced labour, torture, detention and inhumane and  degrading
      treatment. It is said that most sources state that people  who  desert
      and evade the national service risk harsh penalties that  may  include
      torture and other degrading treatment. Some information also indicates
      that punishment is much milder than before. Lifos  states  that  there
      seems to be big  differences  between  serving  in  the  military  and
      serving in the civil sector for the national service, both in terms of
      living conditions and penalties.  Lifos  concludes  that  it  is  very
      difficult to comment on  the  manner  in  which  an  illegal  exit  is
      penalised. Most likely  it  is  a  combination  of  factors.  "Several
      sources state that asylum-seekers  who  return  by  force  risk  being
      subjected to serious abuses, including torture...". The report goes on
      to state that "from a  source-critical  perspective"  the  information
      contained in the 2015 UNCOI Report "has some weaknesses. It  does  not
      mean that it is generally not credible. It should also be  noted  that
      some well-established sources  do  not  always  state  their  sources,
      including the USSD, HRW and AI".  Lifos notes that there is a lack  of
      verifiable information about what happens to people who have had their
      asylum applications rejected and are returned to Eritrea by force.  It
      states  that  "several  sources  state  that  asylum-seekers  who  are
      returned by force risk being subjected  to  serious  abuse,  including
      torture. Some sources emphasise that the Eritrean  government  is  not
      consistent in its actions and can react in different ways. ..."

Swiss Visits, January and March 2016

  77. In January 2016 a group of Swiss politicians conducted a private visit
      to Eritrea.  They were reported in the press and by  the  Swiss  State
      Secretariat (SLM) to have praised the openness of the people they  met
      and stated they  did  not  have  problems  travelling  around  without
      surveillance.  One of the group, Claud  B�gl�,  told  a  Swiss  public
      radio that "....the system remains authoritarian  but  it  is  opening
      up".   The  visit  was  the  subject  of  criticisms  by  some   Swiss
      politicians and the Swiss  branch  of  AI.  In  a  statement  the  SLM
      observed that the politicians concerned did not discuss  human  rights
      topics related to asylum procedures and concluded that there  was  "no
      sufficiently strong evidence to show that the human  rights  situation
      in Eritrea has improved significantly".

  78. In March 2016 three migration officials, two  Swiss  and  one  German,
      conducted a fact-finding mission to Eritrea organised by the  head  of
      the SLM. It was reported that they were not allowed to see  prison  or
      military facilities  but,  accompanied  by  Eritrean  officials,  they
      visited towns and schools during a two-week trip to gather information
      that could help them better understand the situation  in  the  country
      for the Eritreans who make up the largest group of asylum  seekers  in
      Switzerland. The mission was reported to find few rights  improvements
      in Eritrea and the head of the SLM was quoted as saying  that  Eritrea
      had officially gone back on its word to shorten the required  national
      military service. He stated that "[w]e are checking whether people who
      go back to Eritrea  after  having  left  illegally  could  still  face
      draconian punishments".

  79. In a statement to a newspaper on 9 May 2016 the head of SLM  confirmed
      that following the FFM in March 2016 it had been concluded that  there
      was no improvement in human rights and there was  no  indication  that
      the duration of national service would decrease to 18 months. The  two
      latest Home Office Country Information and  Guidance  publications  on
      Eritrea, both published in August  2016,  contain  several  translated
      excerpts of the report of this March 2016  Fact-finding  mission  (the
      original is in German).

Human Rights Watch reports

  80. Reference has already been made to  a  December  2015  report  by  HRW
      criticising the DFFM Report and reference will be made  below  in  the
      subsection on Bisha Mines to the HRW Report,  "Hear  no  Evil:  Forced
      Labour and Corporate Responsibility in Eritrea's  Mining  Sector",  25
      January 2013.

Human Rights Watch, "Sudan: Stop Deporting Eritreans", May 2014

  81. This short report states that on 1 May 2014, Sudanese  authorities  in
      eastern Sudan handed  30  Eritreans  over  to  the  Eritrean  security
      forces, according to two advocates in close telephone contact with the
      group at the time. "Human Rights Watch also obtained further  credible
      information confirming that the deportation took place  and  that  six
      members of the group were registered refugees". It goes on to say that
      on 3 May two Eritreans from a different group told  a  third  advocate
      that a few days earlier the Sudanese  authorities  had  intercepted  a
      group of about 600 persons who included Eritreans and had  taken  them
      to the town of Donga where they were convicted and all  the  Eritreans
      were ordered to be deported to Eritrea.

Human Rights Watch, Human Rights Watch Report 2016

  82. The 2016 World Report highlighted "the continuing  flow  of  Eritreans
      escaping the country, and  the  publication  of  a  scathing  453-page
      report by a UNCOI  describing  the  serious  human  rights  violations
      prompting thousands to seek asylum outside Eritrea.  The  2016  report
      also noted that the DFFM Report of 2014 had been repudiated by two  of
      its three authors.  It added:

           "Despite widespread criticism of the Danish Report,  the  United
           Kingdom's Home Office changed  its  guidance  about  Eritrea  in
           early 2015 to assert that asylum  seekers  "who  left  [Eritrea]
           illegally are no longer considered per se to be at risk of  harm
           or mistreatment amounting to persecution on return".

UK government materials

UK Home Office Policy, February 2014 - September 2015

  83. The February 2014 Home Office Guidance Note on Eritrea reiterated  the
      position it had taken in previous notes, concluding that:

        1) The Eritrean government "views as political opponents those  who
           evade military service or desert from  the  military"  and  that
           "the treatment of  such  individuals  is  likely  to  amount  to
           persecution";

        2) Eritreans forcibly  returned  to  their  country  after  leaving
           illegally  "will  be  subjected  to   arrest   without   charge,
           detention, torture and other forms of ill-treatment"; and

        3) National/military service may involve abuses such as  indefinite
           forced labour,  inadequate  food  and  medical  care,  arbitrary
           arrest and detention for minor infractions, and, in the case  of
           women, sexual violence.

  84. In March  2015,  the  Home  Office  published  two  reports,  "Country
      Information  and  Guidance,  Eritrea:  Illegal  Exit"   and   "Country
      Information  and  Guidance:  Eritrea:  National  (including  military)
      Service". These modified its previous conclusions on each of the three
      aforementioned matters as follows:

        1) It was stated that "those who refuse  to  undertake  or  abscond
           from military/national service are not  viewed  as  traitors  or
           political opponents";

        2) Eritreans fleeing national service "who left  illegally  are  no
           longer considered per se to be at risk of harm  or  mistreatment
           amounting to persecution on return".  It was stated that  anyone
           "who left Eritrea illegally [is] not at risk  of  harm  provided
           they have paid income  tax...  and  have  signed  a  'letter  of
           apology' at an Eritrean Embassy" before returning home.

        3) As regards conditions of national service, it  was  stated  that
           "although a person may be able to demonstrate that they would be
           at real risk of mistreatment or inhuman, degrading treatment  as
           a result of the conditions of military  service,  it  cannot  be
           said that every single person undertaking some form of  military
           training as part of their [national service]  requirement  would
           face such risk".  The National  Service  Report  also  concluded
           that "the most  up-to-date  information  available  from  inside
           Eritrea suggests, in general, military/[national service]  lasts
           for around four years"  and  "[national  service]  is  generally
           between eighteen months and four years".



Foreign & Commonwealth Office Report,  Eritrea  -  Country  of  Concern,
January 2015

  85. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) Report, "Eritrea  -  Country
      of Concern" January 2015 considered that "the Eritrean Government made
      no visible progress on  key  human  rights  concerns...  continued  to
      violate its international obligations and domestic law,  including  in
      the areas of arbitrary and inhumane  detention,  indefinite  [national
      service], and lack of ....freedom, freedom of the media and freedom of
      speech.  The government continued to cite  'no  war,  no  peace'  with
      Ethiopia as justification  for  its  failure  to  implement  the  1997
      Constitution, which provides for democratic government and fundamental
      rights and freedoms".

Country Information and Guidance (CIG) Eritrea: Illegal Exit, version 2.0e

  86. In September 2015 the Home Office issued version 2.0 of  its  'Country
      Information and Guidance (CIG): Eritrea: Illegal  Exit'  which  stated
      that the categories of persons likely  to  be  granted  an  exit  visa
      remained  limited  and  there  were  large  numbers  of  Eritreans   -
      reportedly thousands each month - leaving the country illegally.

  87. The CIG stated that:

           "More recent information suggested that not  everyone  who  left
           illegally is detained on return (or that all draft  evaders  are
           detained) and that the Eritrean  authorities  have  neither  the
           will  nor  means  to  imprison  every  returnee.   The  evidence
           suggests that whilst  some  are  detained/imprisoned  (with  the
           length of time appearing to vary), some are  fined,  others  are
           simply re-assigned to  national  service.   If  disproportionate
           punishment amounting to serious harm is imposed, it  is  applied
           arbitrarily".

  88. This CIG also  sought  to  draw  the  following  conclusion  from  the
      evidence that many  Eritreans  returned  to  Eritrea  each  year,  for
      example to visit friends and family:

           "...the fact that they have e.g. acquired foreign citizenship is
           not  a  reason,  of  itself,  to  exempt  a  person  from   [the
           requirement to complete national service].  This  suggests  that
           either those leaving Eritrea  have  completed  national  service
           and/or there is no real risk of  a  penalty  being  imposed  for
           having previously left illegally."

  89.  The  CIG  also  attached  considerable   significance   to   evidence
      suggesting:

           "that a person who left Eritrea illegally, even a draft  evader,
           can return to Eritrea provided they sign a 'letter  of  apology'
           and pay  any  outstanding  (2%)  diaspora  tax  at  an  Eritrean
           Embassy.   The  diaspora  tax   is   considered   a   reasonable
           requirement and a refusal to comply  with  this  will  mean  the
           person is not issued with a travel document to return to Eritrea
           voluntarily, but this would not amount to persecution or serious
           harm."

  90. For these reasons the CIG concluded that "MO is too prescriptive about
      everyone being at risk and/or the exceptions appear to be  wider  than
      those listed".

Country Information and Guidance (CIG) on National Service (incl.  Military)
Service), version 2.0

  91. Also in September 2015 the Home Office issued Version 2.0  on  Country
      Information and Guidance on National Service (incl. Military) Service.

  92. This CIG accepted that the physical conditions during national service
      were "generally harsh" with reports of torture and mistreatment, often
      for very minor infractions and punishments appearing to be  meted  out
      on an arbitrary basis.  However, some sources reported that conscripts
      were not overworked or  ill-treated  and  that  conditions  vary.   As
      regards civilian national service, conditions were generally better.

  93. The CIG stated that the average time a person  spends  doing  national
      service is between  4-6  years,  although  some  spend  longer:  "this
      appears to be arbitrary".  At 3.1.9 it is stated:

           "Where a person can demonstrate that there would be  a  flagrant
           denial of their right not  to  be  required  to  perform  forced
           labour, in particular beyond the  4-6  year  average  period  of
           national service, then they may be entitled to  a  grant  of  DL
           [discretionary leave]."

  94. At 3.1.10-3.1.11 it stated:

           "3.1.10. The evidence suggests that while some deserters/evaders
           may be detained/imprisoned (with the length of time appearing to
           vary) some are fined, others are simply re-assigned to  national
           service.   In  order  for  a   punishment   to   be   considered
           disproportionately harsh or severe, it would need  to  be  of  a
           particularly serious nature.  Long  prison  sentences  will  not
           normally  be  enough.   However,  the  physical  conditions   of
           detention and potential for mistreatment  may  be  such  that  a
           person can demonstrate that they are at real risk of persecution
           or serious harm.

           3.1.11. The risk may be higher for those who have e.g.  deserted
           more than once and/or deserted a critical post graduate  diploma
           in business management.  However,  there  are  other  'critical'
           posts such as teachers, which the Eritrean Government is keen to
           retain."

Report by the Independent Advisory Group on Country Information  (IAGCI)  on
Eritrea Country Information and Guidance Reports produced  by  the  UK  Home
Office, 13 May 2015

  95. Although by an independent advisory  body,  and  so  not  constituting
      government materials, it is convenient to include here a short summary
      of this report. It states that in the view of the IAGCI the two  March
      2015 CIG Reports were:

           "marred by severe methodological concerns.  In particular, where
           they refer to illegal exit, conditions on  return  and  national
           military service, the two CIG reports rely heavily on [the  DFFM
           Report] [which] has itself been widely criticised  in  terms  of
           its methodology."

Review of UK  Home  Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance  -  Eritrea,
prepared for  the  Chief  Inspector  of  Borders  and  Immigration  and  the
Independent Advisory Group on Country Information (IAGCI), 15 November 2015

  96. This review by Professor John Campbell was commissioned by  the  IAGCI
      and was stated as being drafted in  line  with  instructions  received
      through the IAGCI chair. It is focused on the two September CIGs.

  97. In this report Professor Campbell argues that  the  September  Illegal
      Exit CIG omitted important COI which at  the  very  least  would  have
      qualified their policy recommendations.

  98. He states that in view of the wide-ranging criticisms made of the DFFM
      Report the Home Office could not rely on any part of it.

Home Office Response to IAGCI Review, November 2015

  99. In this document one of the principal points made by the  Home  Office
      is that the IAGCI review failed to apply the same level  of  objective
      assessment to all sources referred to in the CIG.  The response states
      that it does not share  the  view  that  the  DFFM  is  'discredited'.
      Professor Campbell is also criticised for  simply  recycling  previous
      criticism of the  DFFM  Report  rather  than  engaging  with  the  CIG
      observations which only cited the agreed notes.  It contends that  the
      review had gone outside  the  remit  of  the  terms  of  reference  by
      reviewing the policy/guidance section.

UK Fact-Finding Mission - Visit 20 February 2016

 100. On 24 March 2016 the respondent served evidence on the Tribunal  which
      included "Information from the Home Office's Fact-Finding  Mission  to
      Eritrea (7-20 February) 2016".  This comprised (a)  the  UKFFM  Team's
      observation note; and (b) notes of  interviews  with  sources.   On  4
      August 2016, less than 6 weeks after the final  day  of  hearing,  the
      Home Office published this report. Responses to a further direction we
      made regarding  its  publication  confirmed  that  its  contents  were
      virtually the same, changes made being only  presentational.  When  we
      refer in this decision to the "UKFFM materials", these are to be taken
      to include the report as now published.

 101. One of the main aims of this mission was described as being to address
      the issues identified in the Tribunal's original  directions  for  the
      country guidance case made  by  the  UT  in  September  2015.   It  is
      narrated that the members of the mission were in Asmara between 7  and
      20 February 2016.  In addition to visiting parts of  Asmara,  the  FFM
      team travelled to Keren, Barentu, Tesseney and Bisha Mine in the  Gash
      Barka region.  The subjects covered by the terms of reference  covered
      National Service, Demobilisation and Discharge, Evasion/Desertion from
      National Service, Leaving the  Country,  Treatment  of  Returnees  and
      Position regarding the UNCOI  and  other  human  rights  organisations
      reporting on human rights in Eritrea.  Interviewees  were  advised  in
      advance of a number of "Subjects for  discussion"  which  covered  the
      aforementioned  topics  but  also   including   Healthcare/Facilities,
      including for mental health.  The 32 sources consulted included  three
      anonymous sources, several Eritrean government ministers and officials
      including immigration officials, five diplomatic  sources  (A-E)  plus
      the UK Ambassador to Eritrea, a representative of UNHCR,  a  UN  Staff
      member, an international humanitarian organisation, representatives of
      the  National  Union  of  Eritrean   Youth   and   Students   (NUEYS),
      representatives of  the  National  Union  of  Eritrean  Women  (NUEW),
      representatives of the  National  Confederation  of  Eritrean  Workers
      (NCEW), two focus groups of Eritrean youths (1 & 2), a focus group  of
      Eritrean entrepreneurs, a focus group of returnees from Israel, Sudan,
      Yemen and Norway, a focus group of artists, a focus group of returnees
      (in Tesseney), a focus group of returnees (in Barentev), a focus group
      of returnees (in  Keren),  the  Training  Manager  at  Bisha  Mine,  a
      representative of the human resources department  at  Bisha  Mine,  Dr
      Seife Berhe, Director of Andiamo Exploration Ltd. and an international
      development organisation.

The new versions of Home Office CIGs, 4 August 2016

Country  Information  and  Guidance:   Eritrea:   National   (incl.Military)
Service, Version 3.0, August 2016

 102. The latest version of this CIG, said to be  valid  from  its  date  of
      publication on 4 August 2016, together with some new content, contains
      numerous passages that duplicate those in the previous September  2015
      version. It being the current version, our summary  is  more  detailed
      than those of its two predecessors, with particular  emphasis  on  the
      entries containing new source information.  This CIG sets out a number
      of basic facts regarding national service which are stated to  include
      that national service is compulsory for all persons aged 18 to  50  in
      Eritrea with limited exemptions (2.2.4)  and  that  "sources  estimate
      that between 10-20% of the population are conscripted, suggesting that
      the large majority of the country is not in national service" (2.3.5).
      At 2.3.6 it is stated that:


           "Decision makers must determine whether a person is required  to
           perform national service based on the individual facts of  their
           case. Those who are not  likely  to  be  required  to  undertake
           national service and therefore are not at real  risk  on  return
           include those who are exempt:
           a. Those who have already completed (and been demobilized  from)
           national service. This may also be evident from their ability to
           have obtained an exit visa and  left  the  country  legally,  as
           conscripts are not granted exit visas.

           b. Those who are above national service age.

           c. Those who are disabled or medically unfit and therefore  have
           been, or are reasonably likely to  be,  exempted  from  national
           service."


 103. In 2.3.14 note is made that some sources interviewed by the Danish and
      UK FFMs indicate  that  the  Eritrean  government  is  taking  a  more
      pragmatic approach to handling persons  who  avoid  national  service,
      with some individuals who leave illegally and  have  avoided  national
      service being held only for a short period of  time  or  being  simply
      reassigned to national service duties. It is noted that this may apply
      to those who work in professions which are in short supply. At  2.3.16
      it is observed that a  number  of  sources  have  also  reported  that
      Eritreans who return to the country after 3 years or more  abroad  are
      regarded as members of the diaspora, including those who  left  before
      or during their national service. After payment of the 2% diaspora tax
      and signing an 'apology letter', they are considered to have fulfilled
      their national service requirements:


           "...The Home Office FFM of February 2016 met 47 people, most  of
           whom stated that they left Eritrea illegally  before  or  during
           national service who paid the 2% Diaspora tax, signed  a  letter
           of apology and returned to Eritrea without sanction. Given  that
           the interviews were arranged by the Eritrean government and  the
           circumstances of the interviews, this information by  itself  is
           not  conclusive  however  it  is  consistent  with   information
           provided by independent sources that Eritreans who avoided doing
           national service and left the country illegally may be able,  in
           some circumstances, to return without sanction..."


 104.  Having noted that conditions in national service, primarily  military
      service, are harsh, this CIG has this to say at 2.3.33 regarding pay:


           "Unlike those undertaking their national service in the military
           those in the civil service are not provided  with  any  food  or
           accommodation by the  government.  As  salaries  are  below  the
           subsistence level, they face severe financial  difficulties.  In
           practice, many people take a second or third job  or  set  up  a
           small business to supplement their income whilst doing  national
           service. However the Eritrean government stated  in  early  2016
           that the salaries of conscripts would be raised to a living wage
           in line with civil service employees. This  was  effective  from
           July 2015 for certain conscripts graduating from Sawa but is  to
           be rolled out across all conscript groups over  2015  and  2016,
           and to be  paid  retroactively.  There  is  some  evidence  that
           individuals have been paid the increased  wages,  although  this
           appears to have been erratically implemented and not yet  to  be
           applied across all conscript groups. However low  pay,  even  at
           rates existing prior to proposed pay increases, is  unlikely  to
           be sufficient to  constitute  persecution  or  serious  harm  by
           itself."


 105. As regards length of national service,  this  latest  CIG  notes  that
      sources reported periods of national service from two years to over  a
      decade, but that there is  evidence  that  it  is  possible  for  some
      persons to be demobilised or discharged.  The  likelihood  of  release
      from national service is stated to be influenced by the person's:

      (a)   gender - women who are over 27 years old and  are,  or  will  be
        getting, married, or pregnant, or have children are  likely  to  be
        demobilised or likely able to successfully seek to be demobilised;

      (b)   occupation - some sources indicate  that  professions  in  short
        supply (such as teachers, geologists and  engineers)  may  find  it
        easier to be demobilised;

      (c)   area of  work  -  sources  indicate  that  different  government
        ministries, such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,  may  be  more
        willing to demobilise staff than  other  departments  such  as  the
        Ministries of Health or Education;

      (d)    good  relations  with  the  person's  commander  or   reporting
        officer/manager may make the process easier.


 106. At 2.3.40 it is stated that additionally persons who become  medically
      unfit may also be temporarily or permanently discharged from  national
      service and at 2.3.41 that a person who is the sole breadwinner  of  a
      family may also be able to  be  demobilised  (it  being  acknowledged,
      however, that this is based on a single example  provided  by  the  UK
      Ambassador to Eritrea to the UK's  Fact-Finding  Mission  Report).  At
      2.3.42-43 it is stated that:

           "2.3.42 There may be additional factors that  can  increase  the
           likelihood of a person being demobilised, such as the passage of
           time, those with contacts with government and/or those  who  are
           able to pay bribes, and those seeking discharge for economic  or
           family reasons

           2.3.43 Decision makers will need to give  careful  consideration
           to the length of national service that the  person  has  already
           served and their prospects of being demobilised or discharged. A
           long period of national service, even if it is for a  decade  or
           more, is not by itself persecution or serious harm "


 107. At 2.3.44 the CIG turns its attention to the issue of Article 4 of the
      ECHR, stating that:


           "If it is considered that a person is not at risk of persecution
           or serious harm but will return to  national  service,  decision
           makers will then need to consider if there may be a real risk of
           a flagrant breach of Article  4  of  the  ECHR  which  prohibits
           slavery and servitude and forced or compulsory labour."


           At 2.3.46 it is stated that:


           "The onus will be on the person to  show  that  the  length  and
           conditions of their national service  on  return  amounts  to  a
           flagrant breach of Article 4. Working in the civilian sector  in
           national service, is unlikely generally to amount to a real risk
           of a flagrant breach of Article 4. Where a  person  is  able  to
           demonstrate that as a result of the open-ended nature  of  their
           national service they will face a flagrant denial of their right
           not to be required to perform  'forced  labour',  they  will  be
           entitled to a grant of discretionary leave. Each case will  need
           to be considered on its merits."


 108. Coverage is also given of the diaspora tax as well  as  the  "People's
      Army/People's Militia".


 109. This version contains the following policy summary at para 3:


           "3.1.1 National service is compulsory for persons aged 18 to  50
           under Eritrean law with limited  exemptions.  A  requirement  to
           undertake  national/military  service  does  not,   in   itself,
           constitute persecution or serious harm.

           3.1.2 The lack of a civilian alternative to national service and
           the disproportionate penalties for those who refuse to undertake
           it means that conscientious objectors - in particular  Jehovah's
           Witnesses and evangelical  and  Pentecostals  Christians  -  are
           likely to be at risk of persecution and qualify for asylum.

           3.1.3 Evading or deserting from national service, by itself,  is
           unlikely to be perceived as a political act by  the  government.
           This  will,  though,  depend  on  the  person's   circumstances,
           including their actions inside Eritrea  and  since  leaving  the
           country.

           3.1.4 Eritrean law has provisions which punish those  who  evade
           or desert from national service with up to 5 years imprisonment.
           In practice, punishment can be arbitrary and may range  from  no
           punishment at all -  simply  reassignment  to  another  national
           service post - to several years in prison, where conditions  are
           likely to be harsh and may include ill-treatment.  Persons  able
           to demonstrate  that  they  will  face  a  prolonged  period  of
           detention are likely to be subject to serious harm.

           3.1.5 Persons who have  fled  from  national  service  and  left
           Eritrea illegally may be able to regularise  their  status  with
           the Eritrean government  by  paying  the  2%  Diaspora  tax  and
           signing the letter of apology.  Decision  makers  will  need  to
           consider whether the person has or will pay the  tax,  sign  the
           letter and return to Eritrea.

           3.1.6 Conditions during national service (including  the  period
           of military training preceding a national service  posting)  are
           generally harsh,  although  better  for  the  majority  who  are
           assigned to posts in the civilian sector, such as in  the  civil
           service and as teachers. Some persons, in particular women  over
           27 who are married and / or have children, may  be  able  to  be
           demobilised / discharged from national service. Persons who  are
           required to do national service in a  military  posting  may  be
           subject  to  conditions  that  amount  to  serious   harm.   The
           circumstances of each case will be different and therefore  need
           to be considered on its merits.

           3.1.7 The length of national service in law is 18 months but  in
           practice it can be significantly longer and  in  some  cases  is
           open-ended. Open-ended national  service,  by  itself,  may  not
           amount to serious harm but where a person can  demonstrate  that
           they would face a real risk of a flagrant denial of their  right
           not to be required to perform forced labour under Article  4  of
           the ECHR, then they may be entitled to a grant of  Discretionary
           Leave. Each case will need to be considered on its merits.

           3.1.8 In assessing a case, decision makers  should  consider  if
           the person will face:
           . A real risk that they will be punished on  return  for  having
           evaded / absconded national service.
           . What is the likely punishment

           . Will they be required to undertake national service

           . What conditions they will  face  during  national  service  if
           reassigned to a posting

           . Have they paid or will they pay the Diaspora tax and sign  the
           letter of apology


           3.1.9 There may be persons who through a combination of personal
           factors,  including  past  experience,  gender,  education   and
           profession, and the person's link to the government, are not  at
           risk of serious harm.  Each  case  will  therefore  need  to  be
           considered carefully on its facts. Persons able to demonstrate a
           real  risk  of  serious  harm  should  be  granted  humanitarian
           protection unless they are able demonstrate  that  the  risk  of
           harm is for a Refugee Convention reason.

           3.1.10 Those who are not at risk of persecution or serious  harm
           may be able to demonstrate that there is a real  risk  that  the
           length and conditions  of  their  national  service  will  be  a
           flagrant breach of their right to protection form forced  labour
           and, if so, they may be entitled to Discretionary Leave."


 110. In subsequent paragraphs dealing with "Country  Information"  the  CIG
      identifies significant problems that have arisen over  the  limits  of
      sources arising  from  frequent  reliance  on  anonymous  sources  and
      observes  at  4.1.2  that  "information  obtained  directly  from  the
      Eritrean government needs to be treated with caution,  and  considered
      against and corroborated with material obtained by other,  independent
      sources."  Reference is made to criticisms  of  the  methodologies  of
      most major sources including  the  DFFM  as  well  as  the  two  UNCOI
      reports.


 111. The remainder of the CIG contains very  detailed  coverage  of  source
      materials relating to  the  Eritrean  legal  framework,  size  of  the
      military,  exemptions  and  alternatives,   conscientious   objection,
      military training, national service postings  after  Sawa,  conditions
      during   national   service,    duration    of    national    service,
      discharge/demobilisation and dismissal, law and practice on  desertion
      and evasion and the People's  Army/Militia.  As  regards  duration  of
      national service, it is noted at   12.2.4  that  the  country  analyst
      section of the Swiss Secretariat  for  Migration  gave  the  following
      unsourced summary based on its March 2016 fact-finding mission:


           "'Over  the  last  few  years,  the  Eritrean  authorities  have
           announced several reforms to the National Service. Most notably,
           they promised to limit the length of duty to 18 months  starting
           from the 27th conscription round. This has  not  been  fulfilled
           yet. National Service remains open-ended and conscription  lasts
           for several years. It appears, though, that a growing number  of
           conscripts  who  had  been  deployed  in  civilian   roles   are
           discharged once they have served for between  5  and  10  years.
           However,  no  reliable   information   is   available   on   the
           demobilization and  dismissal  of  conscripts  assigned  to  the
           military part of National Service. However, in early  2016,  the
           authorities announced  a  pay  rise  in  the  civilian  part  of
           National  Service.  Apparently,   implementation   has   already
           started.'"


 112. On the subject of exemptions  and  alternatives,  this  CIG  notes  at
      13.2.4 that sources consulted during  the  UK  Home  Office's  FFM  to
      Eritrea in February 2016  "also  confirmed  that  the  procedures  for
      demobilisation were opaque and lacked transparency".


 113.  As  regards  the  treatment  of  draft  evaders  and  deserters,  the
      compendious treatment given identifies a number of sources  suggesting
      on the one hand that it will involve detention and  ill  treatment,  a
      number suggesting on the other hand that it will often amount to short
      detention and/or assignment to (further) national service  duties.  At
      15.2.18 a reference is made to the very recent report  on  Eritrea  by
      the Swiss Secretariat for Migration based on a range of public sources
      and information obtained in conversations with interlocutors in Asmara
      during its own fact finding mission in March 2016. Extracts from  this
      report include the following:


           "'Deserters apprehended within Eritrea are usually  returned  to
           their  military  unit  or  civilian  duty  and  punished.  These
           punishments are  imposed  extrajudicially  by  their  superiors.
           There's no possibility of  appeal.  However,  the  treatment  of
           deserters appears to have become less  harsh  in  recent  years.
           Most sources report that first time offenders  are  now  usually
           detained for several months. Punishment for deserters  from  the
           military part of National Service is reportedly more severe than
           punishment imposed on those deployed in the  civilian  part.  As
           deserters are not tracked down systematically, a number of  them
           effectively go unpunished.


           'Draft evaders are usually tracked down in round-ups ("giffas").
           Those apprehended are usually  detained  for  some  time  before
           starting a military training, which often takes place  in  camps
           with hazardous and detention-like  conditions.  A  part  of  the
           draft evaders, however, manages to avoid these round-ups in  the
           long run. Sporadically, military units try to individually track
           down certain draft evaders, particularly  those  who  have  been
           called up already'".


 114. At 15.3.1 the CIG documents sources shedding light on  the  matter  of
      whether evaders and deserters are perceived as  traitors.  It  states,
      inter alia, that


           "The May 2015 EASO Report, citing various sources, stated:


           'Individuals who leave national service (military and  civilian)
           without permission are regarded  as  deserters.  Most  deserters
           leave either the training centre at Sawa or other military bases
           without authorisation or fail to return from  leave.  They  then
           either hide or attempt  to  leave  the  country  illegally  (cf.
           Chapter 6.4.3). Due to the political and ideological  nature  of
           national service, most sources claim  that  desertion  or  draft
           evasion may be regarded by the authorities as an  expression  of
           political opposition or treason. Due to the  lack  of  empirical
           information on the punishment of deserters and draft evaders  in
           the recent  years  (cf.  Chapter  3.8.2),  there  is  no  recent
           information if this is still the case.'"


 115. The CIG elsewhere identifies sources that suggest desertion/evasion is
      not regarded as an expression of political opinion or treason.


Country  Information and  Guidance:  Eritrea:  Illegal  Exit,  Version  3.0,
August 2016

 116. The latest version of this CIG, also said to be in effect  from  (date
      of publication  on)  4  August  likewise  contains  some  new  content
      alongside numerous passages  that  duplicate  those  in  the  previous
      September 2015 version.  It being the current version, our summary  of
      this is also more detailed than that  for  its  two  predecessors.  In
      2.2.3, it is stated that the latest  evidence  justifies  a  different
      approach from the one taken in  [133  (iii)]  of  MO  -  as  the  UT's
      findings in that case had been made in  light  of  evidence  that  the
      Eritrean government in August / September 2008 suspended issuing  exit
      visas, therefore making it very unlikely  that  any  individual  could
      leave the country lawfully. It was now known that this suspension  was
      temporary and the government resumed issuing exits visas. According to
      Eritrean immigration officials between 60-80,000 exit visas are issues
      annually - albeit that it may  sometimes  suspend  visa  and  passport
      services without warning. Hence:


           "While the government restricts to whom it issues exit visas, it
           remains possible to obtain a visa for certain persons  depending
           on their particular circumstances (see Exit  visas).  Therefore,
           as the court found in MA rather than MO, it  cannot  be  assumed
           that a person left the country illegally if their claim is found
           to be wholly incredible."


 117. At 2.2.4 this version states that  sources  published  since  MO  "are
      broadly consistent with each other and  the  Tribunal  in  identifying
      categories of person who  would  be  able  to  obtain  an  exit  visa.
      However, there is evidence that the categories of person  who  may  be
      able to obtain an exit visa are slightly wider then identified in MO".
       The list then set out includes as one of the categories:


           "Children aged under 13 (note also that children under  the  age
           of 5 are able to exit legally without an exit visa)".


      and adds the observation that:


            " [a]dditionally, there is evidence that women who are over  30
           are also able to obtain exit visas to travel  abroad  (see  Exit
           visas)"


 118. At 2.2.6 it is stated that:


           "The Tribunal in MO (and many sources) links illegal  exit  with
           evasion/avoidance of national service and therefore  a  risk  on
           return. However, there is reason to depart from the  caselaw  on
           this issue as there is now evidence indicating that  it  is  not
           illegal exit per se  that  places  a  person  at  risk  but  the
           underlying reason why a person left Eritrea illegally which  may
           place them at the risk, namely whether a person  has  evaded  or
           absconded from national service."


 119. Reference is then made to sources verifying the above statement.


 120. At 2.2.8 it is further stated that:


           "Additionally, that illegal exit per se does not lead to risk is
           demonstrated  by  the  authorities  response  to  the  Diaspora.
           Thousands of members of the Diaspora return for varying  lengths
           of stay each year, mostly in the summer months. While  many  may
           have become  naturalised  in  third  countries  they  often  use
           Eritrean  documents  to  enter   Eritrea   (possibly   alongside
           documents from their country of residence), a number are  likely
           to have left the country illegally and sought asylum /  obtained
           refugee status. Additionally, over 2,000 Eritreans, some of whom
           may have left Eritrea illegally and  entered  Israel  illegally,
           have returned from Israel voluntarily since 2012.  Many  of  the
           returnees are likely to have regularised their status  with  the
           government of Eritrea by agreeing to pay the 2% Diaspora tax and
           sign  the  letter  of  apology  in  order  to  obtain   Eritrean
           documentation and consular services  enabling  them  to  return.
           However, there is no substantiated evidence that  these  persons
           have been subjected to ill-treatment..."


 121. Nevertheless, it is stated in 2.2.9, that as regards why a person left
      the country without an exit visa,"[i]n most cases it is likely  to  be
      because the person has evaded or absconded from national service".


 122. The policy summary at para 3 states:


           "3.1.1. Eritreans need  official  permission  to  leave  Eritrea
           legally. This entails obtaining an exit visa which is stamped in
           a passport.  Leaving  the  country  without  obtaining  this  is
           regarded as illegal exit and, in law, may be punishable  with  a
           prison sentence and a fine.

           3.1.2 In the country guidance case of MO the Upper Tribunal held
           that, apart from some limited exceptions,  those  who  had  left
           illegally would be at  risk  on  return  to  Eritrea.  This  was
           because they would be viewed with hostility  by  the  government
           and faced arrest,  detention  and  mistreatment.  However,  more
           recent information suggests that the  act  of  having  left  the
           country illegally may not, on its own, result in  punishment  on
           return. It is likely that the reason the person left the country
           - usually because they have evaded or  absconded  from  national
           service - will be why a person  would  be  of  interest  to  the
           Eritrean authorities, not the act of  leaving  without  an  exit
           visa.

           3.1.3 A person who has left Eritrea illegally  may  be  able  to
           return to Eritrea provided they sign a "letter of  apology"  and
           pay any outstanding (2%) Diaspora tax. The  Diaspora  tax  is  a
           reasonable requirement and a refusal or failure to  comply  with
           this may mean the person is not issued with a travel document to
           return to Eritrea voluntarily, but  this  would  not  amount  to
           persecution or serious harm. A person who has regularised  their
           status with the Eritrean government by having signed the apology
           letter and paid the Diaspora tax is unlikely to be  at  risk  on
           return.


           3.1.4 Decision makers should consider the reasons why the person
           left illegally and whether this puts that  person  at  risk.  In
           general  punishment  solely  because  a  person   left   Eritrea
           illegally  is  unlikely  however  each  case  will  need  to  be
           considered on its individual facts. Where a person  is  able  to
           demonstrate a real risk of punishment for having left  illegally
           which amounts to a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR, humanitarian
           protection should be granted."


 123. In later paragraphs dealing with the  "Country  Information"  seen  to
      underlie  the  policy  summary,  it  is  noted  at  6.1.3  that   "the
      prohibitive cost  of  passports  deters  many  citizens  from  foreign
      travel." It costs a citizen in national service the equivalent  of  40
      percent of his or her gross yearly salary to obtain a valid  passport"
      At 7.1.1 is also noted that exit visas cost 200 nakfa  and  are  valid
      for one month and one trip out  of  the  country.  Further  paragraphs
      address  the  state  of  the  evidence  as  regards  numbers   leaving
      illegally,  the  shoot  to  kill  policy  and  numbers  of  returnees,
      punishment for leaving illegally  and  treatment  on  return  and  the
      diaspora tax. In relation to the numbers of  returnees  it  is  noted,
      inter alia, at 10.1.4 that:


           "Immigration officials at a meeting with the  UK  Home  Office's
           fact finding mission to Eritrea, 7-20 February  2016  (UK  FFM),
           stated: '...thousands of Eritreans, including those who left the
           country illegally, come back to visit, especially in summer,  to
           see family, etc. In 2014, 1,538 males and 389  females  returned
           to Eritrea. These had left illegally and  been  away  for  three
           years." In 10.1.8 it is said that "[t]he Population, Immigration
           and Border Authority (PIBA), of Israel, in  correspondence  with
           the Home Office in March  2016  stated  that  since  2012  2,167
           Eritreans had returned voluntarily to Eritrea from Israel."


 124. In the paragraph dealing with punishment  for  leaving  illegally  and
      treatment on return, this CIG sets out sources that indicate that they
      will routinely face ill treatment but notes at 11.1.6, by reference to
      the DFFM Report that "there is information to suggest  that  Eritreans
      abroad, including those who left the country illegally,  are  able  to
      obtain Eritrean passports  at  Eritrean  Embassies  if  they  sign  an
      "apology" letter and start to retroactively pay the two percent income
      tax levied on all Eritrean  citizens  living  abroad."  The  extensive
      sources summarised include more than one that emphasise the difference
      between the likely treatment of those returning voluntarily and  those
      forcibly returned. Thus at 11.1.26, reference  is  made  to  a  recent
      Swiss report arising out of a March 2016 fact finding mission stating,
      inter alia, that:


           "There  is  hardly  any  information  available  regarding   the
           treatment of forcibly returned per-sons (sic). In the  last  few
           years, only the Sudan (and possibly Egypt) forcibly  repatriated
           Eritreans. As opposed to  voluntary  returnees,  those  forcibly
           returned are not  able  to  regularise  their  relation  to  the
           Eritrean authorities  prior  to  returning.  The  few  available
           reports indicate that the authorities treat  them  similarly  as
           persons apprehended within  Eritrea.  For  deserters  and  draft
           evaders, this means being sent back to  National  Service  after
           several months of detention."


Academics and journalists

 125. There are a significant number of articles and academic papers  relied
      on by both parties and we have considered them all, but have  selected
      the following to record because  we  consider  them  to  be  the  most
      relevant to the issues we must consider.

Dr David Bozzini

"National  Service  &  State  Structures  in  Eritrea",  16  February   2012
(Presentation to Federal Office for Migration, Berne)

 126. The paper is based on a dissertation prepared by Dr David Bozzini  who
      spent two years in Eritrea from 2005 to  2007.   The  results  of  the
      dissertation are said to be  valid  for  the  time  period  of  active
      research namely until 2008 and  it  indicates  that  there  have  been
      changes since then.

 127. There is a certain degree of tolerance towards  female  objectors  and
      women are able to travel more freely than men in Eritrea. They can  be
      subject to roundups.    After  the  age  of  twenty-seven,  women  can
      regularise their status such that they are  demobilised  without  ever
      having joined national service.   This  route  was  introduced  in  or
      around 2005.  Another way to avoid conscription is through marriage or
      pregnancy, but in both  cases  demobilisation  is  fragile.    Mothers
      usually are not remobilised but  because  of  the  arbitrariness  this
      cannot be excluded.  There is no  systematic  practice  to  remobilise
      mothers.

 128. Most Eritreans have no possibility to obtain exit visas to  leave  the
      country legally  except  demobilised  women  older  than  twenty-seven
      years.

 129. The payment of a two per cent tax  ensures  access  to  all  kinds  of
      consular  services  including  the  renewal  of  identity   documents,
      transfer of money or material to Eritrea, land  purchase  in  Eritrea,
      heritage matters and legal return to Eritrea etc.  If somebody  wishes
      to travel to Eritrea who has not paid the two per cent of tax  he  has
      to pay it backdated to the moment he started his exile.  People who do
      not want to pay the tax prefer not to return to Eritrea.    There  are
      reports that indicate that some who return without having paid the tax
      did not face consequences such as fines or prison sentences.

Tanja R M�ller

"Beyond the Siege - Tracing Hybridity during  a  recent  visit  to  Eritrea"
(Review of African political economy Vol.39, No.133,  September  2012,  451-
464)

 130.       Tanja M�ller makes observations based on a  two  week  visit  to
      Eritrea in October 2011 and interviews she conducted in Tel Aviv  with
      Eritrean refugees.

 131.       The article intentionally does not focus on human rights  abuses
      but on the day to day life of Eritreans in Eritrea.  It is stated that
      Eritrea is often compared to North Korea but  this  is  far  from  the
      truth.  M�ller mentions those returning from the diaspora for at least
      part of the year having been enticed by the government  to  buy  land.
      Reference is made to those who leave Eritrea illegally  and  who  need
      consular services and that they are  forced  to  pay  a  lump  sum  of
      diaspora tax at two per cent and to sign a confession.

"But my trip is still not  over,  because  I  don't  get  the  rights  I  am
entitled to" - what the  row  over  a  Country-of-Origin-Report  on  Eritrea
reveals about human rights politics (blog posted on 7 December 2014)

 132.   Tanja M�ller  comments  on  the  repercussions  following  the  DFFM
      Report.  She comments that the report is "of  shockingly  bad  quality
      and  little  thoroughness  and  some  of  its  sentences  are   simply
      nonsensical or outright laughable". She also  comments  that  everyone
      who has any knowledge of PK knows that he has been quoted wrongly  and
      out of context.

 133.   Reference is made to the "one dimensional interpretation of Eritrea"
      by the human  rights  lobby  (see  para  [2]  above).   The  narrative
      advanced by organisations like AI or HRW is not recognised  by  anyone
      who visits the country.  Those who have left are  considered  traitors
      but they do not see themselves as such.  There is  no  time  limit  on
      national service obligations for various population groups.

Media reporting from the global fringes  -  Observations  from  Eritrea  and
beyond (blog posted 11 November 2015)

 134. Tanja M�ller considers her recent visit to Eritrea and the 2015  UNCOI
      Report which in her view "took  anonymity  and  confidentiality  to  a
      level  that  makes  many  of  its  statements  devoid  of  context  or
      temporality and thus hard to engage with,  critically  or  otherwise".
      She  criticises  foreign  journalists  and  academics  for  imbalanced
      reporting.  The narrative of Eritrea as  an  unrepentant  dictatorship
      fulfils an important NGO political function.

Mary Harper

"Africa's Modernist Enigma", 22nd June 2016

 135. Mary Harper, journalist, visited Eritrea in June 2016. In the  article
      she describes her visit to Asmara where she spoke with  Eritreans  who
      have been in national service for more than a  decade.   According  to
      the articles between ten and twenty per cent of conscripts are in  the
      military and the rest have civilian roles.   One  man  with  whom  she
      spoke had been serving for fifteen years and supplementing the low pay
      by selling goods.   She met people who have returned to  Eritrea  from
      abroad in order to live and work there.   One  person  with  whom  she
      spoke is quoted as saying "Eritrea is peaceful, it is safe  and  there
      is no violent Islamic extremism.  Of course there are challenges,  but
      this is home".  She reported that it is very  difficult  to  work  out
      what is going on there in the light of what human rights groups assert
      and the United Nations Commission  of  Enquiry.   She  concluded  that
      almost everyone that she met was happy to talk to her  notwithstanding
      the presence of a camera and microphone.  She was not accompanied by a
      minder when she openly travelled to Eritrea as a  journalist  and  was
      not prevented from working there.

Ashish Kumar Sen

"What the UN gets wrong about rights in Eritrea", 7 June 2016

 136. This report mentions that  Bronwyn  Bruton,  Deputy  Director  of  the
      Atlantic Council's Africa Centre, was interviewed by Ashish Kumar  Sen
      from the New Atlanticist.  Bruton expressed her concern about the UN's
      Commission of Inquiry on Eritrea and their findings that the  Eritrean
      government had committed systemic, widespread and gross  human  rights
      violations.  Bruton's view is that the International Criminal  Court's
      (ICC) targeting of African leaders is disproportionate and politically
      motivated.  There  are  problems  with  the  Commission  of  Inquiry's
      methodology in producing the 2015 Report.  The Commission  refused  to
      consider academic literature and refused to use press  reports.   They
      did not speak with experts who had recently travelled to  the  country
      and refused to speak to UN staff  and  western  diplomats  inside  the
      country.  They did not consider the testimony  of  many  thousands  of
      Eritreans who supported the government and only spoke to refugees  who
      "self-identified as having suffered violations of their rights".   She
      accepts that terrible human rights abuses take place  in  Eritrea  but
      she does not believe that the human rights situation described in  the
      Commission of Inquiry's Report is reflective of  the  reality  on  the
      ground.  The claim that Eritrea maintains a 'shoot to kill' policy  on
      the border is "an especially egregious example" and she said that  she
      had "never heard of any meaningful evidence that  would  support  that
      claim, except perhaps in a few, highly militarized  spaces  along  the
      border, where Eritrea is actively in conflict with its neighbours. But
      even there, the evidence seems thin".

Martin Plaut

"Eritreans Rounded up in Sudan", 24th May 2016

 137. According to  a  report  he  had  received,  journalist  Martin  Plaut
      reported that nine hundred Eritreans have been picked up  in  Khartoum
      and possibly expelled to Eritrea.  Eight hundred people were  deported
      while getting ready to go to Libya.  There are no reports from  inside
      Eritrea relating to  where  the  deportees  are  being  held.   Border
      shootings are increasing on both sides of the  border.   On  May  12th
      2016, three Eritreans were found dead near Hamdait (Sudan) from bullet
      wounds fired at them by border guards.

"Eritrea: Naming the Dead and  Injured  Conscript  in  Asmara  Shooting",  7
April 2016

 138. From information obtained from inside Eritrea,  Martin  Plaut  reports
      that on 3 April 2016 national service conscripts  were  shot  dead  in
      Asmara as they were attempting to escape from trucks  taking  them  to
      the Port of Assab.  Twenty-nine conscripts were killed or injured.

 139. Reference is also made to the incident (in an article entitled  "Shots
      fired, stoning in Eritrea's Capital" of 5th April 2016)  on  awate.com
      and on the website assenna.com.

"Eritrea Look to Build Mining Sector to  Kick-Start  Economy",  26  February
2016

 140. This report describes Bisha Mine as  being  a  joint  venture  between
      Canada's Nevsun Resources and the state mining firm EAMCO.   Bisha has
      been "dogged" by allegations from HRW  and  other  groups  and  former
      workers about the use of poorly paid workers on national service.  HRW
      and others have described the use of conscripts as "forced labour".

Edmund Blair

"Eritrea  Won't  Shorten  National  Service  Despite  Migration  Fears",  25
February 2016

 141. The thrust of this article, sent from Asmara, whilst Edmund Blair  was
      there, is that Eritrea is not prepared to stop forcing its youth  into
      lengthy periods of national service which drives Eritreans to make the
      perilous trip to Europe.  The Eritrean government insists conscription
      is vital for national security in light  of  the  fear  of  attack  by
      Ethiopia.   Although officially citizens between the ages of  eighteen
      and forty must complete eighteen months of national service, diplomats
      and those who have fled say that this can stretch to a decade or  more
      and that the government reserves the right to extend time of length of
      service in periods of emergency. The article states  that  Eritrea  is
      raising national service salaries by printing local currency notes  to
      deter people traffickers.   In addition it is investing in mining  and
      other sectors.  A western diplomat  said  that  there  was  a  greater
      engagement and openness.

Bisha Mines Materials

HRW  study  entitled  "Hear   no   Evil:   Forced   Labour   and   Corporate
Responsibility in Eritrea's Mining Sector", 25 January 2013

 142. Before us there was also an  amount  of  material  relating  to  Bisha
      Mines. These included the 25 January 2013 HRW study entitled "Hear  no
      Evil: Forced Labour and Corporate Responsibility in  Eritrea's  Mining
      Sector".  The principal concern expressed in the "Hear no Evil" Report
      was the Eritrea government's insistence that the Bisha  mine  project,
      undertaken  by  the  corporation  Nevsun,  engage  Segen  Construction
      Company as a local contractor.  Segen is owned by the ruling PFDJ  and
      "there is  evidence  that  it  regularly  exploits  conscript  workers
      assigned to it by the government".  Among the Eritreans interviewed by
      HRW two said they  were  conscripts  forced  by  Segen  to  carry  out
      construction work during its initial development; and the report  said
      there was evidence  of  terrible  conditions.   The  report  expressed
      concerns about three other overseas mining firms that were setting  up
      in Eritrea and did not appear to heed human rights concerns.

Witness statement from Elizabeth Chyrum

 143. The materials also included a witness statement from Elizabeth  Chyrum
      of 7 June 2016. It was intended that she would give oral evidence, but
      at the eleventh hour she changed her mind about this;  her  statement,
      however, is relied upon by the appellants. Ms Chyrum is a Director  of
      Human Rights Concern - Eritrea (HRCE) which is a United Kingdom  based
      organisation that works for the  promotion  and  protection  of  human
      rights of all Eritreans through advocacy and lobbying.  She  has  been
      looking at the mining companies in Eritrea as a result of  information
      received about  forced  labour.   One  of  the  companies  which  HRCE
      investigated in respect of forced labour  and  conscripted  labour  is
      Nevsun Mining Resources Limited which is said to own 60  per  cent  of
      the Bisha Mine in Eritrea.   Nevsun  Mining  Resources  Limited  is  a
      Canadian company.  HRCE has interviewed  former  conscripts  who  have
      confirmed that they were subjected to forced labour and harsh  working
      conditions, and that they were starved and  paid  very  little.   HRCE
      supported three former Eritrean conscripts who have filed a lawsuit in
      British Colombia's Supreme Court accusing Nevsun Resources Limited  of
      being an accomplice to  the  use  of  forced  labour,  crimes  against
      humanity and other  human  rights  abuses  at  the  Bisha  Mine.   The
      statement of claim relating to the individuals was produced.

 144. As a result of HRCE encouraging former conscripts subjected to  forced
      labour at the Bisha Mine to join the class action,  it  is  said  that
      they have been contacted by a number of people who  assert  that  they
      worked at the Bisha Mine at various times against their will and under
      harsh conditions.  Ms Chyrum identifies three individuals by  initials
      only who allege ill-treatment and that they had not  been  demobilised
      when working for Nevsun at Bisha Mine.

2015 UNCOI Report

 145. The 2015 UNCOI Report addresses forced labour at the Bisha Mine  which
      is required to hire Segen and other Eritrean public companies to carry
      out all of the unskilled labour and basic  work  construction.   Segen
      was the main Eritrean public company involved in the site work and  it
      sends some skilled workers  to  Bisha  as  well  as  unskilled  manual
      labourers.  Segen tried to conceal their status but  the  majority  of
      the workers were in fact conscripts performing  national  service  and
      the skilled staff work directly for Segen  under  the  Civil  National
      Service Scheme.  The  majority  of  labourers  were  conscripts  whose
      military units were  put  at  the  disposal  of  Segen  by  the  army.
      Conscripts, including people who were disabled, were used by Segen  to
      construct the underground network of tunnels for mining operations.

Human Rights Impact Assessment (2015 Audit) - Bisha Mine 5 August 2015

 146. The respondent produced a Human Rights Impact Assessment of the  Bisha
      Mine in Eritrea (2015 Audit) commissioned by Nevsun Resources Ltd. The
      report concluded from interviews with procurement and  human  resource
      managers that progress has been made  with  respect  to  developing  a
      Standard Operating Procedure for including provisions in all  relevant
      contracts that reinforce  the  prohibition  against  national  service
      workers at Bisha Mine. However, the plan  to  hire  a  local  contract
      manager to  coordinate  screening  and  audit  activities  related  to
      national service workers has not yet been implemented.   The  standard
      screening procedures requiring documentation of discharge of  national
      service has been applied to  all  new  contractors  or  subcontractors
      before they are allowed  on  site.   The  audit  activities  at  Segen
      Construction and Transhorn Trucking  have  disclosed  no  evidence  of
      national service workers being used at Bisha mine.

2.    Expert Evidence of Professor Kibreab (PK) in summary form

 147. It is not necessary for us to set out PK's evidence in any  detail  in
      the main body of our decision as  a  fuller  summary  is  appended  in
      Appendix III; however, here we summarise the main points.

        1)  The DFFM Report does not accurately represent his views and  is
           flawed generally. It does not represent the position in Eritrea.



        2)  Draft evaders or deserters who fled Eritrea illegally  continue
           to be at risk on return.  The requirement to do people's militia
           has effectively increased the upper limit of draft age which  is
           from 54 to 70 for men and from 47 to 60 for women.

        3) The payment of 2 per cent tax and the letter of regret does  not
           provide protection or  immunity;  it  enables  the  diaspora  to
           access consular services.  Those  returning  to  Eritrea  are  a
           small proportion of people who are close to the regime and  have
           been naturalised in another country.

        4) National service is indefinite and there  is  no  procedure  for
           discharge/ release or demobilisation.

        5) Whilst there is a medical exemption, obtaining exemption on this
           basis is difficult and rare.

        6) The Eritrean government have adopted a stricter approach to  the
           granting of exit visas generally. The categories have  narrowed;
           the lower age for children is now 5.

        7) National service is forced labour.




B. ASSESSMENT: THE GENERAL ISSUES

1.  Law

The relevance of existing country guidance

 148. The status of the two existing country guidance cases of MA and MO has
      occupied a central place in the arguments before  us.  This  doubtless
      has much to do with the fact  that  these  cases  identify  relatively
      broad risk categories whose effect has been that  a  very  significant
      number of Eritrean applicants for asylum have been able to  show  they
      fall within them. As noted earlier, it  was  the  publication  of  the
      November 2014 DFFM Report that led the Home Office to  announce  in  a
      March 2015 CIG on Illegal Exit at paras 1.3.4-1.3.8 that  "[t]he  most
      up-to-date information available from inside  Eritrea  -  notably  the
      [DFFM] Report" indicated a different view  and  that  "[c]onsequently,
      the guidance outlined in MO above should  no  longer  be  followed..."
      The appellants and UNHCR, by  contrast,  consider  that  the  guidance
      given in MO should be maintained and that, indeed, its risk categories
      should be extended.

 149. Some of the arguments and counter-arguments ventilated on  this  issue
      have a legal hue. Ms Dubinsky on behalf of  UNHCR  as  intervener  has
      submitted that two essential pre-conditions should apply,  by  analogy
      to cessation, to the issuing of fresh country guidance  withdrawing  a
      previously recognised risk category, or to a finding by  the  Tribunal
      in an individual appeal that earlier country  guidance  recognising  a
      risk category should be disapplied. Those two essential pre-conditions
      are, she submitted, (1) a requirement of  establishing  a  fundamental
      change of circumstances; (2) a requirement of establishing  a  durable
      and stable change of circumstances. Further, there is a burden on  the
      asylum authority which  is  seeking  to  invoke  a  change  since  the
      previous  country  guidance  to  demonstrate  a  durable,  stable  and
      fundamental change of circumstances. In developing  these  submissions
      she sought to argue that support for her position could  be  found  in
      what had been said by Lord Brown in Hoxha v Special Adjudicator [2005]
      UKHL 19 at [63] and by academic  authorities  including  Hathaway  and
      Foster in The Law of Refugee Status and Goodwin-Gill and McAdam in The
      Refugee in International Law. Mr Rawat, on behalf of  the  respondent,
      strongly disagreed with these submissions, arguing that the  reference
      to cessation or a burden of proof was neither helpful nor necessary in
      the context of country guidance.

 150. Ms Dubinsky cited in support of her argument the observations  by  the
      former President of the UTIAC, Blake J, in EM and  Others  (Returnees)
      Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC), who at [71] considered that:

           "The proposition that a Country Guidance case should provide the
           "starting point" for a  subsequent  case  that  relates  to  the
           Country Guidance issue is inherent  in  the  Practice  Direction
           (and its AIT predecessor). Whether the subsequent case is  being
           "set down to review  existing  Country  Guidance"  or  not,  the
           effect of Practice  Direction  12  and  section  107(3)  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is to  require  the
           existing Country Guidance  case  to  be  authoritative,  to  the
           extent that the requirements in Practice Direction  12.2(a)  and
           (b) are met. This is fully in accord  with  what  the  House  of
           Lords (per Lord Brown) held in R (Hoxha) v  Special  Adjudicator
           [2005] UKHL 19. If the existing Country Guidance is such  as  to
           favour appellants (to a greater or lesser extent),  it  will  in
           practice be for the respondent to  adduce  before  a  subsequent
           Tribunal "sufficient material to satisfy them" that the position
           has changed."

 151. Blake J went on at [72] to say that:

           "...where a previous assessment has resulted in  the  conclusion
           that the population generally or certain sections of it  may  be
           at risk, any assessment that  the  material  circumstances  have
           changed would need to demonstrate that  such  changes  are  well
           established evidentially and durable."

 152. Ms Dubinsky reminded  us  that  the  latter  passage  was  cited  with
      approval by Maurice Kay LJ (with whom Underhill and Elias LJJ  agreed)
      in MP (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  829;  Times,  July  3,  2014
      [21]:

           "It goes without saying that extant country guidance  which  was
           valid when promulgated should not be changed when  the  position
           on the ground remains unchanged. The practice  of  the  UT  and,
           before that, the AIT, was explained by the then President, Blake
           J, in EM (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2012]  UKUT  98  (IAC)  (at
           paragraph 72)..."

 153.  However,  as  her  submission  acknowledged,  Blake  J  gave  further
      clarification of  the  UT's  position  in  CM  (EM  country  guidance;
      disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59  (IAC)  wherein  he  stated  at
      [118] that:

           "118.What the Tribunal said at [72] of EM is not to be construed
           as imposing some sort of legal "gloss" on Practice Direction 12,
           so as to place greater  restrictions  on  a  Tribunal  making  a
           "later 'CG' determination"  than,  say,  a  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge hearing "any subsequent appeal".  It  is  clear  that  the
           Tribunal was not seeking to set a test to  be  satisfied  before
           Country  Guidance  could  be  varied,  but  merely  a  means  of
           approaching and evaluating the nature  of  the  changes  in  the
           evidence. Where a regime has engaged in persecutory conduct of a
           particular type even for a limited period, the judge undertaking
           a subsequent  analysis  will  need  to  be  satisfied  that  the
           cessation of the conduct  was  durable  before  concluding  that
           either Country Guidance should not be followed or (if engaged in
           a Country Guidance exercise) that the Guidance itself needed  to
           be amended.  There  is  no  rule  of  law  here  but  simply  an
           application of  the  precautionary  principle  relating  to  the
           assessment of reasonable likelihood of harm, where the  previous
           assessment of risk was itself based on an unusually virulent and
           widespread outburst of persecutory  activity  dating  from  June
           2008, the nature and duration of which  needed  to  be  assessed
           with care."

 154. Moreover, the test articulated by the UT in CM is now well-established
      in the UT - see e.g. AMM and others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;
      returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC) at [345] - and  seems
      to us to be one designed to reflect in substance  the  point  made  by
      Lord Brown in Hoxha but very properly to decline elevation of it to  a
      rule of law. To seek to elevate the analogy with cessation into a rule
      of law would in our judgement place the UT in  the  wholly  artificial
      and untenable position of being prevented from conducting  a  full  ex
      nunc examination of the latest evidence on the merits. That  would  be
      contrary to established authority which provides that  asylum  appeals
      in  general  are  decided  on  up-to-date  assessment  of  risk:   see
      Sandralingam and Ravichandran  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [1996] Imm AR 97 (hereafter Ravichandran  at  p112-113  per
      Simon Brown LJ) and contrary also to the approach enjoined by  Article
      4 of the Qualification Directive (Directive 2004/83/EC). Although  the
      UK has not opted  into  the  recast  Procedures  Directive  (Directive
      2013/32/EU), it seems to us that Article 46 of the latter represents a
      clear articulation  of  the  Ravichandran  principle  and  also  clear
      concurrence with the approach taken by the Strasbourg  Court  when  it
      comes to application of its parallel Article 3 ECHR jurisprudence: see
      e.g. Saadi v Italy (GC), No. 37201/06, 28 Feb 2008 at [133].

The status of UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines and position papers

 155. Ms Dubinsky submitted that UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines  and  position
      papers on risk categories in  countries  such  as  Eritrea  should  be
      accorded very considerable weight. In support she cited  a  number  of
      authorities including what was said  by  Sedley  LJ  in  EM  (Eritrea)
      [2012] EWCA Civ 1336 at [41],  Lord  Kerr's  endorsement  of  Sedley's
      words in EM (Eritrea) [2014] UKSC 12  at  [71]-[72]  and  Lord  Kerr's
      observations in IA (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2014] UKSC 6, 1 WLR 384 at [44] and [49] (with which  Baroness  Hale,
      Lord Wilson, Lord Hughes and Lord Hodge JJSC agreed).  The  appellants
      in their skeleton argument of April 2016 went further and argued  that
      there should be a presumption that such guidelines should be followed.
      Particularly given that the latest  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  in
      this case were published (as was MO) in 2011 and that UNHCR,  although
      saying that it continues to maintain these, has expressed its wish  to
      update them, this would not seem the strongest case to  ask  for  such
      guidelines to be given either great  or  presumptive  weight.  In  any
      event, we would simply respond to  these  submissions  by  underlining
      what was held  by the UT in HM  (Iraq)  [2012]  UKUT  00409  (IAC)  at
      [277], the latter which were endorsed by  the  Court  of  Appeal  (per
      Elias, LJ) in HF (Iraq) v Secretary of State v Home Department  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 1276 at [44] as follows:

           "There is, in my view,  no  justification  for  conferring  this
           presumptively binding status on UNHCR reports merely because  of
           their source. Frequently the court is faced, as  in  this  case,
           with a raft of reports from various international, state and non-
           governmental organisations, and although the guidance enunciated
           in a UNHCR  report  will  typically  command  very  considerable
           respect, for the reasons given by the Tribunal in paragraph 277,
           it will do so because of its intrinsic quality rather  than  the
           status of its author. Ultimately each piece of evidence  has  to
           be put into the balance but the relative weight to be  given  to
           the different reports is for the decision maker."

 156. We think Mr Rawat was right to remind us that IA  was  concerned  with
      the approach to be taken by a national decision maker when  UNHCR  has
      granted an individual refugee status and the Court made clear in  [49]
      that even in that context "[r]ecognition of refugee  status  by  UNHCR
      does not create a presumption, does not shift the burden of proof  and
      is not a starting point..."

 157. Neither should it be forgotten that these Guidelines themselves do not
      purport to possess such a special status, stating in the  introductory
      Note, as do all such Eligibility Guidelines, that "it  is  hoped  that
      the guidance and information  contained  in  the  Guidelines  will  be
      considered carefully by the authorities and the judiciary in  reaching
      decisions on asylum applications."

 158. What we conclude on this issue is that, whilst Ms Dubinsky is entirely
      right to highlight that  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  and  position
      papers will typically command very considerable respect, they will  do
      so in our judgement because of their typically high intrinsic  quality
      rather than any fixed status.

The status of experts in country guidance cases

 159. The appellants' submissions  request  that  by  virtue  of  the  great
      importance accorded by the Court of Appeal to  expert  evidence,  that
      "heavy reliance" should be placed on the  reports  produced  for  this
      case by PK.  They cite in support S v SSHD  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  539  in
      which it was said at [29] that "[i]n this field opinion evidence  will
      often or usually be very important, since assessment of  the  risk  of
      persecutory treatment in the milieu of a  perhaps  unstable  political
      situation may be a complex and difficult  task,  in  which  the  fact-
      finding tribunal is bound to place  heavy  reliance  on  the  view  of
      experts and specialists".  It was averred that  PK  is  just  such  an
      expert and specialist and is "universally recognised  as  such".  Also
      prayed in aid were the observations of the ECtHR in NA v UK (2009)  48
      EHRR regarding "the authority and reputation of the author".

 160. In view of the fact that the Court of Appeal in the above passage uses
      deliberately defeasible language ("often or  usually")  and  that  the
      ECtHR in paragraph [120] of NA likewise viewed the status of  evidence
      about country conditions as a fact-sensitive matter to be assessed  by
      reference to a number of  "relevant  considerations"  (namely  "...the
      authority and  reputation  of  the  author,  the  seriousness  of  the
      investigations by means of which they were compiled,  the  consistency
      of their conclusions and their corroboration by other sources..."), we
      do not regard this body of case law as creating any  presumption  that
      the reports of recognised experts automatically carry heavy weight. We
      respectfully endorse the observation made by  the  UT  in  MD  (Women)
      Ivory Coast [2010] UKUT 215 (IAC) that "[a] competent expert's  report
      is always entitled to respect and due consideration but from the point
      of view of the judicial decision-maker, such reports may sometimes (if
      not often) amount in the end to just one among other items of evidence
      which have to be weighed  in  the  balance".  Also  pertinent  is  the
      guidance given in AAW (expert  evidence-weight)  Somalia  [2015]  UKUT
      00673 (IAC):

           "Any opinion offered that is unsupported by a  demonstration  of
           the objectivity  and  comprehensive  review  of  material  facts
           required of an expert witness is likely to  be  afforded  little
           weight by the Tribunal. In particular, a witness  who  does  not
           engage with material facts or issues that might detract from the
           view  being  expressed  risks  being  regarded  as  an  informed
           advocate for the case of one of the parties to  the  proceedings
           rather than as an independent expert witness".

2.  Methodology and Sources

General Observations

 161. The respondent has invited us to include  in  our  identified  country
      guidance issues that of methodology and  sources.   In  doing  so  she
      relies largely on the fact that the  case  management  directions  had
      originally identified the issues to be covered as including the  issue
      of the DFFM Report.  But she also relied on the  wider  disputes  that
      have arisen over methodology.  In this regard it is fair to  say  that
      all three parties have devoted a considerable amount of time to issues
      of methodology, the appellants' representatives, for  example,  urging
      us to find fault with the great reliance placed by the  respondent  on
      anonymous  sources  obtained  during  the  DFFM  and  UKFFM  and   the
      respondent urging us to find fault with the appellants' great reliance
      on the UNCOI Reports and certain other NGO reports based on  anonymous
      sources, especially those said to be asylum seekers. The  Home  Office
      Country Information and Guidance:  Eritrea:  National  (incl.Military)
      Service, Version 3.0, August 2016 at paragraph 4 also  deals  under  a
      sub-heading "Limits of sources", with  some  of  the  main  criticisms
      made, among others, of the DFFM and UNCOI reports.

 162. We have already given our reasons for  not  treating  methodology  and
      sources or assessment of evidence  as  a  country  guidance  issue  in
      itself and for considering that  on  several  legal  issues  there  is
      already sufficient guidance in existing case  law,  but  we  undertook
      nevertheless to make specific findings on certain  sources.  Initially
      the principal focus was on the DFFM but by the end of the  hearing  it
      was clear that there are other sources which have attracted  criticism
      in regard to their methodological basis, not only the DFFM,  but  also
      the UKFFM (the two main reports on which the  respondent  relies,  the
      former now only for its Appendices) and several sources on  which  the
      appellants and UNHCR rely,  in  particular  the  AI  "Just  Deserters"
      Report and the two UNCOI reports of 2015 and  2016.   In  relation  to
      methodological concerns, it will assist if we deal first with  two  of
      the main manifestations of these in  the  arguments  of  the  parties,
      anonymity of sources and fact-finding missions. We will  then  proceed
      to examine the aforementioned reports in more detail.

Anonymity of sources

 163.  In   their   submissions,   written   and   oral,   the   appellants'
      representatives have criticised the reliance both in the  DFFM  Report
      and the UKFFM Report upon anonymous sources and urged the UT  to  take
      cognisance of the approach set out by the ECtHR in Sufi and Elmi v  UK
      (Application nos. 8319/07 and 11449/07) at  paragraph  [234].  UNHCR's
      skeleton arguments also stated that it "endorsed" the approach of  the
      ECtHR in Sufi and Elmi. We shall deal separately with  the  status  of
      fact finding mission  reports  in  a  moment,  but  on  the  issue  of
      anonymity of sources we are disappointed that the appellants and UNHCR
      should have prayed in aid Sufi and Elmi without due regard to the fact
      that the Court of Appeal has expressly approved the  Upper  Tribunal's
      stated reasons for differing from this judgment in some respects.   In
      CM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1303 Laws LJ said:

           "I have to say that I deprecate what I  see  as  an  attempt  to
           persuade this court to treat the meaning of Sufi & Elmi as if it
           established something not far removed from a rule  of  evidence.
           I would endorse what the Upper Tribunal said at paras 163-165."

 164. We continue to endorse what the Upper Tribunal said in CM (EM  Country
      Guidance: disclosure) Zimbabwe [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC)  at  paras  [157]-
      [158]:

           "Anonymous material is not infrequently relied on by  appellants
           as indicative of deteriorating conditions or general risk.   The
           Tribunal should be free to accept such material but will do  its
           best to evaluate by reference to what if anything is known about
           the source, the circumstances in which information was given and
           the overall context of the issues it relates to and the rest  of
           the evidence available.

           The problem is not one of  admissibility  of  such  material  as
           forming part of the background data from which risk  assessments
           are made, but the weight to be attached to  such  data.   It  is
           common sense and common justice that  the  less  that  is  known
           about a source and its means of acquiring information, the  more
           hesitant  should  a  Tribunal  judge  be  to  afford   anonymous
           unsupported assessment substantial weight, particularly where it
           conflicts with assessment from sources known to be reliable.  In
           our judgment it is neither possible nor  desirable  to  be  more
           prescriptive than this, and the task of evaluation of weight  is
           a matter  for  the  judgment  of  an  expert  Tribunal  that  is
           regularly asked to take  into  account  unsourced  data  whether
           submitted by claimants or respondents."

Fact-finding mission reports: general

 165. Whilst for the most part the submissions of the appellants  and  UNHCR
      recognised that fact-finding mission evidence has a legitimate role to
      play if done in accordance  with  established  guidelines,  we  cannot
      ignore that some of the public criticisms made of the DFFM  and  UKFFM
      reports on Eritrea have verged on generic a priori  arguments  to  the
      effect that such missions are inherently compromised because they  are
      only needed when the country of origin in question is  repressive  and
      it being in the nature of repressive regimes to be  closed  societies,
      they are likely to feature wrongful reliance on anonymous sources,  an
      unrepresentative range of sources and on government or  pro-government
      sources.  In  respect  of  the  UKFFM,  the  appellants'   submissions
      complained  that  the  production  by  the  respondent  of  the  UKFFM
      materials on Eritrea  constituted  a  wrongful  "bypass  of  statutory
      scrutiny" contrary to s.  142  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002. It was submitted that in the context of this case the
      fact that the UKFFM materials have not  been  assessed  by  the  IAGCI
      "should give considerable pause for thought before it is  accepted  as
      'credible fresh evidence' warranting adjustment  to  existing  CG,  in
      particular in the light of the IAGCI's severe criticism of the DFFM".

 166. We analyse below the main FFM reports under scrutiny in this case, but
      insofar as the evidence before us  contains  generic  attacks  on  FFM
      evidence, our omnibus response is simply to say we see  no  basis  for
      rejecting FFM evidence as of potential  relevance  and  value  in  the
      context of country guidance cases. It is the settled practice  of  the
      Tribunal to treat such evidence as  of  potential  value,  whether  it
      emanates from a governmental agency or from an international  body  or
      an NGO. In EM and others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98  (IAC)
      at [88]-[113] the UT analysed a number of criticisms made of the UKFFM
      to Harare making clear throughout that they were a source of  evidence
      that had to be assessed alongside the evidence as a whole.  A  similar
      approach can be seen to run in other cases such as BK  (Failed  Asylum
      Seekers) Democratic Republic of Congo [2007] UKAIT 98 and  R  (on  the
      application of P (DRC)) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin), 9 December 2013. In  general  terms,  it  is
      always better to be able to assess country conditions  if  the  source
      material furnishes evidence  obtained  both  inside  and  outside  the
      country under scrutiny, even when obtaining the former may be  fraught
      with problems.

 167. We will  deal  separately  with  the  argument  regarding  "bypass  of
      statutory scrutiny" when we address the UKFFM Report.

Fact-Finding missions and the Eritrean context

 168. It is more frequent than used to be the case that part of the evidence
      before the Tribunal in country guidance cases  includes  FFM  reports.
      Indeed, the evidence of Mr Olsen and Mr Olesen reminds  us  that  such
      missions only began  in  the  late  1990s.   Up  to  then  immigration
      services in Europe had tended to rely for  in-country  information  on
      written sources and information provided by embassies abroad:

           "The methodology applied and report  format  has  endured  since
           then including putting emphasis on approved notes,  i.e.  typing
           up meeting notes and  sending  them  to  the  interlocutors  for
           correction and final approval."

 169. It seems to us that in this  respect  -  transparent  presentation  of
      notes of interviews - the methodology adopted by  a  number  of  fact-
      finding mission reports in the past decade,  including  the  DFFM  and
      UKFFM reports on Eritrea, represent a significant advance in the field
      of COI.  Within  Europe  that  advance  has  been  entrenched  by  the
      publication in 2010 of "EU common guidelines on  (Joint)  Fact-Finding
      Missions: a practical tool  to  assist  member  states  in  organising
      (joint) Fact-Finding Missions". We accept there  may  be  reasons  why
      other reports on Eritrea, e.g. those produced by the USSD or AI or  by
      the UNCOI, do not demonstrate the same completeness  and  transparency
      in relation to sources, but from the point of view of a judicial fact-
      finding body such as the  UT  when  essaying  country  guidance,  this
      feature of recent FFM reports is a boon.

 170. However the evidence of Mr Olsen and that of Mr Olesen  in  regard  to
      the DFFM Report also reminds us that the value of FFM evidence depends
      on careful prior preparation aimed to ensure the interlocutors cover a
      wide spectrum of views and even then it may be necessary, as  was  the
      case with the DFFM Report on  Eritrea,  to  rely  on  a  "snowballing"
      approach whereby one  contact  recommends  another  and  so  on.   The
      "snowballing" technique carries a real risk that  sources  chosen  may
      not be as representative as otherwise. Even  the  most  careful  prior
      preparation and consultation may not obviate that risk.

 171. We also consider it important to underline that the  controversy  that
      enveloped publication of the DFFM Report  should  not  be  allowed  to
      obscure the value and legitimacy of efforts on the  part  of  external
      researchers and analysts to obtain more direct information from inside
      a country of origin like Eritrea. It seems to us, in the end, that the
      parties were in agreement on this matter,  the  appellants  and  UNHCR
      making clear that their issue was with the way in which the  DFFM  was
      approached, not with the mere fact that such a mission was  attempted.
      This point imports the need to scrutinise with care those  criticisms,
      which, in some of their public manifestations appeared  to  adopt  the
      position that because Eritrea is a closed society  the  only  body  of
      evidence that could be trusted was evidence obtained from outside  the
      country.  Possibly  Messrs  Olsen  and  Olesen  lent  oxygen  to  this
      misconception by noting that they felt it wrong that the  mission  did
      not include sources from outside the country. As we understand it, the
      principal purpose of the mission was to obtain in-country evidence  to
      place alongside that already available from outside  the  country.  It
      seems to us that the presenting difficulty in the Eritrean context was
      pinpointed, with the benefit of hindsight,  by  the  Landinfo  Report,
      "Eritrea: National Service" which  noted  that  because  the  Eritrean
      government had severely restricted access by international NGOs to the
      country, the latter had to base their reports "largely... on  accounts
      from people who have come to the west and to other African counties as
      asylum seekers".  Landinfo, accurately in our view,  notes  that  this
      has led to a "paradox that criticism of the accuracy  of  the  sources
      has been relatively absent in the various reports published  over  the
      years.  Challenges such as reliability, objectivity and  accuracy  are
      discussed only briefly." It seems to us, therefore, that any criticism
      that suggests that it is somehow preferable to  confine  evidence  and
      sources to those obtained outside a  country  like  Eritrea  is  quite
      misplaced. It also seems to us uncontroversial  that  all  evidence  -
      whether obtained from inside or outside a country - must be subject to
      the same rigorous standards. With these initial observations  we  turn
      to examine the  respective  submissions  we  had  regarding  the  DFFM
      Report.

The Danish Fact Finding Mission (DFFM) Report

 172. The appellants' and UNHCR submissions were  unequivocal  in  labelling
      the DFFM Report "discredited".  The respondent's position has  changed
      from relying on it in the CIGs of March 2015 to seeking to rely on  it
      in this hearing solely for the  evidence  disclosed  by  the  Report's
      notes of interviews.

 173. The appellants do not consider this change in position sufficient  and
      submit that the entirety of the DFFM should be treated as  discredited
      because the evidence of two of its researchers was that  the  head  of
      mission, Mr Glynstrup, had  pressured  them  and  had  influenced  the
      contents of the interviews through his manner  of  questioning.   They
      also relied on the evidence of PK who publicly  disassociated  himself
      from the report alleging that the evidence he had given to it had been
      misrepresented.  (The DIS did, of course, publish a revised report  in
      December, which deleted all  references  to  PK's  evidence,  but  its
      manner of doing so - retaining the same text, albeit deleted -   might
      not  be  thought  to  be  accurately  described  as  eliminating   all
      references.)

 174. We consider that PK had legitimate cause to complain at the point  (on
      25 November 2014) when the person in charge of the report  went  ahead
      with publication despite having indicated earlier to him that he would
      be given time to check over whether he was happy with  its  references
      to him.  However, although PK may not have been given  time  to  check
      the report (which must have been obvious to those who were responsible
      for publication), the fact is that he sent an  email  on  25  November
      2014 after it had been published and sent  to  him  as  an  attachment
      saying "thank you for this informative and well-written report".  This
      was in response to having  been  asked  whether  he  agreed  with  the
      report. His oral evidence before us was that he  had  not  opened  the
      attachment, and to this extent he is at fault and  to  blame  for  how
      matters evolved.

 175. Subsequently, he complained that the report misrepresented him but  he
      has confirmed to us that  what  he  was  referring  to  was  only  the
      purported summary made of his interview recorded in the main  body  of
      the report; he was not alleging any distortion of the  interview  note
      itself. Whilst in our judgement his sending of an email approving  the
      DFFM Report even though he had not read it was a lapse in professional
      conduct, we do not count  it  against  him  in  assessing  his  expert
      reports because he has made it abundantly clear that this  message  of
      praise was a mistake due to pressure of work  and  that  it  does  not
      reflect the view he had of it once he had read it. That  still  leaves
      the matter of the meaning conveyed by one particular  passage  of  his
      interview note. It will assist the reader if  we  again  set  out  the
      passage in full:

           "In the past  two  to  three  years  the  government's  attitude
           towards National Service seems to be more  relaxed.  It  is  now
           possible for National Service evaders  and  deserters  who  have
           left Eritrea illegally to return to their country. They must  go
           to an Eritrean embassy and sign a  repentance  letter  in  which
           they accept any penalty for the offense committed. In  addition,
           they must pay the two per cent Diaspora tax. Finally,  they  are
           obliged to participate in public festivals in Eritrea. In  spite
           of this softer approach many evaders and deserters still do  not
           dare to return to Eritrea, individual circumstances play a  role
           as  well.  Persons  who  did  not  participate  in  oppositional
           political activities abroad and  people  who  are  connected  by
           family bonds or in  other  ways  with  government  officials  or
           members of the ruling party would be more inclined to return  to
           Eritrea on  visits.  Gaim  Kibreab  [PK]  was  aware  of  a  few
           deserters who have visited Eritrea and safely left  the  country
           again. These are invariably people who have been naturalised  in
           their countries of origin". [We take "countries  of  origin"  to
           mean "countries of residence".]

 176. PK has sought to  argue  that  this  part  of  his  text  was  wrongly
      interpreted by the DFFM to mean that there  was  now  a  more  relaxed
      attitude towards draft  evaders  and  deserters,  who  fled  illegally
      returning to Eritrea.

 177. We find it very hard to read the text the way PK  has  since  said  he
      intended it to be read.  The  last  few  sentences  do  not  obviously
      qualify the first few. At best, the text was ambiguous and, given that
      he himself had approved it, it was entirely reasonable for the DFFM to
      infer from it that his position had changed.

 178. We dwell on this point here only to explain why  we  think  PK  should
      carry more of the blame for the way in which the controversy developed
      over the DFFM than he continues  to  acknowledge.  We  draw  short  of
      suggesting that he must actually have subscribed to the view  conveyed
      by the first few sentences; we are persuaded by the  strong  reactions
      he subsequently expressed that he did not mean to subscribe to such  a
      view.

 179. As regards the main body of the DFFM Report, we do not  need  strictly
      to decide whether it represents a fair summary, since  the  respondent
      now places no reliance  on  it.   We  would  however  record  that  we
      consider the core criticism made by UNHCR and others - that  the  main
      text sometimes takes statements made by interviewees  out  of  context
      and sometimes  ascribes  statements  to  interlocutors  that  are  not
      contained in the interview notes - well made.  By dint of such  errors
      the main text cannot  be  described  as  a  proper  summary.   Despite
      seemingly denying any wish to express policy ("The fact-finding report
      at hand does not include any policy recommendations"), the  main  body
      of the report is as much evaluative as it is descriptive and,  insofar
      as it is evaluative, is significantly flawed.

 180. However, with regard to the report's Appendices setting out  the  full
      note of what was said during the  interviews  conducted  with  various
      individuals and organisations identified therein  (including  PK),  we
      are not persuaded that they cannot be treated as evidence of potential
      relevance. (The notes  are  not  verbatim  transcripts  but  rather  a
      rendering by the interviewers of what was said). It  is  true  to  say
      that Olsen and  Olesen  have  alleged  that  in  interviews  where  Mr
      Glynstrup was present:

           "He was rather dominant and he would always like to try to  take
           control  of  the  interview  situation.   This   was   a   major
           distraction to us.  It happened  several  times  that  Glynstrup
           seemed  more  interested  in  having  his  perceptions  of   the
           situation in Eritrea confirmed by the interlocutors rather  than
           asking open  questions  and  listen  to  the  interlocutors  and
           reflects on their statements."

 181. It is also the case that although Drs Olsen and Olesen said that  they
      typed up the meeting notes, forwarded those to their interlocutors and
      received some of the approved notes, "at that very point we were  100%
      disconnected from the process concerning writing the report"  and  "we
      only had the chance to see a few of the approved notes in total before
      they were included in the report".  However, these two  gentlemen  did
      not choose to give evidence to this  Tribunal,  notwithstanding  being
      requested to do so by the appellants' representatives.  Nor  did  they
      offer any explanation for their failure to  do  so.   Mr  Knafler  has
      emphasised that we still have their written statement before us  which
      is entitled to significant weight.  We do consider some weight  should
      be attached to this statement but cannot accept that this statement  -
      or the various reports of  their  position  in  the  media  and  other
      sources - should be taken to establish that the  notes  of  interviews
      contained in the DFFM were compromised in any significant way.  We  of
      course have limited access to all the relevant  documents  surrounding
      their resignations and the criticisms they have made.   But  the  same
      disability did not confront the Danish Ombudsman.  Whilst  his  report
      did voice concerns, including about various actions taken by  the  DIS
      and other governmental actors in connection with its DFFM  Report,  it
      also  expressly  rejected  the  complaint  of  maladministration.   In
      particular (as already noted at [44] above), he  found  that  that  "I
      have no reason to believe that the DIS wished to give the  conclusions
      in the report an untenable expression or put  pressure  on  its  staff
      with this purpose in mind".

 182. In addition, perusing  the  statements  from  Drs  Olsen  and  Olesen,
      neither takes issue with the notes of any of the interviews that  were
      published.  We find it very significant that despite  saying  that  at
      the point when they were shut out from completion of the  report  they
      had only received some  of  the  approved  notes  from  interlocutors,
      neither has suggested that any  of  the  transcripts  as  subsequently
      published differ from their own typed notes.   We  are  quite  certain
      that if they had thought there were significant differences they would
      have said so and they have had many months now in which to say  so  if
      that were the case. We also find it significant that despite the blaze
      of publicity given to the report, not a single interlocutor  has  come
      forward and said or suggested the interview notes  as  published  were
      inaccurate. Certainly some of them were in a position to do so.

 183. Accepting that the interview notes are likely to be accurate does  not
      necessarily mean that we accept that  the  main  body  of  the  report
      accurately reflected their contents - we have  already  observed  that
      the main body  of  the  report  conflates  description  with  (flawed)
      evaluation. We are prepared to accept that Olsen  and  Olesen's  joint
      statement raises valid  questions  about  the  representivity  of  the
      sources, (both said that Mr Glynstrup prevented them from interviewing
      additional sources), even though, as already noted, we do not think it
      was wrong in principle for those sources to have been limited  to  in-
      country sources; this was after all a "fact-finding mission"  to  find
      out what was happening inside Eritrea.  We agree that more could  have
      been done to ensure that the report captured a more complete  spectrum
      of opinion, views, insight and knowledge in-country.   Although  these
      two do not say so in terms, we are also prepared to accept  that  they
      consider Mr Glynstrup's intervention during the interviews he attended
      may have prevented the interviewees from mentioning all  they  had  to
      say; that is a feature which certainly calls for a degree  of  caution
      in relying on their contents as a complete account of all  they  might
      have had to say;  but  such  caution  does  not  entirely  negate  the
      potential value of the contents of the interviews as recorded.

 184. Similarly we must be cautious, in light  of  Drs  Olsen  and  Olesen's
      evidence  regarding  the  (limited  number)  of  interviews  where  Mr
      Glynstrup was present to leave open the possibility that the  evidence
      recorded was not all given in reply to open questions; some of it  may
      have been in reply to closed questions.

 185. Drs Olsen and Olesen also criticised the "hazy and  unclear"  planning
      of the mission, resulting in normal procedures concerning informing co-
      partners such as  the  Danish  Refugee  Board,  but  once  again  that
      criticism does not go to the potential utility as raw materials of the
      interview notes.

 186. The appellants' submissions also raise arguments about  the  potential
      weight that the DFFM interview records could be  accorded  given  that
      the interviews with diplomatic sources were inherently limited by  (i)
      the fact that diplomats living in Asmara are prevented by the Eritrean
      government from having genuine and open access to  ordinary  Eritreans
      and from travelling around to see conditions for  themselves;  (ii)  a
      number of the interviews were with  members  (or  supporters)  of  the
      Eritrean government and as such could not be relied upon to present an
      objective and factual picture of matters such  as  the  conditions  of
      national service and the treatment  of  returnees;  (iii)  the  report
      makes no effort to question the particularity and vested interests  of
      Eritrean-based informants; and (iv) some of the quoted information  is
      contradictory or ambiguous or speculative.

 187. Taking these objections in reverse order,  criticism  (iv)  and  (iii)
      seems to us to misunderstand the underlying purpose of  the  interview
      notes.  They are to record what was said, not to put a gloss on  their
      contents or to point out any  inconsistencies  etc.   Such  criticisms
      have some traction in relation to the main body of the report but,  as
      already noted, we place no reliance on that.

 188. However, we see considerable force in the  criticism  that  there  are
      more reasons than usual to be cautious about attaching weight  to  the
      evidence of the Eritrean Minister of Foreign Affairs, since he  had  a
      vested interest in defending the government's position and reputation,
      and also the "Regional NGO based in Asmara" who on the  basis  of  the
      background evidence was also likely to be beholden to  the  government
      (this   representative's    statement    that    the    country    has
      "no...corruption"  is  even  at  odds  with   the   government's   own
      acknowledgement that corruption is a growing problem). But  these  are
      only two of the sources that were consulted.

 189. We see less force however, in criticism (i) above about the  value  of
      the evidence obtained from western diplomats. So far as  concerns  the
      value of evidence from  diplomatic  sources  at  a  general  level  is
      concerned, we have already noted that we concur  with  what  has  been
      said on this score in cases such as EM (Zimbabwe). We  have  commented
      separately on PK's opinions about the evidence obtained  from  western
      diplomats, from Asmara,  some  of  which  can  only  be  described  as
      tendentious.  But even considering the evidence we have on this  issue
      more widely, we find nothing in it to indicate that any of the western
      diplomats interviewed for the DFFM (or the UKFFM) reports  on  Eritrea
      had an agenda to distort their evidence so as to portray the situation
      in Eritrea as better than it was in order to promote a change of  view
      on the part  of  western  government  asylum  officials  dealing  with
      Eritrean asylum claims. If  such  criticisms  had  been  supported  by
      specific  instances,  for  example,  of  a  Western  diplomat  voicing
      ideological views, they may have merited some attention. But so far as
      we can tell such criticisms rely purely on a stereotyped portrayal  of
      western diplomats in Eritrea as a class  of  persons  disqualified  by
      their  institutional  roles  from  truthfully  describing  their   own
      observations  and  giving  their   own   opinions   based   on   those
      observations.  PK  himself  admitted  in  evidence  to  us  that   his
      criticisms to this effect went too far and we are confident that  this
      is a fair description of similar criticisms levelled  by  others.   We
      note that neither Mr Knafler nor Ms Dubinsky relied on this particular
      line of criticism.

 190. We attach weight to the view of Drs Olsen and Olesen  that  "[i]n  the
      case of embassies it became clear that most  of  their  knowledge  and
      anecdotal information stemmed from local staff as well  as  the  other
      embassies in Asmara...".  At the same time, we think it would be wrong
      to assume in  a  generalised  way  that  diplomats  and  international
      organisations simply reproduce uncritically  what  they  are  told  by
      their informants, and wrong to assume they are unaware,  for  example,
      that their own contacts are not representative of  ordinary  Eritreans
      or unaware that their staff might include persons who  are  spies  for
      the Eritrean government.  Evidence from these sources is certainly  of
      limited value but is not to be discarded as being inherently na�ve  or
      intrinsically ill-informed.

 191. As regards the reliance in the DFFM Report on  anonymous  sources,  we
      can see it may have been possible (as urged by the appellants) for the
      interviewers to have provided some further details in some  instances,
      but we consider some of the demands voiced  (e.g.  "no  indication  is
      given about what information each source had access to, the degree  of
      authority or level of relevant 'first-hand'  experience  of  Eritrea")
      quite unrealistic given the closed nature of the Eritrean  state.   We
      observe that the basic reason for anonymity in  the  context  of  FFMs
      whose methodology features publication of full notes  of  interviewees
      must be the wishes of the interlocutors and that in any event none  of
      the sources consulted in Eritrea itself is wholly anonymous (each  has
      a   descriptor:   "well-known   Eritrean    intellectual",    "Western
      embassy...") so that the reader has at least  some  contextualisation.



The UK Fact Finding Mission Report (UKFFM) materials

 192. As noted earlier, we use the term "UKFFM materials" to  encompass  not
      just the documentation produced to us at  the  hearing  but  also  the
      contents of the UKFFM Report which was published on 4 August 2016. The
      appellants' submissions also level a number of criticisms against  the
      2016 UKFFM materials, urging that it be found "no more  credible  than
      the DFFM for broadly the same reasons".   They  urge  that  we  should
      approach  them  with  "huge   caution",   there   being   "significant
      methodological concerns about  the  way  in  which  the  sources  were
      identified, about the impact of the presence of  a  representative  of
      the Eritrean Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MoFA) and/or the presence of
      an affiliated interpreter at the  interviews".   The  appellants  also
      raised concerns as to how the interviews were conducted  and  how  the
      mission was planned to  take  account  of  known  limitations  in  the
      gathering of reliable data with Eritrea.

 193. We would first of all note that, no doubt in a  conscious  attempt  to
      avoid the troubled waters that engulfed the  DFFM  Report,  the  UKFFM
      adheres very closely to the  EU  common  guidelines  on  (Joint)  Fact
      Finding Missions methodology for fact-finding missions. The  terms  of
      reference set out at Annex A  identify  exhaustively  all  the  topics
      covered. Annex B identifies precisely what was sent to interviewees in
      advance. Annex C not only lists the sources  consulted  but  specifies
      through whom the meeting/interview was arranged; the language  of  the
      meeting/interview and the status of notes in terms of whether approved
      or not.  A section headed "FFM Team's 'Observations'" gives  a  purely
      descriptive account of what they observed. Of the  32  sources  listed
      only four are purely anonymous; all others have some descriptor - e.g.
      "Diplomatic  source...",  "young  people".   Some   are   specifically
      identified. Furthermore, the notes contain 130 odd pages  of  verbatim
      accounts, setting out the  questions,  the  answers  and  other  minor
      features. We have also had furnished to us a  witness  statement  from
      Martin Stares which devotes 7 pages to explaining the planning of  the
      mission,  its  aims,  terms  of  reference,  how  interlocutors   were
      identified, dates of the mission and itinerary,  methodology  and  how
      the interviews/meetings were conducted and the  process  for  agreeing
      the Notes. Most notably,  unlike  the  DFFM,  the  UKFFM  attempts  no
      executive summary - which has indisputably been the main target of the
      criticisms made of the former. This is  an  unpromising  start  for  a
      submission (by the appellants) that the UKFFM  evidence  is  "no  more
      credible than the DFFM for broadly the same reasons".

 194. We have already  noted  when  analysing  the  DFFM  Report  that  even
      discounting  unwarranted   reliance   on   stereotypes   of   "Western
      diplomats", there are certain limitations to the potential  weight  we
      can give to  evidence  from  the  diplomatic  community  generally  in
      Eritrea.  Whilst we think these also apply to the  diplomatic  sources
      identified in the UKFFM materials, we find that the evidence of the HM
      Ambassador merits somewhat more weight because we know more  about  it
      and it does indicate that he has been able to move around Eritrea to a
      significant extent, visiting Massawa, Tesseney, Barentu, Bista,  Keren
      and Adi Quala and  in  the  course  of  these  visits  had  spoken  to
      "ordinary  people,  business  people,  ministers  and  officials.    I
      regularly go hiking at the weekends in villages around Asmara and  can
      and do speak freely to Eritreans.  I meet there, and  also  in  social
      venues such as coffee shops or the markets.  It  is  not  unusual  for
      people to start conversations with me in the street". If  he  had  any
      reason to think that such conversations were monitored or  compromised
      by the Eritrean government, we are confident he would have said so.

 195. This brings us to the point noted earlier  when  outlining  the  legal
      points relied  on  by  the  appellants'  representatives,  namely  the
      submission that the UKFFM materials cannot be relied on because  there
      has been a "statutory bypass" of the process by which such reports are
      monitored by the IAGCI.  (The Independent Advisory  Group  on  Country
      Information (IAGCI) was set up in March 2009 by the Independent  Chief
      Inspector of Borders and Immigration to make  recommendations  to  him
      about the content of the Home  Office's  COI  material.)  We  are  not
      persuaded that the UKFFM evidence is diminished by the  fact  that  it
      has "not resulted in any report by the SSHD, properly evaluating  what
      if any evidence should be placed on  the  UKFFM  material."   Even  if
      there had been such a report before us, our primary  interest  in  the
      UKFFM materials would have been (no less than it is now), as a  record
      of interviews conducted and  of  what  was  said,  not  on  any  IAGCI
      commentary on what else might have been said or inquired about. We may
      have learnt something more from such  a  commentary,  but  the  notion
      proposed to us - that a judicial fact-finding body  should  ignore  or
      treat as tarnished in value existent UKFFM evidence simply because  it
      has not yet been through  the  filter  of  an  advisory  body  to  the
      government on COI - is one we find frankly absurd.

 196. We also consider that certain  other  appellants'  criticisms  of  the
      UKFFM materials misunderstand  their  status.   Of  course,  the  mere
      existence of verbatim interviews, approved by the  interviewees,  does
      not render them "ipso facto  credible  and  relevant";  they  "require
      proper evaluation".  But, that is far from  being  a  reason  for  not
      treating them as "raw material" evidence in the first place.

 197. The appellants contend that  the  value  of  the  UKFFM  materials  is
      reduced by the reliance on  27  "anonymous  sources"  and  absence  of
      information that enables the Tribunal to assess the reliability  of  a
      source such as information about the nature of a source's operation in
      the relevant area.  Criticism is also made of the  vague  descriptions
      of anonymous sources; the  lack  of  a  persuasive  justification  for
      anonymity; and the exclusive/preponderant use  of  anonymous  sources.
      As regards the significant reliance  on  anonymous  sources,  we  have
      already explained why we consider that this feature reduces  but  does
      not extinguish the value of such  evidence.  Furthermore,  only  three
      sources were wholly anonymous. Whilst we consider that in relation  to
      these (and also some of those where some descriptor was  given),  more
      information could have been provided, this lack does  not  negate  its
      value entirely.

 198.  Insofar  as  the  appellants  seek  to  argue  that  they  have  been
      handicapped from  being  able  to  comment  critically  on  the  UKFFM
      materials by a failure on the  part  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
      disclose   "highly    material    underlying    documents    including
      correspondence with the Eritrean Government and the original interview
      notes", the Tribunal has already explained  why  this  argument  lacks
      substance in its Interlocutory Judgment: MST and others (Disclosure  -
      restrictions - implied undertaking) Eritrea [2016] UKUT 00337 (IAC) at
      [10] .  We would only reiterate here that we have not  been  presented
      with any evidence to suggest that the published interview notes are an
      inaccurate record.  We are satisfied that the explanation set  out  by
      Mr Stares  of  the  underlying  methodology  plus  the  "Observations"
      document, plus the further information provided by Mr  Rawat  suffices
      to enable us to evaluate that record.

 199. Indeed as a result of the information about  methodology  provided  by
      the SSHD, the appellants and UNHCR have  been  able  to  identify  and
      highlight that of the 32 sources, 17 were  arranged  by  the  Eritrean
      Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MoFA) including all  eight  focus  groups
      regarding whom (as a result) "it can be assumed, [were] identified  as
      suitable to participate in discussions with the FFM, by the MoFA".  We
      concur with the appellants that those involved cannot be assumed to be
      independent witnesses and may have been simply acting as  the  "mouth-
      piece" of the government.  We know from a number  of  country  reports
      that the Eritrean government is anxious to regulate and control access
      by foreigners and is extremely sensitive to potential criticism. Press
      statements put out by  Eritrean  government  representatives  disclose
      that they consider that there has been a  concerted  campaign  mounted
      against them by various UN organisations, NGOs and others  to  portray
      it as despotic.  The  government's  decision  in  2015  to  publish  a
      scathing attack on UNHCR's 2011 Eligibility Guidelines - summarised at
      [32]-[33] above, is just one such example.  As a result, the notes  of
      interviews  conducted  with  Eritrean  government  representatives  or
      ruling party members or supporters or persons who may be  beholden  to
      the  Eritrean  government  must  be  treated  with  very  considerable
      caution. They are helpful to  us  in  understanding  the  approach  of
      government representatives and supporters, but  we  do  not  consider,
      without more, their contents should be relied on  in  any  significant
      way.

 200. The evidence we have indicates  that  several  of  the  civil  society
      organisations, the NUEYS, NUEW  and  NCEW,  are  affiliated  with  the
      ruling PFDJ and in any event cannot be considered to be in a  position
      to speak freely.  We concur too with the appellants' and UNHCR's point
      regarding the fact that a representative of the MoFA sat in on 12  out
      of the 32 interviews and was present during the  interviews  with  the
      Minister  of  Justice,  Minister  of  Health,  Minister  of   Finance,
      Immigration Officers, the Head  of  Political  Affairs,  the  Regional
      Governor of Gash Barka and the representatives of the NUEYS, NUEW  and
      NCEW, 7 of the focus groups; and that an interpreter from the MoFA was
      also present during the interview with the focus  group  of  returnees
      from Tesseney and took an active part in discussions.  From Mr Stares'
      statement we learn that notes of the meetings/interviews  with  the  8
      focus groups were sent to the MoFA.  Whilst we do not know whether the
      participants were told in advance  that  this  would  happen,  in  our
      judgement this tends to confirm that those participants knew that what
      they said would become known to the  MoFA.   We  agree  that  in  such
      circumstances it cannot be assumed the participants were able to speak
      freely.

 201. We deem less significant that of the 31 interviews, only 20  had  been
      approved by the interviewees, with the remaining 12 having  been  sent
      but not yet approved.  This  factor  does  reduce  the  value  of  the
      interview notes somewhat, but  does  not  extinguish  their  potential
      value as evidence.

The  two  Amnesty  International  Reports  (AI  Report  on  AA   and   "Just
Deserters", the  two  UNCOI  Reports  of  2015  and  2016  and  the  witness
statement from Elizabeth Chyrum

 202. A recurrent theme of the respondent's submissions  in  this  case  has
      been that there are as many if not more methodological  problems  with
      key parts of the appellants' case than those  alleged  to  infect  the
      reports relied on by the respondent.  In this  regard  she  has  taken
      particular issue, inter alia, with the evidence of PK, two AI  Reports
      and the two UNCOI Reports  and  a  witness  statement  from  Elizabeth
      Chyrum.  We deal separately with PK's evidence below  at   [228]-[240]
      and have also summarised Ms Chyrum's - see [143]-[144] and [224] - but
      must now turn to assessment of those other items.

 203. As noted earlier, the AI Report on AA and "the Just Deserters"  Report
      rely on the same core data, namely reports from  72  interviewees  who
      were interviewed between  July  2014  and  July  2015,  all  "recently
      arrived asylum seekers" (para 84 of the AI Report on AA).  Because the
      "Just Deserters" Report has been published we will focus primarily  on
      it, but note that we have taken account of the  contents  of  both  in
      full.

 204. The respondent's criticisms of the methodology of "Just Deserters" are
      essentially sixfold: (i) it relies heavily on the accounts  of  asylum
      seekers, i.e. persons whose accounts have not (so  far  as  is  known)
      been tested by a decision-maker or a tribunal; (ii) it  does  not  set
      out who "the range of sources and interlocutors" used to identify  the
      individuals to be interviewed; (iii) it is not made clear who were the
      'Eritrean activists' from whom information was  also  taken,  or  what
      independent views they offered or what questions they  were  asked  on
      what topics; (iv) a large number of the propositions  in  the  reports
      are completely unattributed, and do not specify the actual  number  or
      percentages of the interviewees supporting them; (v)  the  methodology
      used in the interviews is not made clear - whether they were all asked
      the same questions, whether they were interviewed alone, whether  they
      were asked open or closed questions, etc; and (vi)  in  at  least  two
      instances the text from two sources  is  identical  or  near-identical
      (one instance being "Filmon" on page 26 and "Yonas" at page 45).

 205. We find that to a varying extent  the  respondent  is  right  to  draw
      attention to the above features of the AI  reports.   In  relation  to
      (i), we can understand that AI may have wanted to focus on persons who
      had recently left Eritrea so as to give  an  up-to-date  picture.   We
      also accept Mr Knafler's  point  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  apply
      stereotypes to asylum seekers; it would be utterly wrong, for example,
      to assume they have a vested interest in lying.  At the same time,  AI
      is fully aware of the concerns expressed by the Upper  Tribunal  in  a
      number of cases about sources that rely  heavily  on  asylum  seekers'
      evidence which has not been tested and, as PK's own  writings  attest,
      analysts cannot expect decision-makers to assume such  evidence  would
      stand up to judicial scrutiny.

 206. We accept that AI considers that it seeks to verify  the  evidence  of
      witnesses "to the greatest possible extent" (see above at   [65])  but
      in the absence of any indication whatsoever of such evaluation  having
      been applied, it is impossible to gauge what that means  in  practice;
      and it is clearly difficult  for  any  organisation  seeking  to  give
      absolute priority as AI says it does to protecting  the  anonymity  of
      witnesses and reassuring them they can give evidence safely, to pursue
      lines of questioning that might be perceived as expressing doubt.

 207. Considering matters in  the  round,  we  fail  to  understand  why  no
      interviews at all were conducted with Eritreans  whose  asylum  claims
      had been found to be truthful by national decision-makers and/or whose
      claims have resulted in refugee status. If none  were  available  that
      should itself have been explained.

 208. As regards (ii), once the decision was made to rely on  interviews  of
      asylum-seekers only, we do not think it matters  very  much  that  the
      reports do not say more about the range of sources who identified them
      to AI; it is highly unlikely that there would be 72  interviewees  who
      all know each other or reflected  just  one  or  type  of  case.    As
      regards (iii)-(v), we  consider  that  the  missing  information  they
      identify would have helped enhance their possible value  as  evidence,
      although this does not negate it.    We  note  that  it  is  not  AI's
      practice to disclose or publish even anonymised interview notes.  That
      is clearly a matter for AI, but in a world  in  which  the  corpus  of
      available evidence may include FFM reports that do include such notes,
      they cannot complain if this comparative lack of transparency is  seen
      as a shortcoming.  We note that if we had seen such notes we may  have
      been in a better position to make sense of  the  worrying  allegations
      made by the respondent in (vi)  above  in  relation  to  the  apparent
      reliance on identical evidence from two sources.  It  is  possible  in
      the light of such fuller evidence we may have been able  to  establish
      whether these were isolated examples.  As it is, we  cannot  rule  out
      that the reports relied on may contain other apparent errors  of  this
      kind.  Despite Mr Knafler telling us on the second day of the  hearing
      that those instructing him hoped to receive an explanatory  note  from
      AI regarding the two examples identified by Mr  Rawat,  no  such  note
      materialised, nor any  explanation  for  its  non-production.  AI,  we
      remind ourselves, produced its Report on AA for the purposes  of  this
      hearing.

The UNCOI Reports 2015 and 2016

 209. The respondent has also assailed the methodology  of  the  two  recent
      UNCOI Reports, noting that critics of the first  include:  Lifos,  who
      have queried whether their temporal  scope  is  overbroad  (trying  to
      assess the performance of  the  Eritrean  state  from  1991-2015)  and
      stated  that  "from  a  source-critical  perspective  [it]  has   some
      weaknesses"; Bromwyn Bruton, Deputy Director of the Atlantic Council's
      Africa Centre; and Dr Tanja M�ller who has  written  that  the  report
      "took anonymity and confidentiality to a level that makes many of  its
      statements devoid of context or temporality and thus  hard  to  engage
      with critically or otherwise".

 210. The respondent's main criticisms in full are that: (i)  the  overbroad
      temporal scope renders the  report's  methodology  "entirely  opaque";
      (ii) the Commission  does  not  set  out  how  the  interviewees  were
      selected or what steps were taken to protect against  interview  bias;
      (iii) the Commission does not explain what percentage  of  respondents
      were asylum seekers and does not grapple with the issue of whether the
      evidence of asylum-seekers can always be taken at face-value; (iv) the
      Commission does not give any detail about the nature  and  methodology
      of the questioning,  who  carried  out  the  interviews,  whether  the
      questions were open or closed; or whether interlocutors were alone  or
      not; (v) it is not clear  how  written  submissions  were  checked  or
      verified - only selected extracts of interviews  were  made  available
      and there is use of paraphrase; (vi) the vast majority of propositions
      are supported by very few sources.

 211. Despite the respondent having set out the criticisms of the Commission
      in  her  written  and  oral  submissions,  the   appellants'   written
      submissions contain no rejoinder  to  them.  In  oral  submissions  Mr
      Knafler made no reference to them in respect of the 2015 UNCOI Report.
      He submitted that in the second report fresh evidence was relied on.

 212.  UNHCR's  supplementary  written  submissions  do  not   address   the
      respondent's criticism of the  2015  UNCOI  Report,  but  (as  do  her
      supplementary submissions addressing the August 2016 versions  of  the
      CIGs) they do address the status of  the  2016  UNCOI  Report  in  the
      context of criticism made  of  the  2015  Report.   These  submissions
      observe that whatever force the criticism of the 2015 UNCOI Report for
      its wide temporal scope might be thought to have, that critique is not
      applicable to the 2016 UNCOI Report, since at [74] the  latter  report
      noted that:

           "All the witnesses and other evidence cited in subsections  1-10
           of this section of the report on current human  rights  concerns
           detailed violations that took place between 1 June 2014 and  the
           date of issuance."

 213. The 2016 UNCOI Report, UNHCR points out, also identified that its pool
      of interviewees was drawn from thirteen countries and  the  Commission
      also spoke with experts, diplomatic staff of third countries currently
      working in Eritrea, foreign journalists who recently  visited  Eritrea
      and other UN agencies and NGOs.  UNHCR submitted that  both  the  2015
      and 2016 reports identified that their interlocutors included not just
      victims but former members of the Eritrean  government  and  commended
      the care with which the 2016 UNCOI  Report  had  reviewed  the  44,267
      responses to its call for written  submissions  (which  came  from  39
      countries), noting that it considered a randomly  selected  sample  of
      2,250 of these respondents and contacted the author  of  each  one  to
      verify its authenticity. The UNCOI  had  correctly  noted  the  highly
      generalised nature of the assertions and denials. UNHCR considered the
      Commission had fairly assessed the limited value of  the  majority  of
      these  responses  that  were  critical  of  the  2015  UNCOI   Report.
      According to UNHCR "the thoroughness of  the  2016  Report's  analysis
      affords a striking contrast to the Danish and UKFFM Reports."

 214. We are wary of reaching a definitive view regarding  such  criticisms.
      The fact that the 2016 UNCOI Report records that most  of  the  44,267
      responses it had to the 2015  Report,  coupled  with  the  information
      contained in a Shabait press release dated  23  June  2016  ('Eritrea-
      Ministry of Information') that when  it  was  officially  launched  in
      Geneva, a protest demonstration against  it  was  said  to  have  been
      attended by 6,000 persons, is  a  vivid  illustration  of  the  strong
      feelings engendered by all reports on Eritrea that  have  implications
      for the treatment and processing of Eritrean asylum  seekers  and  the
      international profile of the Eritrean state more  generally.   We  are
      also conscious that our focus is very different from that of the UNCOI
      Inquiry.  We are not tasked with deciding on the nature and extent  of
      human rights violations in that country over a 25 year period  and  it
      would be arrogant in the extreme for a domestic tribunal dealing  with
      a country guidance case focusing on risk on forcible return to try and
      pass judgement on a large-scale international inquiry which has  taken
      several years and involved a prodigious amount of work. On  the  other
      hand, we cannot avoid identifying certain difficulties posed by  these
      two reports that impinge on  our  own  task  and  we  agree  with  the
      respondent that we cannot apply different standards from that we apply
      to e.g. government Fact-Finding Missions, just because the  report  is
      carried out by UN officials.

 215. We venture no criticism of the Commission for its wide temporal scope,
      since that was clearly the remit it was given, but this  feature  does
      make it very hard to ascertain the precise  evidential  basis  of  the
      2015 Report for its assessment of the situation in  Eritrea  in  2015.
      It is a pity that the 2015 Report tells us so  little  about  how  the
      interviewees were selected.  We note that unlike AI's "Just  Deserters
      Report", the UNCOI interviewees are said to include refugees  as  well
      as asylum seekers, which potentially reduces  the  scope  for  concern
      about reliance on untested evidence.   Yet  the  report's  failure  to
      identify how many non-asylum seeker "victims"  were  interviewed  does
      not assist.

 216. We are very conscious that the UNCOI makes very clear that it is not a
      judicial body, but at the same time it does state that it has  applied
      rigorous standards and it does  purport  to  apply  international  law
      principles and for this reason we would have hoped that  the  report's
      methodology would have given more context regarding  such  matters  as
      whether questions were  open  and  closed,  whether  anyone  else  was
      present etc.

 217. The fact that the  2015  UNCOI  Report  only  includes  extracts  from
      interviews is a feature that causes difficulties in  being  sure  they
      link to different witnesses. The respondent also makes fair points  in
      analysing the extent to which key propositions in the 2015 Report  are
      only supported by limited sources.

 218. As regards the 2016 UNCOI Report, it is indeed much more  helpful  for
      our purposes in identifying that although still  forming  part  of  an
      inquiry into the past 25  years,  one  of  its  specific  purposes  is
      considering whether there had been any significant changes  since  the
      first  report:  see  [54]  above.  On  many  key  issues  relating  to
      military/national service the level of  detail  and  cross-linking  to
      primary  and  secondary  sources  is  extraordinarily  impressive  and
      conveys to us that the authors have refused to rely on generalisations
      and have eschewed the temptation to simply regurgitate materials  from
      elsewhere. We take note that it relied on more  than  830  sources  of
      information.

 219. We do have concerns nevertheless about the way  that  the  2016  UNCOI
      Report  responded  to  the  fact  that  the  "bulk"  of  their  44,267
      submissions respondents expressed views critical  of  the  2015  UNCOI
      Report.  We found very helpful the response of the Special  Rapporteur
      to our further directions sent in late  July  to  questions  regarding
      this concern. Although making clear that since the Commission has  now
      completed its  task  she  is  not  in  a  position  to  make  detailed
      statements concerning its  methodology,  her  responses  shed  further
      light. Nevertheless they  do  not  entirely  allay  our  concern.  The
      authors may well be right in stating in the report that a good  number
      of  these  respondents  had  not  read  the  2015  Report   and   were
      orchestrated by pro-Eritrean  government  actors  (that  was  a  point
      reiterated by the Special Rapporteur in the  15  August  letter),  but
      that does  not  wholly  explain  why,  as  a  result,  none  of  these
      individual responses are referred to in the report itself. The  Report
      details that it considered a randomly  selected  sample  of  2,250  of
      these  respondents  each  of  whom  was  "interviewed  to  verify  the
      authenticity of the submission". In the  15  August  letter  from  the
      Special Rapporteur it is explained that the Commission  did  not  have
      the resources to review each and every submission  and  that  it  took
      steps to ensure that the sample group of 2,250 was selected so  as  to
      cover all languages, geographic areas and  gender  and  that  it  then
      selected 500 writers located in 126 countries to contact  individually
      and that - "although invited to provide further information -  "[n]ext
      to none added the type of factual detail  that  would  have  permitted
      consideration in the findings on international crimes and human rights
      violations" and "[n]one of those contacted chose to discuss their  own
      personal experiences in the national  service,  although  most  stated
      generally that national service in Eritrea is a necessary response  to
      the numerous threats that  Eritrea  faces".  This  confirms  what  was
      stated in the report itself about the highly generalised nature of the
      assertions and denials and the fact that "next to none of the  authors
      referred to their own military national  service,  the  conditions  of
      their military national service or the length of  their  service"  and
      that many were vague about their own reasons for leaving Eritrea.  The
      letter further observes that "[none] of them  described  witnessing  a
      situation in which human rights violations had been said, in the first
      report to be occurring...". The  Special  Rapporteur  further  stated:
      "Had any of the writers provided, whether in writing or in the  sample
      phone-calls,  any  substantive  information  with   respect   to   the
      crimes/human rights violations at issue (including to state that  they
      had concrete evidence that these were not occurring),  the  Commission
      would have made follow up contact with  the  writers  and  asked  them
      whether they would be willing to speak formally  as  witnesses.  Their
      evidence would then have been  assessed  in  sections  III-IV  of  the
      report. There were in fact, at the request of a handful of  those  who
      the Commission contacted by phone, some further follow  up  calls  but
      these still did not elicit relevant information of substance". However
      she also accepts that  the  Commission  "chose  not  to  ask  specific
      questions,  including  concerning  military  service"  and  that   the
      interviews were "specifically directed at  understanding  what  weight
      could be attributed to the written submissions, given  the  appearance
      of a coordinated campaign".  Given that presumably some  at  least  of
      these respondents were people who have lived in  Eritrea  since  1991,
      they must all or many have performed some period of  national  service
      and if asked about  this  may  have  been  able  to  provide  concrete
      information  going  to  the  issues  within  the  Commission's  remit,
      potentially affecting for example the extent  to  which  human  rights
      abuses were systematic. We entirely understand the dilemma facing  the
      Commission in terms  of  its  limited  resources,  but  having  sought
      further submissions and then received some  44,267  submissions,  even
      eliminating those found to be formulaic or coerced, we  do  not  think
      they could so easily be discarded as  potential  sources  of  evidence
      relevant to the issue  of  the  military/national  service  system  in
      Eritrea.  The responses received are not identified  anywhere  in  the
      report except by way of a summary and an analysis of  "common  themes"
      at [48]-[55].

 220. The treatment of these submissions  is  in  sharp  contrast  with  the
      specific use made of "witness" evidence that  reflected  adversely  on
      the Eritrean government,  which  is  used  throughout  to  corroborate
      various findings made in the report. It seems  to  us  that  the  same
      methodology should have been applied to all the sources, whether  they
      were "respondents" or "witnesses".  To underline  the  point  we  have
      made already, the letter from the Special Rapporteur accepts that  the
      efforts made to follow up by contacting a sample  of  respondents  did
      not include asking them if  they  were  able  to  describe  their  own
      military/national service  experiences.   If  they  had  it  may  have
      yielded potential evidence from at least some.  This  would  not  have
      prevented the Commission from identifying that it considered any  such
      further evidence received in response  to  be  partisan  or  otherwise
      deficient.

 221. It is surprising that despite noting at  [22]  that  most  respondents
      stated that they visited  Eritrea  only  occasionally  and  that  many
      stressed  the  general  sense  of  calm  and  order  in  Asmara,   the
      Commission's only  expressed  response  to  this  information  was  to
      observe that the types of human rights abuses committed in Eritrea are
      not committed on the streets of Asmara. We doubt  that  all  of  these
      writers would have regarded calm and order on  the  streets  as  proof
      that all was well throughout Eritrea.

 222. We would add that we find it at least curious that pursuant to Council
      Resolution 26/24 the Commission of Inquiry should include  as  one  of
      its members the Special Rapporteur, someone who in proper exercise  of
      her remit for that post  (she  was  appointed  in  October  2012)  had
      already gone  on  record  on  numerous  occasions  as  someone  highly
      critical of Eritrea's human rights performance.  For her to  give  her
      own evaluation was precisely what  the  UN  would  expect  of  such  a
      Rapporteur. However,  in  September  2014  the  Human  Rights  Council
      appointed her to the Commission of Inquiry. We  are  sure  there  were
      worthy  motives  behind  this  action,  including  the  value  of  the
      Commission benefiting  from  her  existing  expertise.  We  also  take
      judicial notice of the UN's Rules of  Fact-Finding  Procedure  for  UN
      Bodies Dealing with Violations of Human Rights adopted in 1973 and the
      Belgrade Minimum Rules of Procedure  for  International  Human  Rights
      Fact-finding  Visits,  approved  by  the  59th   Conference   of   the
      International Law Association,  held  in  Belgrade  in  1980  and  the
      Guidelines on  International  Human  Rights  Fact-Finding  Visits  and
      Reports (The Lund London Guidelines) 2009 and the fact that more  than
      one  previous  UN  commission  of  inquiry  has  included  a   Special
      Rapporteur member. But from a procedural perspective it does open  the
      report  to  criticisms  as  to  its  impartiality  (the  Lund   London
      Guidelines, for example, at para 8 state that "The mission's delegates
      should  comprise  individuals   who   are   and   are   seen   to   be
      unbiased"(emphasis  added)).  In  the  judicial   context   it   would
      ordinarily be expected that anyone appointed to  an  inquiry  had  not
      previously reached any publicly expressed view on the issue  in  hand,
      so that the public can be assured they approach  their  task  with  an
      open mind.

 223. At the same time, we consider it extremely important not to allow  the
      difficulties we have just identified to blur perspective and we do not
      consider  that  they  significantly  undermine  the  fact   that   the
      Commission's findings were based on a very substantial number of first-
      hand accounts.  It cannot be  gainsaid  that  the  two  reports  taken
      together, represent a large-scale, sustained and intensive  effort  to
      detail and evaluate all relevant aspects of the Eritrean state on  the
      basis of substantial, first-hand evidence.

Witness statement of Elizabeth Chyrum

 224. We have summarised the evidence of Ms Chyrum contained in her  witness
      statement regarding Bisha Mines and the evidence generally relating to
      Bisha Mines. Ms Chyrum did not give evidence,  although  initially  it
      was her intention to do so.  We  accept  that  there  is  evidence  of
      exploitation generally in the mining industry and  that  a  number  of
      conscripts have complained to Ms Chyrum of being subjected  to  forced
      labour, three of whom have joined a class  action.  Others  are  being
      encouraged to do so.  We are in no position to assess their claims and
      as Ms Chyrum would not give evidence we can only treat it in the  same
      way as much of the other background evidence.  However,  the  evidence
      overall does establish that some conscripts may be subject  to  forced
      labour in the mining industry and we  will  return  to  this  when  we
      assess forced labour.

The Home Office Country Information and Guidance  (CIG)  publications  on  4
August 2016

 225. As noted earlier on the same day that the Home  Office  published  the
      UKFFM Report on Eritrea, it produced new versions of its two CIG notes
      on  Eritrea:  Country  Information  and  Guidance:  Eritrea:  National
      (incl.Military)  Service,  Version  3.0,  August  2016   and   Country
      Information and Guidance: Eritrea: Illegal Exit, Version  3.0,  August
      2016.  Having learnt of their publication whilst still deliberating on
      this case the Tribunal decided to make  further  directions  affording
      the parties the opportunity to make submissions on their  significance
      and relevance. In response the respondent pointed out  that  in  large
      part save for very limited exceptions relating to a journalistic piece
      from Mary Harper, the Landinfo mission of February 2016  and  a  Swiss
      fact-finding mission of April 2016 report (the latter which  had  only
      been available in German at the hearing stage)  these  relied  on  the
      same body of sources already before the Tribunal. The response by  the
      appellants questioned the timing of their publication,  which  "appear
      to be  a  direct  response  to  anticipated  guidance  on  key  issues
      ventilated  during  these  proceedings".  They  drew  the   Tribunal's
      attention to the sections of the CIG which have undergone considerable
      revision or editing when compared to the previous version relied  upon
      during  the  proceedings  submitting  that   "[n]o   explanation   (or
      evidential basis) is proffered by the SSHD as to why critical passages
      from v2  have  been  omitted  from  v3."  UNHCR's  response  expressed
      concerns about the timing of the new CIG versions "less than  a  month
      before the anticipated date of the judgment." These concerns were said
      to be "reinforced by the problems  in  the  new  CIGs  of  unexplained
      reliance on sources suggesting positive changes in preference to  more
      critical sources; selective citation of sources in the CIGs;  and  the
      heavy reliance on the methodologically flawed  Danish  and  UK  FFMs."
      Among the points raised was that the new CIGs did not properly reflect
      the balance of the evidence relating  to  the  likely  perception  and
      treatment  on  return  of  draft  evaders/deserters  and  the  serious
      consequences for persons failing to comply with  their  obligation  to
      serve  in  the  people's  militia.  UNHCR  also  submitted  that   the
      criticisms made in the new CIGs of the methodology of  the  two  UNCOI
      Reports were unwarranted.

 226. We have taken fully into account the two new versions of the CIGs  and
      the parties' further submissions on them.  We make no criticism of the
      respondent for acting to publish the new  versions  of  the  CIGs,  to
      align with the publication of the UKFFM materials  (the  latter  which
      she had made clear at the hearing had been served on the  Tribunal  as
      soon as they became available, even though publication  would  take  a
      little more time). That said, it is unfortunate  that  the  respondent
      did not make clearer on the last day of hearing (on 20 June) that  the
      Home Office planned to publish them within weeks. Given  the  sequence
      of events we  wholly  fail  to  understand  the  basis  on  which  the
      appellants sought to submit that their  publication  was  designed  to
      "head off" the anticipated guidance from the Tribunal. The  respondent
      could not have anticipated that we would decide to invite  submissions
      on them.

 227. Beyond the above observations, we  do  not  propose  to  set  out  our
      assessment of the responses we received. It suffices to  say  that  we
      have taken them into account. We have already summarised the  contents
      of the new CIGs and,  in  line  with  the  general  structure  of  our
      decision we refer to them and/or submissions made  regarding  them  as
      and when appropriate.


C.       ASSESSMENT OF THE EVIDENCE OF PROFESSOR KIBREAB (PK)

 228. PK gave evidence to the Tribunal in MA and MO and in the  latter  case
      the Tribunal stated that "[l]ike the Tribunal in MA, we consider  that
      PK should be considered as a serious expert on country  conditions  in
      Eritrea"; and, whilst not accepting every aspect of his  evidence,  it
      concluded that his  evidence  generally  should  be  accorded  serious
      weight ([93]). Unlike the position in MA and MO the respondent in  the
      present case has mounted a great many criticisms of PK's evidence  and
      it is fair to say that as a  result  of  the  events  surrounding  the
      publication of the DFFM Report and the use made subsequently of it  by
      the UK Home Office, PK has taken a very public position regarding this
      report and regarding the policies of the governments of  Denmark,  the
      UK and other Western states concerning  the  treatment  of  claims  by
      Eritrean asylum-seekers.

 229. One of the principal criticisms levelled by the respondent is that  PK
      let himself become too personally involved in the DFFM controversy  to
      be able to give independent evidence regarding it and  that  this  has
      carried over into his approach to the UKFFM. We regret to say that  we
      see a certain force in that criticism.

 230. As noted when assessing the DFFM Report, we find  that  PK  must  bear
      some of the blame for the way that  the  public  controversy  unfolded
      after the DFFM publication because he had not checked through a  draft
      of it as he was asked to do and had sent an email nevertheless to  the
      DIS describing the published report as "informative and well  written"
      when he had not even read it. He had also approved  the  note  of  the
      interviews he had given to the DFFM researchers despite the fact  that
      it included a passage which was  clearly  capable  of  being  read  as
      conveying that he believed there had been a relaxation in  the  policy
      of the Eritrean government to draft evaders and deserters who had left
      illegally: see above at [175]. We accept from his evidence to us  that
      at the relevant time he was under very considerable  pressure  in  his
      university  work,  but  instead   of   immediately   recognising   and
      acknowledging that this passage was not what he meant  to  convey,  he
      blamed the DIS for distorting what he had told them. There were indeed
      serious errors in the DFFM, which we have analysed  above.  We  accept
      PK's evidence that its head did not give him time to check the  report
      having initially said he would do so, but we find that PK did not help
      the terms of the subsequent public debate by failing to make clear  at
      the time his own responsibility for not checking his note of interview
      and the rest of the report. His use in his early public statements  of
      the language of "betrayal" did not adequately explain his  own  errors
      and did not assist the level  of  public  understanding  and  did  not
      exemplify the behaviour we would expect  of  an  experienced  academic
      expert.

 231. It seems to us that the extent to which  PK  had  let  himself  become
      personally embroiled in the public debate over the  DFFM  and  the  UK
      Home Office response to it is  borne  out  by  the  language  that  he
      employed in the critique he wrote of the DFFM immediately after it was
      released and in the AA Report of September 2015. There are passages in
      this September 2015 Report which we can  only  say  are  untypical  of
      reports we have read from him over the years. More  than  one  passage
      says in effect that the diplomatic community in Asmara  has  a  vested
      interest in painting an untrue picture of conditions in order to  stem
      the flow of Eritreans seeking asylum (see e.g. A1/8).  His  commentary
      of March 25, 2015 entitled "Some Reflections on the UK  Home  Office's
      Country  Information  Guidance  Eritrea:  National  (incl)   Military)
      Service and Illegal Exit, March 2015" and  his  revised  report  of  4
      April 2016 for this case contain similar assertions;  and  the  latter
      endorses the review commissioned by the IAGCI from  Dr  John  Campbell
      (which he  describes  as  being  "unequivocally  scathing"  about  the
      September Home Office CIGs), without any reference to the Home  Office
      response to the IAGCI review published in November 2015. Pressed about
      this by Mr Rawat, PK said he had read the Home Office response but saw
      no need to comment on it. We find that a lapse  in  judgement  on  the
      part of the professor. Irrespective of whether or not the Home  Office
      response was cogent, any endorsement of the Campbell critique  without
      reference to it was bound to appear as a one-sided  treatment  of  the
      relevant materials. It does not comport with proper performance by  an
      expert witness of his duty to identify evidence  pointing  against  as
      well as for the opinion evidence proffered.

 232. For similar reasons we find it striking that despite  continuing  into
      2015-2016 to devote a significant portion of his critique of the  DFFM
      Report to highlighting  the claim by Drs Olsen  and  Olesen  that  the
      head of mission had put pressure on them he nowhere mentions that  the
      Danish Ombudsman specifically examined the question "Was pressure  put
      on staff of the DIS to paint a favourable  picture  of  conditions  in
      Eritrea which were not actually how  things  were?"  and  reached  the
      specific finding that "I have no reason to believe that the DIS wished
      to give the conclusions in the report an untenable expression  or  put
      pressure on its staff with this purpose in mind"  (see  above  [181]).
      None of this is to gainsay whether in fact  the  Ombudsman's  findings
      amounted to a direct contradiction of the evidence of Olsen and Olesen
      or whether the remit of the Ombudsman was sufficiently broad to enable
      him to make findings on such matters. But the Ombudsman  is  the  only
      person who had sight of all relevant documentation about what actually
      happened inside the DIS regarding the DFFM and at the very  least  his
      findings on this issue should have been referred to. PK's  failure  to
      refer to them coupled with his great emphasis on what Olsen and Olesen
      had alleged, was quite insufficient. His reference to the  Ombudsman's
      findings otherwise do not rectify this insufficiency.

 233. There is also an element of one-sidedness in PK's treatment of certain
      NGO sources who became involved in the polemics surrounding  the  DFFM
      Report. In his report for AA, for example, he sought to rebut the view
      (which he saw to lie behind the  DFFM  Report)  that  only  informants
      inside  Eritrea  could  produce  reliable  data  by  invoking  "highly
      reputable and dedicated human rights organisations, such as  AI,  HRW,
      Journalists Without Borders etc. who have over time  built  formidable
      reputation thorough unimpeachable rigour and scrupulous  scrutiny  and
      seasoned academics whose publications are filtered through severe  and
      thorough scrutiny".  Under cross-examination on the subject of the  AI
      report, "Just Deserters", PK had to agree that he was not in fact in a
      position to vouchsafe the contents of  that  particular  report  apart
      from the fact that it comported with  his  own  understanding  of  the
      situation in Eritrea. The strong reputation of bodies such  as  AI  is
      not in dispute  and  is  often  referred  to  by  various  courts  and
      tribunals, including this Tribunal, as one relevant consideration when
      assessing sources, but it is  not  in  anyone's  interests,  including
      AI's, for such respect be elevated into a dogma. As PK accepted in his
      oral testimony, every report from whatever source must be subjected to
      the same critical standards. When adulatory  language  like  this  co-
      exists with ad hominem criticism of the motives of  western  diplomats
      in Eritrea, the inevitable impression created is of an expert who  has
      strayed from an approach that is unwaveringly objective and impartial.



 234. We would emphasise that we find these aspects of PK's written evidence
      atypical and note that in his  "Reflections on Home  Office  FFM",  21
      April 2016, he generally adopts a far more measured and objective tone
      (save for one isolated passage in 5.11).

 235. This case has  required  us  to  examine  many  key  sources  under  a
      microscope in relation to the methodology underlying them and in  this
      context it is almost inevitable that PK's own research techniques  and
      methods should come under greater scrutiny  than  ever  before.  To  a
      certain extent we think that some of the criticisms  directed  by  the
      respondent at his written and oral evidence for defective  methodology
      were over exacting: e.g. it was suggested  that  there  was  something
      deficient about the fact  that  he  said  he  had  only  conducted  24
      research interviews since 2012 (between 2002 to 2012 he had  conducted
      190). Viewed together with his daily contact with a network of sources
      and his various papers and talks on Eritrea, this does not  strike  us
      as deficient. The criticism that he failed in his AA  Report  to  cite
      the current Tribunal Practice Directions is  not  unimportant  because
      these contain the basic ground rules for an expert  witness,  but  the
      respondent does not dispute that the  earlier  version  on  which  the
      professor relied was in substance the same. On the other hand,  we  do
      consider that the respondent identifies some significant  shortcomings
      in his patterns of research. We have already had cause to refer to his
      regrettable lapse in sending an email describing the DFFM draft report
      as "well-written and informed" when he had not even read it and to his
      evident inattention to the meaning likely to be conveyed  by  passages
      he approved for the DFFM notes. Despite the claim  in  his  AA  Report
      that "I have a practice of counter-checking every source", he conceded
      in cross-examination that this was not always  the  case.  There  were
      instances, hopefully isolated,  where  he  exhibited  carelessness  in
      sourcing (e.g. using a book published in  2013  making  an  un-sourced
      claim that the people's militia had increased draft  ages  to  80  and
      failing to note obvious "round  tripping";  e.g.  his  description  of
      Martin Plaut's 26 February 2016 "analysis" when the latter was  simply
      cutting and pasting from HRW).

 236. More troubling to us in terms of determining the weight to be given to
      his expert evidence has been the information he has given in  response
      to questions seeking clarification of who comprise what he referred to
      several times in his reports as his  "dense  network"  of  sources  in
      Eritrea.  Whilst we have no doubt that his network  is  a  significant
      one and includes contacts  with  persons  who  work  in  the  Eritrean
      government as well as outside it, we were surprised at the  number  of
      occasions when under  pressure  from  Mr  Rawat,  it  turned  out  his
      information for a particular matter comprised just friends and  family
      and/or was based on an  what  he  described  (too  often)  as  "common
      knowledge".

 237. It was also not always easy to tell when he was  drawing  on  his  own
      research interviews and/or his dense network of contacts and  when  he
      was rather relying on his own unadorned  opinions.  Sometimes  he  was
      very candid about relying solely on the latter, as when  in  reply  to
      questions about the likely profile of Eritreans who go back to Eritrea
      for holidays, he  said  "but  I'm  speculating",  yet  prior  to  that
      observation he had given the impression his opinion on this matter was
      based on his dense network  of  sources.  Sometimes  when  pressed  he
      explained that he arrived  at  his  opinion  simply  by  inference  or
      deduction from other known facts. For example, he  said  that  he  had
      reached the conclusion that the category of students  able  to  obtain
      exit visas had narrowed  because  this  was  a  "consequence"  of  the
      (greater)  numbers  of  Eritreans  leaving   the   country   and   the
      introduction of the people's militia. We fail to see what added  value
      such comments bring to understanding of this issue. We did not  always
      find it easy to follow how he reached certain of his key  conclusions:
      for example when asked why he had not stated prior to  2016  that  the
      upper age limits for exit visas had changed from what  he  had  stated
      them to be in MO, he said he had changed his mind as a result  of  his
      research. Yet elsewhere he said he relied for information  about  this
      on his own "dense network" of contacts  in  Eritrea.  Given  that  the
      people's militia was established in 2012, we do not understand why  it
      took four years for him to revise his view about this.

 238. We were also troubled by his evidence relating to the paragraph in the
      DFFM which he agreed: see [36] and [175]  above.  Although  we  accept
      that the DIS interpreted it in a  way  that  does  not  represent  his
      position, PK's evidence about his interpretation of it  and  what  was
      meant by it was unimpressive. He sought to explain the  identification
      of "a few deserters" by reference to three witnesses, but when  probed
      about the three, it is clear  that  his  information  about  them  was
      lacking in detail.  He described the "relaxation" he meant as being in
      the government's attitude to its supporters, but  this  did  not  make
      much sense to us.

 239. In light of such observations we find ourselves unable  to  attach  as
      much weight to PK's evidence as the UT has done  hitherto  in  country
      guidance cases on Eritrea. We continue to view him as an able academic
      having a long-established and extensive knowledge about conditions  in
      Eritrea and someone whose research plays (and we hope will continue to
      play) an invaluable role in informing others about  the  nature  of  a
      regime which makes it particularly difficult for the outside world  to
      gain a full picture of  what  happens  inside  the  country.  However,
      whilst for that reason we continue to draw on his evidence as  one  of
      the many sources available to us on Eritrea, we are not able  to  give
      it pre-eminent weight.

 240. It is fair to add straightaway that our  re-evaluation  of  PK  as  an
      expert witness has not in the end had a significant effect on our main
      conclusions, since we now have considerably more evidence  from  other
      sources, including of course the two UNCOI Reports of 2015  and  2016.
      Mr Knafler correctly observed  in  submissions  that  the  appellants'
      cases did not hinge on whether the Tribunal felt able to rely  heavily
      on PK's evidence.

D.       FINDINGS ON MAIN GENERAL ISSUES

 241. We are now in a position to give  our  findings  on  the  main  issues
      arising in this case. As signposted already, we consider  it  best  as
      much as possible to set down in the same place first a short  synopsis
      of the relevant  background  materials;  second  a  reference  to  any
      existing country guidance on the issue; third, a brief outline of  the
      submissions we had regarding each issue; and fourth  our  findings  on
      it. We shall deviate a little from this structure  where  appropriate.
      It is in the nature of the main  issues  thrown  up  by  the  Eritrean
      context that some overlaps will occur.

The general situation

 242. It is not in dispute  that  the  human  rights  situation  in  Eritrea
      remains of deep concern.

 243. The background reports chronicle some positive measures which seem  to
      us to be uncontentious. For example, in February 2016 a delegation  of
      OHCHR was permitted to make a working level technical assessment visit
      to Eritrea. In addition a delegation of HCHR visited Eritrea in  March
      2016 and was permitted a short visit to  Sembel  prison.  Eritrea  has
      acceded to the Convention Against Torture  (in  September  2014).  The
      government has brought into force a new Civil Code, Penal  Code,  Code
      of Civil Procedure and Code of  Criminal  Procedure.  It  has  adopted
      Proclamation No. 158/2007 to abolish female genital mutilation. It has
      made  some  progress  in  achieving  the   health-related   Millennium
      Development  Goals.  It  has  formulated  a  new  national  policy  on
      children. In March 2015 the European  Commission  under  the  Eritrea-
      European Union Partnership of 2015 and National  Indicative  programme
      for  Eritrea,  11th  European  Development  Fund   announced   a   new
      development package of 312 million euros. In April 2014,  8  political
      detainees were released  and  in  January  2015,  6  journalists  were
      released from detention.  There is  some  evidence  of  a  raising  of
      national service salaries, the printing of new currency rates to deter
      people-traffickers and greater foreign investment in mining and  other
      sectors. Checkpoints for ID and travel documents are  less  prevalent.
      There appear to have been more journalists able to  visit  Asmara  and
      sometimes other areas. There is evidence that many diaspora  Eritreans
      return to Eritrea each year to visit family and friends.

 244. There is,  however,  far  more  frequent  mention  in  the  background
      evidence  of  continuing  matters   of   concern.   Those   that   are
      uncontentious include, for example, the  fact  that  the  UN  Security
      Council continues to extend the arms  embargo  on  Eritrea.  The  1997
      Constitution, published as  the  Supreme  Law  of  the  Land,  remains
      unimplemented and indeed the President declared the  new  Constitution
      void on 30 April 2014.  The National Assembly  remains  suspended  and
      there is  an  absence  of  a  functioning  legislature.  There  is  no
      independent judicial system.  The 2015 World Press Freedom Index ranks
      Eritrea last among 180 countries. The economy is weak. The 2015  UNCOI
      Report cites a  former  military  clerk  as  stating  that  one  could
      estimate the number of detainees to have reached  14,000  in  2014  in
      military prisons alone  (see  [794]).  The  same  report  states  that
      torture is widespread and systemic. The level of corruption  increased
      such that in 2015 out of 168 countries only 13 others were  ranked  as
      more corrupt than Eritrea (see Transparency International 2015 Index).



 245. It must be emphasised that as regards the  debit  side  of  the  human
      rights auditing  of  Eritrea,  the  respondent's  position  is  little
      different from that of the appellants and UNHCR, although she  clearly
      maintains that on certain issues relevant to risk categories on return
      there has been some improvement. This is not surprising given that the
      FCO, for  example,  continues  to  issue  statements  expressing  very
      serious concerns about the human  rights  situation  in  Eritrea:  see
      above at [85]. In  outline  submissions  Ms  Dubinsky  identified  ten
      propositions  which  can  be  derived  from  the  evidence  which  she
      understood not to be in dispute between the parties. Although  neither
      Mr Rawat nor  Mr  Knafler  agreed  these  expressly,  we  consider  it
      provides useful context to set them out as stated by Ms  Dubinsky  (it
      is only  really  as  regards  point  10  that  there  is  any  obvious
      conflict).

            1) Eritrea is a 'closed state' in which independent media  have
               been banned since  2001  and  the  government  has  resisted
               international human rights  monitoring  by  the  UN  Special
               Rapporteur for Eritrea,  the  African  Commission  of  Human
               Rights and established NGOs such as AI. Even the ICRC, which
               has a presence in  the  country,  is  not  given  access  to
               prisons. As regards its visit to Sembel prison, HCHR  stated
               that the visit was not carried out  "...in  conditions  that
               allowed for full human rights or  technical  assessment...No
               specific  information  was  provided  on   the   number   of
               detainees, not on  their  identity,  safety,  well-being  or
               whereabouts" and OHCHR said  it  "remained  concerned  about
               continued reports and allegations of  serious  human  rights
               abuses".  There  are  restrictions   on   the   ability   of
               international   diplomats   and   the   representatives   of
               international  organisations  to   travel   outside   Asmara
               although  some  travel  takes  place  through  a  permission
               process.

            2) Eritrea is a one-party state.   The  only  recognised  party
               remains the ruling PFDJ and  there  is  no  indication  that
               provisions contained in the 1997  constitution  which  would
               have allowed other parties to exist will be  implemented  or
               contained within ongoing discussions for a new constitution.



            3) There is a continued undeclared  state  of  emergency  which
               government representatives justify on the basis of  the  'no
               war,  no  peace'  policy  and  continuing   concerns   about
               Ethiopian belligerence. Given  that  there  continue  to  be
               border skirmishes, it seems unlikely this policy will  alter
               in the near future.

            4) Eritrea operates both 'official'  and  unofficial  detention
               sites,  the  latter  which  include  underground  cells  and
               shipping containers. Detention is often unrecorded.

            5) There is an absence of rule of law. As  already  noted,  the
               judiciary is not independent,  trials  fail  internationally
               recognised safeguards and detainees continue to be held  for
               long periods without charge and incommunicado. There are  no
               known  internal  or  external  mechanisms   to   investigate
               security force abuse.

            6) Torture remains widespread.

            7) Despite recent government indications that it would  set  an
               18 months limit to national service, it has not done so  and
               has disavowed its intention of doing so.

            8) It remains a criminal offence in Eritrean law  to  exit  the
               country illegally and to desert or evade national service.

            9) MA and MO were correctly decided at the time.

           10) With very limited exceptions Eritreans between the ages of 5
               and at least 54 (men) and 47  (women)  are  prohibited  from
               leaving Eritrea.



 246. However, despite considerable common ground between the  parties  over
      country conditions in Eritrea, they disagree over whether  there  have
      been significant improvements in certain respects  that  bear  on  the
      issue of risk on return. That being so, the extent to which  Eritrea's
      very poor human rights record in general informs our  assessment  must
      depend on an issue-by-issue analysis.

National Service

 247. According to the EASO Report, May 2015,  "Eritrea's  national  service
      ... differs from the defence forces of other  countries  in  that  its
      overall aim is not only to defend the country, but also to rebuild  it
      following the War  of  Independence  and  to  propagate  the  relevant
      ideology".  National  service  is  regarded  as  "the  school  of  the
      nation".

 248. The  same  report  records  that  the  CIA  World  Factbook  estimates
      Eritrea's population as of July 2014 at just over 6.3 million and that
      the manpower reaching militarily significant age  annually  is  around
      66,800 males and 66,700 females.  According to the 2015  UNCOI  Report
      at [1178], there are an estimated 201,750 civilian active  members  of
      the armed forces  who  are  national  service  conscripts.  Under  the
      Proclamation of National Service No.82  (1995  [Eritrea])  Article  8,
      "Active National Service" consists of six months of  training  in  the
      National Service Training Centres and twelve months of active military
      service and development tasks in military forces.  As a result of  the
      'no war, no peace' policy Eritrea adopted following  the  war  between
      Eritrea and Ethiopia (1998-2000), the government launched the  'Warsai
      Yikealo Development Campaign' (WYDC). Thereafter national service  was
      considered as indefinite.  Eritrean law  contains  no  provisions  for
      conscientious objection or alternative service.

 249. Article 22(1) of the 1995 Proclamation states that "[t]he citizen  who
      upon termination of military training  enters  into  a  12  months  of
      Active National Service is entitled to pocket money".   In  2015  this
      was said to be less than �6 per month ($10- see 'African  Dictatorship
      Fuels Migrant Crisis: Thousands flee isolated Eritrea to  escape  life
      of conscription and poverty,  M.Stevis  and  J.Parkinson  Wall  Street
      Journal, 21 October 2015). There is evidence before us  of  government
      promises to increase this amount and of this having been done in  some
      cases for some periods, but it is far from clear that  these  promises
      have been implemented on a general scale.

 250. The Proclamation of  National  Service  specifies,  as  categories  of
      people who may be exempted from or unable to perform military service:



           "Those  exempt  from  'Active  National  Service'  are  (1)  the
           citizens  who  have  performed  national  service   before   the
           Proclamation; (2) all  fighters  and  armed  peasants  who  have
           spent all their time in the liberation  struggle  (Article  12);
           citizens  who  suffer  from  disability  such   as   invalidity,
           blindness, psychological derangement" (Article 15(1)).

 251. As regards students, it is stated in Article 14 that:

           "Students on a regular daily course may be exempted from  Active
           National Service for a limited period (a) if  he  is  continuing
           his studies from middle up to secondary  grade;  (b)  if  he  is
           following his course of studies in a Professional  or  Technical
           School; (c) if after passing university examinations he has been
           accepted by the university and is following his studies; (d)  if
           he has been authorised as a  special  case  to  continue  higher
           studies by the Technical School or by the university; (e) if  at
           any school level he has  been  required  by  the  government  to
           attend a special course or to be sent on a scholarship."

 252. Article 15(2) states that '[t]he  citizens  who  [....]  are  declared
      exempted from national service by the  Board  will  receive  from  the
      Ministry of Defence a certificate of exemption'.

 253. Prior to the National Service Proclamation of 1995, married women  and
      mothers were exempt from national service.  According to  PK  and  the
      2015 UNCOI  Report,  although  the  1995  Proclamation  removed  these
      exemptions de jure for married women and mothers, many  married  women
      and single mothers continued to be de facto exempted at the discretion
      of recruiting officers (2015 UNCOI Report at [1201]).

 254. Eritrean national service  can  involve  civilian  service  which  can
      include jobs in the  civil  service.  Indeed  the  great  majority  of
      conscripts are  engaged  in  civilian  national  service  rather  than
      military national service.

 255. The aforementioned Proclamation sets  out  a  penalty  of  2-5  years'
      imprisonment for military violations.

 256. All 12th grade students, including some younger than 18, are  required
      to complete their final year of education at  the  Sawa  Military  and
      Educational Camp.  Those who refuse  to  attend  cannot  receive  high
      school graduation certificates,  go  on  to  higher  education  or  be
      offered some types of jobs.  Anyone who drops  out  of  school  before
      their 11th  school  year  can  be  conscripted  for  national  service
      directly by the Kebadi Administration once they reach the age  of  18.
      In 2014 the government announced that the duration of national service
      of future conscripts would be limited  to  18  months.   It  was  PK's
      unchallenged  evidence  that  on  25  February   2016   the   Eritrean
      Information Minister, former spokesperson of the president,  announced
      that there were no plans  to  scrap  or  cut  national  service.  PK's
      evidence throughout is very firmly that national service is indefinite
      and he referred to members of his family who had  served  16-17  years
      and 20 years respectively.   The EASO Report at [3.7.1] referred to  a
      study by PK in 2008 and 2012 among Eritrean migrants in  European  and
      African countries which revealed an average service time of 5.8 years.
      PK's evidence is that this was taken out of context and what was meant
      is that this was the average time of service prior to fleeing Eritrea.
      His evidence is that it is open ended.

 257. AI (the AI Report on AA at [72]) states that it is  commonly  accepted
      that Eritrean national service is  indefinite  in  duration  both  for
      those engaged in military and non-military activities  and  what  this
      means is that it is of unknown duration rather than permanent  and  it
      is subject to arbitrary and unpredictable recall. Interviewees told AI
      that  they  have  been  in  national  service  for  7  and   8   years
      respectively. AI notes in "Just Deserters" (at page 15) speaking to  a
      woman whose husband had served 20 years and another whose husband  had
      been in national service since 2006.  The UKFFM interviewed  anonymous
      witnesses who claimed that many had done it for 10 - 20 years.

 258. The 2015 UNCOI Report at [206] notes that numerous witnesses  gave  an
      account that the duration of military service is arbitrary  and  often
      of punishing length and routinely outside of the eighteen month period
      provided for in the 1995 Decree.  It is frequently  for  periods  well
      over a decade. The Eritrean government has  repeatedly  justified  the
      prolongation of national service with what they  consider  to  be  the
      continued occupation of its sovereign territories and  the  so  called
      "no war, no peace" situation. Conscription into the  national  service
      is at an early age without any prospect of being  formally  discharged
      or  otherwise  released  (see  [1250]).  The  Commission  of   Inquiry
      interviewed witnesses who had been in  national  service  for  periods
      including 17, 18 and 14 years. The procedure for release is  "unclear"
      (see 1252]), there being no  rules  or  procedure  governing  this  or
      mechanism to challenge a refusal.  Journalists report people being  in
      national service for more  than  a  decade  (Mary  Harper  and  Edmund
      Blair).

 259. On the other  hand  there  are  a  number  of  reports  which,  whilst
      recognising that national service is indefinite and that duration  can
      be lengthy, give analyses that suggest or lend  some  support  to  the
      view that on average most  Eritreans  have  completed  their  national
      service before the end of 7 years. We will address this evidence below
      at [304] - [307].

People's Militia

 260. In 2012 the government created a new programme called Hizbawi  Serawit
      or the people's army or militia.  According to the 2015  UNCOI  Report
      at [144] the  motivation  behind  its  introduction  was  "perhaps  in
      response to an increasing number of defections, dwindling  numbers  of
      conscripts and ongoing incidents with neighbouring  countries".   This
      is described as a compulsory system providing for additional  military
      training as well as assignment to unpaid  law  enforcement  and  other
      civilian duties, such as agricultural work, development  projects  and
      security and border guard duties.  At [201] of the 2016  UNCOI  Report
      the Commission stated that  it  had  "received  numerous  corroborated
      reports that Eritreans in their  60s  and  70s  have  been  forced  to
      participate in the people's army, as well  as  persons  who  had  been
      released from military/national service on health grounds."

 261. People's army units are said by the 2015 UNCOI Report at [286]  to  be
      organised by profession (e.g. teachers' militia, artists' militia)  or
      by geographic area or neighbourhood.  Units meet regularly,  i.e.  one
      day per week or one week per month.  Members are allowed to keep their
      current jobs (see [286]).  There is no known law or decree  regulating
      this programme.

 262. As such the people's militia constitutes a form of compulsory service.
      Although separate from national service, it now  constitutes  part  of
      the Eritrean military service system.

 263. Given the dearth of clear evidence as to age-limits,  we  consider  we
      should regard the age limits  as  being  that  contended  for  by  the
      appellants and UNHCR, namely up to 70 for men and 60 for women.

 264. As regards the nature of military/national  service  in  Eritrea,  the
      Tribunal in MO did not seek to make any finding on it  except  insofar
      as it was relevant to the "issue of categories of lawful exit and risk
      on return for those who had left illegally" (see [3]).  It reconfirmed
      the findings of the Tribunal in MA that national service in Eritrea is
      open-ended and indefinite and  demobilisations  from  active  military
      service did not free people of ongoing obligations to undertake  other
      types of national  service.   As  explained  earlier  in  the  section
      dealing with the country guidance issues addressed in  this  case,  we
      have accepted that there is now a need  to  address  national  service
      issues more directly, including the issue of whether military/national
      service in  Eritrea  is  contrary  to  human  rights  prohibitions  on
      slavery, servitude and forced or compulsory labour.  Potentially,  for
      the appellants and  UNHCR,  such  an  assessment  could  result  in  a
      conclusion  that  irrespective  of  whether  a  person  left   Eritrea
      illegally or not, as long as it was reasonably likely  they  would  be
      required to perform national service, they would on return face a real
      risk of being exposed to treatment contrary to Article 4 of the  ECHR.
      This is considered separately below.

Submissions

 265. The respondent's position is that no previous  country  guidance  case
      has  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  prospect  of  an  individual
      undertaking national service is in itself sufficient to prevent him or
      her from lawfully being returned to Eritrea.  The issue had only  been
      relevant insofar as a person will be regarded as a deserter  or  draft
      evader and subjected to punishment.

 266. The respondent submits that the position in 2016 discloses a far  more
      nuanced position than confronted the Tribunal in  MO.   She  considers
      that there are a significant number  of  people  who  appear  able  to
      obtain an exit visa, which chimes with other evidence that  there  are
      viable exemption categories and that there are a significant number of
      demobilised persons who are able to obtain exit  visas.   It  is,  she
      submits, a proper inference from the evidence that a large  percentage
      of the Eritrean population is not involved in  national  service.   At
      most, the numbers engaged in national service are only 9 per  cent  of
      the population.  This supports the argument that  the  Eritrean  state
      does not assiduously pursue those who have not done national service.

 267. The respondent accepts that the Eritrean government had not gone ahead
      with its promises made in 2014-2015 to limit the duration of  national
      service to 18 months.  Her position is that its duration  is  variable
      and to a degree uncertain, but inherent in the variation must  be  the
      real  prospect  of  being  discharged  from  national   service.   The
      respondent does not accept that only a few  have  been  discharged  or
      that discharges are only available on the grounds of  ill-health.  The
      criteria may be inconsistent, but  the  following  categories  can  be
      identified: those who are discharged simply due to the passage of time
      or on request; women; those suffering from physical or  mental  health
      problems; those with contacts or who are able to pay bribes; and those
      seeking discharge for economic or family reasons.

 268. As regards the conditions of national service, the  respondent  argues
      that there is a very significant distinction between military  service
      and those carrying out national service in civilian  roles.  That  was
      recognised by the 2015 UNCOI  Report  at  [1443]  and  also  by  other
      sources.  This distinction also impacts on potential punishment.   The
      same UNCOI Report states at [1446] that conscripts  in  civil  service
      are usually not subjected to harsh punishment.

 269. As regards punishment for draft evaders and desertion  generally,  the
      basis of  the  respondent's  position  is  that  the  latest  evidence
      indicates  that  the  Eritrean  government  no  longer  detains   them
      routinely  or  exposes  those  they  do  detain  to   physical   harm.
      Punishment taking the form of ill-treatment is reserved for people who
      have had some sort of oppositional  activity  or  where  for  symbolic
      reasons the government wants to make an example.  The "shoot to  kill"
      policy and  the  round-ups  of  suspected  evaders  (giffas)  and  the
      targeting of relatives are now, she submits, significantly less likely
      occurrences.

 270. The respondent disagrees flatly with the appellants'  contention  that
      military service, and the people's militia all amount to violations of
      Article 4 of the ECHR.  The evidence does not indicate,  she  submits,
      that there is a consistent  pattern  of  such  violations,  especially
      given the evidence that there is a wide spectrum of circumstances  and
      that the national service system is variable as between  military  and
      civilian  service  and  between  national  service  and  the  people's
      militia.  For many individuals national service  amounts  to  no  more
      than attendance at an office part-time or in working hours, in Asmara,
      living with their  families.   Service  in  the  national  service  is
      variable  and  might  amount  to  duties   once   every   two   weeks.
      Demobilisation or discharge can be anticipated as a likely outcome for
      many.  As regards conditions, the 2015 UNCOI Report itself  states  at
      [1426] that "[t]he length and the conditions of work  for  conscripts,
      including wages, working hours, places of assignment, leave  time  and
      rest days, do not per se constitute elements of forced labour".

 271. The appellants' position as regards national service is distinctly  at
      odds with that of the respondent.  According to their submissions  the
      risk categories identified in MA and MO require  expanding  so  as  to
      state that all citizens between the ages of five and 70 (regardless of
      gender) who are not medically unfit for national service and who  have
      left illegally are  viewed  as  being  at  risk  of  serious  risk  of
      persecution, save  for  limited  categories.   It  was  wrong  of  the
      respondent to suggest that many  Eritreans  did  not  go  to  national
      service. National  service  remained  open-ended  with  no  meaningful
      demobilisation and with eligibility extended to those between the ages
      of 60-70 years  in  the  people's  militia.   Conditions  in  military
      service remain oppressive, very harsh and life-threatening and  amount
      to a breach of Article 4 of the ECHR.  They rely  on  the  2015  UNCOI
      statement at [1501] that "[t]here is a pattern  of  torture,  inhuman,
      cruel or degrading treatment or punishment of conscripts in  the  army
      in connection with the labour that conscripts are forced to  perform";
      and the ILO Observation (CEACR) which accepted in 2015 that "Eritreans
      are subject to systems of [national service] and  forced  labour  that
      effectively abuse, exploit and enslave them for indefinite periods  of
      time....."; and the USSD Report of 13 April  2016  which  referred  to
      examination  by  the  International  Labor   Organization   Conference
      Committee on the Application of Standards noted  discussion  "relating
      to the large-scale and  systematic  practice  of  imposing  compulsory
      labor on the population for an indefinite period of  time  within  the
      framework of the national service program which encompassed all  areas
      of  civilian  life  and  was  therefore  much  broader  than  military
      service." Punishments often amount to ill-treatment.

 272. In  relation  to  the  treatment  of  those  returnees  who  had  left
      illegally,  the  appellants'  submission  is  that  it  was  extremely
      unlikely that the Eritrean government had changed  its  position,  not
      least because to treat them leniently  would  place  them  in  a  more
      advantageous position than those who  had  not  left  illegally.   The
      letter of regret does  not  establish  that  they  are  excused  their
      obligation to perform national service in the future  and  effectively
      amounts to a confession of guilt.

 273.  The  appellants  submit  there  was  no   evidence   of   significant
      demobilisation or discharges  and  that  there  is  no  provision  for
      exemption from national service to women and the practice of exemption
      in medical cases was arbitrary and difficult;  there  is  no  specific
      sole breadwinner exemption.

 274. The appellants  submit  that  whether  one  is  conscripted  into  the
      military or civil service within the national service framework  makes
      no difference because no conscripts can leave the country and none are
      free to change employment.  Conscripts in civil service are  subjected
      to the same restrictions on movement as in the army and travel permits
      are limited to their area of service.  Conditions may be variable  but
      fundamentally the consequences are the same.

 275. For UNHCR there has been no  fundamental,  durable  or  stable  change
      since the MA and MO country guidance.  National service remains  open-
      ended and can last more than ten years in practice; its conditions are
      harsh, amounting to inhuman and degrading treatment.   Allocations  to
      different forms  of  national  service  and  military  exemptions  are
      arbitrary as is the duration of national service; and individuals  may
      be transferred between different types of national service  assignment
      as a punishment.  There is therefore a real risk of re-conscription to
      a harsh military assignment even for  a  person  previously  given  an
      informal  exemption  or  previously  allocated  to  relatively   light
      civilian duties. Women and girls face the additional and real risk  of
      sexual abuse. Conscripts are reportedly paid extremely low  wages  and
      are routinely separated from their families.  They are forced to carry
      out non-military work, such as construction,  mining  and  farming  in
      circumstances   amounting   to   forced   labour.    Punishment    for
      transgressors,  including  evasion   and   desertion   is   draconian;
      exemptions are limited and even the legal exemption on medical grounds
      is  applied   inconsistently   and   granted   only   in   exceptional
      circumstances.

 276. In relation to round-ups and the "shoot to kill" policy, the  position
      of the appellants and the UNHCR is that these are still  part  of  the
      regime's policy and that family members of evaders and  deserters  are
      also punished. The evidence they rely on  includes  the  AI  statement
      that round-ups take place regularly (see the AI Report on AA at  [93])
      during which anyone appearing to be of national service age who cannot
      produce papers justifying their absence from  service  is  taken  into
      custody. According to interviewees spoken to by AI, the round-up is  a
      "regular threat" and at [95] it is  stated  that  round-ups  occur  at
      schools. It is asserted  at  [96]  that  some  who  produce  exemption
      documents are rounded-up  in  any  event  and  ordered  to  return  to
      service. The 2015 UNCOI Report at [1211]  reports  that  the  Eritrean
      Defence Forces regularly conduct round-ups in search of  citizens  who
      have failed to respond to  national  service  call  ups  or  who  have
      absented themselves from the army without leave.  Excessive  force  is
      often used (see [1229]). Anonymous source 1 interviewed by  the  UKFFM
      said that round-ups were random and that there was one three  or  four
      months ago in Asmara whilst anonymous source 3 stated that a  round-up
      occurred only two weeks before.

 277. AI reports (in the AI Report  on  AA  at  [132])  that  anyone  caught
      illegally crossing the border is arrested and punished  and  that  the
      "shoot to kill  policy"  remains  in  force  for  those  crossing  the
      Ethiopian border and there were  shootings.   It  is  asserted  by  AI
      ("Just Deserters" page 52) that the policy is only  in  force  on  the
      border with Ethiopia.  An incident in  2014  is  cited.  AI  spoke  to
      conscripts who were deployed on the border and one, who left in  2015,
      stated that they let people get across the border but  had  they  been
      caught by their commanders they would have been in  trouble  and  even
      killed and that sometimes they would obey  orders  and  shoot  people.
      Those caught trying to flee face detention for  anything  from  a  few
      months to many years. Those assisting others to flee the country  face
      longer periods of detention.  There were  reports  of  torture  during
      interrogation and general mistreatment.

 278. The 2016 UNCOI reports at [56] that the "shoot to kill policy" has not
      been rescinded, but that it has been implemented in  a  less  rigorous
      manner in recent years. It is reported in the 2015  UNCOI  Report  (at
      [1234]) that desertion can be punished with the death penalty  and  at
      [1115] and [1116] it is concluded that the  number  of  shootings  and
      killings is high and reference is made to incidents in 2013 and  2014.
      The Commission of Inquiry also heard from  witnesses  that  there  had
      been a revision of the policy and that border guards are under  orders
      to shoot below the knee with a  view  to  stopping  the  flight  after
      firing a warning shot in the air, but there was evidence  from  others
      interviewed that border guards still continue to shoot at  people  who
      attempt to cross the border whilst others said that they  had  crossed
      the border without problems  as  border  guards  no  longer  shoot  at
      people.  The EASO Report cites an incident in 2014 (see 6.4.3).   PK's
      evidence was that the policy was in force citing a shooting that  took
      place in Asmara on 3 April 2016.

 279. The 2015 UNCOI Report  describes  reprisals  against  family  members,
      friends and associates following the conduct of a third  person  which
      include arrest and detention.  The Commission records the accounts  of
      witnesses who had fled that detail family members having been detained
      and arrested. Landinfo in the report of 23 March  2016  reported  that
      since  1999  threats  have  been  made  against  family   members   of
      deserter/evaders. PK's evidence was that family members were targeted,
      but that his own family had not been, despite his  open  criticism  of
      the regime and overall he thought the policy  was  less  in  evidence.
      Anonymous source 2 spoken to by the UKFFM heard of  reprisals  against
      families of those who fled illegally  including  the  detaining  of  a
      parent until the child's return, but that it did not  happen  much  at
      present because of lack of manpower.





Our assessment

Enforcement and punishment

 280.  Before  addressing  conditions,  we  shall  first  of   all   address
      punishments  because  it  seems  to  us   that   notwithstanding   the
      respondent's submission that the Eritrean authorities have  adopted  a
      "more pragmatic approach" as stated in submissions and in the  Country
      Information and Guidance: Eritrea: National  (incl.Military)  Service,
      Version 3.0, August 2016), the preponderance of  the  evidence  points
      strongly   to   the   conclusion   that   the   Eritrean   regime   of
      military/national service (excluding civilian national service and the
      people's militia), is characterised by a system that often responds to
      transgressors with harsh and disproportionate punishments. We  exclude
      from this  conclusion  civilian  national  service  and  the  people's
      militia because by contrast the evidence  does  not  demonstrate  that
      punishment for transgressions by persons evading or deserting from one
      or the other is either as likely or as severe in nature.

 281. We would accept that the preponderance of evidence also indicates that
      roundups (giffas) are happening less frequently and that the "shoot to
      kill" policy is now intermittent  and  arbitrarily  applied  and  that
      punishment of family members or associates may not be as common as  it
      was,  but  these  are  only  some  of  the  regime's   repertoire   of
      punishments, and there is a substantial body  of  evidence,  including
      the US State Department reports, indicating  that  the  generality  of
      evaders and deserters are harshly punished and this is a common thread
      running through the majority of source evidence. We note that the 2015
      UNCOI Report at [818] refers to the grant of an amnesty  to  deserters
      in November 2014, but this was from detention and the Report does  not
      suggest this represented a  change  of  government  policy.  The  main
      evidence concerning this matter on which the respondent relies is that
      from Eritrean government ministers  and  interviews  with  individuals
      during the UKFFM and we have explained why we feel that this  evidence
      should be approached with caution: see  [192]-[201].   We  have  taken
      into account the evidence of AI (the AI Report on AA  at  [104])  that
      punishment for deserters is generally more  severe  although  this  is
      arbitrary and  that  the  generality  of  evaders  and  deserters  are
      punished with imprisonment for varying periods.  Those caught  on  the
      border trying to flee  are  almost  always  subjected  to  periods  of
      arbitrary detention. Generally (see [106]) those arrested for  evading
      service are detained for some time between one  and  six  months.  The
      reports demonstrate (see [115]) a high level  of  variation  which  is
      said to be indicative of the arbitrary nature of punishments that  are
      at the discretion of officers. The EASO Report concludes at [3.8] that
      deserters and evaders are punished by imprisonment  if  caught  within
      the country before being able to leave or on return at the airport and
      that punishment  is  harsh  being  more  severe  for  deserters.  PK's
      evidence throughout is  that  deserters/evaders  will  be  subject  to
      persecution.

 282. The 2015 UNCOI Report (at [96] and [97]) reports arbitrary  detention,
      enforced disappearance, torture and mistreatment generally in Eritrean
      detention centres.  The Commission spoke to those who had fled in  the
      past two years and  reported  that  they  had  been  subject  to  ill-
      treatment and detained without due process. The Commission (at  [239])
      reports arbitrary detention for periods ranging from months to  years,
      enforced disappearances ([249]) and torture ([259]). EASO reports  (at
      [4]) poor conditions in detention. The Swiss  fact-finding  report  of
      March 2016, to which several references  are  made  in  the  new  Home
      Office CIGs of August 2016, considers that even though  the  treatment
      of deserters appears to  have  become  less  harsh  in  recent  years,
      "[m]ost sources report that  first  time  offenders  are  now  usually
      detained for several months" (cited in the CIG on National Service  at
      15.2.18). Given that  we  consider  anything  beyond  very  short-term
      detention in Eritrea to create a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment,  this
      confirms our view that deserters/evaders continue to face a real  risk
      of persecution.

 283. To summarise, we reject the respondent's  case  that  enforcement  and
      punishment is reserved for those  who  are  involved  in  oppositional
      activity over and above desertion or evasion. It is impossible in  our
      view to derive from the evidence as a whole any other conclusion  than
      that for Eritreans inside the country any evasion of military  service
      or desertion  still  carries  a  real  risk  that  the  generality  of
      transgressors  will  be  subject  to  treatment   which   amounts   to
      persecution as well as serious harm.

Conditions

 284. As regards conditions of national  service,  we  will  have  cause  to
      return to this subject when considering the  interrelated  issue  that
      has arisen in this case as to whether the Eritrean system of  national
      service is in violation of Article 4 of the ECHR, but we need here  to
      give our general view on conditions in broad terms. In  light  of  the
      finding we go on to make, that those who left illegally and who  would
      be perceived on return as draft evaders/deserters would  face  a  real
      risk of persecution and serious harm, it will not be relevant in  most
      cases to consider whether a forced returnee would be at real  risk  of
      facing national service that was in breach of their human  rights  (by
      virtue of  the  system  of  military/national  service  being  abusive
      because of conditions or other features). However, we  recognise  that
      there may be cases of persons facing forcible return even though  they
      are not perceived as draft evaders or deserters, for  example  because
      they exited lawfully.  Hence it is necessary to make specific findings
      on the system  of  military/national  service,  including  as  regards
      conditions.

 285. We recognise that hitherto Tribunal country guidance  on  Eritrea  has
      not regarded the  Eritrean  system  of  military/national  service  as
      generally demonstrating a consistent  pattern  of  breaches  of  human
      rights.  We continue to be cautious about making distinct findings  on
      this issue.  One reason is that the principal source  relied  upon  by
      the appellants and UNHCR - the 2015  UNCOI  Report  -  does  not  make
      sufficiently clear findings about the conditions in Eritrean  national
      service today, as distinct from the conditions pertaining  during  the
      past three decades.  If its position is that for all  points  in  time
      over this period (including the present) conditions demonstrate such a
      consistent pattern, then we would expect greater clarity  about  this.
      The 2016 UNCOI Report, although having a remit to consider the last 12
      months, refers often to examples from previous years.  Another  reason
      for caution is that it is quite difficult very  often  to  disentangle
      what is stated in the UNCOI reports and the other background  evidence
      about conditions and what is stated about the  punishment  regime  for
      those who commit transgressions.  As we have just said, we are  in  no
      doubt that the latter is abusive, but evidence  about  that  does  not
      necessarily establish that conditions as such  are  abusive.   Another
      reason to be cautious is that the UNCOI  reports  themselves  identify
      (as do the sources cited in  the  Country  Information  and  Guidance:
      Eritrea: National (incl.Military) Service, Version 3.0,  August  2016,
      to mention but one recent compilation)  that  conditions  in  civilian
      military service (and in the people's militia) are  better  relatively
      speaking.

 286. Nevertheless we consider that the evidence for finding  conditions  of
      military national service (not civilian  national  service)  generally
      abusive is stronger than was the case when MA  and  MO  were  decided.
      Despite the reasons expressed above for being cautious  regarding  the
      UNCOI Reports, we regard what is said at [1391] of the 2015 Report  as
      broadly  reflective  of  the  wider  body  of  evidence,  namely  that
      "conditions of national service characterised by conscripts'  lack  of
      adequate food, access to  water,  access  to  hygiene  facilities  and
      adequate  accommodation  during   military   training   and   service,
      constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment" ([1391]).   (Why  we
      consider that although conditions are not generally abusive for  those
      doing civilian national service the national service system  generally
      constitutes forced labour contrary to Article 4(2), is dealt  with  in
      our section below on Article 4 of the ECHR: see [376]-[430]).

Eligibility/duration

 287. As regards the eligibility requirements for national service, age (and
      duration) in particular, we will deal below with the age  requirements
      when considering the categories of lawful exit visas: see [308]-[328].
      But in a nutshell we consider that the age limits for national service
      are likely to remain the same as stated in MO, namely 54 for  men  and
      47 for women except that for children the limit is now likely to be  5
      save for adolescents in the context of family reunification.  For  the
      people's militia, the age limits are likely to be 60 for women and  70
      for men.

 288. In relation to duration, it is  agreed  on  all  sides  that  national
      service is indefinite and open-ended, but there is disagreement as  to
      whether this means  that  it  results  in  most  Eritreans  performing
      military/national service duties permanently  or  for  very  prolonged
      periods. As noted above, the  respondent's  position  is  that  actual
      performance of military/national service is  variable  and  uncertain,
      but that there is a real prospect  of  discharge.  This  is  in  stark
      contrast to the position of the appellants, UNHCR and PK.

 289. We accept that there are no clear statistics relating to the number of
      individuals in national service, but it is reasonable  to  infer  from
      what evidence there is, that at any  one  time  most  people  are  not
      engaged in the performance of military  or  national  service  duties.
      Most sources estimate  Eritrea  to  have  a  population  of  over  6.3
      million. The 2015 UNCOI Report states that there  are  201,750  active
      members of the armed  forces,  the  majority  being  national  service
      conscripts (at [1178]). The EASO Report at [3.1] states that there  is
      no official data available regarding the number of people  engaged  in
      national service but various estimates place  the  figure  at  between
      200,000 and 600,000 in recent years, approximately half  of  whom  are
      assigned to active military service.  PK's opinion  is  that  9.2  per
      cent of the population has been conscripted over  the  past  20  years
      (the figures, he states, do not take into account those who have  fled
      the country). The respondent does not accept PK's  percentage  figure,
      claiming that it is far less. However, even if we accept PK's  opinion
      on the issue, which is the most  favourable  to  the  appellants,  the
      figures are significant. The only logical conclusion we can draw  from
      them is that active performance of national service duties  cannot  be
      as extensive as the appellants and  UNHCR assert.  The system  remains
      indefinite and  open-ended  in  the  sense  that  all  persons  of  or
      approaching eligible draft age  or  within  the  age  limits  for  the
      people's militia remain obliged to perform military/national  service;
      but it is a distinct matter whether persons have to  actually  perform
      military/national service and for  what  periods  of  time.  We  shall
      return to the possible implications of this conclusion  when  we  deal
      further with demobilisations/discharges at [297]-[307].

 290. We also consider the evidence to indicate that discharge/release is  a
      more common phenomenon than the appellants contend.  We  will  address
      this issue more fully when we deal with demobilisations/discharges and
      with draft evaders and deserters: see [297]-[307] and [338]-[356].

Exemptions

 291. As regards exemptions from national service,  we  first  consider  the
      position of women. It seems  to  us  that  the  source  that  is  most
      representative of the various strands of evidence on this issue is the
      2015 UNCOI Report.

 292. According to the 2015 UNCOI Report [395]-[398], there is  a  "practice
      of tolerance with regard to women's national service  obligation  when
      they are married or have children".  However, very few women have been
      formally released or discharged which makes it difficult for  them  to
      get identity cards or travel permits, although married women  can  get
      travel permits issued at an officer's discretion.

 293. As regards exemption on medical grounds, the evidence is mixed.  There
      are a significant  number  of  sources  which  state  that  physically
      disabled people are exempt from service.  However, illustrative  of  a
      different view, in March 2015 Landinfo  stated  that  people  who  are
      considered to be not fit for service are exempt from military training
      but must perform civilian service.

 294. We note that there is wide recognition that (separate from  the  legal
      possibilities  for  exemption,  which  all  agree   are   limited   by
      legislation to medical cases), a significant number of  people  appear
      able to obtain exemptions based on contacts and/or  bribes.   We  take
      the principal thrust of the evidence regarding such avenues  as  being
      that national service is not necessarily an unavoidable experience for
      everyone in Eritrea.

 295. However, we need to say more at this point about medical exemption. AI
      in its Report of 22 September 2015 made observations  in  relation  to
      the appellant AA, but also  general  observations  that  there  is  no
      functioning and reliable process  of  assessing  medical  fitness  for
      national service. The Sawa training facility did not  have  a  routine
      health assessment on arrival or at any time.  The  same  is  true  for
      other camps. Permission to see a doctor  or  a  designated  first  aid
      officer must be granted by  a  commanding  officer  and  is  extremely
      difficult  to  obtain.  If  assessed,  resources  are  very   limited.
      Recognition of mental health difficulties is  harder  to  obtain  than
      physical health problems. In any event, such exemptions are  sometimes
      ignored in round-ups or call-ups. If conscripted it would  be  for  an
      indefinite period and constitute forced labour. The UNCOI 2015  Report
      states at [60] that achieving  exemption from national service is very
      difficult particularly for men. Examples are cited within  the  report
      of witnesses (with physical injuries) who had not  been  exempted  and
      had been forced to remain in  military  service  despite  having  been
      declared  unfit  (see  [1196]).  The  Commission  concludes  that  the
      exemptions on health grounds are rarely granted, even though the state
      of health of the persons concerned prevents them from serving  in  the
      military.  There is evidence of blind and seriously visually  impaired
      people being sent to Sawa ([see 1197]). In the UNCOI 2016 Report there
      is an example given at [92] of a witness who in 2014 was  unwell  with
      papers to establish this,  but  who  was  not  believed.  The  witness
      reported being detained for six months without due process.  AI in the
      "Just Deserters" Report of December 2015 refers at page 28  to  former
      conscripts who told of people with disabilities being conscripted  and
      taken to Sawa for military training.  There  is  no  health  check  or
      assessment of  physical  or  mental  fitness  when  people  are  first
      conscripted and sent for training or at the end of the year  at  Sawa.
      Medical assessments are carried out on an ad hoc  basis,  and  usually
      only if the conscript repeatedly requests it. To obtain an exemption a
      doctor has to recommend that the conscript is unfit to serve,  whether
      for physical or mental health reasons and this recommendation  has  to
      be confirmed by a military commander. Those with health problems  have
      been assigned to national service and the report makes reference to  a
      former conscript with a (physical)  health  problem  who  spent  three
      years in national service and another former conscript who had  severe
      injuries to both legs following a car accident. Although the commander
      concluded that he could not carry out physically demanding  tasks,  it
      was decided that he could work. The source stated that this is  not  a
      medical decision, but a decision of the commander. The individual  was
      assigned to administrative work, but he was told  there  was  no  pain
      relief and not granted permission to see a doctor.

 296. While we accept that there is an official exemption on grounds of ill-
      health, the majority of the evidence points to this being  applied  in
      an arbitrary and inconsistent manner.  Whether  a  medical  assessment
      takes place is not a given, but rather is  entirely  arbitrary.  If  a
      medical assessment takes place, the thrust of the evidence establishes
      that it would take place at the military training centre, rather  than
      at  a  hospital.   The  outcome  of  the  medical  assessment  is  not
      determinative  of  exemption.   The  ultimate  decision   as   regards
      exemption is not made by  a  doctor,  but  by  a  military  commander.
      Relevant to this, there is on the evidence before  us,  a  culture  of
      disbelief on the part of the Eritrean authorities. It is not  uncommon
      for those with mental health problems or general  health  problems  to
      have to undergo national service.

Demobilisations/discharges and release

 297. As regards demobilisations and dismissals/discharges,  notwithstanding
      PK's  continued  animadversions  to  the  contrary,  we  consider  the
      evidence taken as a whole establishes that these are now more frequent
      than was the case when MO was decided.

 298. It is important first of all to  express  caution  about  the  various
      terms that are used in the background literature.  We find helpful the
      point highlighted in the EASO Report:

           "A  distinction  should  be  made  between  demobilisations  and
           dismissals; demobilisations follow wartime demobilisations;  and
           dismissals take place on an individual basis after the discharge
           of obligations."

      but observe that there continues to be  a  lack  of  clarity  both  as
      regards terminology (dismissals and  discharges  and  releases  -  and
      sometimes demobilisations - mostly being used  as  synonyms)  and  the
      meaning attached to various terms.

 299. It seems to us also that even if  achieved  by  unofficial  means  the
      Eritrean system of internal control on the movement of its  population
      depends very much on persons carrying documents to prove their  status
      and these can take various forms. They certainly include  certificates
      of completion of national  service;  such  documents  also  match  the
      reference in Eritrean law to such certificates. We know from the  2015
      UNCOI Report at [1254] that documents carried  also  include  "release
      papers" which  are  obtained  from  employers.  Although  they  are  a
      precondition to a certificate of completion,  they  also  serve  as  a
      travel permit.

 300. We recognise that the 2015 UNCOI Report  states  at  [1252]  that  the
      procedure for discharge/release  is  "unclear"  and  that  testimonies
      reveal arbitrariness, systematic refusals of requests and no mechanism
      for challenge.  It is asserted that release is rare and  difficult  to
      obtain and can usually only be obtained through bribery or for medical
      reasons and not on the basis of the number of  years  in  service  and
      that a certificate of completion is extremely difficult to get without
      facilitation by a high ranking employee of the Ministry of Defence. At
      [1261]  it  is  stated  that  "reportedly,  even  persons   who   have
      documentary evidence that they have completed  their  active  military
      service find themselves at risk of punishment as  evaders  of  reserve
      responsibilities if they leave the country  while  still  of  military
      age". But we consider that if discharge/release were not  commonplace,
      the figures for those engaged in national  service  (even  taking  the
      highest given) would be much, much higher than they are. That  release
      is a regular occurrence is  the  only  rational  explanation  for  the
      significant discrepancy between the appellants' case and  the  numbers
      said to be in national service.  It is also said that some holders  of
      a certificate of completion have been recalled. For example, the  2011
      UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines considered that people were liable to  be
      recalled. The AI "Just Deserters" Report noted at page  26  a  "recent
      practice of re-mobilising women or women and children  in  Gash  Barka
      region".  Viewed as a whole, however, the evidence falls well short of
      indicating that this  is  a  widespread  phenomenon.  In  relation  to
      national service, for instance, examples are given  of  people  having
      been recalled when the war with Ethiopia broke out in  1998  and  1999
      and remaining in national service. Anonymous source 2 spoken to by the
      UKFFM knew of someone who left national service unofficially  and  was
      working elsewhere, but who could be called back at any time. At  [102]
      of the AI Report on AA it is stated that ..."it seems that  there  may
      be some incidence of record keeping, of who  has  performed  [national
      service], for how long and under  what  circumstances  they  left  the
      country". At [74] of the same report AI asserts that all those engaged
      in national service ".... including those at  risk  of  round-ups  and
      recall" are at risk of indefinite forced labour.

 301. We find more compelling the evidence of the respondent, reinforced  by
      the source compilation contained in Country Information and  Guidance:
      Eritrea: National (incl.Military) Service, Version 3.0,  August  2016,
      that discharge or release  is  likely  to  be  commonplace.  The  DFFM
      records Western embassy B's statement that "there are indications that
      young people are now released from national service  after  a  shorter
      period of service than was previously the case" and Western embassy  D
      stating that "[r]ecently, it seems ...more and more are released  from
      national service after serving a shorter period of time". We note that
      in the context of round-ups, it would appear that many people who  are
      checked are able to establish that they are not evaders and deserters.
      For example AI ("Just  Deserters"  at  page  24)  in  the  context  of
      "giffas" gives witness accounts of people with papers  being  released
      following a round-up.  It is not suggested that such round-ups  result
      in whole communities being taken off. We note also that whilst release
      can properly be described as arbitrary, in that it is at the whim of a
      commander or employer and often on the payment of a  bribe,  there  is
      considerable evidence  indicating  that  bribery  and  corruption  are
      prevalent.  This seems to us to be borne out by the  language  adopted
      in the 2016 UNCOI Report  which  observes  at  [159]  that  "witnesses
      consistently linked corruption to  exemption  or  early  release  from
      military service".  They cite one witness as saying that "release from
      national service is  mostly  by  corruption".  We  also  know  that  a
      substantial  number  of  women  are  able,  whether   through   family
      connections or bribery or other means, to obtain a de facto  discharge
      from   military   service   based   on   pregnancy,   marriage,    and
      responsibilities for children.  The  EASO  Report  at  3.2  cites  the
      Bozzini 2012 study's observation that women over the  age  of  27  can
      'regularise' their status, i.e. be officially demobilised.  The  Lifos
      Report of March 2015 at 2.9.2. and 4.2 notes women's  ability  to  get
      demobilisation papers.

 302. We re-emphasise that evidence  to  show  that  recall  is  a  frequent
      phenomenon is lacking.

 303. In reaching the above conclusions we have taken  into  account,  inter
      alia, PK's evidence on the issue which was in our view  equivocal  and
      unimpressive. On the one hand he said in relation to the  evidence  in
      the 2015 UNCOI Report about a certificate of completion  that  it  was
      "inconsistent with [his] own analysis," but then he said that some may
      be able  to  get  papers,  but  added  that  he  did  not  think  that
      centralised records existed. He further explained that  this  was  why
      there are round-ups because there are no centralised records, but this
      does not tally with the evidence cited above relating to round-ups and
      the showing of papers resulting in release.  However, we  accept  that
      for the Eritrean government none  of  these  discharges  or  de  facto
      demobilisations means that their beneficiaries are thereby free of all
      liability to perform national service for ever more, except when  they
      are outside the relevant age limits or perhaps  in  long-term  medical
      cases.  We  also  accept  that  because  a   significant   number   of
      discharges/releases appear to be de facto, it is likely that  it  will
      be difficult for beneficiaries to establish by documentation that they
      have completed national service. It is necessary  also  to  look  more
      closely at what is known about age limits and eligibility for national
      service.

 304. A person starts national service at age 18 or indeed even  younger  in
      some cases. It is very unlikely that  a  conscript  will  be  released
      within the first 18 months of service when a conscript is  engaged  in
      active national service (which comprises six months military  training
      and 12 months military service). Our understanding is that immediately
      after this period  conscripts  are  redeployed.  The  evidence  points
      strongly, therefore, to a system which conscripts young people  at  18
      (or earlier) and then  requires  them  to  continue  national  service
      uninterrupted beyond completion of  the  initial  18  months.  When  a
      person starts national service, the term  they  will  be  expected  to
      complete is  not  known  and  to  this  extent  it  is  arbitrary  and
      indefinite. Ordinarily, by the time they are in their mid-20s  (unless
      they have been discharged or dismissed or released) they are likely to
      have been in national service for 7 years. The critical issue  is  how
      long the period is likely to be  for  them  to  be  accepted  to  have
      completed national service in the eyes of  the  Eritrean  authorities.
      Here there is evidence going both ways.

 305. On the one hand, there is the evidence we have just noted that release
      is commonplace and that for most citizens the duration is likely to be
      only several years. The DFFM  Report  records  Western  embassy  C  as
      stating that it "had heard of people in their forties who  were  still
      in national service, but in general  3-4  years  of  national  service
      seemed to be the  norm"  and  Western  embassy  D  as  narrating  that
      "[t]oday it is easier to be released from the service  and  for  young
      people today national service seems to  be  limited  to  a  couple  of
      years". The EASO Report at 3.7.1. refers to two  studies  of  Eritrean
      migrants where the persons were conscripted for an average  of  5  and
      5.8 years respectively. The September 2015 Home Office  CIGs  consider
      that the most up-to-date information  available  from  inside  Eritrea
      suggests in general that military/[national service] lasts for  around
      four years (a statement not seemingly retracted  in  the  August  2016
      version). The UKFFM mission  materials  contain  examples  of  persons
      whose national service  was  relatively  short.  On  the  other  hand,
      however,  the  evidence  cited  above  is  not  without  problems.  In
      particular one of the two studies cited by the EASO Report  is  by  PK
      and in his April 2016 Report he has pointed  out,  accurately  in  our
      view, that the figures he gave in his study of 5 and  5.8  years  were
      the average years the conscripts  interviewed  for  the  study  served
      before they fled the country, not the years they had taken to complete
      their national service. The other report mentioned by EASO, the "SIHA,
      Letters from Eritrea, Refugee Women tell their story, 2013" refers  to
      women only and is confined to the women surveyed in that study, "Women
      surveyed [in that  study]  had  served  an  average  of  five  years".
      Furthermore, there are many more sources that describe the norm period
      as being lengthy and  protracted.  The  UKFFM  materials  record  some
      examples.  Viewing the evidence as  a  whole,  we  consider  that  the
      position taken in the two UNCOI Reports is broadly reflective  of  the
      bulk of the evidence. The 2016 Report states at  [206]  that  national
      service is "routinely well beyond the 18 months provided  for  in  the
      1995 decree, and frequently for periods exceeding well over a decade".
      Although we have not accepted the view expressed in both UNCOI Reports
      that release from military/national service is rare, we cannot  ignore
      the very considerable body of evidence indicating that the duration of
      national service is protracted. We find  telling  the  fact  that  (as
      noted in the AI "Just Deserters" Report in Part  1)  the  Wall  Street
      Journal, whose correspondent was permitted a media trip to Eritrea  in
      September 2015, reported that the Eritrean government had  rejected  a
      $222.7 million plan from the EU to facilitate  the  demobilisation  of
      long serving conscripts because "it would violate the  principle  that
      no one is exempt from patriotic duties".

 306. We are bound to say we have had very considerable difficulty  deciding
      this issue, notwithstanding the preponderance of sources that describe
      national service as protracted, for two reasons.  First,  because  for
      reasons set  out  earlier  we  consider  it  likely  that  release  is
      commonplace. Secondly because (as also noted earlier) the  figures  of
      persons involved in  national  service  at  any  one  time  appear  to
      indicate that 9 out of 10 persons are not engaged in national  service
      duties. If we had felt able to draw inferences from these two findings
      alone, we might well have concluded that the Eritrean authorities  are
      likely to regard 7 years as being long enough for them to be satisfied
      an Eritrean citizen has completed national service. We  are  certainly
      satisfied that the great majority of Eritreans begin national  service
      at the age of 18 (if not earlier) and  continue  in  national  service
      beyond the 18 months period and that this means  that  ordinarily,  by
      the time they reached 25 (if they have not been discharged,  dismissed
      or released), they would have performed 7 years of  national  service.
      As a corollary, we would have concluded that the category of those who
      have left Eritrea illegally who would be perceived on return as  draft
      evaders or deserters would be confined to those who were under the age
      of 25 or could otherwise show that they had not yet  served  7  years.
      However, we do not think  inferences  can  be  drawn  from  these  two
      findings alone. It seems to us  that  the  broader  body  of  evidence
      identifying national service as  prolonged  must  be  weighed  in  the
      balance and accorded due weight. Even  in  relation  to  the  evidence
      regarding release, it is likely that in a significant number of  cases
      release is simply de facto, without it  being  confirmed  by  official
      documentation which makes it likely that it would be difficult for the
      generality of beneficiaries to show that their  national  service  was
      formally complete.

 307. We find it very striking that not more attention has been paid to  the
      fact that 9 out of 10 persons are  not  engaged  in  national  service
      duties by country analysts. We do not exclude that further information
      may become available in the future making clearer  what  the  position
      is, as regards completion of national service, for  such  persons.  It
      may be that this could  vindicate  our  hypothesis  that  the  average
      period for completion of national service is 7 years. But on the basis
      of the evidence before us, this seems to us a  classic  example  of  a
      situation where we should not depart from existing country guidance as
      set out in MO on this matter for the reason articulated by the  UT  in
      EM & Others [2011] UKUT 98 at  [72]  that  "any  assessment  that  the
      material circumstances have changed would  need  to  demonstrate  that
      such changes are well established evidentially and durable." In short,
      we do not find that such a change is well established evidentially and
      durable.

Eligibility for national service and exit visas

 308. By Article 17 of Proclamation No.82/1995 an  Eritrean  citizen  "under
      the obligation of national service... may be allowed to travel abroad"
      by producing evidence that he or she is exempted or has completed  his
      or her service or by producing a registration card and entering into a
      security bond.  Lawful exit from Eritrea requires an exit visa  issued
      by the Department of Immigration.   According to the 2015 UNCOI Report
      at [401]-[413] exit visas are issued to  certain  individuals  without
      difficulty and in this regard mention is  made  of  three  categories:
      older women; individuals who have completed national service when  the
      nature of their occupation requires  regular  travel;  and  conscripts
      travelling for official business for the government,  although  it  is
      emphasised that the system operates arbitrarily.

 309. In MO at [106] the Tribunal endorsed PK's identification  in  2011  of
      seven categories of lawful exit:

            i) a male of 54 years or over;

           ii) a female of 47 years or over;

          iii) children of seven or younger;

           iv) a person declared by an official committee to  be  unfit  on
               medical grounds to perform any military or national service;

            v) a person certificated by an official committee to be  unable
               to receive appropriate medical treatment in Eritrea;

           vi) highly trusted government officials and their families;

          vii) members of ministerial staff recommended by  the  department
               to attend studies abroad.

 310. The EASO Report states (at [6.4]) that "most sources agree  that  exit
      visas are generally issued to the  following  categories  of  persons.
      However, some contradictions and  uncertainties  remain,  particularly
      regarding the age boundaries". Its list is as follows:

           . Men aged over 54
           . Women aged over 47
           . Children aged under 13 (some sources state an even lower age)
           . People exempt from national service on medical grounds
           .  People  travelling  abroad  for  medical  treatment   and   in
             individual cases for studies or for a conference
           . In some cases, businessmen and sportsmen
           . Former freedom fighters (Tegadelti) and their family members
           . Authority representatives in leading positions and their family
             members
Submissions

 311. The appellants submit firstly that the position in  relation  to  exit
      visas for those within the national service scheme  has  not  improved
      since MO and that the exceptions therefore remain limited.   Secondly,
      they submit that there is credible evidence that  there  has  in  fact
      been a narrowing in the age range of those able to obtain exit  visas,
      "such that with the limited exceptions still applicable,  those  under
      the age of 5 and over the age of 70 regardless of  their  gender,  are
      unlikely to leave Eritrea lawfully".  The appellants also dispute  the
      respondent's claim that around 60,000 -  80,000  persons  are  granted
      exit visas.  Mr Knafler said that the  only  source  for  this  was  a
      statement by Eritrean immigration  officers  to  the  UKFFM  and  this
      should be given little weight.  In any event, submit  the  appellants,
      this figure was not an indicator of Eritreans seeking to leave Eritrea
      to go abroad, since it must include substantial numbers  of  Eritreans
      who go back to Eritrea for holidays.

 312. In submissions UNHCR cites the list of categories as set  out  in  the
      EASO Report and comments that the ability of some of these  categories
      of individuals to obtain exit visas  was  recently  confirmed  in  the
      UNCOI Report.  UNHCR mentions 'older  women',  'individuals  who  have
      completed  national  service  when  the  nature  of  their  occupation
      requires regular travel', and people travelling for  medical  reasons.
      The UNHCR Evidence Table notes that according to Landinfo and the EASO
      Report, exit visas are generally only available to women aged over  47
      and according to the 2015 UNCOI Report there appears to be a  "general
      travel ban enforced on children" (at [411]).

 313.  The  respondent's  position  is  that  lawful  exit  remains  a  real
      possibility and it cannot be assumed that an  Eritrean  applicant  for
      protection left illegally.  According to the  respondent,  the  figure
      given by an Eritrean official to the UKFFM of 60,000  -  80,000  visas
      per year is not inherently  fanciful  or  unrealistic.   Far  from  it
      having become more difficult since MO  to  obtain  an  exit  visa  (as
      contended for by PK among others), there is evidence pointing  in  the
      opposite direction, to some relaxation.  The immediate reason why  the
      Tribunal in MO considered the categories were limited to seven  was  a
      temporary suspension of exit visas and  passport  services  in  August
      2008 with only partial re-opening at the  time  of  hearing;  that  no
      longer applied.  The USSD Reports covering 2012 and 2013 had  reported
      some relaxation, "including for medical purposes, allowing an  unknown
      number of  persons  below  the  age  cutoffs  to  leave  the  country"
      ('Eritrea 2013 Human Rights Report' USSD, 2014 at page 13).

 314. The respondent considers relevant the data  concerning  European  visa
      applications by Eritreans which although charting a drop in  2014  and
      2015, showed an increase from 2011 (when they were 1789)  to  2043  in
      2015.  The  evidence  justifies,  according  to  the   respondent,   a
      reformulation of the categories able to obtain exit  visas.   This  is
      similar to the EASO list except that the upper age  for  women  should
      now be reduced from 47 to 30 and those granted an exit visa to  travel
      abroad  for  treatment,  conference  and  studies  should  be   listed
      individually.  The  respondent  does  not  accept  that  the  evidence
      regarding the people's  militia  justifies  extending  the  upper  age
      limits for men and women eligible for an exit visa.  She  asks  us  to
      rely on the fact that the USSD for 2015 continued to give an age level
      for men of 54 years and indeed for women has lowered  it  to  30.   As
      regards the age limit for children, the respondent  acknowledges  that
      the same USSD Report states that "[a]uthorities generally did not give
      exit visas to children aged 5 or older" but notes that all recent USSD
      Reports including this one refer to 'adolescents' being  granted  exit
      permits.  The respondent refers to Landinfo in  April  2015  citing  a
      source "who considered that children up to  13-14  years  can  receive
      travel documents in family reunification cases".  In the  respondent's
      view, this evidence justifies a higher upper limit  and  at  the  very
      least should persuade the Tribunal to leave the position unchanged.

 315. The respondent takes particular issue with PK's evidence that  it  has
      become more difficult to  obtain  a  'medical  visa',  evidence  which
      appears to be purely anecdotal and is difficult to square in any event
      with his own evidence about many Eritreans  travelling  to  Sudan  for
      medical treatment.  As regards students, the respondent also considers
      significant the evidence of Dr Tanja  M�ller  recorded  in  2012  that
      "students are being sent abroad again on scholarships for  masters  or
      PhD degrees, a programme that had all but stopped in the last decade".
       Even if the Eritrean government  was  restrictive  in  granting  exit
      visas for students to western countries, there was recent evidence  of
      students going to countries such as China, Japan, South  Korea,  Dubai
      and the Gulf States, South Africa, India and African countries such as
      Kenya and Sudan. The respondent  produced  a  number  of  media  items
      referring to Eritrean students in non-Western countries.

Our assessment

 316. We pause to remind ourselves of the unusual nature of the task we face
      in deciding this issue. Ordinarily  a  state's  exit  visa  categories
      would be officially declared and known. Not here,  and  we  are  faced
      with the unsatisfactory position in examining the issue of  having  to
      try and construct what is likely to be  the  actual  list  applied  in
      practice in Eritrea, taking into account, inter  alia,  what  Eritrean
      government officials have said about them, bearing in mind  of  course
      that  government  representatives  may  not  be  stating   facts   and
      officialdom in Eritrea can act  arbitrarily.   With  that  caveat,  we
      consider that the list of categories of lawful exit given in the  EASO
      Report provides a more useful starting  point  than  that  constructed
      over five years ago by the Tribunal in MO, when one of the  bases  for
      it was the lack at that time of a full lifting of the 2008  suspension
      of exit visa and passport service.

 317. We do not accept that the introduction of the people's militia in 2012
      has raised the age limits for exit visas beyond the  national  service
      age limits of 54 for men and 47 for women. Whilst there is significant
      evidence going both ways on this issue, we are not persuaded  that  it
      can be concluded  that  the  authorities  treat  eligibility  for  the
      people's militia as a barrier to obtaining exit visas.  We accept that
      the 2015 UNCOI Report at [87] states that  most  Eritreans  discharged
      from and into the people's militia are not  able  to  obtain  an  exit
      visa. Yet the very detailed study of the  people's  militia  by  Lifos
      (Subject Report: People's Army, 23 November 2015), having  noted  that
      women are involved in the people's militia to a lesser extent and  the
      conditions under which they are  excluded  are  unclear,  states  that
      "[i]t should be noted that, there seem to be other circumstances which
      allow a person to be released from service". We recognise as well that
      in the UKFFM interviews government minister Yemane Gebreab appears  to
      assert at one point that people serving in the people's militia cannot
      leave the country. However, (leaving  aside  that  we  treat  Eritrean
      government sources with great caution) his evidence may  be  referring
      only to persons on active people's militia duty  (his  answer  to  the
      question whether such persons were allowed to leave  the  country  was
      "No, not now"). Despite the people's militia having been in  existence
      since 2012, the USSD Reports and the EASO Report  have  not  seen  its
      introduction to alter these age limits.

 318. What seems particularly important to us is the fact that the  people's
      militia is a part-time  obligation  and  is  not  established  in  all
      regions of the country  (the  EASO  Report  at  3.9  states  that  the
      People's Army takes place primarily in Asmara).

 319. Unlike the national service system it is a system that  has  grown  up
      outside any legislative framework. Whilst we are  prepared  to  accept
      that persons actively involved in doing people's  militia  service  or
      known to face immediate call up to the people's militia in order to do
      weapons training or guard duty  etc.  may  face  refusal,  we  do  not
      consider that outside of this context the authorities see time-limited
      trips abroad as at odds with the orderly functioning of  the  people's
      militia.

 320. We found PK's oral evidence about the people's  militia  unimpressive.
      It was anecdotal and his source evidence was lacking. He said that the
      fact that someone was not in the people's militia did  not  mean  that
      they were exempt and "it would only be a matter of  time  before  they
      were holding a gun."  Despite PK's evidence before us that  the  upper
      age limit for exit visas should be increased, he had not  stated  this
      in his  February  report,  and  his  explanation  for  this,  that  he
      "probably made the changes as a result of the research [he]  did",  is
      unsatisfactory considering the people's militia was introduced in 2012
      and the source he cited was a book published in  2013.   His  evidence
      about the consequences of fleeing from the people's militia  was  that
      they are likely to be the same, but he accepted this was  speculative.
      He also stated that his aunt was in the people's militia. He  had  not
      mentioned her in his reports, but she is aged 40 and in  the  people's
      militia, she was not engaged on  a  full-time  basis  but  had  to  be
      available whenever there  was  a  specific  task  and  can  be  called
      anytime. This evidence is of a piece with other evidence  establishing
      that the people's militia has  limited  reach,  it  is  arbitrary  and
      episodic. It follows that we conclude  that  there  is  no  reason  to
      consider that the upper age limit for exit visas has increased.

 321. Equally, however, we are not persuaded by the respondent's  submission
      (also reflected in the policy position set  out  in  the  Home  Office
      Country  Information and Guidance: Eritrea: Illegal Exit, Version 3.0,
      August 2016) that we should treat the age for women as having  reduced
      from 47 to 30.  We acknowledge that 30 is the age given  in  the  USSD
      Report covering 2015, but the weight  of  the  evidence  continues  to
      indicate that the age limit is 47 and that even though  a  substantial
      number of women are able to obtain a de facto discharge from  military
      service  based  on  pregnancy,  marriage,  and  responsibilities   for
      children, this does not appear to translate into  them  receiving  the
      necessary official documentation needed  for  exit,  although  clearly
      some, perhaps a not insignificant number,  are  able  to  obtain  this
      through family connections and/or bribes.

 322. As regards children, we do not consider that the EASO  formulation  at
      [6.4] - "[c]hildren aged under 13 (some sources state  an  even  lower
      age" (or the Home Office Country  Information and  Guidance:  Eritrea:
      Illegal Exit, Version 3.0, August 2016 position to similar  effect)  -
      reflects the significant number of sources who place the age at 5.  As
      with so many aspects of the Eritrean state, there is no certainty over
      whether the Eritrean government uses a precise age or  what  it  is  -
      although the immigration officials told the UKFFM it was 5.   However,
      the latest USSD Report puts the age  at  5  and  we  think  that  best
      reflects the weight  of  the  present  evidence  indicating  that  the
      Eritrean government believes it has lost too  many  of  its  youth  to
      emigration/flight: if that is so, it is likely that it would view exit
      visa  applications  from  children  with  greater   scepticism.    The
      respondent correctly observes that this same  report  also  refers  to
      "adolescents" being granted exit visas, but  it  appears  to  us  most
      likely that this phenomenon  is  closely  linked  to  the  context  of
      applications for family reunification  abroad  (as  suggested  by  the
      Landinfo evidence) rather than a general raising of the minimum age.

 323. As regards EASO's two medical categories (people exempt from  national
      service on medical grounds and people travelling  abroad  for  medical
      treatment), we see no good reasons to consider they have been narrowed
      in scope or withdrawn.  Whilst  PK's  evidence  was  strongly  to  the
      effect that they have narrowed, it was not substantiated. We  find  it
      significant (at least in respect of the latter category) that he  also
      referred to the very sizeable numbers of Eritreans travelling to Sudan
      for medical treatment.  Whilst he appeared to describe them being able
      to do so on travel permits rather than exit visas, we do not think the
      Eritrean authorities would adopt a stricter  approach  to  one  rather
      than the other. His evidence was that crossing the border  into  Sudan
      for medical treatment was relatively commonplace, but that  you  would
      only be granted a travel permit if outside  draft  age  (applying  the
      upper and lower limit as he put forward in his evidence). He talked of
      buses taking people across the border for this purpose and when he was
      asked whether the occupants of the buses were  all  over  the  age  of
      70/60 and under five, he then stated that the border was porous and in
      places there were no check points.  PK's evidence generally about  the
      narrowing of the regime's approach to exit  visas  was  anecdotal  and
      largely uncorroborated.

 324. Similarly with students, and again notwithstanding PK's  evidence,  we
      see no sound basis for regarding this category as having narrowed.  PK
      was unable to justify his assertion that the  number  of  scholarships
      has "diminished considerably" (PK's  Report  of  4  April  2016).   We
      consider that what was noted in MO - that it is highly likely that the
      Eritrean authorities have more confidence that students they allow  to
      go to non-western countries will  not  defect  or  fail  to  return  -
      remains true, particularly given the evidence we have of there being a
      diverse number of different non-Western  countries  (including  Sudan)
      where Eritrean students go for  studies.   We  also  concur  with  the
      respondent that it makes sense to list this as an additional  category
      on its own.

 325. Nor are we  persuaded  by  PK's  evidence  that  there  has  been  any
      narrowing of the other categories.  The EASO category  of  businessmen
      and  sportsmen  is  corroborated  by  the   UNCOI   observation   that
      Proclamation No 82/1995 allows for conscripts to show  a  registration
      card and leave a bond to obtain a visa and it has been made  available
      only to conscripts travelling for official business for the government
      (see [407] of the UNCOI 2015 Report). It seems to us  that  the  final
      category ("Authority representatives in leading  positions  and  their
      family members") likewise remains a sufficiently  accurate  reflection
      of the overall state of the evidence.  In  particular,  we  find  PK's
      suggestion that this should be narrowed to those  in  the  President's
      inner circle to be too dependent on anecdotal evidence.

 326. Of course, in regard to all  these  categories  we  accept  there  are
      continuing uncertainties and contradictions  (as  highlighted  by  the
      EASO Report) and a certain degree of arbitrariness (as highlighted  by
      PK and the UNCOI Reports).  These categories represent therefore  only
      those mostly likely to be available; there remains the possibility  in
      any individual case of denial.

 327. We  also  think  that  these  categories  are  being  exercised  by  a
      significant number of Eritreans. We agree with the respondent that  in
      approaching this issue sight must not be lost of the fact that even on
      the highest figures given, a very large  proportion  of  the  Eritrean
      population are not involved in national service.  The  available  data
      concerning European visa applications  by  Eritreans  seems  to  us  a
      significant  indicator  of  demand  and  we  continue  to  think  that
      Eritreans are unlikely to go to the trouble and  expense  of  applying
      for visas from other countries  if  they  do  not  have  a  reasonable
      expectation of being able to obtain an exit visa (the  latest  version
      of the Home Office CIG on Illegal Exit at 2.2.3 cites the reference in
      the US  State  Department  Report  published  in  June  2015  to  "the
      prohibitive cost of passports deter[ring] many citizens  from  foreign
      travel. It costs a citizen in national service the  equivalent  of  40
      percent of his or her gross yearly salary to obtain a valid  passport.
      Some persons previously issued passports were  not  allowed  to  renew
      them, nor were they granted exit visas". At 7.1.1 is also  noted  that
      exit visas cost 200 nakfa and are valid for one month and one trip out
      of the country). This data shows a drop in 2014 and 2015 but  even  so
      an increase from 2011 (when they were 1789)  to  2043  in  2015.  Such
      evidence  certainly  does  not  suggest  a  narrowing  of  exit   visa
      categories. We also consider  salient  the  evidence  of  the  diverse
      number of non-Western countries which have Eritrean students,  in  our
      view another strong indication that a significant number of  Eritreans
      regard the categories of lawful exit as  offering  real  possibilities
      for them even for those of  draft  age  par  excellence.   We  do  not
      however, place reliance on the  figure  given  for  the  UKFFM  by  an
      Eritrean immigration officer of 60,000 - 80,000 applications per  year
      for exit visas as it is not corroborated by  any  independent  source.
      (We would note that we are not persuaded that the  exit  visa  figures
      would include persons who go to Eritrea on  holiday.  Not  only  would
      including them make no sense  of  the  figures,  since  their  numbers
      appear to add up to more than the total figures otherwise, but it also
      seems to us odd that, if an Eritrean  abroad  makes  contact  with  an
      Eritrean Embassy, pays the 2 per cent tax and (if relevant) signs  the
      regret letter and gets an ID document, he or she would not  receive  a
      stamp on arrival that would automatically allow them to exit within  a
      certain period without further need for an exit visa.)

 328. We conclude that the categories of lawful exit have not  significantly
      changed since MO. The Eritrean  system  of  exit  visas  continues  to
      afford, and to be perceived by a significant number  of  Eritreans  as
      affording, real, albeit restricted, possibilities for  them  to  avail
      themselves of and accordingly we would list  the  exit  categories  as
      follows (where the categories are different from those given by  EASO,
      they are underlined):

           . Men aged over 54

           . Women aged over 47

           . Children aged under five (with some scope  for  adolescents  in
             family reunification cases)

           . People exempt from national service on medical grounds

           . People travelling abroad for medical  treatment  (this  is  now
             listed as a separate category)

           . People travelling abroad for studies or for a conference  [This
             is now listed as a separate category. We do not think that  the
             EASO qualifier "and in individual cases" serves any descriptive
             purpose]

           . Business and sportsmen [here again we do not think that  EASO's
             prefatory words "[I]n some cases" adds any descriptive purpose]

           . Former freedom fighters (Tegadelti) and their family members

           . Authority representatives in leading positions and their family



The 2 per cent tax and the regret letter

Submissions

 329. The respondent's position,  based  inter  alia,  on  the  DFFM  Report
      (including the Eritrean MoFA  source  who  had  stated  that  national
      service evaders and deserters have the possibility of restoring  their
      relations with the Eritrean government by paying this tax and  signing
      the letter of regret, the Landinfo Reports and the Home Office  CIGs),
      is that Eritreans can return safely to Eritrea should they pay the tax
      and sign the letter of regret (also known as the letter of  repentance
      or apology or rehabilitation) notwithstanding that they left illegally
      and/or evaded or  deserted  from  national  service.  The  appellants'
      position and that of UNHCR is that this is entirely  misconceived  and
      that there is no evidence to support the respondent's  case  and  that
      the tax and letter are  used  by  the  diaspora  in  order  to  access
      consular services only.

 330. We were referred to findings of the 2015 UNCOI  Report at [440])  that
      many Eritreans no longer have an Eritrean passport and can only obtain
      one after the  payment  of  the  2  per  cent  tax  collected  through
      Eritrea's diplomatic representatives abroad. In order  to  ensure  the
      payment of the tax, methods used have been found to be illicit by  the
      United Nations Security Council. The Commission found that one of  the
      methods used is to force payment for basic consular services and  that
      the non-payment of the tax presents a security  risk  for  arrest  and
      detention (see [441]). In  addition  to  the  tax,  according  to  the
      Commission in the same report at [442], Eritreans who left the country
      illegally have to sign a document to regularise  their  status  before
      they can request consular services. By signing the form an  individual
      admits the offence and agrees to accept punishment.

 331. We were referred to the anonymous source 2 spoken  to  by  the  UKFFM.
      This source did not assert that the payment of the tax would enable  a
      person to return safely, but rather linked it with  renewing  licences
      for family members in Eritrea.  Anonymous source 1 said that those who
      left illegally pay 2 per cent tax "and come back legally" going on  to
      say that they visit their family here and then return to  the  country
      from where they came.

 332. We were referred by Mr Rawat to  the  evidence  from  the  2015  UNCOI
      Report (see [436]) concluding that there are  two  exceptions  to  the
      rule that returnees are arrested, detained and  forced  to  enlist  in
      national service following a forced return. The  report  refers  to  a
      group of Eritreans  who  returned  from  country  "D"  with  a  letter
      certifying that they had paid a 2 per cent rehabilitation  tax  having
      already been detained  for  several  years  in  country  D.   Specific
      reference is made to  an  individual  from  the  group  who  had  been
      imprisoned for three years in country D.  Another case is referred  to
      of forced repatriations in 2014 where seven older men were  reportedly
      freed whilst younger men who were also forcibly returned at  the  same
      time were not released.

Our Assessment

 333. The weight of the evidence points very much in the direction that  the
      letter and the tax do not guarantee safety  for  Eritreans  returning;
      rather they enable them to access consular services.  There  is  scant
      evidence of anyone who has not been  naturalised  in  another  country
      paying the tax and/or signing  the  letter  and  returning  safely  or
      otherwise.  We accept PK's evidence about this, which  was  very  much
      corroborated by evidence from other sources.  There being insufficient
      detail about the returnees to draw conclusions, we would have  reached
      this conclusion  independently  in  any  event.  Apart  from  the  two
      exceptions referred to by the UNCOI, it would appear that the bulk  of
      the examples cited concern or  may  concern  persons  who  voluntarily
      returned, which in our view (as set out below when dealing with failed
      asylum seekers and forcible returns at  [335]-[337]  and  [357]-[367])
      puts them in a different category.

 334. Suffice to say for the purpose of this section, that we do not  accept
      that the evidence goes anywhere close to establishing that the payment
      of the tax and the signing of the letter would  enable  draft  evaders
      and deserters to reconcile with the Eritrean authorities. In  relation
      to the letter of regret, we also  have  serious  doubts  that  it  can
      properly be described as a basis for reconciliation, since  its  terms
      amount to a confession of guilt by the person who signs it to what the
      Eritrean regime considers  "appropriate punishment" in the context  of
      a regime with a very poor human rights record.

Failed Asylum Seekers

 335. In MO the Tribunal at [131] held that failed asylum  seekers  as  such
      are not at risk of persecution  on  return.   We  do  not  detect  any
      enthusiasm from any of the parties for a different  view  being  taken
      today.  Indeed the appellants' expert witness  PK,  was  adamant  that
      failed asylum seeking could not be enough on its own to engender  risk
      because of the main reasons highlighted in MA and MO that the Eritrean
      authorities have a vested interest  in  embedding  abroad  people  who
      claim asylum but are in reality well-regarded by  the  government  and
      that a significant number appear to be in reality  supporters  of  the
      Eritrean government or able  to  demonstrate  that  they  are  through
      attendance at rallies etc.

 336. We note that references can be found in some of the sources  taking  a
      different view, but here we regard the way the matter was put  by  the
      April 2015 Landinfo Report, that there was "no empirical evidence"  to
      support the contention that an application for  asylum  will  lead  to
      adverse reactions from the Eritrean  authorities,  as  being  entirely
      fair.

 337. To the extent that any inferences  can  be  drawn  from  the  evidence
      overall, it seems to us that there is likely to be  a  further  reason
      presently why the Eritrean authorities would not view the mere fact of
      being a failed asylum seeker adversely.  This  is  that  the  Eritrean
      authorities consciously recognise the economic value to them of having
      a sizeable diaspora who send remittances and  some  of  whose  members
      also pay the 2  per  cent  tax.   Rightly  or  wrongly,  they  clearly
      consider that many of the Eritreans who have left have done so out  of
      a desire for economic betterment rather than asylum yet go on to claim
      asylum as a way of residing elsewhere.  That may be a factor that  has
      played a part in Eritrean  government  thinking  for  some  time,  but
      recent evidence does underscore how greatly  the  Eritrean  government
      depends on foreign  remittances.  According  to  Crisis  Group  Africa
      Briefing  No  100  August  2014  ("Eritrea:   Ending   the   Exodus?")
      remittances inject hard currency into  the  country's  meagre  foreign
      exchange reserves, whilst bolstering the economic  resilience  of  the
      families left  behind  and  the  government  has  become  increasingly
      dependent on  Eritrean's  abroad  as  a  source  of  capital.  It  was
      estimated that approximately one third of Eritrea's 2005 GDP came from
      remittances and this  may  have  increased.  Whilst  there  are  still
      references in some sources to the Eritrean authorities viewing  failed
      asylum seekers as traitors, we continue to follow  MO  in  considering
      this as  something only likely to be acted on in any way when there is
      a particular symbolic importance for Eritrea public policy  e.g.  when
      dealing  with  collective  expulsions  back  to  Eritrea.  This   last
      observation,  however,  is  we  think  of  greater   importance   than
      previously, because what we have to consider is not  just  how  failed
      asylum seeking as such  would  be  perceived,  but  how  the  Eritrean
      authorities would react to  persons  perceived  as  draft  evaders  or
      deserters when forcibly returned.

Illegal exit by those perceived on return to be draft-evaders or deserters

Submissions

 338. The  respondent  maintains  that  according  to  the  DFFM  and  UKFFM
      interlocutors the  Eritrean  government  does  not  detain  or  punish
      evaders and deserters within the country systematically and  was  more
      concerned to put them back in national  service  work.   She  observed
      that the 2015 UNCOI Report at [818] noted the grant of an  amnesty  to
      deserters in November 2014. The evidence regarding the "shoot to kill"
      policy indicates it was less in evidence and that round-ups or  giffas
      are less frequent. The evidence shows, she submits, that targeting  of
      relatives had also reduced.

 339. The respondent also maintains that in any event  it  is  incorrect  to
      infer that those who have left the country would be  punished  in  the
      same way as those caught within  the  country.  That  is  because  the
      latter can obtain an Eritrean passport and/or ID card by paying  fees,
      the diaspora tax and signing a letter of apology. Reliance was  placed
      on the Eritrean MoFA who had stated to the DFFM that national  service
      evaders  and  deserters  have  the  possibility  of  restoring   their
      relations with the Eritrean government by paying this tax and  signing
      the letter  of  apology.   It  was  indeed  this  view  that  led  the
      respondent in its March 2015 CIG Policy Eritrea: Illegal Exit the Home
      Office, drawing heavily  on  the  DFFM  Report,  to  decide  that  the
      guidance given in MO should no longer be followed,  stating  at  1.3.4
      that:

           "However MO  was  promulgated  in  2011.   The  most  up-to-date
           information available from inside  Eritrea  notably  the  [DFFM]
           Report.....[indicates that  as]  a  result  Eritreans  who  left
           illegally are no longer considered per se to be at risk of  harm
           or   mistreatment   amounting   to   persecution   on    return.
           Consequently, the guidance outlined in MO above should no longer
           be followed and failure of a person to comply with a  reasonable
           request to pay diaspora tax would not in itself give rise  to  a
           well-founded fear of persecution or serious harm."

 340. The respondent also submits that illegal exit  is  no  longer  a  risk
      factor or as great a one as before - because there is now  a  body  of
      evidence showing  that  each  summer  many  members  of  the  Eritrean
      diaspora return for holidays. Western embassy A gave an account to the
      DFFM of 400 Eritreans with Swedish passports being stranded in  Asmara
      following the collapse of  an  air  company.  The  majority  had  left
      illegally yet were all able to return to  Sweden.   According  to  the
      NCEW source, there were also  diaspora  returnees  who  came  back  to
      settle and set up  businesses.  The  respondent  considered  that  the
      cohort of diaspora returnees must include those  who  left  illegally,
      yet there was no evidence of such individuals being subjected to  ill-
      treatment.

 341. The respondent also seeks to  rely  on  the  fact  that  the  Eritrean
      immigration officials interviewed by the UKFFM said that those who had
      been outside the country for three years or more were free to  return.
      If they came back within the three years they had to complete national
      service.  Those interviewed by the UKFFM included persons who had  not
      been naturalised in their destination countries.  For  the  respondent
      the evidence from the UKFFM necessitated, in consequence, a more fact-
      specific analysis  than  presently  required  under  existing  country
      guidance.

 342. The appellants' counter-argument was as follows. Firstly, it was  said
      that the evidence of what  happens  in-country  to  draft-evaders  and
      deserters was still overwhelmingly to the effect that  they  were  the
      recipients of ill-treatment. Secondly it was  argued  that  statements
      made to the UKFFM by officials and others that there is some  kind  of
      amnesty for deserters/evaders who pay the tax and/or sign  the  letter
      of regret was "blatantly untrue" considering that  [84]  of  the  2016
      UNCOI  Report  showed  that  the  Commission  had  received   reliable
      information indicating that the office of the President had instructed
      Eritrean officials  meeting  delegates  to  make  certain  assertions.
      Thirdly, the appellants submitted that it  was  highly  unlikely  that
      those who had fled Eritrea and are concerned about punishment directed
      towards them or their family members on account of illegal exit  would
      pay  the  diaspora  tax  and  make  their  whereabouts  known  to  the
      authorities. PK's evidence was clear that the  diaspora  tax  was  not
      something that was in fact paid by persons  likely  to  face  forcible
      return and in any event, paying it would not immunise them  from  ill-
      treatment on return because that  tax  gave  one  access  to  domestic
      services but did not extinguish the fact that they would be  perceived
      on return as evaders and deserters and punished accordingly. Fourthly,
      even if the  diaspora  tax  can  somehow  immunise  those  who  exited
      illegally from persecution on return, these are  sums  extracted  from
      members of the  diaspora,  often  by  illegitimate  pressure  to  fund
      purchases of arms in breach of a UN arms embargo and  militant  groups
      that destabilise the region.   Further,  it  could  not  be  suggested
      consistently with HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 and  RT  (Zimbabwe)  [2012]
      UKSC 38 that a person  who  is  unwilling  to  subject  themselves  to
      national service or the people's  militia  or  otherwise  unattractive
      aspects of the Eritrean regime, should not be treated as  in  need  of
      protection simply because they could take  those  steps.  Fifthly,  as
      regards signing of the letter of regret,  the  appellants'  submission
      was that it  does  nothing  more  than  express  consent  to  whatever
      punishment  the  government  considers  fit  for  desertion  or  draft
      evasion.  "It is  very  unlikely  that  an  individual  who  has  been
      subjected to past persecution would consent to such treatment  and  in
      relation to forced returnees, it seems  entirely  irrational  that  an
      individual would sign".

 343. UNHCR's submission reminded the Tribunal that in the UNHCR Eligibility
      Guidelines of 2011, which UNHCR say continue to apply,  it  is  stated
      that  "[d]raft  evaders/deserters  are  reported  to   be   frequently
      subjected to torture".  Desertion  and  draft  evasion  were  criminal
      offences under Eritrean law. The UNHCR  submissions  placed  reliance,
      inter alia, on the statement by the USSD of June 2015 that "refusal to
      perform military or militia service,  failure  to  enlist,  fraudulent
      evasion of military service and desertion  were  punished  by  lengthy
      imprisonment or other  arbitrary  forms  of  punishment"  and  similar
      observations made by the UN Special Rapporteur, the UNCOI  and  by  AI
      and HRW, the latter who wrote in July 2015 that:

           "The preponderance of evidence... indicates that there has  been
           no change in Eritrea's treatment of draft evaders, deserters and
           people leaving the country without permission."

Our Assessment

 344. As regards the issue of how decision-makers should  decide  whether  a
      person has left illegally, we see no reason to differ from the precise
      terms of the guidance in MO at (iii):

           "(iii)....The general position as regards illegal  exit  remains
           as expressed in MA, namely that illegal exit by a person  of  or
           approaching draft age and not medically unfit cannot be  assumed
           if they have been found to be wholly  incredible.   However,  if
           such a person  is  found  to  have  left  Eritrea  on  or  after
           August/September 2008, it may be that inferences  can  be  drawn
           from their health history or level of education or their  skills
           profile as to whether legal exit on  their  part  was  feasible,
           provided that such inference  can  be  drawn  in  the  light  of
           adverse credibility findings."

      None of the parties has pointed to any evidence  indicating  the  need
      for a different approach on this issue. We would next  reiterate  that
      it is incorrect of the March and September 2015 and August  2016  CIGs
      to portray (as they certainly do in places) the position set out in MO
      as being that Eritreans who left illegally are considered to  be,  per
      se, at risk.  The MO position was explicitly stated as  being  subject
      to three exceptions (see [133iv]). Indeed,  UK  country  guidance  has
      never asserted that the fact of illegal exit from Eritrea is of itself
      enough to place a person at risk.

 345. We are bound to say that certain of the arguments advanced  seemed  to
      us  to  obfuscate  rather  than  assist  the  Tribunal's   task.   The
      possibility canvassed  by  the  appellants,  for  example,  that  sums
      extracted from members of the diaspora may be  used  by  the  Eritrean
      government to fund purchases of arms in breach of a UN arms embargo by
      militant groups that destabilise the region, seems to us  far  removed
      from the task of identifying risk categories or factors.  Be  that  as
      it may, our view is that the totality of  the  evidence  continues  to
      support the view that the fact of illegal exit is not of itself enough
      to place an individual at risk.

 346. The question is, therefore, what further characteristics are needed to
      place a person at real risk of persecution or serious harm on return.

 347. We consider two further characteristics are needed: (i) that they will
      be perceived on return as evaders/deserters; and (ii) that  they  will
      be persons subject to forcible return. Even then, however, we continue
      to think that this category is subject to certain exceptions and  that
      they are exactly the same  as  those  identified  in  MO,  namely  (1)
      persons whom the regime's military and political leadership  perceives
      as having given them valuable service (either in Eritrea  or  abroad);
      (2) persons who are trusted family members of, or are themselves  part
      of, the regime's military or political leadership.  A further possible
      exception, requiring a more case specific analysis is (3) persons (and
      their children born  afterwards)  who  fled  (what  later  became  the
      territory of) Eritrea during the War of Independence. We do not accept
      the position identified in the latest version of the Home  Office  CIG
      on Illegal Exit published on 4 August 2016 that  the  scope  of  these
      exceptions has widened.

 348. The respondent has sought to argue that we should adopt a  more  open-
      ended fact-specific analysis, but her argument  is  dependent  on  the
      premise that those who have  left  Eritrea  illegally  as  evaders  or
      deserters have the ability to regularise their position by payment  of
      the diaspora tax and letter of regret.  For  reasons  given  above  at
      [333] we reject this. Persons  who  are  likely  to  be  perceived  as
      deserters/evaders will not be able to avoid exposure to such real risk
      merely by showing they have paid (or are willing to pay) the  diaspora
      tax and/have signed (or are willing to sign) the letter of regret.

 349. Whilst we accept there are individual examples of the  government  not
      punishing or mistreating returning draft evaders or deserters who left
      illegally, they are small in  number  and  in  some  cases  appear  to
      pertain to those who returned voluntarily (and may have naturalised in
      another country: see immediately below).

 350. Insofar as the evidence of diaspora members returning to  Eritrea  for
      holidays is concerned, the evidence does  appear  in  one  respect  to
      support the respondent's position in that it persuades  us  that  they
      include a significant number of draft evaders and deserters  who  left
      illegally. We infer that because if it were confined to those who left
      Eritrea during the war of independence and their children and/or those
      who left lawfully, that would have been identified by  more  than  one
      source on the basis of some empirical evidence. Given that the  annual
      numbers appear relatively high (even if not as high as the  government
      figure of 80,000-90,000 as stated by Yermane  Gebreab),  we  seriously
      doubt that all could be from  that  category.  Even  according  to  PK
      (whose evidence was the main  source  for  the  view  that  they  were
      confined to this cohort) there are significant numbers of  individuals
      among the diaspora who left Eritrea illegally after 1991 but who  have
      close connections with the present government and  as  such  would  be
      unlikely to face any difficulties on return.

 351. However, it seems to us that the great majority of  such  persons  are
      likely to be naturalised. We accept that the evidence  regarding  this
      is sketchy, but consider it a reasonable inference that (unless having
      close connections with the present government as set out in the  first
      two  of  three  aforementioned  exceptions)  persons  who   have   not
      naturalised would  not  put  themselves  and  their  families  in  the
      position of going back to a country with  such  a  poor  human  rights
      record. Such an inference would clearly not be warranted if there  was
      concrete evidence of persons (evaders/deserters) who exited  illegally
      going back without having naturalised; but there is not.

 352. One of the main sources relied on by  the  respondent  regarding  this
      matter, the DFFM Report, is based to a significant degree on  evidence
      given by PK, which he  says  was  misinterpreted  and  in  consequence
      cannot be relied on. The same we think is  true  of  the  evidence  of
      Eritrean government interlocutors consulted by the DFFM team. It  must
      also be borne in mind when considering the possible identity of  those
      who  go  back  for  holidays,  that  diaspora  persons  who  have  not
      naturalised will certainly include those who have obtained  settlement
      or some kind of permission to stay under the  Immigration  Rules,  but
      they  will  also  include  asylum  seekers  or  illegal  entrants   or
      overstayers. It is difficult to see that any persons in the last three
      categories would voluntarily leave the UK to go  anywhere,  let  alone
      Eritrea, since they would thereby negate their chance of returning. It
      is also a reasonable inference that a significant number of those  who
      have acquired refugee status (but who have not naturalised), would  be
      wary of returning to Eritrea on holiday for fear that such conduct may
      expose them to cessation action on  return  back  to  the  country  of
      refuge (although we cannot assume, we accept, that all of those we are
      discussing necessarily act according to such concerns).

 353. The significance of holidaying returnees having  prior  naturalisation
      is that, whilst the Eritrean government  might  well  have  chosen  to
      disregard their foreign nationality and rely  simply  on  their  being
      Eritreans who left illegally and who are draft  evaders/deserters,  it
      appears very much that they do not, as  the  Western  embassy  example
      given to the DFFM illustrates.

 354. What, then, is the basis for considering that those who left illegally
      and will be perceived on return as draft evaders/deserters would be at
      risk? There is first of all,  the  evidence  as  to  what  happens  to
      evaders/deserters within Eritrea. As explained at [253]-[256], we  are
      satisfied that despite a  lessening  in  the  frequency  of  round-ups
      (giffas) and "shoot to kill" operations and punishment  of  relatives,
      the treatment such persons are likely to face amounts  to  persecution
      or serious harm, since it continues to take  the  form  of  widespread
      recourse to detention. Mr  Rawat  conceded  during  the  hearing  that
      anything more than a very short period in detention in  Eritrea  would
      carry a real risk of ill-treatment and on the available evidence there
      is in our judgement a real risk that draft evaders/deserters regularly
      face more than very short-term detention. There is some evidence  that
      some  persons  may,  instead  of   detention,   face   assignment   to
      military/national service, but for an initial period of  time,  it  is
      likely this will be assignment to military duties and, in  any  event,
      as will be explained below, we consider that a requirement to  perform
      national service duties, military or civilian, would constitute forced
      labour contrary to Article 4 of the ECHR, if not also Article 3.

 355. Second, argument that the Eritrean authorities would  treat  returning
      evaders/ deserters  differently  from  in-country  evaders/  deserters
      seems to us insufficiently made out. Indeed, one of  the  most  recent
      sources cited at 11.1.26 of the August CIG on Illegal Exit  (the Swiss
      Report of  March  2016)  states  that  "[t]he  few  available  reports
      indicate  that  the  authorities  treat  them  similarly  as   persons
      apprehended  within  Eritrea."  This   brings   us   to   the   second
      characteristic which we consider is required to bring a person  within
      a risk category.

 356. The specific category of persons with whom we are  concerned  are  not
      draft evaders or deserters who have left illegally and would be making
      a voluntary return. In relation to the latter there are some  possible
      examples in the evidence which suggest they can  reach  reconciliation
      with the Eritrean authorities. We have taken particular note  in  this
      regard of the sources relating  to  voluntary  returns  cited  by  the
      latest version of the Home Office  CIG  on  Illegal  Exit  at  10.1.16
      (citing a UKFFM source), 11.12.1 and 11.1.26 (citing the Swiss  Report
      on March 2016). Those with whom we are concerned are persons  who  are
      or will be perceived as evaders/ deserters and who will be known to be
      persons who are the subject of a forcible return.  Whilst  we  do  not
      necessarily think the Eritrean authorities would  react  in  precisely
      the same way to individual forced returnees as they have in  the  past
      to mass forcible returnees, we consider it reasonably likely that they
      would feel similarly impelled to adopt a punitive stance in a way they
      have not sometimes done to voluntary returnees. On the totality of the
      evidence we consider this is a reasonably likely state of affairs.  We
      must analyse the issue of forcible returns in more depth in  the  next
      subsection.

Forcible Returns

 357. In MO the Tribunal had little evidence before it regarding  individual
      forced returns and was cautious of attaching weight to an AI report of
      two forcible returns by Germany in 2009 in light of  the  shortcomings
      in sourcing (see [126]).   It  recorded  ongoing  concerns  about  the
      treatment of those subject to mass forcible returns from Malta,  Libya
      and Egypt in the 2002-2009  period,  but  seemed  to  proceed  on  the
      assumption that individual forcible returns to Eritrea were an ongoing
      reality.

Submissions

 358. The respondent's position is that since MO the evidence  about  likely
      ill-treatment to persons forcibly returned remains vague and  tenuous.
      She notes, as did  Landinfo  2013,  that  PK  did  not  have  concrete
      information.  The one example he gave concerned a Mr Berhane  but  his
      information left unclear whether this man had a  particular  political
      profile.  The respondent regards UNHCR's evidence  on  this  issue  as
      lacking proper sourcing and  the  UNCOI  Report  instances  appear  to
      relate to forced repatriations in 2002, 2004 and 2008 and the only two
      examples given in these reports that are post-MO are somewhat unclear.

 359. The appellants' and UNHCR's closing submissions highlighted the recent
      evidence to hand  about  deportations  from  Sudan  based  on  several
      reports, including Martin Plaut's Report  of  2  June  2016  that  900
      Eritreans had been picked up in Khartoum and  refouled  and  that  800
      were deported while getting ready to go  to  Libya;  the  Report  from
      Kirsty Siegfried of 25 May 2016 which says  that  the  authorities  in
      Sudan  have  launched  a  crackdown  on  Eritrean  migrants  and  have
      summarily deported c1300 Eritreans in c.23  May  2016  and  that  they
      remain detained in Eritrea; and the 2016 UNCOI Report at [98]  stating
      that Sudan deported 313 Eritreans back to Eritrea on 22 May  2016  and
      that on arrival the returnees were arrested and  detained.   Witnesses
      were reported as saying that those who were in national service  prior
      to departure were  held  at  Abeito  Prison  and  those  who  had  not
      undergone national service were awaiting transfer to military training
      call up.  (There were reports from UNHCR  (see  11.1.24  of  the  Home
      Office CIG on Illegal Exit, August 2016) and HRW which appear to cover
      the same May deportations.)

Our assessment

 360. We consider that the further evidence before  the  Tribunal  since  MO
      regarding forced returns requires us to address its implications  more
      closely.  Although there are some shortcomings in the sourcing of  the
      evidence regarding forcible returns  since  2011  (e.g.  inconsistency
      between the various sources over the precise details regarding  recent
      returns to Sudan),  we  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that  the  evidence
      suggests much more strongly than was the case in MO that draft evaders
      and deserters forcibly returned run a  real  risk  of  suffering  ill-
      treatment.

 361. The 2015 EASO Report notes that Eritreans were repatriated from  Egypt
      in  2009,  2011  and  there  have  been  many  instances  of  overland
      repatriations  from  Sudan  in  recent  years.   "No  information   is
      available on  the  fate  of  those  repatriated  after  their  return,
      however".  It  goes  on  to  note,  nevertheless,  that  some  of  the
      respondents contacted in Eritrea during Denmark's and Norway's FFMs in
      late 2014 and early 2015 believed  that  (repatriated)  deserters  and
      draft evaders were held in prison for several weeks or months and were
      then reassigned to national service.  The  EASO  Report  records  what
      appears to be the same incident, noting that some of  the  respondents
      contacted during Denmark's and Norway's FFMs in  late  2014  and  2015
      considered a spell in prison of at least several weeks was the  likely
      outcome for those forcibly repatriated: see para 3.8.2.

 362. The Arapiles study ("The True Human Rights Situation in  Eritrea:  The
      New UK  Home  Office  Guidance  as  a  Political  Instrument  for  the
      Prevention of Migration" p19 at n182]) refers to an  Eritrean  refugee
      interviewed in April 2015 stating  that  he  had  been  deported  from
      country X when his student visa expired  in  2013  and  suffered  ill-
      treatment.

 363. The 2015 UNCOI Report notes at [430] the forced repatriation of around
      40 Eritreans from country E in 2014, plus an unspecified  number  from
      country D in the same year.  It is said in the same context that there
      is a "common  pattern"  of  systemic  ill-treatment  of  such  persons
      ([431], see also [1069]).  At [433]  the  report  notes  that  several
      hundred Eritrean refugees who managed  to  escape  and  were  forcibly
      returned to Eritrea were reported to have faced detention, torture and
      other forms of inhuman treatment.  At [436] the Commission said it had
      found "two  exceptions  to  the  rule  that  returnees  are  arrested,
      detained and forced to enlist  in  the  national  service  upon  their
      arrival in Eritrea". These were:

           "A group of Eritreans has  returned  from  [country  D]  with  a
           letter  certifying  that  they  had  paid   the   2   per   cent
           Rehabilitation Tax and had already been detained  several  years
           in [country D].  The witness had  himself  been  imprisoned  for
           three years in [country D].  He was given a permit to return  to
           his home town, but which had to be reviewed  every  two  months.
           He left Eritrea again shortly after being deported.   The  other
           case concerned forced repatriation to  Eritrea  in  2014,  where
           seven older men were reportedly freed, while the younger men who
           were returned to Eritrea at the same time were not released."

 364. Albeit the recent evidence is sketchy and even though it  falls  short
      of solid documentation, in terms of the number of incidents (some very
      recent), it amounts to significantly more than was before the Tribunal
      in MO and we do not think it can be disregarded.

 365. The UT in MO considered that the context of mass forcible returns  may
      affect the reaction of the Eritrean authorities because  such  returns
      are likely to have a public profile and  those  authorities  may  feel
      they have to send out a tough message.  By implication the UT did  not
      necessarily consider that those authorities would react in  a  similar
      way to forcible returns undertaken on an individual basis. We feel  it
      necessary to reconsider that assumption. The overall context is highly
      unusual because it would  appear  that  in  Europe  and  indeed  other
      Western countries, governments have  not  been   making  any  enforced
      returns to Eritrea for some time; that at least is what we  understand
      the position to be from Mr Rawat when we sought clarification  on  the
      matter. That was not the Tribunal's understanding of the  position  in
      2011, when, in any event, although falling short of  considering  that
      those who left illegally would per se face  ill-treatment  on  return,
      the UT assessed that the great majority would.

 366. Be that as it may, the recent evidence of forcible returns  made  from
      non-Western countries, chiefly the overland repatriations from  Sudan,
      is really the only type of evidence we have against  which  to  assess
      risk on  return  from  Western  countries  such  as  the  UK.  And  it
      constitutes evidence showing that in the last few years those who  are
      likely to be perceived on return as draft  evaders/deserters  and  who
      have been the subject of such forcible returns have met with,  or  are
      likely  to  have  met  with,   ill-treatment   on   return.   Further,
      recommencement of forcible returns from Europe would  very  likely  in
      our judgement be seen by the Eritrean authorities as requiring them to
      adopt  a  punitive  stance  even  in  relation  to  persons   in   the
      aforementioned category who are returned individually. We  infer  that
      their reaction to such a re-commencement would be  a  matter  of  high
      importance to the regime.

 367. It is possible to conjecture that the Eritrean government  would  feel
      the need, especially in the light of recent EU funding, to demonstrate
      a more relaxed or softer policy, such as was mooted in the DFFM Report
      mainly (it seems) by reference to voluntary returnees.  On  the  other
      hand, the evidence points more strongly to the policy  imperatives  of
      the current Eritrean government being driven not by concerns about its
      image in the eyes of Europe and the  West  but  by  domestic  concerns
      about  the  maintenance  of  control  and  regulation  of  their   own
      population and the need to show that those perceived as draft  evaders
      or deserters would not receive preferential treatment on  return.   In
      our judgement there is a real risk  that  the  likely  reaction  would
      therefore be similar to that given to those forcibly repatriated  from
      Sudan and the evidence we have about that indicates such  persons  are
      likely to face treatment contrary to basic human rights.

Draft Evaders and Deserters

 368. To this point our assessment of the issue of risk on return  to  those
      who left illegally and are likely to be perceived on return  as  draft
      evaders and deserters is not markedly different from MO. We  now  have
      to consider whether it  remains  sufficient  that  such  persons  have
      exited illegally and are of or approaching eligible draft age  (unless
      falling within one of three specified exceptions).

 369. As can be gleaned  from  our  earlier  observations  when  considering
      duration of national service ([261-263]) and discharge ([270] - [278])
      we have found it very difficult to resolve  this  issue,  particularly
      given that  the appellants' case and that of  UNHCR  is  not  easy  to
      square  with the figures available as regards those who are performing
       national service duties and the fact that for reasons  given  earlier
      we have accepted the respondent's case before us that "discharge" from
      national service is commonplace.

 370. However, for the reasons we have given earlier, we conclude  that  the
      preponderance of the evidence continues to support the MO position and
      that, although it is reasonably likely  that  persons  who  have  been
      released will have documentation which  will  enable  them  to  travel
      within Eritrea, the fact that they are reservists (a term we use  here
      simply to identify those who have been discharged/released) would  not
      entitle them to an  exit  visa.  Whilst  release  is  commonplace,  it
      appears that it is often de facto and that those who benefit would not
      ordinarily be given or hold official documents  confirming  that  they
      have completed national service. We consider that recall is not common
      but that the  Eritrean  system  operates  to  ensure  that  the  great
      majority of those of or approaching draft age are  regarded  as  still
      "on the books" and as not having completed national service. What  was
      noted in the EASO Report regarding civilian national service and those
      in ministries strikes us  as  very  pertinent:  "[m]any  employees  of
      ministries do not know whether they  are  still  engaged  in  national
      service or have been dismissed". We remind ourselves  that  the  great
      majority of sources, including the very recent UNCOI Reports, consider
      that the duration of national service is prolonged.  From the evidence
      we conclude that a person who exits Eritrea illegally  and  is  of  or
      approaching draft age, is likely on  return  to  be  perceived  as  an
      evader or deserter because of non-completion of national service.

National service as slavery or servitude or forced labour

 371. We explained at [14] that one of the country  guidance  issues  to  be
      dealt with in this case is  "(iii)  Whether  the  Eritrean  system  of
      military service gives rise to a real risk on return  of  exposure  to
      treatment contrary to Article 4 ECHR."

372. Article 4 provides as follows:

          "(1) No one shall be held in slavery or servitude.

            (2) No one shall be required to  perform  forced  or  compulsory
          labour.

             (3) For the purposes of  this  Article  "forced  or  compulsory
           labour"   shall not include:

                 a) any work required to be done in the ordinary  course  of
                    detention imposed according to the provisions  of  Art.5
                    of the Convention or  during  conditional  release  from
                    such detention.

                 b) any service of a military character, or in the  case  of
                    conscientious objectors  in  countries  where  they  are
                    recognised,  service  exacted  instead   of   compulsory
                    military service.

                 c) any service exacted in case of an emergency or  calamity
                    threatening the life or well-being of the community.

                 d)  any work or service which forms part  of  normal  civic
                    obligations."

 373. By virtue of Article 15(2), this Article admits of no  derogations  or
      limitations in respect of slavery or servitude, but the prohibition on
      forced or compulsory labour is a derogable provision, albeit forced or
      compulsory  labour  is  only  permitted  in  circumstances   set   out
      exhaustively in Article 4(3).

 374. For the appellants and UNHCR, the answer to the question  posed  as  a
      country guidance issue should be that there is such a risk because the
      Eritrean system of military/national service is contrary to Article 4.
      The respondent maintains that no such risk  arises  and  that  in  the
      context of extraterritorial application of  Article  4  the  threshold
      test is higher, being that of "flagrant  denial".  The  same  test  is
      posited in paragraph 2.3.44 of the Country Information  and  Guidance:
      Eritrea: National (incl.Military) Service, Version 3.0, August 2016.

 375. At one or two  points  in  the  submissions  the  parties  framed  the
      conflict as being between a "flagrant denial" test and a  "real  risk"
      test, but we take their essential position - and one we discern to  be
      clearly reflected in established case law  -  that  the  principle  of
      flagrancy is concerned with the threshold  for  violation,  i.e.  with
      whether (as in the case of non-derogable  rights)  mere  violation  is
      enough, or whether, as in the case of derogable rights, the  violation
      must be "flagrant": see R (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator [2004] UKHL 26
      at [28],[34],[44],[47]; EM(Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [2008] UKHL 64 at [13],[33], [55].

Article 4 and Article 3

 376. We will address the threshold issue next, but  would  observe  at  the
      outset that it does not  seem  to  us  to  be  of  central  importance
      because, to the extent that UNHCR  and  the  appellants  rely  on  the
      prohibition within Article 4 on slavery and servitude  and  indeed  on
      forced or compulsory labour, their arguments are at least  capable  of
      being cast in Article 3 terms, as there would seem to be  considerable
      overlap. In a case cited in Ullah - Ould  Barar  v  Sweden  (1999)  28
      EHCRR CD 1999; 28 EHRR CD  213  -  the  Court  found  the  applicant's
      complaint under Article 4 (as well as his complaints under Articles  2
      and 3) to be inadmissible on  the  facts,  but  recognised  'that  the
      expulsion of a person to  a  country  where  there  is  an  officially
      recognised regime of slavery might, in certain circumstances, raise an
      issue under Article 3 of the Convention.' And Lord Bingham in Ullah at
      [41] appeared to consider that forced or compulsory labour cases could
      also fall within the ambit of Article 3:

           "It is no doubt right that in the modern world a  case  alleging
           slavery is perhaps a little unlikely. A  case  asserting  forced
           labour is less unlikely but, if it arises, would no  doubt  fall
           under article 3."

 377. On the other hand, since neither party has sought to  argue  that  the
      Eritrean system of military service was per se contrary to Article  3,
      we shall focus primarily on Article 4 and indeed Lord Bingham  in  the
      same paragraph [41] appeared to accept that a person seeking  to  rely
      solely on Article 4 in an extraterritorial context could not be turned
      away.

Article 4: the legal framework

 378. The appellants' submissions ask the UT to find that  return  of  those
      approaching or of draft age to Eritrea would expose them to  a  breach
      of all three of the prohibitions enshrined  in  Article  4  -  against
      slavery, servitude and forced or compulsory labour. UNHCR invited  the
      Upper Tribunal to find that the return of that category  would  expose
      them to a breach of the prohibition on servitude or of the prohibition
      on forced labour not falling within  the  Article  4(3)(b)  exception.
      UNHCR also emphasised that it was not its submission that all  aspects
      of Eritrean national service breached those thresholds  regardless  of
      assignment or duration," but rather that, given the  arbitrariness  of
      duration and assignment, there was a real risk of  a  breach."  It  is
      necessary, therefore, to have regard to  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  on
      each of the three prohibitions and their interrelationship. In Case of
      Rantsev v Cyprus and Russia, Application no. 25965/04, the Court noted
      at para 276:

           "In  Siliadin  [Application  no.   73316/01,   ECHR   2005-VII],
           considering the scope of "slavery" under Article  4,  the  Court
           referred to the classic definition of slavery contained  in  the
           1926 Slavery  Convention,  which  required  the  exercise  of  a
           genuine right of ownership and reduction of the  status  of  the
           individual concerned to an "object" (Siliadin,  cited  above,  �
           122)."

 379. For the Court the concept of "servitude" entails an obligation,  under
      coercion, to provide one's services, and is linked with the concept of
      "slavery" (see Seguin v France (dec) Application no 42400/98, 7 March
      2000; and Siliadin, cited above, para 124).  In  Siliadin  the  Court
      observed that with regard  to  the  concept  of  "servitude"  what  is
      prohibited is a "particularly serious form of denial of freedom"  (see
      Van Droogenbroeck v Belgium,  Commission's  Report  of  9  July  1980,
      Series B no. 44, p. 30, paras 78-80). It includes, "in addition to the
      obligation to perform certain services for others ...  the  obligation
      for  the  'serf'  to  live  on  another  person's  property  and   the
      impossibility of altering  his  condition".  In  this  connection,  in
      examining  a  complaint  under  this  paragraph  of  Article  4,   the
      Commission paid particular  attention  to  the  Abolition  of  Slavery
      Convention (see  also  Van  Droogenbroeck  v  Belgium  Application  no
      7906/77, Commission decision of 5 July 1979, DR 17, p. 59).

 380. The 2014 Council of Europe/European Court of Human Rights publication,
      "Guide on Article 4 of the Convention..." makes clear by reference  to
      leading cases on Article 4 that "servitude is an "aggravated" form  of
      forced or compulsory labour" and that "the fundamental  distinguishing
      feature between servitude and forced or  compulsory  labour...lies  in
      the victim's feeling that their condition is permanent  and  that  the
      situation is unlikely to change" (para 17).

 381. For "forced or compulsory labour" to arise, the Court  has  held  that
      there must be some physical or mental  constraint,  as  well  as  some
      overriding of the  person's  will  (Van  der  Mussele  v  Belgium,  23
      November 1983, � 34, Series A no.  70;  Siliadin,  cited  above,  para
      117).

 382. In Van Der Mussele v Belgium the Court had recourse to the ILO  Forced
      Labour Convention (FLC) No.29 concerning forced or  compulsory  labour
      and to the fact that for the purposes  of  that  Convention  the  term
      "forced or compulsory labour" means "all  work  or  service  which  is
      exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for  which
      the said person  has  not  offered  himself  voluntarily".  The  Court
      approved the European Commission of Human Rights' position that:

           "37. ... for there to be forced or compulsory labour,  for  the
           purposes of Article 4 � 2 (art. 4-2) of the European Convention,
           two cumulative conditions have to be satisfied:  not  only  must
           the labour be performed by the person against his or  her  will,
           but either the obligation to carry it out must  be  "unjust"  or
           "oppressive" or its performance must  constitute  "an  avoidable
           hardship",  in  other  words  be  "needlessly  distressing"   or
           "somewhat harassing".

 383. Strasbourg jurisprudence, as outlined for  example,  in  the  Van  der
      Mussele case, understands Article 4(2) to be a right  which,  although
      derogable, is subject to very strict delimitations. It considers  that
      Article 4(3) is not intended to "limit"  the  exercise  of  the  right
      guaranteed by paragraph 2 (Article 4(2)), but to  "delimit"  the  very
      content of this right, for it forms a whole with paragraph 2  (Article
      4(2)) and indicates what "the term 'forced or compulsory labour' shall
      not include" ("ce qui n'est pas  consid�r�  comme  'travail  forc�  ou
      obligatoire'"). This being so, paragraph 3 (Article 4(3)) serves as an
      aid to the interpretation of Article 4(2).

 384. The four sub-paragraphs of  paragraph  3  (Article  4(3)(a),  4(3)(b),
      4(3)(c), 4(3)(d)), notwithstanding their diversity,  are  said  to  be
      "grounded on the governing  ideas  of  the  general  interest,  social
      solidarity and what is in the normal or ordinary course of affairs".

 385. In the same Guide, when considering normal civic duties and the  issue
      of voluntary consent, it is noted that:

           "...the Court will have regard to all the circumstances  of  the
           case in the light of the underlying objectives of Article 4 when
           deciding whether a service required to be performed falls within
           the prohibition of "forced or compulsory labour...".

 386. The standards developed by the Court  for  evaluating  what  could  be
      considered normal in respect of  duties  incumbent  on  members  of  a
      particular profession take into account whether the services  rendered
      fall outside the scope of the normal professional  activities  of  the
      person concerned; whether the  services  are  remunerated  or  not  or
      whether the service includes another compensatory factor; whether  the
      obligation is founded on a conception of social solidarity and whether
      the burden imposed is disproportionate (para 29).

 387. Article 4(3)(c) excludes any service exacted in case of  an  emergency
      or calamity threatening the life or well-being of the  community  from
      the scope of forced or compulsory labour. This same Guide  notes  that
      in a case which concerned a requirement that  the  applicant  serve  a
      year in the public dental service in northern Norway, two  members  of
      the Commission held the view that the service in question was  service
      reasonably required of the applicant in an emergency  threatening  the
      well-being of the community and was not forced or compulsory labour (I
      v Norway Commission decision) (para 43). In Van der Mussele the  Court
      held, in respect of the applicant who was a pupil-advocate, that while
      remunerated work may also qualify as forced or compulsory labour,  the
      lack of remuneration and of reimbursement of  expenses  constitutes  a
      relevant factor when considering  what  is  proportionate  or  in  the
      normal course of business.

 388. The clause excluding military service expressly prevents such  service
      being regarded as constituting "forced or compulsory labour"  per  se,
      but there is no similar clause relating  to  "slavery  or  servitude",
      hence this does  not  prevent  it  from  being  so  regarded  in  some
      instances.  As was noted by the Commission, in W,X,Y and Z application
      no 3435/67, "...there are historical examples of unacceptable  slavery
      or servitude being used for purposes of  military  service".  However,
      the examination of whether  any  particular  military  service  regime
      constitutes servitude or slavery must be informed by an  understanding
      that the duty of a soldier to observe the terms of his service and the
      ensuing restriction on his freedom and personal rights does not amount
      to an impairment of rights which could come under the  terms  "slavery
      or servitude".

 389. There is very limited jurisprudence on Article 4(3)(c), which excludes
      any service exacted in case of an emergency  or  calamity  threatening
      the life or well-being of the community from the scope  of  forced  or
      compulsory labour, but the jurisprudence on Article  15,  whose  terms
      bear some resemblance, make abundantly clear that emergency provisions
      are not to be construed broadly: see P van Dijk et  al  (eds),  Theory
      and Practice of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,  4th  Ed.,
      chapter 34.





The threshold test

 390. In relation to the issue of the relevant threshold test to be  applied
      in relation to  Article  4,  there  is  a  sharp  divide  between  the
      respondent and  UNHCR,  with  the  appellants'  position  moving  from
      initial agreement with  the  respondent  to  eventual  agreement  with
      UNHCR. According to the respondent (and the appellants in paragraph 59
      of their first skeleton argument) the relevant test is whether persons
      forcibly returned to Eritrea would be exposed to  a  real  risk  of  a
      "flagrant breach" of Article 4 on  return.  According  to  UNHCR  (and
      latterly the appellants) the test is the  same  as  under  Article  3,
      namely whether there is a real risk  of  being  exposed  to  treatment
      contrary to the Article. For the test of "flagrant breach" is confined
      to non-derogable rights. The respondent argues that such  an  approach
      would be contrary to the analysis of the House of Lords in R (Ullah) v
      Special Adjudicator [2004] UKHL 26, the opinions of  Lord  Bingham  at
      [24], Lord Steyn at  [49]-[50]  and  Lord  Carswell  at  [68]-[70]  in
      particular.

 391. We must first of all note that according to the  logic  of  the  UNHCR
      position the ordinary test as applied in the Article 3  context  could
      only be applied in any event if the Eritrean military  service  system
      amounts to either slavery or servitude, not  if  it  only  amounts  to
      forced labour. That is because for  UNHCR  the  critical  factor  that
      determines the test is the status of Article 4(1) as  a  non-derogable
      right. But, as the respondent properly highlighted,  that  right  only
      encompasses slavery and servitude, not forced labour. On  UNHCR's  own
      analysis the test to be  applied  if  the  Eritrean  military  service
      system amounts to forced or compulsory labour only, would be  that  of
      'flagrant breach'.

 392. At all events, we do not consider that  their  Lordships  intended  in
      Ullah to prescribe a specific  legal  test  for  the  extraterritorial
      application of Article 4(1). Indeed their remarks regarding all of the
      nonderogable rights of the ECHR other than Article 3  were  predicated
      on their understanding being descriptive of what the position  was  in
      Strasbourg jurisprudence: see e.g. Lord Bingham at [68] and Lord Steyn
      at [50]. That is important  because  the  respondent's  position  that
      Article 3 "remains ... a special case" would in  logic  seem  only  to
      hold if the Strasbourg Court has excluded that  the  same  test  could
      apply in an Article 4 extraterritorial context.

 393. We have not been taken to any Strasbourg or  other  national  case  on
      Article 4 in an extraterritorial case that applies a "flagrant denial"
      test. On the other hand, the Strasbourg Court seems to have come close
      to applying much the same test as applied for Article 3 in the case of
      VF contre France Application no 7196/10, 29 November  2011  where  the
      applicant claimed, inter alia, that her return to Nigeria  from  where
      she had been trafficked, would place her at risk of being again forced
      into prostitution. In  the  event  the  Court  concluded  it  was  not
      necessary  to  pronounce  on  this  issue  since  it  considered   the
      application manifestly ill-founded, but its analysis of why it came to
      that conclusion made no reference to  a  "flagrant  breach"  test  and
      proceeded on the basis that the issue was  a  straightforward  one  of
      real risk of a violation. When it  came  to  the  applicant's  further
      claim that her return would violate Article 3, the Court said that  it
      did not consider  it  necessary  to  address  it  since  it  had  been
      considered in substance under Article 4.

 394. We do not regard as conclusive as to  what  the  test  should  be  for
      Article 4(1) that the Strasbourg Court has not seen the same  test  as
      Article 3 to apply to Articles 2 and 7, which are  also  non-derogable
      (a "near certainty test" being applied to Article 2 -see Lord  Bingham
      at [15] of Ullah, citing para 61 of  Dehwari  (Dehwari  v  Netherlands
      (2000) 29 EHRR CD 74) because, again, the premise of any  analysis  in
      this regard  is  what  has  been  established  by  Strasbourg  in  its
      jurisprudence. Nor do we think that it is helpful to place reliance on
      the fact that even rights that could be said to be more important than
      Article 3 (e.g. Article 2 and  the  right  to  life)  apply  a  higher
      threshold than real risk of a mere violation.

 395. But the principal difficulty we have with the respondent's approach on
      this issue is that to which we have already  alluded  above  at  [376]
      namely that there is clearly scope for heavy factual  overlap  between
      Articles 3 and 4 such that a real risk of being exposed to slavery  or
      servitude (or indeed forced labour) would  very  often,  other  things
      being equal, constitute a real risk  of  being  exposed  to  treatment
      contrary to Article 3. It would be  odd  if  the  same  set  of  facts
      showing that there was a real  risk  of  a  person  being  exposed  to
      slavery or servitude or forced labour could result in a finding  of  a
      violation of Article 3 but not of Article 4, by virtue of  the  latter
      requiring  a  higher  threshold.  This  is  particularly  so  because,
      although  derogable,  Article  4(2)  does  not  identify   permissible
      limitations but only exceptions.

 396. In any event, it must be recalled that in  the  context  of  assessing
      whether there is a risk on return at a general level of persons  being
      exposed to a regime of military service contrary to Article 3 or 4, it
      is necessary to be satisfied that there is a high likelihood that such
      risks will arise. This approach is, we adjudge, consistent  with  that
      taken by the CJEU in the Shephard  case  (Andre  Lawrence  Shepherd  v
      Bundesrepublik Deutschland) (Case C-472/13)).

 397. To an analogous issue of whether  return  would  expose  a  person  to
      having to commit acts contrary to international law. The  Court  ruled
      at [40] that:

           "the assessment which the national authorities  must  carry  out
           can be based only on a body of evidence which alone  is  capable
           of establishing, in view of the circumstances in question,  that
           the situation of that military service makes  it  credible  that
           such acts will be committed."

      At [43]  it concluded that:
           "It follows that, in those circumstances, it is for  the  person
           seeking  refugee  status  under  Article 9(2)(e)  of  Directive
           2004/83 to establish with sufficient plausibility that his  unit
           carries out operations assigned to it, or has carried  them  out
           in the past, in such conditions that it is  highly  likely  that
           acts such as  those  referred  to  in  that  provision  will  be
           committed."
 398. Given the findings we go on to make, we resolve to first  examine  the
      Article 4 issues posed by  Eritrean  military/national  service  at  a
      factual level and then consider whether it makes any difference to our
      findings if we apply a real risk of a "flagrant breach" or "real risk"
      of a breach. That way the respondent  cannot  complain  that  we  have
      applied a test less stringent than the one she considers apt.
The Eritrean context: the ILO background

 399. On a number of occasions the various organs of the ILO, including  its
      Committee of Experts, have found that the  Eritrean  system  of  open-
      ended compulsory national service  constitutes  forced  or  compulsory
      labour contrary to the  ILO  Conventions,  in  particular  the  Forced
      Labour Convention, 1930 (No.29), ratified  by  Eritrea  in  2000.  The
      terms of the prohibition on forced labour set out in  this  Convention
      are not precisely the same as those  set  out  in  Article  4(2),  but
      because the Strasbourg Court has treated it as a  relevant  source  of
      interpretation and as a starting point for interpretation  of  Article
      4(2) (Van der Mussele v Belgium [1983] ECHR 12, 23 November 1983 [para
      32]; Graziani-Weiss v Austria  [2011]  ECHR  1730,  18  October  2011;
      Stummer v Austria [GC] [2011] ECHR 1096, 7 July 2011 [para 118]),  the
      ILO assessments are of particular import.

 400. The various ILO materials which were produced to us, which include the
      very recent Individual Case  (CAS)  -  Discussion:  2015,  Publication
      104th ILC Session (2015)  (and  which  records  the  dialogue  between
      Eritrean  government  representatives)  and  the  Observation  (CEACR)
      -adopted 2015, published 105th ILC session (2016), can  be  summarised
      as follows. It is noted that the Eritrean government  and  worker  and
      employer representatives continue to voice the  same  views  they  had
      been expressing for a number of years namely that the Eritrean  system
      is compatible with the requirements of the  Forced  Labour  Convention
      because it falls within the permitted exceptions relating to  military
      character  (Article  2(2)(a));  normal  civic   obligations   (Article
      2(2)(b)); and cases of emergency (Article 2(2)(d)). In relation to the
      emergency exception, the Eritrean representatives  continue  to  argue
      that the  ongoing  border  conflict  and  the  absence  of  peace  and
      stability has been affecting the labour administration of the  country
      and that the "no peace, no war" policy and their  concerns  about  the
      "threat of war and famine" justify the forced and compulsory nature of
      the current system of national service.

 401. These arguments continue to be strenuously rejected by ILO organs. For
      example, as regards the need for compulsory military service to be  of
      a purely military character, it is observed that that  limitation  has
      its corollary in Article  1(b)  of  the  Abolition  of  Forced  Labour
      Convention 1957 (No.105) which prohibits the  exaction  of  forced  or
      compulsory labour "as a means of mobilising and using labour  for  the
      purposes of  economic  development".  The  practices  adopted  by  the
      government of Eritrea continue to be considered to go well beyond  the
      context envisaged by Convention No.29 as  they  allow  conscripts  not
      only to be used for ordinary public works, but  also  in  the  private
      sector.  The work exacted from recruits as part of  national  service,
      including work related to national development, is not  considered  to
      be military in character.  As regards  the  claim  that  the  Eritrean
      system falls under the emergency exemption set out in Article 2(2)(d),
       ILO organs continue to regard this  exception  as  applying  only  in
      restricted circumstances confined to genuine cases  of  emergency,  or
      force majeure, that is,  sudden,  unforeseen  happenings  calling  for
      instant counter-measures. According to the ILO  organs,  the  Eritrean
      system of national service, being  in  force  for  over  two  decades,
      cannot benefit from this exception.

Slavery and servitude: our assessment

 402. The principal basis on which the appellants contend that the  Eritrean
      national service system amounts to slavery is the conclusions  of  the
      2016 UNCOI Report to this effect. We would note that we think they are
      entirely right to focus on the 2016 Report because  the  2015  Report,
      although containing at Part 6 a section C  headed  "Abused,  Exploited
      and Enslaved", only refers  glancingly  to  enslavement  or  servitude
      (e.g. at n.2093) or "slave-like" conditions and only illustrates  such
      concepts  in the  context  of  the  treatment  of  women  in  military
      contexts; it nowhere refers specifically to either international human
      rights law (IHRL) prohibitions on slavery and servitude (e.g.  Article
      8, ICCPR) or specific customary international law provisions.

 403. We have considerable reservations about the reasoning adopted  in  the
      2016 Report as regards slavery and servitude.

 404. First, although stating that it is guided, inter  alia,  by  IHRL  and
      customary  international  law  ([6]),  the  Commission's  analysis  is
      conducted in the context of deciding whether the  Eritrean  system  of
      military/national service amounts to enslavement as  a  crime  against
      humanity - as defined by Article 7  of  the  Rome  Statute  (see  e.g.
      [191]) or by  equivalent  customary  international  law  (e.g.  [196]-
      [197]). Correspondingly, the jurisprudence it bases itself on is  that
      of the international criminal tribunals such as the ICTY and the  ICC.
      That the Commission should choose that context is only to be  expected
      given that its mandate had been extended for this purpose "in order to
      investigate systematic,  widespread  and  gross  violations  of  human
      rights in  Eritrea  with  a  view  to  ensuring  full  accountability,
      including  where  these  violations  may  amount  to  crimes   against
      humanity"([(3]). But it does mean that  for  our  purposes  we  cannot
      treat its analysis as being based directly on IHRL - either Article  8
      of the ICCPR or its European equivalent in Article 4 of the ECHR.  Our
      task is limited to  deciding  whether  the  Eritrean  system  violates
      Article 4 of the ECHR and despite more than one opportunity to do  so,
      the ECtHR has not seen the international  criminal  law  framework  as
      providing guidance for the interpretation of Article 4.




 405. Whilst it has  oppressive  features,  we  do  not  consider  that  the
      Eritrean system  of  military/national  service  constitutes  anything
      comparable to the paradigm identified in Siliadin of  "the  obligation
      for  the  'serf'  to  live  on  another  person's  property  and   the
      impossibility of altering his condition", certainly not in the context
      of assessing the military/national service system as  a  whole,  whose
      conditions are extremely variable: see above [267], [274]  and  [288].
      Even those who are required to perform lengthy national service cannot
      sensibly be described  as  being  compelled  to  live  permanently  on
      government property and whilst the possibilities for exemption  or  de
      facto demobilisation are limited, it cannot be said that there  is  an
      impossibility to alter one's condition.  Nor do we consider  that  the
      obligation  to  perform  military/national  service  can  sensibly  be
      described as amounting to the "exercise [by the Eritrean state]  of  a
      genuine right of legal ownership .... reducing those called up to  the
      status of an "object"". Eritrean law does  not  create  such  a  legal
      ownership.



 406. We entirely follow the Commission's summary of the approach  taken  in
      the international criminal law context by the ICTY trial  and  appeals
      chambers in Kunarac (Kunarac [2001] IT-96-23-T/IT-96-23/1-T (Tribunal)
      and Kunarac [2002] IT 96-23 8 IT96 23/1-A (Appeals Chamber)) and  that
      taken by the ICC Trial Chamber in the Katanga case (Kantanga [2009] IT-
      95-5/18-AR73.3) which consider that the powers attaching to the  right
      of ownership should not be  construed  as  limited  to  the  crime  of
      "chattel slavery" and regards a number of other indicia  of  ownership
      and control (ten in total) as being relevant.  However,  even  on  the
      Commission of Inquiry's  own  application  of  these  indicia  to  the
      Eritrean context, we do not follow how it progresses from its argument
      that  there  are  certain  aspects   of   the   Eritrean   system   of
      military/national service that constitute the crime of enslavement  to
      its  conclusion  that  the  programme  generally,  including  civilian
      national service and service in the people's militia, constitutes such
      a crime.



 407. Of the ten indicia relied on to justify the finding  that  the  system
      amounts to enslavement, there are at least  three  that  can  only  be
      applied to civilian national service and  the  people's  militia  with
      considerable  difficulty:  e.g.  "(vi)  inhumane  conditions",  "(vii)
      torture and killing" (where all the examples cited relate to  military
      national service, not civilian national service) and  "(x)  impact  on
      family life". As regards civilian national  service,  the  2015  UNCOI
      Report itself, for example, notes at [1443] that:




           "[c]onditions in civil service are perceived to  be  far  better
           than in the army because conscripts may lead  a  civilian  life.
           They have regular office working hours. Outside  working  hours,
           their time is free and they usually have at least  part  of  the
           weekend off. ...Conscripts are free to live with their families,
           may attend religious services outside of working hours  and  can
           get married without restriction or prior authorisation. Some may
           get annual leave, but others have none. "




 408. The Commission goes on to note, however, that freedom of  movement  of
      those in civil service is restricted. Having  noted  at  [1446],  that
      conscripts in the army  are  frequently  subjected  to  punishment  in
      connection with the labour exacted from them that amounts to  torture,
      the Commission observes at [1447] that: "Unlike  those  in  the  army,
      conscripts in  civil  service  are  usually  not  subjected  to  harsh
      punishment in the course of their work. When they leave  work  without
      authorisation, they are treated differently  from  conscripts  in  the
      army. .."




 409. What the Commission appears to rely on  for  including  even  civilian
      national service within its categorisation of the Eritrean  system  of
      military/national service as amounting  to  slavery  is  the  lack  of
      freedom of choice. Thus the Commission observes at [2010] of its  2016
      Report that:

           "As noted above, the Commission has  heard  evidence  that  some
           conscripts  are  assigned  to  work  in  non-manual  labour   in
           government ministries, schools, hospitals and in the  judiciary,
           but that even these conscripts have no freedom of choice".

 410. There is then a reference back to [90] where it is noted  that  "[t]he
      working conditions for this set of conscripts, particularly for  those
      working in Asmara, appear  to  be  more  favourable  but  that  "these
      conscripts have no freedom of choice."  However, we are not aware that
      lack of freedom of choice (even when coupled  with  features  such  as
      restricted freedom of movement, occasional disproportionate punishment
      for absenteeism  etc),  is  sufficient  to  constitute  the  crime  of
      enslavement or (more pertinent for our purposes) a  violation  of  the
      Article 4(1) prohibition against slavery.

 411.  Nor  in  relation  to  these  indicia,  does  the  Commission's   own
      description regard them as applicable either at all  or  to  the  same
      extent in respect of the people's militia.

 412. Even applying the international criminal law framework, the Commission
      appears to  make  an  unjustified  leap  from  the  identification  of
      instances where the ten indicia apply to the conclusion in [234]  that
      "...there are reasonable grounds to believe  that  Eritrean  officials
      have committed the crime of enslavement, a crime against humanity,  in
      a persistent, widespread and systematic manner  since  no  later  than
      2002." What is missing from the Commission's analysis is any  concrete
      basis for considering that the scale of  the  violations  of  each  of
      these indicia is such that, quantitatively and qualitatively,  it  can
      be said to cross the threshold of  "widespread  and  systematic".  (In
      this regard, the Commission's decision in its 2016 Report not to probe
      the evidence of any of the respondents who  sent  responses  to  their
      first report as to what light, if any, it might shed on the scale  and
      frequency of such violations, does not assist). We  remind  ourselves,
      that by operation of Article 7(1) of the Rome Statute   this threshold
      is a necessary condition for there to arise a "crime against humanity"
      ("For the purpose of this Statute, "crime against humanity" means  any
      of the following acts when  committed  as  part  of  a  widespread  or
      systematic attack  directed  against  any  civilian  population,  with
      knowledge  of  the  attack").  We  also  see  a  difficulty  with  the
      Commission's  reasoning  for  classifying  conscripts  generically  as
      civilians, but do not consider it  necessary  to  develop  this  point
      here.

 413. We note further that the case that national service is slavery is  not
      supported by the evidence of PK. His evidence was that some even do it
      voluntarily. The clear  thrust  of  his  evidence  was  that  what  is
      problematic about national service is that it is open-ended and  badly
      paid.

 414. We consider that very similar difficulties apply  when  one  turns  to
      consider  whether,  even  if  not  slavery,  the  Eritrean  system  of
      military/national service amounts to "servitude" contrary  to  Article
      4(1).

 415. Having set out our main conclusions on Article 4(1), we  turn  briefly
      to consider what difference would  be  made  to  them  by  applying  a
      "flagrant breach" or a "breach" test.  Here we  would  simply  observe
      that we are quite satisfied that the Eritrean system does not  pose  a
      "real risk" of a violation of Article 4(1) and a fortiori it could not
      constitute a real risk of a "flagrant denial" of this provision.

Forced or compulsory labour: our assessment

 416. That leaves the issue of whether the  system  amounts  to  "forced  or
      compulsory labour".

 417. In this context  and  in  light  of  the  legal  framework  summarised
      earlier, it seems to us that the evidence we have before us  is  on  a
      different footing. For one thing we have the ILO analysis and  (unlike
      the international criminal law framework) the ECtHR has seen  the  ILO
      framework to have a bearing on interpretation of Article 4 (see  above
      [399]). For another, the  ILO  analysis,  taken  together  with  other
      sources, constitutes a considerable body  of  very  specific  evidence
      tending to show that the workings of the  Eritrean  system  cannot  be
      seen to fall under any of the exclusions set out in Article 4(3). That
      is important because in the course  of  various  ILO  proceedings  the
      Eritrean government has  not  disputed  that  their  military/national
      service system amounts to forced or compulsory labour. Their  argument
      is directed only to their system falling under  one  or  more  of  the
      permitted exemptions or exclusions.

 418. We take first the exclusion of 'any service of a  military  character"
      (Article 4(3)(b)).

 419. Paragraph 3(b) of the Article excludes from  the  ambit  of  the  term
      "forced or compulsory labour", as used in paragraph (2), "any  service
      of a military character". There are at least two respects in which the
      Eritrean  system  of  military/national  service  falls  outwith  this
      exclusion. First of all, its legislative framework, Article 5  of  the
      1995 decree  in  particular,  identifies  one  of  the  objectives  of
      military service as  "to  develop  and  enforce  the  economy  of  the
      national  by  investing  in  development  work...."  The   legislative
      framework thereby endorses the use of compulsory labour  for  purposes
      of economic development. Second, there is overwhelming  evidence  that
      in its actual practice the Eritrean state uses  conscript  labour  for
      services of a non-military character. The 2015 UNCOI Report  documents
      the use of conscript labour in construction projects and in support of
      private enterprise, in agriculture, in the civil service  and  in  the
      judiciary ([1399]-[1479]).  In any event  we  do  not  understand  the
      arguments of the Eritrean representatives before the  ILO  to  dispute
      the use of conscript labour in the context of a wide range  of  public
      works, although they do dispute (unconvincingly in our view)  its  use
      for private enterprise.

 420. As regards assignment to civilian national service,  it  seems  to  us
      that,  notwithstanding  that  its   conditions   are   not   generally
      oppressive, that is not a necessary condition for forced labour.  Here
      the UNCOI argument concerning lack of  freedom  of  choice  (which  we
      rejected in relation to the slavery/servitude  argument)  has  in  our
      judgement a proper place, since the effect is  that  those  forced  to
      undertake such work are  prevented  often  for  lengthy  periods  from
      pursuing their own occupations and professions, save for  some  access
      to  small  family-based  businesses.  According  to  the  Council   of
      Europe/ECtHR study, it is not necessary for  forced  labour  to  exist
      that the condition being  experienced  be  permanent  or  unlikely  to
      change (para 17).

 421. We have not found it easy to decide the issue of whether it is correct
      to conclude that the Eritrean system of military/national service as a
      whole constitutes forced labour, given that civilian national  service
      does  not  ordinarily  result  in  significant  punishments  and   can
      sometimes amount to little more than attending  an  office  in  normal
      working hours and in the case of older women is sometimes said  to  be
      undertaken voluntarily. On balance we consider that the  breach  is  a
      generic one  for  several  reasons.  First,  the  Eritrean  government
      representatives before the ILO have not sought to argue that  civilian
      national service is other than forced labour  (although  they  dispute
      whether it falls within permitted exceptions). Second, ILO organs have
      seen it as generic. Third, even though we are  unable  to  accept  the
      findings of the 2016 UNCOI Report that the Eritrean system constitutes
      enslavement and servitude, it does particularise aspects that  have  a
      strong bearing on the issue of forced  labour.  Thus  the  2015  UNCOI
      Report notes at [1426] that;

           "The length and conditions of  work  for  conscripts,  including
           wages, working hours, place of assignment, leave time  and  rest
           days do not per se constitute elements of forced labour. But the
           open ended nature  of  national  service  and  the  often  harsh
           working and living conditions of conscripts subjected to  forced
           labour have a significant impact on the enjoyment of some rights
           including safe and healthy  working  conditions,  the  right  to
           security, integrity of the person, and  the  highest  attainable
           standard of physical and mental health".

 422. In the same report at [1519] it is stated  that  the  "Government  has
      unlawfully and consistently been using conscripts and other members of
      the  population,  including  members  of  the  militia,  many   beyond
      retirement age, as forced labourers to construct infrastructure and to
      pursue the aim of economic development  and  self-sufficiency  of  the
      State, thus indirectly government that has been in power for the  past
      24 years".  Fourth, even if not performed  in  oppressive  conditions,
      civilian national service  (like  service  in  the  people's  militia)
      nevertheless falls within the description of  work  "exacted  ...under
      the menace of any penalty" and also performed against the will of  the
      person concerned, that is work for which he "has not  offered  himself
      voluntarily"  (Van Der Mussele, para 34). The  fact  that  some  older
      women undertake it voluntarily, because it pays them  something,  does
      not seem to us to be enough  to  alter  its  underlying  character  as
      forced labour. We would also observe that  the  Home  Office  CIGs  on
      National Service appears to acknowledge that there may well be a  real
      issue as regards forced labour in the  context  of  Eritrean  national
      service. At 2.3.46 of the August 2016  version,  for  example,  it  is
      stated (with reference to non-civilian national service) that "[w]here
      a person is able to demonstrate that as a  result  of  the  open-ended
      nature of their national service they will face a flagrant  denial  of
      their right not to be required to perform 'forced labour',  they  will
      be entitled to a grant of discretionary  leave..."  (see  also  3.1.10
      and, as regards women, 11.3.3).

 423. In relation to the exemption for "any work or service which forms part
      of normal civic obligations" (Article 4(3)(d)), we consider  that  the
      reasoning of the ILO organs applies with equal force in the context of
      Article 4 of the ECHR. We do not consider that the use  of  conscripts
      in civilian national service can escape  the  application  of  Article
      4(3) on the basis that they form part of normal civic obligations.  It
      is true that Strasbourg jurisprudence has seen this  exclusion  clause
      to include compulsory fire  service  in  Baden-Wurttemberg  (Karlheinz
      Schmidt v Germany judgment pp no. 13580/88, 18 July  1994,  para  23);
      compulsory jury service such as exists  in  Malta  (in  Zarb  Adami  v
      Malta, Application no 17309/02, para 47);  an  obligation  to  conduct
      free medical examinations (Reitmayr v Austria; and the  obligation  to
      participate in the medical emergency services  (Steindel  v  Germany).
      However, as the ILO organs have  consistently  noted,  the  range  and
      extent of work conscripts  in  Eritrea  are  required  to  perform  in
      civilian national service  goes  well  beyond  anything  that  can  be
      described as the performance of "normal civic obligations",  (emphasis
      added). The UNCOI Report of 2015 reinforces the findings  of  the  ILO
      that national service is a way of  controlling  the  population.  Even
      though we consider discharge/release is granted more  frequently  than
      has been contended by the appellants and UNHCR, it  remains  that  for
      those who have to perform such duties, the type of work a conscript is
      expected to do is again  arbitrary  and  includes  agricultural  work,
      working in  the  mining  industry  and  construction  work.  There  is
      evidence of conscripts working for the private benefit  of  commanders
      and of the government lending conscripts to  foreign  companies  (e.g.
      PK's evidence, the EASO Report at 3.5 and the evidence relating to the
      mining industry).

 424. As regards the exemption based  on  provision  of  emergency  services
      (Article 4(3)(c)), we consider that the ILO organs are entirely  right
      in their repeated conclusion that the Eritrean reliance over a lengthy
      period on this provision goes well beyond  the  restricted  nature  of
      this exemption. The 2015 UNCOI Report reinforces the ILO observations,
      noting at [1468] in respect of the people's militia for example,  that
      "[T]he Commission is not aware of any such situation of  emergency  in
      the last few years that would have justified the establishment of  the
      People's  Army.  In  any  case,  by  definition,  such  situations  of
      emergency are limited in time and compulsory labour cannot be  exacted
      beyond the critical and genuine phase of emergency."

 425. We turn then to consider whether  our  findings  regarding  forced  or
      compulsory labour would be  any  different  depending  on  whether  we
      applied a "real risk" or  "flagrant  denial"  test.  We  are  entirely
      satisfied that the open-ended duration of  national  service,  coupled
      with the fact that its duration appears to be prolonged, gives rise to
      a real risk of a violation. There is a significant  body  of  evidence
      showing that  conscripts will be required to engage in work where  the
      conditions amount to  forced  labour.  There  is  strong  evidence  of
      conscripts working in the agricultural and  construction  industry  in
      poor conditions. There is the Bisha mine  evidence.  There  is  strong
      evidence of poor conditions and mistreatment during military and  some
      types of civic service. However, despite such evidence, we do not find
      that such conditions are sufficiently widespread for  us  to  conclude
      that they amount to forced labour. Not all conscripts are  working  in
      conditions that would  constitute  forced  labour.  Nevertheless,  for
      reasons given above, we consider that the lack of freedom of choice is
      sufficient to give rise to a breach. We also think that it amounts  to
      a "flagrant breach" of the right to be  protected  against  forced  or
      compulsory labour, since in our views the Eritrean system  effectively
      extinguishes that right.

 426. In this regard we would emphasise again  that  that  unlike  qualified
      rights such as Articles 8 to  11,  the  ECtHR  has  not  regarded  the
      limitations set out in Article 4(3) as being intended to  "limit"  the
      exercise of the right guaranteed by paragraph 2. Taken  together  with
      the fact that there has been recognition of a strong  factual  overlap
      between  Articles  3  and  4,  (including  in  respect  of  forced  or
      compulsory labour) we  do  not  consider  that  there  is  a  need  to
      establish extinguishment of content beyond that  set  out  in  Article
      4(2).

 427. For similar reasons we also consider  that  to  the  extent  that  the
      Eritrean system of military/national service breaches Article 4(2)  it
      is also likely to give rise to a violation of Article 3.

 428. We would emphasise, however, that our findings  above  concern  active
      national service only. If one is a reservist subject to recall, we  do
      not find that the risk of recall is sufficiently likely to amount to a
      breach of Article 4 (see [297] - [307] above).

 429. We conclude that the national service regime in Eritrea does not as  a
      whole constitute enslavement or servitude contrary to Article 4(1)  of
      the ECHR, but that it does constitute forced labour under Article 4(3)
      which is not of a type permitted under  Article  4(3)(a)-(d).  A  real
      risk on return of having to perform military national  service  duties
      (including  civilian  national  service  but  not  with  the  people's
      militia) is likely to constitute  a  flagrant  or  a  mere  breach  of
      Article 4(3) as well as a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

 430. Where it is specified above that there is a real risk  of  persecution
      in the context of performance  of  military/national  service,  it  is
      highly likely that it will be  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason
      based on imputed political opinion. In  so  concluding  we  take  into
      account that the Home Office CIG:  Eritrea:  National  (incl.Military)
      Service, Version 3.0, August 2016 at 2.2.6 considers  that  given  the
      Eritrean regime's economic realpolitik and the  widespread  emigration
      "it is unlikely that avoiding national  service,  by  itself,  is  now
      perceived to be a political act by the government" (see also 2.2.3 and
      3.1.3), but note that the same document cites the May 2015 EASO Report
      as stating that "[d]ue to the  political  and  ideological  nature  of
      national service, most sources claim that desertion or  draft  evasion
      may be regarded by the  authorities  as  an  expression  of  political
      opposition  or  treason".  Additionally,   in   this   CIG's   Country
      Information section addressing this topic, only one source interviewed
      by the UK FFM  (a  UN  staff  member)  is  cited  in  support  of  the
      proposition set out at 2.2.6 and (as UNHCR correctly  pointed  out  in
      her submissions  regarding  this  CIG)   this  UN  official  does  not
      directly answer the question  of  whether  deserters  are  treated  as
      traitors by the government. We do not consider the recent evidence  to
      demonstrate that the  Eritrean  regime  has  ceased  viewing  national
      service in political and ideological terms. The fact (noted in the  AI
      "Just  Deserters"  Report)  that  the  Wall  Street   Journal,   whose
      correspondent was permitted a media trip to Eritrea in September 2015,
      reported that the Eritrean government had rejected  a  $222.7  million
      plan from the EU to facilitate  the  demobilisation  of  long  serving
      conscripts because "it would violate the  principle  that  no  one  is
      exempt from patriotic duties", only reinforces us in this view.


Conclusions

 431. Our conclusions may be stated thus:

Legal

   "Country guidance" is an established term denoting judicial guidance  and
   adoption by the Home Office of terminology apt to confuse this  important
   fact is to be deprecated.

Country guidance

   1. Although reconfirming parts of the country guidance given  in  MA  and
      MO, this case replaces that with the following:

   2. The Eritrean system of military/national  service  remains  indefinite
      and since 2012 has expanded to include a people's  militia  programme,
      which although not part  of  national  service,  constitutes  military
      service.

   3. The age limits for national service are likely to remain the  same  as
      stated in MO, namely 54 for men and  47  for  women  except  that  for
      children the limit is now likely to be 5 save for adolescents  in  the
      context of family reunification. For peoples' militia the  age  limits
      are likely to be 60 for women and 70 for men.

   4. The categories of lawful exit have not significantly changed since  MO
      and are likely to be as follows:

                  i) Men aged over 54

           ii) Women aged over 47

          iii) Children aged under five (with some scope for adolescents in
               family reunification cases

           iv) People exempt from national service on medical grounds

            v) People travelling abroad for medical treatment

           vi) People travelling abroad for studies or for a conference

          vii) Business and sportsmen

         viii) Former freedom fighters (Tegadelti) and their family members

           ix) Authority representatives in  leading  positions  and  their
               family members

   5. It continues to be the case (as in MO) that most  Eritreans  who  have
      left Eritrea since 1991 have done so illegally. However,  since  there
      are viable, albeit still limited, categories of lawful exit especially
      for those of draft age for national service, the position  remains  as
      it was in MO, namely that a person whose asylum  claim  has  not  been
      found credible cannot be assumed to have left illegally. The  position
      also remains nonetheless (as in MO) that if such a person is found  to
      have left Eritrea on or after August/September 2008, it  may  be  that
      inferences can be  drawn  from  their  health,  history  or  level  of
      education or their skills profile as to whether legal  exit  on  their
      part was feasible, provided that such inferences can be drawn  in  the
      light of adverse credibility findings. For these  purposes  a  lengthy
      period performing national service is likely  to  enhance  a  person's
      skill profile.

   6. It remains the case (as in MO) that failed asylum seekers as such  are
      not at risk of persecution or serious harm on return.

   7. Notwithstanding that the round-ups of suspected evaders (giffas),  the
      "shoot to kill" policy and the targeting of relatives of  evaders  and
      deserters are now significantly less likely  occurrences,  it  remains
      the case, subject to three limited exceptions set out in (iii)  below,
      that if a person of or approaching draft  age  will  be  perceived  on
      return as a draft evader or deserter, he or she will face a real  risk
      of persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 or
      4 of the ECHR.

            i) A person who is likely to be perceived as a  deserter/evader
               will not be able to avoid exposure to such real risk  merely
               by showing they have  paid  (or  are  willing  to  pay)  the
               diaspora tax and/have signed (or are willing  to  sign)  the
               letter of regret.

           ii) Even if such a person may avoid punishment in  the  form  of
               detention and ill-treatment it is likely that he or she will
               be assigned to perform (further) national service, which, is
               likely to amount to treatment contrary to Articles 3  and  4
               of the ECHR unless he or she falls within one or more of the
               three limited exceptions set out immediately below in (iii).

          iii) It remains the case (as in MO) that there are persons likely
               not to face a real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm
               notwithstanding  that  they  left  illegally  and  will   be
               perceived on return as draft evaders and deserters,  namely:
               (1)  persons  whom  the  regime's  military  and   political
               leadership perceives as having given them  valuable  service
               (either in Eritrea or abroad); (2) persons who  are  trusted
               family members of, or are themselves part of,  the  regime's
               military  or  political  leadership.   A  further   possible
               exception, requiring a more case specific  analysis  is  (3)
               persons (and their children born afterwards) who fled  (what
               later became the territory of) Eritrea  during  the  War  of
               Independence.

   8. Notwithstanding that many Eritreans are effectively reservists  having
      been discharged/released from national service and  unlikely  to  face
      recall, it remains unlikely that they will have received or be able to
      receive official confirmation of completion of national service.  Thus
      it remains the case, as in MO, that "(iv) The general position adopted
      in MA, that a person of or approaching draft age ... and not medically
      unfit who is accepted as having left Eritrea illegally  is  reasonably
      likely  to  be  regarded  with  serious  hostility   on   return,   is
      reconfirmed, subject to limited  exceptions..."  A  person  liable  to
      perform service in the people's militia and who is  assessed  to  have
      left Eritrea illegally, it not likely on return to face a real risk of
      persecution or serious harm.

   9. Accordingly, a person whose asylum claim has not been found  credible,
      but who is able to satisfy a decision-maker (i) that he  or  she  left
      illegally, and (ii) that he or she is of or approaching draft  age  is
      likely to be perceived on return as a draft evader  or  deserter  from
      national service and as a result face a real risk  of  persecution  or
      serious harm. While likely to be a rare case, it is  possible  that  a
      person who has exited lawfully may on forcible return face  having  to
      resume or commence national service. In such a case there  is  a  real
      risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  by  virtue  of  such  service
      constituting forced labour contrary to Article 4(2) and Article  3  of
      the ECHR.

  10. Where it is specified above that there is a real risk  of  persecution
      in the context of performance  of  military/national  service,  it  is
      highly likely that it will be  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason
      based on imputed political opinion.



E.        ASSESSMENT: THE APPELLANTS

MST

 432. Beyond the fact that MST is a national  of  Eritrea,  participated  in
      national military service at some stage and arrived in the  UK  on  21
      November 2014, the only other fact we are prepared to  accept  is  his
      account that his  family  owned  livestock  and  grew  crops.  He  was
      entirely consistent about this matter and as a result we are  able  to
      find that his family enjoys secure economic circumstances. However, as
      regards the rest of his account,  there  are  significant  credibility
      problems arising from his evidence. His representatives conceded  that
      he was not an impressive witness. He gave evidence before Judge Holmes
      who recorded his evidence in detail.  There was no  challenge  to  the
      record of evidence. In a number of material respects it  was  at  odds
      with what MST told us.

 433. At the hearing before us he stated, for the first time,  that  he  had
      given a false name and date of birth when he was  detained  (following
      having been caught on the border trying to leave Eritrea).  He did not
      mention this to Judge Holmes and he raised it for the  first  time  at
      the hearing before us. Judge Holmes observed  that  MST  was  released
      when he was aged 18 and allowed to return to his  family  despite  the
      fact that he was at that age due  to  perform  national  service  (see
      [24]) of Judge Holmes' decision).   Judge Holmes recorded at [25] that
      MST was pressed on  this  "and  his  only  explanation  was  that  the
      authorities did not know how old he was because he did not tell  them,
      and they had no way of ascertaining his age". We believe that MST  has
      fabricated this part of his evidence  in  a  misconceived  attempt  to
      overcome the difficulty  in  his  evidence  as  highlighted  by  Judge
      Holmes.

 434. In his evidence before Judge Holmes,  MST  stated  that  he  had  been
      issued with an ID card in 2008 when he was aged 19.  He told  us  that
      he was issued with an ID card in 2007; his  inconsistency  arose  from
      confusion.  It is our view that he has fabricated  this  part  of  his
      evidence in another  attempt  to  overcome  the  difficulties  in  his
      evidence identified by Judge Holmes (namely why he would receive an ID
      card at the age of  19  which  would  have  identified  him  as  being
      eligible for compulsory national service from the age of 18 and yet he
      had not received call-up  papers  despite  the  Global  Administration
      Centre being aware of his age).

 435. MST's evidence before us was that he married on 16 January  2011  when
      his wife was aged 22 and that they stayed in his family home for about
      one month during the honeymoon period, but afterwards  he  rarely  saw
      her. However, in his evidence before Judge Holmes he stated  that  his
      wife was aged 18 when they married and that he had lived with her  for
      a year after their marriage in his family home. He told  Judge  Holmes
      that he then left the family home to live elsewhere, visiting  her  at
      her parents' home from time to time.  When this was put to him at  the
      hearing before us he said that because his wife was  living  with  his
      parents he counted this as living with him.  We did not find  this  to
      be a credible or adequate explanation for the  inconsistency.  On  the
      issue of his wife's age, in an attempt to resolve  the  discrepancies,
      he told us that his wife was now aged 23 and she was aged  22  at  the
      date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Again  we  do  not
      accept this as a reasonable or credible explanation.

 436. MST's evidence before us relating to his  escape  from  the  lorry  in
      Mendefera is inconsistent with what he told  Judge  Holmes.   He  told
      Judge Holmes that he stripped off his military  uniform  in  order  to
      blend into the general population; however, he told us that he was not
      wearing a uniform at the time.  When Mr Rawat put the  discrepancy  to
      him he stated that he was in fact wearing a military overall which  he
      removed.  In  our  view  this  was  another  example  of  inconsistent
      evidence further undermining his credibility.

 437. It does not assist MST that there are significant discrepancies in his
      evidence for which he  has  not  given  an  adequate  explanation.  He
      described himself as single in the screening interview.   In  evidence
      before us he stated that he believed that what he was being asked  was
      whether his wife was with him in the UK, but this is not a  reasonable
      or credible explanation for describing himself as single if indeed  he
      is married.  In  the  screening  interview  he  was  asked  about  his
      occupation and  indicated  that  he  had  completed  national  service
      (Q1.9).  We have taken into account his  explanation  before  us  that
      this was an error.  However, later in the same interview he was  asked
      (Q5.7) whether he had ever  worked  for  organisations  including  the
      armed forces and he gave the dates February 2009 to October  2009  for
      national service. In a Bio-Data Information form he described  himself
      as unemployed in Eritrea. He  was  asked  whether  he  has  ever  been
      arrested and whether he is subject to an arrest warrant or  wanted  by
      any law enforcement authority for an offence in any country (Q5.1  and
      Q5.2) and he answered no to both questions. We have  considered  MST's
      evidence  that  the  answer  in  relation  to  national  service   was
      erroneously translated. We have taken into account his  evidence  that
      he has not committed an offence and that is  why  he  answered  no  to
      Q5.2, but this is not  consistent  with  the  background  evidence  in
      relation to Eritrea.  Illegal exit and desertion  from  the  army  are
      both criminal offences and it is inconceivable that he  would  not  be
      aware of this.

 438. MST was asked (Q7.1) whether he has been subject to any forced work or
      exploitation in his country and he answered no. In his evidence before
      us he described poor conditions at Wia, but this  is  in  contrast  to
      what he said in the Asylum Interview at (Q43) when he said that he did
      not experience problems whilst doing military training.

 439. MST failed to put forward a credible or reasonable explanation why  he
      did not claim asylum in France or Italy.

 440. Having found that MST wholly lacks credibility (except in relation  to
      his nationality, participation of  some  sort  in  national   service,
      arrival in the UK and his family's secure economic circumstances),  we
      do not accept his account and reject his evidence.

 441. Having been found to be wholly lacking in credibility and his  account
      having been rejected, MST cannot be assumed to  have  left  illegally.
      Failed asylum seekers are not at risk for that reason alone.

 442.  In accordance with  our  country  guidance,  we  must  thus  turn  to
      consider whether as someone who has obviously left Eritrea on or after
      August/September 2008, inferences  can  be  drawn  from  MST's  health
      history or level of education or his  skills  profile  as  to  whether
      legal exit on his part was feasible, provided that such inferences can
      be drawn in the light of adverse credibility findings. Given that  his
      date of birth is 18 February 1989  and  that  he  left  Eritrea  circa
      January 2013, we find it reasonably  likely  that  he  served  several
      years in national service  and  that  during  this  time  he  acquired
      experience or skills making it feasible for him to qualify for  lawful
      exit.

 443. It follows from our guidance that MST would not be perceived on return
      as someone who has exited illegally and hence he would not be at  risk
      on return.

MYK

 444. Whilst it is reasonable to expect a degree of confusion in relation to
      dates, MYK's account is littered with inconsistencies in  relation  to
      dates and the relative timing of events to such an extent that he  has
      failed  to  put  forward  a  coherent  account.   The   most   serious
      inconsistencies are the following:

        1) In his asylum interview he indicated that his  mother  had  been
           imprisoned twice and this is entirely at odds with his  evidence
           in his witness statements  and  oral  evidence.  There  is  also
           internal inconsistency. In the same interview he stated that the
           second time the authorities  came  she  was  not  arrested,  but
           threatened, and that she had not been detained  twice.  However,
           in oral evidence before us he said the  threatening  visit  when
           she was not detained was on an earlier occasion to  the  arrest.
           There is no mention of this in his witness statements.

        2) Whilst it is reasonable to confuse events in 2011 and 2012,  the
           discrepancies are not limited to simple  confusion  over  dates.
           In the asylum interview he clearly indicated that he had been on
           leave in 2011 and in 2012. This is entirely  at  odds  with  the
           evidence on which he now seeks to rely.

        3) MYK's evidence relating to detention is inconsistent in terms of
           dates and duration. This  was  put  to  him  during  the  asylum
           interview whereupon he changed his account stating that  he  had
           in fact been detained for a period of seven months (this  fitted
           with the dates that he had given).  However, the discrepancy  is
           not properly addressed and inconsistency remains throughout  the
           evidence.  In  his  most  recent  witness  statement  he   still
           maintains that he was detained for a period of two months whilst
           in the witness statement of 20 January  2015  his  evidence  was
           that he was detained from September 2012 until March 2013.

        4) In oral evidence before us MYK stated that he  returned  to  his
           military unit in January 2013  and  that  it  was  "a  memorable
           date", but this is entirely at odds with what he said during his
           interview; namely, that he returned  to  his  military  unit  in
           March 2013.  This inconsistency was put to him by Mr  Rawat  and
           he stated that when he rejoined his unit he was arrested  again.
           This not only inadequately addresses the point, but he  had  not
           mentioned previously having been arrested after January 2013.

 445. We do not accept MYK's evidence relating to contact with his wife.  It
      is not credible that he would not have made  efforts  to  contact  her
      since his arrival in the UK; particularly considering that he said  he
      had only learnt that he had had a child after his departure. We do not
      accept that he has not been in contact with her since fleeing  Eritrea
      and conclude that he learned about the birth of his  son  having  made
      contact with her.   We do not accept that he was told  this  by  other
      Eritreans.

 446. We have taken into account what MYK said about the raising of funds in
      his interview  (see  Q263  and  Q264).  We  found  that  the  evidence
      generally about the funding of his journey and payment of  agents  was
      vague and inadequate. There was  no  credible  explanation  given  how
      funds had been raised in such a short period of time since receipt  of
      the call-up papers (he left Eritrea in the same month).  The  evidence
      about making contact with his uncle once in Sudan, how he was able  to
      track down the smuggler in Libya after his escape and how he  obtained
      funding to continue his journey into Italy and then  into  France  and
      the UK, is similarly vague and unsupported.

 447. His evidence before us was that he had lost  his  identity  card,  but
      there was no explanation why this had not previously  been  mentioned.
      It is inconsistent with what he said in his screening interview (Q2.6)
      where  he  said  that  he  had  not  ever  had  his  own  Eritrean  ID
      card/military identity card or driving licence.

 448. MKY has failed to provide a coherent or credible account  relating  to
      his circumstances in Eritrea, the reasons for having left Eritrea  and
      the funding of his  journey  here.  It  follows  that  we  reject  his
      account.

 449. Having been found to be wholly lacking in credibility and his  account
      having been rejected, MYK cannot be assumed to  have  left  illegally.
      Failed asylum seekers are not at risk for that reason alone.

 450. In accordance with our country  guidance  we  thus  turn  to  consider
      whether as  someone  who  has  obviously  left  Eritrea  on  or  after
      August/September 2008, inferences can be drawn from his health history
      or level of education or his skills profile as to whether  legal  exit
      on his part was feasible, provided that such inferences can  be  drawn
      in the light of adverse credibility findings. We think  it  reasonably
      likely that he has performed several years of national service  duties
      whilst in Eritrea (and that was his own account) and that during  that
      time he acquired experience or skills  making  it  feasible  he  would
      qualify for an exit visa.

 451. It follows from our guidance that MYK would not be perceived on return
      as a draft evader or deserter and would not be at risk on return.

AA

 452. AA did not give evidence before us. He has a chronic  mental  illness.
      He is currently prescribed quetiapine, an antipsychotic drug.  He  has
      been discharged into  the  community  and  is  in  24  hour  supported
      accommodation where he is monitored. It is accepted by the  respondent
      that  quetiapine  is  not  available  in  Eritrea,  but  it   is   the
      respondent's case that other antipsychotic medication is available  as
      is medication to counter side effects. The First-tier  Tribunal  found
      at [71] that there is a family home in Eritrea  and  some  reason  for
      believing that AA's family do continue to spend time there in addition
      to residing in Saudi Arabia. At [86]  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
      that there are some "remote" family members in Eritrea. There has been
      no challenge to these findings and no reason for us to go behind them.
       It is not entirely clear whether on the accepted evidence AA could be
      said to have exited Eritrea illegally, but since  even  on  the  basis
      most favourable to the respondent  -  that  he  left  lawfully  -  the
      findings we make below would still be the same,  we  shall  assume  in
      what follows that he left lawfully.

 453.  We  have  taken  into  account  all  the  medical  evidence  relating
      specifically to AA and the conclusions we reached  concerning  medical
      exemptions generally. We take into account the  latest  correspondence
      from Dr Larsen concerning alternative  medication  and  medication  to
      counter side effects. There is no proper challenge by  the  respondent
      to this evidence and we accept that it establishes  that  there  is  a
      reasonable  risk  of  side  effects  in  the  event  of  a  change  of
      prescription. We also accept that there is a strong clinical  argument
      for AA to continue taking quetiapine.

 454. Having accepted the medical evidence relating to AA we find that  when
      AA is taking  his  prescribed  medication,  quetiapine,  he  does  not
      present with visible symptoms of being mentally ill and  therefore  he
      would not present as  medically  unfit  on  arrival  to  Eritrea.  His
      condition would deteriorate  without  medication.  From  the  evidence
      before us we are not able to say with any certainty  when  this  would
      take place, but in the absence of evidence to the contrary, we  accept
      what Ms Robertson told the First-tier Tribunal  that  there  would  be
      symptoms within a couple of weeks (see [40] of  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal).  AA does not speak fluent Tigrinya. We  conclude
      that it is reasonably likely, at least in the short-term, that AA will
      suffer a relapse, not long after his return.

 455. It is AA's case that  the  circumstances  of  his  illness  reach  the
      threshold required under Article 3 in the context of health cases, and
      secondly; he will not be exempt from national service; rather he  will
      be required to undertake national service. In the light of his  mental
      health, this would amount to  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  and
      Article 4. We will engage with the second proposition advanced  by  AA
      relating to Article 3.

 456. AA would not be returning to Eritrea as an evader or a  deserter,  but
      he would be  required  to  do  national  service,  unless  subject  to
      exemption on grounds of ill-health.

 457. We conclude that it is reasonably likely that on arrival AA  would  be
      taken to Sawa or a similar  military  training  camp.   He  would  not
      necessarily be medically assessed. AA would be able to communicate and
      he is likely to have documents from the UK relating to his  condition,
      but we are not nearly persuaded  that  it  follows  it  is  reasonably
      likely he would be properly medically assessed and exempted.   Whether
      AA is medically assessed will depend on whether he is able to persuade
      his commander that he should be.  The response  may  be  dependent  on
      whether he starts to exhibit signs of being unwell and this will occur
      over a period of time, the duration of which is  unclear.   Throughout
      the process, it is not reasonably likely that the AA would have access
      to alternative anti-psychotic medication or indeed any medical care or
      support.

 458. If he is medically assessed and it is decided by the medical assessors
      that he is unfit, this is not the end of the story because  ultimately
      the decision as to exemption will lie with his military commander.  We
      note that paragraph 2.3.32 of the Country  Information  and  Guidance:
      Eritrea: National (incl. Military) Service, Version 3.0,  August  2016
      notes that "a person who is medically unfit and  /  or  disabled,  is,
      depending on the  degree  of  their  impairment,  more  likely  to  be
      assigned to a civilian post". However, that statement  is  immediately
      qualified by the words, "... persons have limited choice or ability to
      influence where they may be deployed" and we consider  this  statement
      to refer not to initial  processing  but  rather  eventual  assignment
      after being taken to Sawa military training  camp.  We  are  satisfied
      that there is a reasonable risk  of  AA  having  to  undergo  national
      service and initially military training.  If he were  to  be  assessed
      and ultimately exempted, there  is  simply  no  evidence  of  a  clear
      procedure or timeframe, which would enable us to conclude that leading
      up to exemption, and whilst subject to military training, he would not
      be at risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 on account of his mental
      health.

 459. For the above reasons we conclude:

The First-tier Tribunal in the cases of MST, MYK and AA materially erred  in
law and their decisions have been set aside.

The decisions we re-make are to dismiss the appeals of MST and  MYK  but  to
allow the appeal of AA.

Signed

[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal







APPENDICES

                                 APPENDIX I

The Evidence of MST

1.    At the hearing before us MST gave oral evidence  in  Tigrinya  through
    an interpreter. He adopted his witness statement of 16 July 2015 as his
    evidence-in-chief.  MST was at the date of the hearing before  us  aged
    27. We will record his oral  evidence  before  that  contained  in  his
    earlier witness statement because the witness statement is  a  response
    to the decision to refuse his application  for  asylum  and  is  not  a
    detailed account of his evidence.

The AIR

2.          MST married his wife on 16 January 2011  and  she  is  still  in
    Eritrea. He attempted to flee Eritrea in 2006 when he was  aged  17  to
    avoid conscription but he was arrested on the border at  Ghirmayka  and
    detained underground in Adersere prison for 12 months. He was  released
    without conditions in 2007 and he began national  service  in  February
    2009. He completed military service in October  2009  when  he  escaped
    from a lorry in Mendefera. He returned to his village on foot. He lived
    in the wilderness for four years, but fled when the authorities came to
    his family home and gave his father a final warning. He fled Eritrea on
    20 January 2013 using an agent and travelled to  Sudan,  Libya,  Italy,
    France and finally arriving in the UK.

Oral Evidence

3.    MST's oral evidence that he gave at  the  hearing  before  us  can  be
    summarised. He was born in  Adi-Mahkok  where  he  was  raised  by  his
    parents who are peasant farmers.   His  family  had  thirty  goats  and
    cattle and grew various crops, but they were  not  wealthy.  They  were
    ordinary.  He started school at the  age  of  11.  He  dropped  out  of
    school, aged 16, with no qualifications, in order to help his  parents.
    His siblings were in the army. Having dropped out of school,  he  lived
    with his livestock in what he described  as  the  "wilderness"  or  "no
    man's land." His nephew  would  come  and  tell  him  when  there  were
    roundups and he would then exercise caution. Roundups  were  seldom  in
    the small rural village where they lived.

4.    After working as a shepherd and  subsistence  farmer  for  a  year  he
    decided to attempt to leave the country. He was not free  to  take  his
    animals to the market in his home town because he was at risk of  being
    caught by the authorities.  He wanted to leave  because  he  could  not
    have a peaceful life in Eritrea. His siblings had all been conscripted.
    They were the property of the State and  like  slaves.  They  were  all
    denied leave to visit their parents. His  eldest  brother  was  married
    with children and unable to look after them.

5.          When he was aged 17 he travelled  to  Asmara  by  car  and  then
    headed to Sudan on foot. After 20 days he was captured in Ghirmayka, on
    the border with Sudan, and  detained  in  Adersere  Prison  for  twelve
    months.  He was held in an underground  dungeon.  The  temperature  was
    boiling and conditions generally poor. He was  given  three  pieces  of
    fermented bread to eat each day and dirty water to drink.

6.          MST provided the authorities with a false name  and  false  date
    of birth and misled them into thinking that he was  under  the  age  of
    conscription. Following this he was released in 2007 rather than forced
    to do national service. He cannot remember whether he was  asked  about
    this in his interview with the Home Office.  He returned to his village
    where he continued to hide with his livestock.

7.          MST says he started national service on 1 February 2009, at  the
    age of 20. He accounts for this by having given false details  when  he
    was detained. He was sent to Wia training camp for eight  months  where
    life  was  miserable,  but  slightly  better  than  that   during   his
    incarceration in Adersere Prison. It was very  hot  and  the  food  was
    inadequate. The conscripts were beaten with a stick and put  under  the
    sun.  He completed military service and was to be posted to a unit.

8.          Whilst being transported in a lorry to his unit  he  managed  to
    escape.  He did not know where he was going, but he recognised the area
    when passing Mendefera and at that point in the journey he  escaped  by
    jumping from the lorry.  It was market day and it was crowded. He  just
    kept on running and did not look back. He made  his  way  back  to  his
    village which was 80 km away. He removed his military overalls. He  was
    wearing light clothes under this and he was given a top and some  pants
    by people he met. He made his way back home on foot, using back routes.
    The journey took him about two days.

9.    MST remained in hiding between  2009  and  2013.  He  lived  with  his
    livestock. He married on 16 January 2011.  His wife was aged  22.   She
    was not doing national service. They stayed  in  his  family  home  for
    about a month during their honeymoon and afterwards he rarely  saw  her
    as he returned to live with his livestock.

10.   The authorities were conducting frequent roundups and  he  decided  to
    flee after his father was given a final warning for him to surrender to
    the authorities and informed that he would be  responsible  should  his
    son not surrender.

11.   MST has been in contact with his family since he has been  in  the  UK
    but that was only once and he does not know where his father and  uncle
    are.  The authorities did not take action against his father.

12.   His paternal uncle arranged for an agent to take him to Sudan and  the
    agent and MST travelled on foot across the Sudanese  border.   He  made
    his way to Khartoum and from there he travelled on the back of a  lorry
    to Libya where he resided for a year and four months.  During  most  of
    the time he was in Libya he was in Ganfuda  Prison.   When  celebrating
    Eid-al-Fitr detention was relaxed  and  he  escaped.  He  travelled  to
    Italy. This was paid for by his family selling livestock.  He continued
    his journey to France and then to the UK.  He did not claim  asylum  in
    Italy or France.  He was told by the smugglers to continue his  journey
    to the UK.

13.   At 1.9 of the screening interview MST was asked about  his  occupation
    and his answer is recorded as  unemployed/completed  national  service.
    His evidence before us was that this must be an error  because  no  one
    would say that they  had  completed  national  service  because  it  is
    endless.  It is also an error when he described himself as single.

14.   MST was given an ID card in Eritrea in 2007.  He  denied  having  told
    the First-tier Tribunal that he had been given an ID card in  2008.  He
    had not received call-up papers. He fears return to Eritrea because  he
    has absconded from national service and  left  Eritrea  illegally.   He
    would be subject to imprisonment and he would also be  conscripted  and
    he does not want to be a soldier for the rest of his life.

Witness Statement of 16 June 2015

15.   MST's witness statement is brief and a response  to  the  decision  to
    refuse to grant him  asylum.   He  said  he  was  not  married  in  the
    screening interview because he thought that the  question  was  whether
    his wife was in the UK.  The final warning  given  to  his  father  was
    verbal. He is wanted by the authorities but he does  not  know  whether
    there is a warrant for his arrest.





The Evidence of MYK

16.   MYK has made three witness statements. The first witness statement  is
    dated 9 August 2014. He was  interviewed  by  the  Home  Office  on  19
    November 2014 and the respondent relies on the Asylum Interview  Record
    (AIR).  He has produced two further witness statements, of  20  January
    2015 and 7 June 2016.  He gave oral evidence before and he adopted  his
    witness statements as evidence-in -chief.

Witness Statement of 9 August 2014

17.         MYK was born in Segenetiy, Eritrea.  He married his wife  in  an
    arranged marriage on 15 January 2012 whilst on leave. He last  saw  her
    in January 2014 and they have one child, a son, born in March 2014.  He
    left Eritrea on 11 January 2014. He attended school  between  1998  and
    2006. In February 2006, he was rounded-up by the authorities whilst  at
    school and taken to Wia Military training  camp  where  he  stayed  for
    three weeks.  He was then dispersed to Assab where he remained for nine
    months. The training there was very tough and exhausting. He  was  then
    dispersed to Gelalo in around December 2006 where he remained for about
    a year before being re-deployed to the Gash Barka region where he was a
    guard.  In December 2010 he was relocated to Tokombya.

18.         He was given home leave for a month in January 2012 and  he  did
    not  return.  He  went  into  hiding  for  six  or  seven  months.  The
    authorities came searching for him in August 2012 and they arrested his
    mother and she was placed in detention for about a month. As  a  result
    of his mother's detention, in September 2012, he handed himself in  and
    his mother was released the same  month.   He  was  detained  in  Alebu
    detention centre for two months where  he  was  detained  in  appalling
    conditions and mistreated. After two months he  was  released  and  re-
    joined his unit. He requested home leave in 2013 and this was  refused.
    He left in May 2013 without permission. He returned home and went  into
    hiding. During this time the authorities came to his house to look  for
    him. They did not arrest his mother because she was unwell. He received
    a call up letter in January 2014 which gave him until later that  month
    to hand himself in. He then decided to flee Eritrea. He left the family
    home on 6 January 2014 with the help on an agent. This was arranged and
    paid for by his family. He arrived in Sudan  on  11  January  2014.  He
    arrived in Khartoum on 12 January 2014 where he remained until 18 March
    2014 living under the constant fear of deportation. It was  common  for
    the Eritrean authorities  to  come  to  Sudan  and  with  the  Sudanese
    authorities to deport Eritreans.  He left Sudan with an agent  who  was
    paid by his uncle (who lived in Eritrea).  He  travelled  to  Libya  by
    lorry through the Sahara desert arriving in Libya on 5 April 2014.   In
    Libya he was detained in appalling  conditions  in  a  prison  near  to
    Tripoli for approximately three months. He  was  regularly  beaten  and
    forced to carry out hard labour.  On 6 July 2014 he managed to  escape.
    He was with a few prisoners who scattered in different  directions  and
    it was at this point that he took the opportunity to flee.  He  managed
    to avoid being shot by the Libyan authorities and made good his escape.
     He caught up with two other escapees and was able to make contact with
    the agent who had taken him to Libya.  The agent took them to his  home
    in Tripoli where he stayed for a week before leaving Libya on  13  July
    2014.  His friends in Israel paid the agent who then took him to Italy.
    He arrived in Sicily on 14 July 2014.

19.   He was not fingerprinted by the authorities in Italy.   He  was  taken
    to a compound where he was able to escape after two hours  of  arrival.
    He made his way to Catania where he met an agent who took him and three
    others to Rome where he stayed in hiding. He did not make a  claim  for
    asylum there.  He did not feel safe  in  Italy  having  seen  Eritreans
    living on the street.  On 17 July 2014 he left Italy arriving in France
    the next day and travelling to Calais where he stayed (in "the jungle")
    until 23 July 2014. Friends paid the costs of the agent to take him  to
    France.  He did not claim asylum in France because he did not have  the
    opportunity to do so and he did not know how to claim asylum there.  He
    was advised that should he claim asylum in France the authorities would
    deport him to Eritrea. With others he managed to travel to  the  UK  in
    the back of a lorry on 23 July 2014, arriving on the same day.  He  was
    arrested in Derby on the same day whilst still  in  the  lorry  and  he
    claimed asylum.

The AIR

20.   MYK was interviewed by the respondent on 19 November 2014.  He  stated
    that he went on home leave in 2011 and when it was put to him  that  in
    his witness statement he said he went on leave in August 2012 he stated
    (at Q130) that he "went on both occasions".  He then said that he  went
    on leave in 2011 and stayed for seven months  in  August  and  did  not
    return (see Q132).  When he was asked why he said that he had  left  on
    two occasions he said that what he meant was that he stayed and that he
    was still at home in 2012 (see Q132 and Q133). He stated that it  might
    be a mistake in his witness statement that he had been given  leave  in
    2012 (see Q134). He stated during  the  same  interview  that  he  left
    military service in January 2012 and did not return  for  seven  months
    and that he had been confused when he said that he  went  on  leave  in
    August 2011 (see Q153).

21.   When he did not return to his military unit  he  was  sent  a  call-up
    letter and his house was searched (see Q135 and Q136).  He received  in
    total two call-up letters (the first when he failed to  return  to  his
    unit on the  first  occasion  and  the  second  when  he  left  without
    permission). The authorities came looking for him on two occasions (see
    Q139). He returned to the military unit in March  2012  (see  Q143)  in
    response to his mother's arrest.  His  mother  was  imprisoned  on  two
    occasions (see Q148). They took her on the first occasion  in  December
    2012 (see Q149). He later changed this to August 2012 (see  Q150).   He
    stated (see Q202), having been asked about the  second  time  that  his
    mother had been detained, that it was after they sent the second  call-
    up letter.  He then stated that it was at the end of  2013  (see  Q225)
    but that this time she had received a letter and they did not take  her
    and that she has not been  detained  twice.  The  authorities  had  put
    pressure on her on the second occasion (see Q228).  He then stated that
    he had left the country and did not know what had happened after  that.



22.   MYK stated that he returned to his military unit in  March  2013.   It
    was put to him in his interview that in his witness  statement  he  had
    indicated that he had been detained for a period of two months and that
    if he had handed himself in in August 2012,  as  he  asserted  was  the
    case, and was then detained for two months, this would leave  a  number
    of months unaccounted for, if he did not  re-join  his  unit  in  March
    2013. In response to this he stated that he was initially working as  a
    prisoner on a farm for two months and then for two months as  a  normal
    worker on a farm.  After this he had escaped and  stayed  at  home  for
    eight months.  He then stated  that  he  had  stayed  on  the  farm  in
    detention until March 2013 (see Q190) and had been in detention  for  a
    period of seven months.  He served  with  his  unit  for  seven  months
    before escaping in May 2013.

The Witness Statement of 20 January 2015

23.    In the witness statement of 20 January 2015, he stated  that  he  was
    given leave on one occasion in January 2012 and that he  did  not  have
    leave in 2011. He was sent a call  up  letter  in  2012  which  he  had
    forgotten to mention previously. He was  detained  in  Alebu  detention
    centre for five months from September 2012 until March 2013.

The Witness Statement of 7 June 2016

24.         In the witness statement of 7 June 2016, MYK's evidence is  that
    he is not prepared to sign a letter of apology and admit that  he  left
    Eritrea illegally having deserted. He is unable and  unwilling  to  pay
    the 2 per cent tax.

Oral Evidence before the UT on 7 June 2016

25.   At the hearing before us MYK was aged 31. He  gave  oral  evidence  in
    Tigrinya through an interpreter. He adopted three witness statements as
    his evidence-in-chief.

26.   MYK said he had had an Eritrean ID card,  but  he  lost  this  in  the
    desert en route to Libya. He has not been able to contact his  wife  in
    Eritrea. He tried to make contact with her through friends, but  to  no
    avail. He has been informed by Eritreans who have  met  her  about  the
    birth of his son. He has not attempted to contact her since he has been
    in the UK. She does not have a  mobile  phone.  His  wife  did  not  do
    military service after they married.

27.         MYK was given leave from his  unit  in  2012,  but  he  did  not
    return. He was on the run  for  six  or  seven  months  before  handing
    himself in. He  handed  himself  in  in  December  2012  following  his
    mother's arrest which came about because he had  not  returned  to  the
    military unit. This was the only time that she  was  arrested.  In  his
    asylum interview he made reference to a time when soldiers came to  the
    house and threatened her, but she was not arrested on that occasion.

28.         Having handed himself in, he was detained  for  two  months  and
    then he returned to his unit in January 2013. When the  discrepancy  in
    dates was put to him, MYK said that he was moved from prison to  prison
    and cannot remember how it happened although he remembered returning to
    his unit because it was a "memorable day". It was put to  him  that  he
    had in his interview stated that he returned to his unit in March  2013
    and he then stated to us that when he  returned  to  his  unit  he  was
    arrested again and he was not thinking clearly  in  his  interview.  He
    served for about eight months before he escaped. He  received  call  up
    papers in January 2014 before he left Eritrea. The papers were given to
    his mother. As a result of this he decided to flee, but it  had  always
    been his intention to leave Eritrea. He left on 6 January 2014 with  an
    agent and fled to Sudan.  He did not know how  his  family  raised  the
    money in order to pay an agent to help him leave Eritrea  or  how  they
    managed to do this in such a short period of time (since receipt of the
    call-up letter in the same month).  He left  Eritrea  illegally  on  11
    January 2014.

29. MYK said he had fled Sudan on 18 March 2014 with the assistance  of  an
    agent and travelled to Libya.  His maternal uncle in  Eritrea  paid  an
    agent to make the arrangements.  MYK did not have his uncle's telephone
    number with him, but he was able to make  telephone  contact  with  him
    with the help of Eritrean friends living  in  Sudan.  He  was  able  to
    contact his friends in Israel with the help of  Eritreans  and  agents.
    Other Eritreans helped him to pay the agent to take him  to  Rome.   He
    did not want to claim asylum in Italy having  seen  Eritreans  sleeping
    rough there.

The Evidence of AA

30.   AA relied on the evidence that was before the First-Tier Tribunal.  He
    produced a witness statement of 22 September  2014  and  he  gave  oral
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal. He  also  relied  on  evidence
    relating to his mental health. AA relied on a  witness  statement  from
    Ann Robinson, a Deputy Manager at Chalkhill St. Martin of  Tours  where
    the appellant was at that time residing and Ms  Robinson  attended  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  We do not have a copy  of  her
    witness statement, but her evidence has been recorded in the  decision.
     There was before the First-Tier  Tribunal  a  report  from  Consultant
    Clinical Psychologist, Mr Nicholas Stokes of 12 August 2013;  a  letter
    from Consultant Forensic  Psychiatrist,  Dr  Francis  Fernandes  of  27
    August 2013 and a psychiatric report prepared by Dr John Jacques  of  9
    September 2014.

31.   AA has produced more up-to-date  evidence  about  his  mental  health.
    There are three letters from Dr N Larsen, a Locum  Consultant  Forensic
    Psychiatrist; the first of 27 April 2015  to  Ziadies  solicitors;  the
    second of 24 March 2016 to Roelens solicitors and the third of  27  May
    2016 to Roelens solicitors.  There is a  report  written  by  AA's  key
    worker, Adebisi Ayoade of 6  May  2015,  a  letter  from  the  Eritrean
    Community in Lambeth of 9 September 2014 and an expert report from Dr S
    A Bekalo of 20 April 2015.

32.   AA's evidence is contained in his witness statement  of  22  September
    2014. There is no challenge to the evidence as set out  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in their decision. AA's father was born  in  Eritrea  but
    his origins and tribal roots are in Ethiopia. His  mother  is  from  an
    Eritrean tribe. They fled Eritrea.  AA was born  in  Sudan  in  a  non-
    military camp. His family went to Saudi Arabia when he was three months
    old and he was raised there. He came to the UK  with  the  help  of  an
    agent.

33.   AA's evidence was that he had returned to Eritrea on one  occasion  in
    1992, after the War of Independence, and stayed there for two or  three
    months. He found the  experience  frightening.  His  family  reside  in
    Riyadh and his older sister lives in Canada. He has  a  cousin  and  an
    uncle living in the UK. They did not  attend  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He speaks to  his  parents  every  four  or  five
    months and he misses his family.  He can speak and understand  Tigrinya
    although he does not  have  a  good  accent  and  he  cannot  read  the
    language.  He would be able  to  say  a  few  words  in  the  Tigrinyan
    language about his diagnosis and how long he has been in  hospital.  He
    has no family or friends in Eritrea.  His mother has  relatives  there,
    however her brothers and sisters have married and left the country.  AA
    believes that the house belonging to  his  mother's  parents  is  still
    there. Should he return  to  Eritrea  he  does  not  believe  that  his
    relatives would be able to help him settle there and  his  parents  are
    elderly and would not be able to help him.

34.   AA was referred to a community health mental  team  in  2005.  He  was
    detained at the Three Bridges  Mental  Health  Unit  between  2007  and
    January 2014 (following conviction). Since January 2014 he has been  at
    Chalkhill where he receives nursing support and he is able  to  go  out
    into the community.  He sees a doctor every six weeks as  well  as  his
    community psychiatric nurse (CPN).

The Evidence of Ann Robertson

35.   Ms Robertson's unchallenged evidence is set out  in  the  decision  of
    the First- tier Tribunal.  She  is  a  qualified  nurse  with  forensic
    experience and general mental health experience. She  sees  AA  in  the
    morning and administers his medication.  He requires a  high  level  of
    input from staff. His condition has improved and he  engages  more  and
    displays  less  anxiety.   There  were   difficulties   regarding   his
    medication.  He  suffered  horrendous  side  effects  from   the   drug
    risperidone.   He would get up in the morning and then be  "wiped  out"
    and would not engage with anybody.  His face and tongue were affected.

36.   So long as AA is monitored at  the  current  level,  whilst  there  is
    always a risk, if things continue as they  are,  Ms  Robertson  has  no
    concerns.  If his  appeal  is  dismissed  Ms  Robertson  would  not  be
    surprised if he suffers a relapse and should he be removed there  would
    be a quick deterioration in his mental health and stability. Should  he
    return to Eritrea, with no medication, Ms Robertson finds  it  hard  to
    predict what the result would be, but believes that within a couple  of
    weeks there would be symptoms and AA  would  deteriorate  quickly.   He
    requires a lot of support.

The Evidence of Dr N Larsen

37.   Dr Larsen's letters were not before the First-tier  Tribunal.  In  his
    first letter of 27 April 2015 he confirms that support  and  monitoring
    provided in the 24 hour supported accommodation is  essential  to  AA's
    ongoing stability and that he is at high risk  of  relapse  into  acute
    schizophrenia with significant risks to himself and others  should  his
    mental  state  be  de-stabilised  by  significant  stressors  and  that
    deportation to Eritrea would be a significant stressor. In  his  second
    letter of 24 March 2016, having been requested to give  an  update,  he
    confirms that AA requires long-term treatment with anti-psychotics  due
    to the chronic nature of his mental illness and  the  risk  of  relapse
    should he discontinue medication. If he relapses Dr Larsen would expect
    a return of the previous symptoms.

38.    In  the  most  recent  correspondence,  Dr   Larsen   considers   the
    respondent's  position  that  a  number  of  antipsychotic  drugs   are
    available  in   Eritrea;   namely   haloperidol,   chlorpromazine   and
    fluphenazine.  Dr Larsen confirms  that  AA  has  not  been  previously
    prescribed any of the drugs purported to  be  available,  but  that  he
    learnt from AA that  he  has  previously  been  prescribed  olanzapine,
    risperidone and amisulpride which  are  all  antipsychotic  drugs.   AA
    informed him that olanzapine was discontinued due to  excessive  weight
    gain, risperidone was discontinued due to troublesome side effects  and
    amisulpride  was  discontinued  due  to  lack  of  clinical   progress.
    Haloperidol  is  not  uncommonly  prescribed  in   psychiatric   wards,
    particularly in cases of acute agitation  which  are  not  uncommon  on
    initial admission to a psychiatric service and it is possible  that  AA
    has been previously prescribed this.

39.   All antipsychotic medications have possible side  effects.  AA  has  a
    history of sensitivity to the so  called  extrapyramidal  side  effects
    (EPSEs) of risperidone. Although medication to counter side effects can
    be prescribed they are of variable efficacy and  Dr  Larsen  is  unsure
    whether  they  would  be  available  in   Eritrea.   Fluphenazine   and
    haloperidol result in pronounced EPSEs although the effect on AA cannot
    be accurately predicted. Chlorpromazine is  noted  to  be  of  moderate
    potential to  cause  EPSEs,  but  a  well-established  side  effect  is
    sensitivity  to  light.   Dr  Larsen  would  have  reservations   about
    prescribing any of these  drugs  to  AA  without  clinical  trial.  The
    therapeutic efficacy for switching drugs is difficult to  predict.  One
    needs a strong clinical argument and robust  risk  management  plan  in
    place. It is very likely that AA would experience side effects from the
    three drugs and there is a  strong  clinical  argument  for  continuing
    quetiapine in his case.

      The Evidence of Dr John Jacques

40.   Dr John Jacques was instructed  by  Ziadies  Solicitors  in  order  to
    prepare an independent psychiatric report on AA. In  his  report  of  9
    September 2014 he concluded the following:

    (1)    AA has a good insight into his mental health problems  and  past
         drug use.

    (2)    AA's mental state has been stable and has started to improve.

    (3)    Expulsion would interfere with his mental health.   It  is  most
         likely that the stress of immigration proceedings  has  contributed
         towards his anxiety symptoms which have caused concerns.

    (4)    AA receives treatment and support in the community and his  most
         recent problems have required a higher level of input  from  mental
         health and support services.

    (5)    AA receives support from  a  consultant  forensic  psychiatrist,
         community psychiatric nurse and vocational support worker.  He  has
         a key worker allocated to him at  the  24  hour  specialist  mental
         health hostel where he lives.

    (6)    There is concern that if AA is  deported  to  Eritrea  he  would
         suffer  a  relapse.  His  relapse  signature  is   one   of   rapid
         deterioration in his mental state and behaviour potentially leading
         to violence as well as self-neglect.   It  is  therefore  important
         that he receives treatment.

    (7)    AA would not receive the same treatment or support  in  Eritrea.
         Eritrea does have access to some antipsychotic treatments and basic
         community support but the medication he receives,  quetiapine,  is,
         according to the Home Office, not available in Eritrea.

    (8)          AA developed  side  effects  from  the  alternative  drug,
         risperidone, which included  persistent  orofacial  dyskinesia  and
         hyperprolactinaemia when he was prescribed this medication in 2009.
          These conditions can be disabling and distressing and there  is  a
         risk of permanent irreversible movement problems if the problem  is
         not   addressed   by    stopping    the    offending    medication.
         Hyperprolactinaemia can have significant problems particularly  for
         men with sexual side effects (breast  development  and  lactation).
         It is not clear whether AA developed any side effects  in  relation
         to hyperprolactinaemia  but  records  indicate  that  he  developed
         involuntary  twitching  of  the  face  and  tongue  which  led   to
         discontinuation of the treatment and subsequent resolution of these
         symptoms.

    (9)    The respondent makes reference to other antipsychotic treatments
         being available in Eritrea but such treatments are widely known  to
         cause hormonal problems and may be  less  effective  in  preventing
         relapse and schizophrenia.

    (10) AA's death may be expedited  if  he  were  unable  to  access  the
         treatment.  Individuals with  schizophrenia  have  a  significantly
         higher risk of suicide compared to  the  general  population.   His
         mental health would be at risk of deterioration if he were to leave
         the United Kingdom for Eritrea because he would be unable to access
         the treatment and support he requires and he will find adjusting to
         a new country very difficult without the support from  friends  and
         family and he is fearful of being attacked.

  The Evidence of Dr Bekalu

41.   In summary Dr Bekalu concluded that if the appellant is returned,  the
    authorities will know that he has not completed national service, he is
    highly likely to face serious risk on return and he would  most  likely
    be subjected to limitless national service.

The Evidence of Adebisi Ayoade

      42.        Mr Ayoade is AA's key worker and he provided a report of  6
    May 2015 which confirms that AA  is  currently  on  quetiapine  and  is
    prescribed 400 mgs in the morning and evening and that he has been self-
    medicating for a month on his evening medication only.

The Background  Evidence  of  Mental  Health  Problems  in  the  Context  of
National Service

      Amnesty International report of 22 September 2015

43.   In so far as this report engages with the issues that  arise  in  AA's
    case, it is asserted that there is no functioning and reliable  process
    of assessing medical fitness for national service.  The  Sawa  training
    facility did not have a routine health assessment on arrival or at  any
    time.  The same is true for other camps. Permission to see a doctor  or
    a designated first aid officer must be granted by a commanding  officer
    and it is extremely difficult to obtain.  If  assessed,  resources  are
    very limited.  It  is  difficult  to  speak  with  a  great  degree  of
    certainty about the likely outcome  for  AA  if  deported  because  his
    situation is unusual. However, anyone forcibly returned from Europe  to
    Eritrea potentially faces distrust and suspicion and there  is  a  risk
    that he will  be  treated  as  someone  who  has  tried  to  flee,  the
    consequences of  which  are  forcible  conscription  or  arbitrary  and
    indefinite detention.  He is unlikely to  be  able  to  obtain  medical
    exemption  as  he  lacks  experience  and   the   contacts   necessary.
    Recognition of mental health difficulties  is  harder  to  obtain  than
    physical health problems. In any event, such exemptions  are  sometimes
    ignored in round-ups or call ups. If conscripted it  would  be  for  an
    indefinite period and constitute forced labour.

UNCOI 2015

44. The report of 4 June 2015 at [60]  concludes  that  being  exempt  from
    national service is very difficult particularly for men.  Persons  with
    disabilities are conscripted for military instead of civilian service.

45. Examples are cited within the report of 5 June 2015 of witnesses  (with
    physical injuries) who had not been exempted and forced  to  remain  in
    military service despite having been declared unfit (see  [1196]).  The
    Commission concluded that the exemptions on health grounds  are  rarely
    granted, even though the state  of  health  of  the  persons  concerned
    prevents them from serving in the military.  There is evidence of blind
    and seriously visually impaired people being sent to Sawa (see [1197]).



UNCOI 2016

46.   There is an example given within the report at [92] of a  witness  who
    in 2014 was unwell with papers to  establish  this,  but  who  was  not
    believed. The witness reported being detained for  six  months  without
    due process.

      Just Deserters December 2015

47.  Amnesty documented (at page 28)  reports  from  former  conscripts  who
    told of people with disabilities being conscripted and  taken  to  Sawa
    for military training. There  is  no  health  check  or  assessment  of
    physical or mental fitness when people are first conscripted  and  sent
    for training or at the end of the year at Sawa. Medical assessments are
    carried out on an ad hoc basis,  and  usually  only  if  the  conscript
    repeatedly requests  it.  To  obtain  an  exemption  a  doctor  has  to
    recommend that the conscript is unfit to serve, whether for physical or
    mental health reasons and this recommendation has to be confirmed by  a
    military commander.  Those with health problems have been  assigned  to
    national service and the report makes reference to a  former  conscript
    with a (physical) health problem who  spent  three  years  in  national
    service and another former conscript who had severe  injuries  to  both
    legs following a car accident. Although the commander concluded that he
    could not carry out physically demanding tasks, it was decided that  he
    could work. The source stated that this is not a medical decision,  but
    a  decision  of  the  Commander.  The  individual   was   assigned   to
    administrative work, but he was told there was no pain relief  and  not
    granted permission to see a doctor.

    The appellants also submitted a transcript of the  testimony  of  Helen
    Gebreklak dated 21 May 2016 with  a  certificate  of  translation.  Her
    evidence touched upon, inter alia, the delays persons in  custody  face
    in having their medical complaints dealt with.


    APPENDIX II

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11206/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |
|on 7th May 2015                               |


                                   Before



                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                    [MYK]


                                                                   Appellant


                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Howard of Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                                ERROR OF LAW

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    C Mather promulgated on the 17th February 2015.




                           � CROWN COPYRIGHT 2016


Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Eritrea born on the 15th August 1987. He
    claimed to have left Eritrea on 6th  January  2014  and  travelled  via
    Sudan, Libya, Italy, and France, before arriving in the UK. He  claimed
    asylum and was interviewed on 19th November  2014  and  the  claim  was
    refused.

 3. The Judge found  the  Appellant  not  to  be  a  credible  witness.  In
    paragraph 17 of the determination it is recorded that the Appellant was
    unable to give consistent evidence which is said to go to the  core  of
    his claim for the reason set  out  in  the  refusal  letter.  No  other
    reasons have been provided.

 4. In paragraph 18 the Judge found it not credible that the Appellant  did
    not know how much his mother paid the agent or the  agent's  name,  but
    gave no reasons.

 5. In paragraph 19 the Judge refers to conflicting evidence  by  reference
    to paragraphs 15(i) and (v) of the  determination  but  fails  to  give
    reasons and it is not clear what conflicts are being referred too.

 6. In paragraph 20 the Judge found the Appellants evidence  incredible  in
    relation to how he was able to contact various agents and friends  "who
    magically paid agents  for  the  Appellant  during  his  journey".  The
    terminology used  perhaps  reflects  the  lack  of  acceptance  of  the
    Appellant's account in the mind of the Judge but no reasons  have  been
    given in support of this finding.

 7. At paragraph 23 the Judge accepts the Appellant's nationality and  that
    he undertook his national service. His date of  birth  of  15th  August
    1987 is not disputed making him 27 and within the age  range  of  those
    eligible to serve in the military. At paragraph 24 the Judge states:

              "24. I have reminded myself of the case of MO (Illegal exit -
                  risk  on  return)  Eritrea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  190,  which
                  states:

              "c.      The general position concerning illegal exit remains
                 as expressed in MA, namely that illegal exit by a person of
                 or approaching draft age and not medically unfit cannot  be
                 assumed if they have been found to be wholly  incredible.""



 8. At paragraph 25 the Judge finds:

              "25. I accept the Respondents' submissions that the  material
                  aspects of the Appellant's claim are not credible  and  I
                  do not accept the Appellant left Eritrea illegally."

 9. There is no mention of the submissions in the determination. It is  not
    clear on what  basis  this  finding  is  being  made.  Are  these  oral
    submissions made at the hearing or those  in  the  refusal  letter,  or
    both?


Discussion

10. It is a settled principle that whilst there is  no  obligation  upon  a
    judge to set out their reasons for each and every  element  of  a  case
    before them, it is necessary for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  identify
    and resolve key conflicts in the evidence  and  explain  in  clear  and
    brief terms their reasons so the parties understand why they  have  won
    or lost - Budhathoki (reasons for decision)  [2014]  UKUT  00341  (IAC)
    refers.

11. The Judge may consider that  sufficient  reasons  have  been  given  by
    referring to the Respondent's refusal  letter  and  submissions  but  a
    reader of the determination is unable to understand the  basis  of  the
    decision as there is no reference, even in summary form, to the  nature
    of such arguments. It is not clear if the submissions made  and  issues
    raised differ in any way from the arguments contained  it  the  refusal
    letter.

12. Of greater concern, which Mr McVeety accepted,  is  paragraph  24.  The
    quotation from MO (illegal exit - risk on  return)  Eritrea  CG  [2011]
    UKUT 00190 (IAC) is arguably selective as the Tribunal also found  that
    "whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum seekers as such
    are not generally at real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  on
    return, on present evidence the great  majority  of  such  persons  are
    likely to be perceived as having left illegally and this fact, save for
    very limited exceptions, will mean that on return they face a real risk
    of persecution  or  serious  harm".  The  determination  is  silent  in
    relation to the assessment of risk of the Appellant  being  arbitrarily
    arrested and ill-treated on return  for  this  reasons  which  does  no
    appear to have been considered. The grounds refer  to  the  Respondents
    OGN at page 300 of the appeal  bundle  indicating  this  was  a  matter
    raised before the Judge.

13. The reasons for refusal letter  relies  at  paragraphs  52-55  upon  MA
    (Draft evaders - illegal departures - risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    00059 and the finding the issue was that of illegal exit  which  it  is
    said was upheld in MO (illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011]
    UKUT 00190 (IAC).  If the Judge relied upon this assertion,  which  may
    be the case as it appears in the refusal letter, it  ignores  the  fact
    that although the Tribunal in MO endorsed the general position  adopted
    in MA, that a person of or approaching draft age (i.e. aged 8  or  over
    and still not above the upper age limits for  military  service,  being
    under 54 for men and under 47 for women)  and not medically  unfit  who
    is accepted as having left Eritrea illegally is reasonably likely to be
    regarded with serious hostility on return, it found this was subject to
    limited exceptions in respect of (1) persons whom the regime's military
    and political  leadership  perceives  as  having  given  them  valuable
    service (either in Eritrea or abroad);  (2)  persons  who  are  trusted
    family members of, or are themselves part of,  the regime's military or
    political leadership. A further possible exception,  requiring  a  more
    case-specific  analysis,  is  (3)  persons  (and  their  children  born
    afterwards) who fled (what  later  became  the  territory  of)  Eritrea
    during the war of independence and  (v)  Whilst  it  also  remains  the
    position that failed asylum seekers as such are not generally  at  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm on return, on present evidence  the
    great majority of such persons are likely to  be  perceived  as  having
    left illegally and this fact, save for very  limited  exceptions,  will
    mean that on return they face a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious
    harm.

14. It may be that the Judge was correct in relation to  the  core  of  the
    claim but the lack of reasoning and  failure  to  consider  a  material
    element amounts to an arguable  material  legal  error  such  that  the
    determination shall be set  aside.  The  nationality,  fact  of  having
    completed national service and immigration history does not  appear  to
    be in dispute between the parties but  all  other  elements  remain  at
    large.

Decision

15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside  the
    decision of the original Judge.

16. Further directions shall follow in relation to the  future  conduct  of
    this case.

Anonymity.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson


Dated the 20th May 2014


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07733/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2016                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between



                                     MST

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Denholm, Counsel instructed by Immigration
                    Advice Service

For the Respondent:    Mr B Rawat, Counsel instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department



                           � CROWN COPYRIGHT 2016

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea and  his  date  of  birth  is  18
    February 1989.  He made an application for asylum and this was  refused
    by the respondent on 29 April 2015.  The  appellant  appealed  and  his
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J  M  Holmes  in  a
    determination that was promulgated on 6 July 2015 following  a  hearing
    on 24 June 2015.  Permission to appeal was granted to the appellant  by
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal Jordan on 4 August 2015.  Thus  the  matter
    came before me.


The Background Evidence

2.    The appellant's case is  that  he  is  a  deserter  and  left  Eritrea
    illegally.  He relied on the case of MO (illegal exit - risk on return)
    Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190.

3.    The respondent's case is that the appellant is not  credible  and,  in
    any event,  the guidance in MO should not be followed in the  light  of
    the  two Country  Information  Reports  of  March  2015,  one  entitled
    Country Information and Guidance - Eritrea: National  (incl.  Military)
    Service (March 2015) and Country Information and  Guidance  -  Eritrea:
    Illegal Exit (March 2015).

4.    The Danish Immigration Service ("DIS") produced a report,  the  Danish
    Fact-Finding Mission Report ("the FFM report") which was  published  in
    November 2014 and recorded observations on penalties for  illegal  exit
    and likely treatment on return.  The sources  in  the  report  are  not
    identified by name, save Professor Kibreab, but instead are referred to
    as international organisation or western embassy A, B and C etc.  There
    is also reference to an unnamed well-known intellectual.  Reliance  was
    placed on this report by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  informed  the
    Country Information Reports of 2015.

5.    It is not necessary for me to  set  out  the  guidance  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal ("UT") in MO.  Suffice  to  say,  for  the  purposes  of  this
    decision, that had the appellant established desertion and  or  illegal
    exit (or that he would be perceived as a deserter or as someone who had
    exited illegally) and the guidance in MO had been  followed,  the  only
    lawful conclusion would have been to allow the  appeal.   However,  the
    conclusions of  the  FFM  report  are  that  one  who  illegally  exits
    Eritrea/a draft evader/deserter who has paid 2 per cent income tax  and
    signed an apology letter would not face problems on return and that the
    authorities have become more  relaxed  and  understanding  towards  the
    young people who have left Eritrea.  Professor  Kibreab  has  distanced
    himself from the  report  since  publication  and  has  criticised  the
    findings therein.  It has been publicly criticised by others  including
    the UN, UNHCR and HRW. Professor Kibreab's position has been  disclosed
    by a number of  emails  between  him  and  the  DIS.  DIS  has  removed
    reference to him in the updated FFM report in December 2014.

6.    I was not assisted  at  the  hearing  before  me  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors who had failed to prepare a bundle  for  the  error  of  law
    hearing.  I was keen to ascertain  exactly  what  evidence  was  before
    Judge Holmes.  Mr Denholm was not able to assist  me.   The  respondent
    prepared a bundle for the hearing which purported to include a copy  of
    the appellant's bundle that was before the First-tier Tribunal  ("FtT")
    and this includes an index.  Mr Rawat indicated that  this  appellant's
    bundle had been served on  the  respondent,  but  he  had  no  personal
    knowledge of what was before the judge.

7.    I accept  that  the  bundle  replicates  that  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it is apparent  that  the  Judge  had  before  him  documents
    including the following:

    1.      A document entitled "Statement on EU Asylum and Aid  Policy  to
       Eritrea of 31 March 2015".   This  document  is  signed  by  various
       academics including Professor Kibreab and the authors indicate  that
       the FFM report has been the source of much  controversy  in  Denmark
       after Professor Kibreab declared that he had been misquoted and that
       although  the  report  has  not  been   officially   withdrawn   its
       conclusions are no longer used as a reference for policy in Denmark.

    2.      A document from Human Rights Concern Eritrea expressing concern
       about the findings of the FFM.

    3.      A report from HRW dated 17  December  2014  entitled  "Denmark:
       Eritrea Immigration Report  Deeply  Flawed  -  European  Governments
       Should Rely on UN Reports, Support UN Inquiry".  It is asserted that
       the FFM  report  is  largely  based  on  interviews  with  anonymous
       diplomatic and other sources in Eritrea and  contains  contradictory
       and speculative statements about Eritrea's human  rights  situation.
       It is asserted that the sources often qualify their statements about
       Eritrea's human rights noting that there is no independent access to
       detention centres and that the fate of people returned to Eritrea is
       unclear, but this is not reflected in the conclusions  of  the  FFM.
       It is asserted that there is no indication that the authors  of  the
       report interviewed victims or witnesses of human  rights  violations
       in Eritrea and a  prominent  Eritrean  academic  consulted  for  the
       report has publicly criticised it.

    4.      A press  release  from  DIS  of  9  December  2014  documenting
       communication between them and Professor Kibreab.  It is stated that
       DIS received an email from Professor Kibreab in which  he  expressed
       objections to the  report.   Corrections  and  additions  were  made
       following  this.   On  Tuesday  25  November  2014  the  report  was
       published and a copy sent to Professor Kibreab who sent DIS an email
       in  which  he  expressed  his  gratitude  for  a  well-written   and
       informative report.

            On Friday 28 November 2014 DIS received an email from Professor
       Kibreab in which he expressed  objections.   On  the  same  day  DIS
       received a copy of an email from Professor Kibreab  addressed  to  a
       number of professionals in which  he  claimed  that  DIS  attributed
       information to him which was taken out of context.

            The same day DIS asked Professor Kibreab to forward to them his
       objections but he did not responded to this.

    5.      A newspaper article  of  10  December  2014  entitled  "Denmark
       admits 'doubts' about Eritrea report" and in  this  document  it  is
       reported that DIS has been  under  heavy  fire  since  the  report's
       release and DIS now says  that  the  feedback  "raises  doubts"  and
       Eritreans can expect to be granted asylum in many cases.

            It is also stated that DIS  has  changed  its  mind  about  the
       conclusions of the much  criticised  report  after  the  report  was
       criticised, by its only named  source,  Professor  Kibreab.   It  is
       stated  that  according  to  DIS  sending  deserters  of   Eritrea's
       compulsory military service back home does present  a  danger  after
       all and the article states that in a press release DIS  stated  that
       the reaction to its report "raises doubts about  whether  there  are
       risks to people returning to Eritrea  after  illegally  leaving  the
       country and avoiding national service".

    6.      A document from UNHCR in which examples are given of where  the
       FFM report ascribes  statements  to  interlocutors  that  cannot  be
       traced to their statements. The report gives four examples of  this,
       one of which  relates  to  Professor  Kibreab.   It  refers  to  the
       following conclusion in the FFM report,

            "It is now possible for evaders and  deserters  who  have  left
       Eritrea illegally to return if they pay the  2%  tax  and  sign  the
       apology letter at an Eritrean embassy.  Kibreab was aware of  a  few
       deserters from the national service who  have  visited  Eritrea  and
       safely left the country again."

            The report states that according to the documented conversation
       that the authors of the FFM had with Professor Kibreab, he  followed
       this  sentence  with  the  following  qualification:    "These   are
       invariably people who have been naturalised in  their  countries  of
       asylum."  This qualification is not, according to UNHCR, included in
       the main text of the report on any of the three occasions  that  the
       statement is quoted.

            There are three other examples of  similar  problems  with  the
       report which do not relate to Professor Kibreab.

    7.      A printout from EIN summarising the UN human rights  report  on
       Eritrea which was published on 8 June 2015.   It  is  summarised  as
       follows, "UN finds Eritrea responsible  for  systematic,  widespread
       and  gross  human  rights  violations,   calls   for   international
       protection for those fleeing".  The summary by EIN  states,  amongst
       other things, that the FFM report followed  a  Fact-Finding  Mission
       undertaken due to a large increase in  Eritrean  asylum  seekers  in
       Denmark and that two Danish Immigration Service employees  who  were
       critical of the report resigned in protest.



The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

8.    Judge Holmes heard evidence from the appellant but  he  did  not  find
    him credible and he  rejected  his  evidence  that  he  illegally  left
    Eritrea and that he was a deserter.  He made findings at [43] - [55] of
    the decision and it is necessary for the purposes of this  decision  to
    replicate the following paragraphs:

        "43.     As set out above I have had regard to the country guidance
              case of MO, and  to  the  earlier  cases  of  MA  and  GM  in
              assessing the weight to give to the evidence  before  me.   I
              have also considered the Country Information reports of March
              2015, which rely (inter alia) upon letters from  the  British
              Embassy in Asmara dated 1 April 2010, and  11  October  2010,
              and, the Danish  FFM  report  of  December  2014  'Eritrea  -
              drivers and root causes of emigration, national  service  and
              the  possibility  of  return.'   The  Embassy  letters   were
              considered in MO, but plainly the Danish report is also based
              upon much more recent information from a range of  apparently
              reputable and reliable sources, who might be expected to have
              detailed and first hand knowledge of the information given to
              the authors of the Danish report.

        44.      I have considered the bundle of reports relied upon by the
              Appellant that offer criticisms of that Danish report from  a
              wide range of authors.  Much (although not all by any  means)
              of that criticism is dependent upon Professor  Kibreab's  own
              criticisms of the way the  information  he  provided  to  the
              Danish FFM has been handled.  The Appellant's bundle does not
              include the statement published by Professor Kibreab  on  the
              internet of 25 March 2015 which offers his own criticisms  of
              the Country Information reports of March 2015, but I am aware
              of its content.  The Appellant's bundle does not include  the
              press release issued by the Danish authorities of 9  December
              2014 detailing  their  chronology  of  their  exchanges  with
              Professor Kibreab, the occasions upon which he  agreed  notes
              of  meetings  and  conversations  held  with  him,  and   the
              occasions upon which he failed to respond to requests  to  do
              so, culminating in his email  of  25  November  2014  to  the
              Danish authorities congratulating  them  on  a  well  written
              informative report, so that it was only on 28  November  2014
              following its wider publication that Professor Kibreab sought
              to  distance  himself  from  that   report.    However   that
              information is set out in section 1.3 of the report,  and  of
              course the quotations of Professor  Kibreab's  evidence  have
              not been redacted from the report, but merely struck  through
              so that the reader may see in their proper context what  they
              were.  However much  of  what  is  now  struck  through,  and
              withdrawn by Professor Kibreab appears to be a repetition  of
              the evidence that he gave to the Upper Tribunal in MO [cf 24-
              39].

        45.      It seems to me clear that there is a wide ranging  dispute
              over the reliability of the Danish  FFM  report  of  December
              2014, and in turn over the  Country  Information  reports  of
              March 2015.  That dispute is centred upon  the  behaviour  of
              Professor  Kibreab  and  the  information  he  has  provided.
              Professor Kibreab has for many years held himself out  to  be
              an expert upon Eritrea and what occurs in that  country,  and
              to have been accepted as such by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Put
              simply, if he was accurately quoted in the Danish  report  as
              his own email of 28 November 2014 appears to accept  he  was,
              then he has  undertaken  a  rather  surprising  and  complete
              change of heart following the  international  publication  of
              that report.  That begs  a  number  of  questions  about  his
              reliability,  and  his  current  stance  towards  the  Danish
              report."

9.     The  Judge  found  that  the  applicant's  evidence  was  "inherently
    incredible" or "simply inconsistent" with the evidence reviewed  in  MA
    and in MO.  He went on to find that the appellant was  not  a  reliable
    witness in relation to any of the details of his account  and  that  he
    had  created  a  fictitious  account  of  his  experiences  and  family
    circumstances in Eritrea.

10.   The Judge concluded at [49] that the appellant accepts that he is  not
    a draft evader but it does not  follow  that  he  is  a  deserter  from
    national service or that he will be perceived as one on return and  the
    Judge concluded that he was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  a
    deserter.  He went on to conclude at [51] that he was not satisfied  in
    the light of either MO or the 2014 FFM report that there is a real risk
    that the appellant will be regarded upon return  as  someone  who  left
    Eritrea illegally, or as a deserter.

Error of Law

11.   Judge Holmes applied MO but found that MST was not at risk on  return.
     However, in assessing credibility he also considered  the  FFM  report
    and the position of Professor Kibreab.  The Judge's  conclusions  about
    this evidence, namely that Professor Kibreab was unreliable and that MO
    was out of date in the  light  of  the  fresh  evidence,  informed  his
    overall credibility assessment.  Whilst it is not possible to determine
    the extent of influence this had on his assessment of  credibility,  it
    is clear that the Judge attached significant  weight  to  the  evidence
    relating to communication between DIS and  Professor  Kibreab  and  the
    unfavourable view  he  held  about  Professor  Kibreab.   Although  the
    findings are framed  in  the  alternative  (see  [51]),  it  cannot  be
    discounted that had he taken a different view about the fresh evidence,
    he would have found the appellant credible.

12.   The Judge did not take into account all of the  evidence  in  reaching
    conclusions about the FFM report.  Whilst the Judge properly  concluded
    that not all the criticisms of the report depend on Professor  Kibreab,
    he did not adequately engage with the wider evidence.  There was before
    the Judge evidence from sources other than Professor Kibreab that  was,
    by any account, capable of undermining the FFM  report.   There  was  a
    failure to properly engage with this evidence (particularly the  highly
    critical evidence from UNHCR and the newspaper article of  10  December
    2014 in which it is asserted that that DIS had stated that the reaction
    to the report raises doubts about whether there  are  risks  to  people
    returning to Eritrea after illegally leaving the country  and  avoiding
    national service).  I am concerned that the Judge relied on a statement
    which was published by Professor Kibreab on the internet  on  25  March
    2015, but this was not produced by either party. I have not seen a copy
    of this statement.  It  is  not  apparent  what  is  contained  in  the
    statement and what weight the Judge attached to it.

13.   For the above reasons the FtT materially erred and  I  set  aside  the
    decision (in its entirety) to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

14.   This case will remain a Country Guidance case and is listed  for  four
    days on 25 April 2016. Following this the appellant's individual appeal
    will be determined.  The parties remain subject to directions issued by
    the Upper Tribunal.   The appellant remains the subject of an anonymity
    direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                             Date



Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam








                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00924/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 22nd January 2015                 |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before



                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER



                                   Between



                                     AA

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms A Benfield, counsel, instructed by Ziadies solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr M Shilliday, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           � CROWN COPYRIGHT 2016

                   DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS

1. The appellant is an Eritrean national  born  on  6th  September  1979  in
   Sudan. At age 3 months he moved to Saudi Arabia where  the  family  lived
   with a residence permit. He arrived in the UK  on  25th  March  2003.  He
   claimed asylum on 27th March 2003 and claimed his date of birth  was  6th
   September 1986. His claim was refused and his appeals to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal were dismissed. He  made  an  application
   for indefinite leave to remain on 15th September  2004.  On  17th  August
   2007 he was convicted of sexual assault at Isleworth crown Court  for  an
   offence committed on 8th September 2006. On 21st September 2007 an  order
   was made under s37 Mental Health Act 1983 authorising  his  detention  at
   Three Bridges Unit. An order was made under s41 adding a  restriction  to
   the Hospital Order  without  time  limit.   On  21st  February  2008  the
   appellant's representatives made submissions on Article 3 and  8  grounds
   requesting that they be treated as a fresh  claim  enabling  a  right  of
   appeal if refused. On 22nd July 2013  the  respondent  wrote  asking  for
   reasons why the appellant should not be deported and on 7th  May  2014  a
   decision to deport was made pursuant to s3(5)(a) Immigration Act 1971.

2. The appellant was released from Three Bridges Unit to Chalkhill  Facility
   on  10th  January  2014  following  a  Mental  Health  Tribunal  Hearing.
   Chalkhill Road is  a  supported  accommodation  placement  with  24  hour
   supervision.

3. The appellant has been  diagnosed  with  paranoid  schizophrenia  and  is
   medicated on 800mg Quetiapine per day.

4. The First-tier Tribunal panel found:

        a. the appellant has a history of dishonesty  in  relation  to  his
           asylum claim, including having initially  claimed  asylum  as  a
           minor, which he was not;
        b. his parents continue to live in Saudi Arabia; he has 2  brothers
           and a sister there, a sister in Canada;
        c.  there  is  a  house  in  Eritrea  formerly  belonging  to   his
           grandparents and it is likely that his parents spend  some  time
           in Eritrea;
        d. there is ample medical evidence, which is not doubted,  that  he
           suffers from chronic paranoid schizophrenia  that  is  currently
           controlled by medication; he is monitored at Chalkhill round the
           clock but is able to  go  into  the  community  during  the  day
           without supervision;
        e. his Quetiapine medication is administered by the deputy  Manager
           of Chalkhill; when he was attending to his medication himself he
           was not taking it correctly and his condition deteriorated;  the
           appellant is aware that he has to take his medication regularly;
        f. The panel referred to the findings of the Mental Health Tribunal
           that "there will clearly be risks in the community.  He  has  no
           close relatives in the UK other than an uncle in  Stockwell  who
           does  not  visit  him  and  he  has  no  close  friend  in   the
           community....He needs to continue with his  medication  to  stay
           well";
        g. With residential  supervision  and  regular  medication  he  has
           settled into his current accommodation and can be trusted in the
           community without supervision during the day;
        h. there is nothing  adverse  in  his  behaviour  since  the  index
           offence  in  September  2006;  he  had  previously  received   a
           reprimand for possessing an offensive weapon, cautions for theft
           of a bicycle and for possession of cannabis;
        i.  his criminal offence coupled with the need to supervise him and
           regularly administer medication in order to avoid a relapse with
           associated risks and the fact that he has  no  legal  basis  for
           being in the UK, make him a suitable case for deportation;


Error of Law

5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on four grounds:



        1. in assessing Article 8 the panel placed inappropriate weight  on
           the existence  of  the  extended  family  in  Eritrea,  if  they
           existed.
        2. The findings by the panel as regards the possibility  of  forced
           conscription were not supported by the evidence and amounted  to
           speculation
        3. The panel failed to give adequate weight to  the  report  of  Dr
           Jaques and to the evidence of the respondent in determining  the
           availability of adequate medication
        4. The panel failed to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance  No  2
           of 2010 as regards vulnerable witness.



6. The appellant was granted permission to appeal the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal in the following terms:



             ....The grounds of application argue that the panel  erred  in
             its assessment in relation to articles 3 and 8  of  the  human
             rights convention.

             The grounds relating to article 3  are  in  essence  that  the
             panel failed to properly assess why  the  appellant  would  be
             regarded  as  medical  unfit  and  therefore   exempted   from
             conscription into the Eritrea military.

             Although I am satisfied that the panel had in  mind  paragraph
             11.05 of  the  4  September  COIS  report  (which  is  in  the
             respondent's  bundle),  it  is  not  clear  that   the   panel
             considered  it  in  the  context  of  paragraph  28.15,  which
             indicates that mental health  issue  go  unrecognised.  It  is
             arguable that the panel's  conclusion,  which  is  reached  by
             inferring that a mental health diagnosis in the  UK  would  be
             sufficient to establish that the appellant is medically  unfit
             to serve in  Eritrea,  is  legally  defective  because  it  is
             applying western norms into a wholly  different  cultural  and
             legal context.

             Although I am less persuaded  by  the  arguments  relating  to
             article 8, where the challenge is in  effect  to  whether  the
             panel properly carried out a balancing  exercise,  as  I  have
             found an arguable legal error, I will leave those issues  open
             for the Upper Tribunal to decide.

7. Before me the  appellant  withdrew  reliance  on  the  fourth  ground  of
   appeal. The appeal before me was thus on Article  8,  Article  3  (forced
   conscription) and article 3 (health).

8. Dr Jaques in his report  stated  that  the  drugs  available  in  Eritrea
   (Risperidone, Fluphenazine, Haloperidol and Chlorpromazine),  information
   as to which had been received and produced by the respondent in  response
   to a Country of Information request, are not appropriate options for  the
   appellant's treatment. The Deputy  manager  gave  evidence  that  if  the
   appellant were subjected to enforced  removal  there  would  be  a  rapid
   deterioration in his mental health and stability. She said that within  a
   couple of weeks there would be symptoms.

9. The panel found

             76. There is some treatment available in Eritrea, though it is
             clearly inferior to the treatment the  appellant  receives  in
             the  United  Kingdom.  It  does  not  appear  that  the   drug
             Quetiapine  is  available  in  Eritrea.  Risperidone  may   be
             available but is unsuitable. ....it is for the  individual  to
             prove that medical treatment or care will not be available  to
             him in the receiving country. In this case we do  not  have  a
             complete picture of the drugs available in Eritrea. It has not
             been shown to our satisfaction that there is no suitable  drug
             available for the appellant.

             77. We do not consider that suicide is a real risk....

             78. We do not find that the high threshold in Article 3  cases
             is met in this case.

             79. It is common ground that the appellant is of  conscription
             age and he might be eligible to be conscripted if he satisfies
             the age criteria and is 'medically  fit'.  In  this  case  the
             appellant is  not  medically  fit,  and  the  appellant  would
             presumably have with him evidence  of  his  treatment  in  the
             United Kingdom to establish that he is not fit.  The  argument
             that the appellant might be  conscripted  anyway  because  the
             authorities do not  understand  his  illness  or  because  the
             appellant might present as a healthy young man seems to us  to
             be complete speculation. The fact is that the appellant is not
             fit to serve in the Armed Forces.  We  do  not  consider  that
             conscription is a real risk in his case.

10. The OGN confirms that Eritreans, who satisfy the age  criteria  and  are
   medically fit, are  subject  to  conscription.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
   determination is predicated upon firstly  the  appellant  being  able  to
   state what his medical condition is, secondly that his statement will  be
   accepted as a correct indication that he is not  medically  fit,  thirdly
   that the medical documents he produces from the UK  in  English  will  be
   accepted as indicative that he is medically unfit and fourthly  it  is  a
   fact that he is not medically fit because he is not. The medical evidence
   before the First-tier Tribunal panel included  evidence  that  whilst  on
   medication and complicit he presents in such a way that  he  is  able  to
   operate within the community without difficulty. He would not present  as
   medically unfit. The medical evidence was also that the  drugs  available
   in Eritrea were not appropriate for the appellant, that he was unable  to
   self medicate correctly, that a failure to medicate would lead to a rapid
   deterioration (in the region of two weeks)  which  had  consequences  not
   only for  his  personal  presentation  but  also  in  terms  of  aberrant
   behaviour.  The background country material indicates a serious  shortage
   of treatment available for mental health problems. It was  the  Secretary
   of State's evidence as to the drugs available; to extrapolate  from  that
   evidence that the appellant had failed  to  prove  there  were  no  other
   suitable drugs available was  not  based  on  a  realistic  premise.  The
   Secretary of State made an enquiry through her  own  respected  channels,
   disclosed that evidence and there was undisputed  medical  evidence  that
   the drugs were not appropriate for this appellant.  It  is  difficult  to
   understand on what basis the First-tier Tribunal were able to  find  that
   the appellant's ability to describe his illness would  be  sufficient  to
   enable him to be found medically unfit. There is no  background  material
   or authoritative case law that  sets  out  how  medical  assessments  are
   undertaken, whether information provided in English is taken  account  of
   or what level of incapacity is deemed sufficient to prevent conscription.
   The First-tier Tribunal did not engage with  what  would  happen  at  the
   airport on arrival:  if  questioned  immediately  on  arrival  he  would,
   because he would be on his supervised medication,  present  as  medically
   fit despite explaining he had serious mental  health  problems.  If  that
   resulted  in  him  being  immediately  conscripted,  there  has  been  no
   engagement with whether it is possible to subsequently  be  examined  for
   fitness  and  how  that  occurs.  There  was  no  engagement   with   the
   consequences to the appellant if  he  were  conscripted,  was  unable  to
   access adequate medication and his behaviour deteriorated  and  what  the
   consequences of that would be.

11. These are not, on  the  basis  of  the  unchallenged  medical  evidence,
   speculative assumptions as to deterioration. The failure  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal to make findings on treatment on arrival, whether he  would
   be detained and consequential treatment is an error of law. Whilst it may
   have been difficult to reach conclusions based on the evidence presented,
   there has been no proper engagement with the matrix of factors applicable
   to this appellant.

12. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its assessment of the Article  3
   risk on forced conscription grounds.

13.  In so far as the Article 3 health findings  are  concerned  the  First-
   tier Tribunal erred in finding that the appellant  had  failed  to  prove
   there was no appropriate medication available. There was no assertion  by
   the respondent that there were  other  drugs  available;  the  respondent
   relied upon the drug availability  she  had  ascertained  was  available.
   Those were not appropriate for the appellant. The tribunal made  findings
   that there was a family home in Eritrea and  it  was  possible  that  his
   parents spend time there and that there was some, albeit inferior, mental
   health treatment available. Although referring to relevant case law,  the
   First-tier Tribunal did not engage  with  the  specific  facts  for  this
   appellant  namely  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  there  were  any
   appropriate drugs; that although there may be a family home there was  no
   finding on the quality or quantity of family care that may be  available;
   what the consequences  would  be  for  the  appellant  given  the  likely
   deterioration in health. Matters relating to conscription would  also  be
   factors to be taken into account. Those  are  all  matters  that  require
   specific consideration in terms of the threshold.  It  may  be  that  the
   applicant does not meet the very high threshold required but  the  First-
   tier Tribunal erred in law in failing to consider these issues.

14. In so far as Article 8 is concerned  the  grounds  relied  upon  are  in
   essence disagreements with the weight placed upon various elements of the
   appellant's evidence. The decision reached by the First-tier Tribunal was
   well within the range of decisions open to it. There is no error  of  law
   in their Article 8 decision.

15. In conclusion therefore I am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   erred in law in its decision on article 3 both in  terms  of  the  health
   issue and conscription. I set aside that decision to be remade.

16. On conclusion of the hearing before me on 22nd January 2014 I  canvassed
   with the parties the future conduct if I were to find  an  error  of  law
   such that the decision is set aside.  It  was  agreed  that  the  resumed
   hearing would be limited to submissions only but that both  parties  were
   at liberty to file and serve such further evidence as they sought to rely
   upon.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law in  so  far  as  the  decision  on
    Article 3 is concerned.

    I set aside the decision dismissing the appeal on  Article  3  grounds;
    the decision on Article 8 and asylum grounds stands.

      Consequential Directions

    The resumed hearing will be listed for submissions only.  Both  parties
    have leave to file and serve such further evidence as they seek to rely
    upon; service to be no later than  10  days  before  the  date  of  the
    resumed hearing. Both parties are directed to file  skeleton  arguments
    no later than 3 days before the resumed hearing.

      Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.  I  was
    not asked to make such an order and am not aware of any reason why  one
    should be made.





                                             Date 9th March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker










                                APPENDIX III

EVIDENCE OF PROFESSOR KIBREAB (PK)

Report on AA, 23 September 2015

 1. The first report prepared by PK dated 23  September  2015  was  at  the
    request of AA's representatives.  In addition to a number of  questions
    about country conditions in Eritrea the report addressed  a  number  of
    points concerning medical issues.

 2.  PK  described  his  initial  involvement  in  the  DFFM  Report,   his
    disassociation from it and the subsequent criticisms  he  made  in  the
    public realm.  With reference to  the  critique  he  wrote  immediately
    after the report was released,  he  reiterated  that  he  believed  the
    conclusions of the report were what the DIS wanted  to  establish  from
    the outset.  He deprecated  the  DFFM  for  wrongly  assuming  that  no
    empirical knowledge on Eritrea  could  be  generated  without  visiting
    Eritrea.  He found it unsatisfactory that apart from  himself  and  Ato
    Kebede the DFFM Report does not identify any of its sources.   He  said
    that the interlocutors who were representatives  of  western  countries
    "have clear vested interests in terms of stemming the flow".   He  said
    the DIS team had distorted most of the information he provided.

 3. PK said that despite the DFFM's evident flaws the UK Home Office  based
    most of its guidance on this report.  He cited the  IAGCI  critique  of
    the DFFM Report and its recommendation that the two March  CIGs  should
    no longer be used pending a review.  He referred to his publication  on
    25 March 2015 of a commentary "Some Reflections on the UK  Home  Office
    Country Information Guidance Eritrea: National (incl. Military  Service
    and Illegal Exit), March 2015".  PK acknowledges that the two September
    CIGs, whilst still referring to the DFFM, draw  on  it  in  combination
    with other country reports and was more nuanced  and  covers  the  2015
    UNCOI Report.

 4. PK then addresses the direction of national service, taking issues with
    the Home Office position that it is generally between  eighteen  months
    and four years, the medical exception.  In relation to  the  return  of
    Eritreans, PK said the Eritrean authorities  would  know  if  some  had
    exited illegally and ill-treatment may result.

Report by PK, 29 February 2016

 5. After outlining his qualifications and experience, PK reproduces almost
    word for word the  contents  of  his  Report  for  AA,  mentioning  his
    criticisms of the DFFM for  its  "unsound  methodology  and  unreliable
    sources" and distortion of information he  provided;  stating  that  he
    never conveyed that draft evaders and deserters are no longer routinely
    subjected to severe  punishment;  that  he  had  a  "dense  network  of
    informants inside Eritrea" built up over time.  In very  similar  terms
    to his report on AA, he addressed the various responses that  had  been
    made to the DFFM Report and the UK Home Office's heavy reliance  on  it
    for their March 2015 CIGs, the subsequent critique  by  the  IAGCI  and
    Professor Campbell of these documents, and  his  recognition  that  the
    September CIGs were more nuanced.  He reiterated that national  service
    remains indefinite.

 6. PK then turned to further instructions he had received  asking  him  to
    comment further on other "wider" issues which the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    directed to be addressed.

 7. As regards illegal exit and its consequences he said  he  rejected  the
    assumption that those who left Eritrea illegally  no  longer  face  any
    risks of persecution.  He considered this assumption  to  underpin  the
    DFFM Report and the Home Office CIGs including the September 2015  CIGs
    which in common with the March ones he found  "uncharacteristically  of
    lower standard and devoid of  evidence".   He  commended  the  Landinfo
    Report of March 2015 which had warned about the problem experienced  in
    obtaining information about  Eritrea  and  the  likelihood  of  "round-
    tripping" or fake confirmations.

 8. PK stated that the overwhelming majority of those who leave the country
    do  so  illegally  because  the  issuance  of  exit  visas  is   highly
    restricted.  Having cited the categories of persons cited in  the  EASO
    Report of 2015, PK  said  that  with  the  exception  of  children  the
    categories were consistent with those he had identified to the Tribunal
    in MA in 2007.  His own findings showed that  the  Eritrean  government
    denies exit visas to children between five and  seven.   He  considered
    that the category of former freedom fighters and their  family  members
    was too broad as it was really confined to those  enjoying  connections
    to the President and his inner circle.  The same was true of  authority
    representatives.

 9. In his conclusions PK added that whilst category (iv) of MO  (a  person
    declared by an official committee to be exempt from national service on
    medical grounds) remained  the  same,  the  government  had  introduced
    stricter controls for MO category (v) (those seeking medical  treatment
    abroad).   Owing  to  the  need  for  specialised  skills  required  by
    government departments, there are people who can get visas for  skilled
    work, but the process of vetting  based  on  loyalty  has  become  more
    severe.  The number that leave for the purposes of further training has
    diminished considerably because of the numbers leaving  unlawfully  and
    those who leave lawfully but fail to return.  The repressive nature  of
    the regime in Eritrea made it impossible to document what  happened  to
    failed asylum seekers, but it was  "safer  to  assume"  that  deserters
    would be detained incommunicado indefinitely.  The only  evidence-based
    case  he  knew  of  concerned  the  posting  on  the  Eritrean  website
    assena.com on 16 February 2016 of the case of Berhane  Embaye  who  had
    fled to South Sudan whilst serving in the army and on  being  "cajoled"
    by the government to return, disappeared soon after his arrival.   This
    action, PK considered  was  "typical  of  the  treatment  the  Eritrean
    authorities accord to those whom  they  suspect  of  disloyalty".   The
    Eritrean government's claim that only  those  who  did  not  commit  an
    offence are exonerated mean that only  those  who  left  legally  after
    being demobilised are unlikely to  face  punishment.   Payment  of  the
    diaspora  tax  does  not  immunise  those  who  exited  illegally  from
    punishment.  The reason why  the  Eritrean  government  introduced  the
    repentance letter was to  discourage  exiles  from  joining  opposition
    groups in the diaspora: it has no other significance.  It amounts to  a
    willingness to accept punishment.

10. As regards those Eritreans who  were  returning  to  visit,  they  were
    naturalised and the Eritrean authorities did not detain them except  in
    exceptional cases.

11. As regards exemptions, he considered there had been little or no change
    since MA and the numbers were likely to be insignificantly small.

12. PK said it was possible for those who left Eritrea illegally to  obtain
    an Eritrean passport, although many were reluctant to do so.

13. There was no evidence, PK said, that the Eritrean government has a more
    "relaxed"  attitude  towards  those  returning  to  Eritrea  who   left
    illegally.  His statement to the DFFM did not state this.

14. Those who left Eritrea illegally but return when they are  below  draft
    age will be required to do national service but are  unlikely  to  face
    other consequences.  Those who return after reaching draft age are also
    unlikely to face other consequences unless their reason  for  departure
    was to avoid conscription.

15. In the main body of his report PK said he considered that the  Eritrean
    authorities still treated the benchmark  age  for  imposing  exit  visa
    restrictions as eight years old, but in his conclusions he said the age
    was now reduced to five years.

16. As regards adults, PK considered that there was no  longer  a  54  year
    limit for men and 47 age limit for women.  It was now 70 for men and 60
    for women following the introduction of the people's militia,  although
    it was very unlikely that women over the age of 47 would be required to
    serve in the national service.  Both men  and  women  in  the  people's
    militia can apply for permission to leave  the  country  through  their
    unit commanders.

17. As regards the question whether the requirement to  undertake  national
    service put the person at risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm,  PK
    agreed with the characterisation by the ILO that the Eritrean  national
    service regime involved forced labour.  The hundreds  of  thousands  of
    conscripts are seldom involved  in  military-related  activities,  most
    being involved in manual labour  on  construction  sites,  agricultural
    farms, housing projects belonging to the government  and  the  PFDG  as
    well as senior military officers.   Many  also  work  in  the  civilian
    sector of the administration.  A  person  subjected  to  forced  labour
    against  his/her  will  under  the  menace  of  severe  punishment   is
    undoubtedly suffering persecutory treatment.

18.  PK  said  conditions  in  prisons  and  detention  sites  were  severe
    everywhere, most taking place in shipping containers and/or underground
    dungeons.  Common problems mentioned by former detainees are  beatings,
    overcrowding, lack of sanitary facilities and shortage of  food,  water
    and ventilation.

19. PK considered that the open  sources  and  data  gathered  from  former
    conscripts  indicate  that  desertion  is  severely  punished  by   the
    government,  there  are  no  rules  applied  consistently.   Given  the
    vindictive nature of the Eritrean authorities they are likely to punish
    re-conscripted deserters and draft evaders severely.

20. PK gave answers about exemptions  from  being  conscripted  for  former
    liberation fighters, those declared unfit.  He was  adamant  there  had
    been no demobilisation for those within the age  of  conscription.   As
    regards the people's militia, it runs parallel to the national  service
    and all citizens between 18 and 70 are eligible to join.   Members  are
    required to  receive  military  training  and  carry  weapons  and  are
    required to do unpaid manual work in development projects of  different
    kinds.

21. Although the government's plan is to recruit throughout the country, so
    far only some regions such as the  Central,  Southern  and  Anseba  are
    affected.  Those who refuse to respond to the call for service can face
    serious consequences such as loss of  ration  cards  and  imprisonment.
    There are no exemption categories.  The consequences for those  fleeing
    the country to avoid the people's militia and then returning are likely
    to be the same, "but I am speculating".

22. Some of PK's conclusions have already been noted.   His  two  principal
    conclusions are that:

          " There is no evidence to suggest that the  Eritrean  authorities'
          hostility to those who  desert  from  or  evade  the  Eritrean  NS
          [national  service]  and  subsequently  flee   the   country   has
          diminished"

        and

        " In light of the restrictive categories of those allowed to  leave
          Eritrea lawfully, the great majority will be perceived  as  having
          left illegally.  Save for very limited exceptions, returnees  will
          face serious harm.  This will not be avoided by the payment  of  a
          2%  tax  and/or  letter  of  apology.   Rhetoric  notwithstanding,
          nothing has changed on the ground."

23. The professor's report was subsequently modified in minor respects on 4
    April 2016.

Reflections on Home Office FFM, 21 April 2016

24. PK has also provided a critique of the Home Office FFM based on  visits
    in February 2016.  He takes issue with the presence of a representative
    of the  MoFA  in  most  of  the  interviews  and  the  presence  of  an
    interpreter provided by the MOFA  during  the  interview  of  returnees
    interviewed in Tesseney.  He considered  that  a  good  number  of  the
    interviewees had to be viewed as pro-government sources unlikely to  be
    objective.  The fact that these interviewees all seemed "to  sing  from
    the same hymn sheet" reinforced that view.  He considered  the  quality
    of the three anonymous interviewees was "indisputably far  superior  to
    any other data the FFM gathered during the mission".  PK then  comments
    on the contents of a number of interviews, notably  agreeing  with  the
    British  Ambassador  on  some  points  but  not  on  others.   He   was
    particularly disparaging about the evidence given by the  head  of  the
    government's political officer, Yemane Gebreab.

25. In the course of dealing with some of the UKFFM interviews,  PK  offers
    further evidence of his own.  For example  PK  said  it  has  been  the
    policy of the Eritrean government for some time that, if a  person  who
    lives abroad and is within the age of conscription returns  to  Eritrea
    and stay for a year or  more,  he  will  be  required  to  do  national
    service.  He said he knew of several people affected by this policy who
    routinely leave the country for short periods and return with stamps on
    their passports of foreign countries  to  show  they  have  been  away.
    "This may also be  seen  in  the  exit  visa  issued  by  the  Eritrean
    authorities when they leave the country".

26. In reaction to the UNMS interview, PK considers that those  going  back
    to Eritrea on holiday "is a small proportion  which  is  close  to  the
    regime".

27. PK concludes that in the absence of verified data and in the  light  of
    the government's prevailing dismal human rights record and  the  dearth
    of political and economic reform, it is safe to assume that  those  who
    fled  illegally  and  are  forcibly  deported  would  face  persecutory
    treatment.

28. It was PK's view that the data in the notes  of  the  FFM  indisputably
    indicates that the national service is devoid of uniform  rules,  which
    is also consistent with the findings  of  his  own  studies  over  many
    years.  He was critical, however, of the virtual  silence  in  the  FFM
    notes about the prevalence or  absence  of  corruption.   He  found  it
    difficult to  accept  that  those  working  for  embassies  and  mining
    companies were 100 per cent demobilised.  Round-ups and  the  shoot  to
    kill policy continue.

PK's answers to written questions submitted on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
State

29. In reply to written questions from the respondent seeking clarification
    of aspects of his report, PK sent his answers in April 2016.  He  noted
    and regretted that his initial report did not conform in  all  respects
    with the Practice Direction of the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  of
    the First-tier and Upper Tribunal, 13  November  2014.   He  sought  to
    clarify various aspects of  the  use  of  sources  and  informants  who
    included refugees and asylum seekers, the latter whose information  was
    likely to be more up-to-date.  PK accepted that when the DIS  team  had
    asked him for feedback on the draft DFFM they  had  sent  him,  he  had
    emailed "Thank you for the well-written report"  without  even  opening
    the email attachment.  He was under great pressure  running  three  MSc
    programmes at the time.  He believed that the head of the DFFM had then
    agreed to give him time to send corrections to  what  he  had  by  then
    learnt were distortions.   However,  Mr  Glynstrup  then  emailed  back
    saying they were going public immediately.

30. PK said his criticisms of the DFFM Report were of the main body of  the
    report but the problem remained with the interview material namely that
    Messrs Olsen and Olesen  had  cast  doubt  on  whether  the  underlying
    interviews were themselves reliable, given the use of leading questions
    and Mr Glynstrup's fixation with achieving a specific result.



PK: Oral Evidence

31. Much of PK's oral evidence covered the  same  grounds  as  his  written
    evidence.  He explained that he had prepared his report for  AI  before
    he was aware it would be used for the country guidance case; he did not
    learn he had been jointly instructed by all three appellants  until  23
    January 2016.  In April he made revisions in his February  2016  Report
    so as to add a 'Conclusions' section.  He accepted that this had led to
    him omitting paragraph 1.5; he did not know how this had happened.   He
    accepted he should have made an effort in his February Report  to  cite
    the correct Tribunal Practice Directions.

32. PK said that when concluding his research in 2013 he assembled his  190
    respondents by using the snowball or "chain  referral"  technique.   It
    was indicative rather than conclusive but  one  could  rely  on  it  if
    properly carried out.  The limitation is that you cannot get as diverse
    a group of respondents but he had a built-in method for correcting this
    by identifying multiple sources (using different  ethnic  groups  etc).
    He accepted that if not used with care this technique could  result  in
    "roundtripping".

33. Asked about the extent that his research on Eritrea was up to date,  PK
    said he had conducted about 20 interviews since 2012 and a further four
    interviews with Eritrean sources since 3 March 2016. These 24 came from
    different backgrounds; they were  all  people  who  had  fled  national
    service; all were under 30, some women, some Christians; some  who  had
    fled as recently as end of 2015 and two who had fled in 2016.  He  gave
    details of two  examples.   As  regards  the  three  returnees  he  had
    referred to in his DFFM interview he said he knew  one  personally  who
    had been in national service for more than five years and  was  a  very
    active supporter of the government. He had met him through  his  cousin
    in 2013.  He went back in  2013.  He  had  good  connections  with  the
    government and was an  active  participant  in  the  ruling  party.  He
    understood he had got clearance from the Eritrean embassy. He  did  not
    discuss with him whether he paid the diaspora tax. The second person he
    had found out about through a friend and he too was very active in  the
    ruling party. He did not know him personally.  He  had  no  discussions
    about the diaspora tax. The third person was related to a friend of his
    and he had been granted asylum in the UK He was actively involved  with
    the Eritrean embassy. His uncle was a prominent freedom fighter.

34. Mr Rawat asked was it  unusual  to  have  conversations  with  Eritrean
    people about the topic of Eritreans going back to Eritrea. PK  said  it
    was one of the most contested issues people talked about. Most objected
    that it undermined the opposition parties,  as  it  would  provoke  the
    reaction, "If they are safe there, what are they doing  here?"  It  was
    seen as undermining the opportunity of others to be granted status.

35. PK said he had read the new UNCOI Report and had noted its reliance  on
    fresh evidence.

36. Mr Rawat turned to the subject of the  DFFM  Report:  PK  said  he  was
    interviewed by the DIS researchers in September 2014  -  Mr  Olsen  and
    Olesen came to see him twice.  They sent him their draft transcript and
    he approved amendments on 14 November 2014. When he was  approached  by
    Olsen and Olesen he was happy to cooperate as he considered that  their
    concern was to investigate the human rights situation  in  Eritrea  and
    they were very honourable.  Mr Rawat asked him why he had written  that
    he had felt "used and betrayed" when he himself had approved  the  note
    of his interview.

37. He said that his statement about a relaxation  in  the  policy  of  the
    Eritrean government towards returns had been taken out of  context  and
    cited three times in the 20 page main body  of  the  report  (see  para
    [175] above). He had not had time to check through any  of  the  report
    because he had heavy academic commitments at the time. He had told  the
    head of the mission that he could not comment quickly yet they had gone
    ahead. At that time he did not know that Olesen had resigned and so was
    unaware he would not be given more time. He had made a  mistake.   When
    he had emailed the head of mission on 25 November 2014 that the  report
    was "well-written and informed" he had not read  it.   He  conceded  he
    should not have done that. The  DIS  head  of  the  mission  had  taken
    advantage  of  him.  But  he  had  a  clear  conscience  and  all   COI
    professionals had supported him.  Mr Rawat asked whether he believed he
    could give independent evidence when he was so intimately connected  to
    the event surrounding the DFFM and  when  he  described  himself  as  a
    victim of unethical conduct and someone who had  been  "betrayed".   PK
    said his ethical standards had been untarnished throughout. He believed
    he had been objective. He had  never  been  emotionally  involved.  The
    report ended up being discredited and that was nothing to do  with  his
    intervention.

38. PK said that he accepted that fact-finding missions were in  themselves
    a valid type of exercise in the context of Eritrea so long as they  did
    not seek to synthesise and analyse the date.  He  applauded  them  (the
    FFMs) for trying different sources.

39. When asked whether he thought that the DFFM was  completely  flawed  or
    whether it was possible to differentiate between the first 20 odd pages
    and  the  sections  which  simply  gave  the  texts  of  the  interview
    transcripts, PK said that from the statements of Olsen and  Olesen  the
    contents of some of these transcripts  may have been  affected  by  the
    methods used by their boss. The section of the report  which  describes
    the sources and what they said is contaminated and the quality  of  the
    data effected.  There is generally no harm in  FFMs.  They  are  not  a
    complete waste of time, but  there  are  caveats  about  anonymity  and
    sources.  The Danish FFM is exceptional and he would not put the  UKFFM
    in the same category.

40. He agreed  that  the  Martin  Plaut  article  was  not  an  independent
    "analysis" (as he PK had described it in his report) since it  was  cut
    and pasted from the HRW press release.  He had used other  sources  and
    had not relied just on this source.

41. Mr Rawat questioned why PK  had  not  mentioned  in  his  'Reflections'
    document the Home Office response to the IAGCI Report  criticising  the
    March and September CIGs.  PK said he knew of its existence but saw  no
    reason to cite it. Mr Rawat asked PK if he did not  consider  that  his
    duty as an expert was to mention both sides to any issue.  He  said  he
    agreed with Professor Campbell. He read a lot when he  wrote  a  report
    and only referred to other reports when he considered it  relevant.  He
    did not change his mind after he read the Home Office response.  He did
    not consider it necessary to reflect on the Home Office view  regarding
    use of anonymous sources.

42. Asked about the methodology used by the UNCOI in its  first  Report  of
    2015, PK said he did not think the degree of anonymity  was  excessive,
    but agreed that as a result very little  was  known  about  them.   For
    Eritreans there was always anxiety  that  the  government  surveillance
    would  make  them  identifiable   and   their   families   could   face
    repercussions.  He did not know how the informants were selected.

43. PK was asked a number of questions about  the  methodology  of  the  AI
    'Just Deserters Report'.  He could not say if the  "range  of  sources"
    this report drew on  were  obtained  through  use  of  the  snowballing
    technique.  He accepted that  it  appeared  that  the  'Just  Deserters
    Report' had two persons (Filmon and Yonas) saying identical things, but
    it was possible it was two persons who fled together or  had  identical
    experiences or who had chosen to  say  something  jointly  or  who  had
    rehearsed the same story.  If it had been anyone else than AI he  would
    have been concerned there had been error.  It was incompatible with his
    knowledge of AI that they would make such an error.  He accepted  there
    were two other passages, virtually the same from two persons  Elan  and
    Danait. He accepted  that  if  AI  had  annexed  transcripts  of  these
    interviews it would have been possible to check.  He did not think this
    cast doubts on other parts of the 'Just Deserters  Report'.   He  would
    give the benefit of the doubt.  He knew Eritrea and what was  described
    here matched his knowledge of the country.  Generally  the  report  was
    accurate about the country. He  did  not  need  to  rely  for  his  own
    assessment on the 'Just Deserters Report' in any  event.   He  counter-
    checked with other sources.

44. PK said he accepted that AI's decision to rely  on  the  evidence  from
    asylum seekers meant that questions had to be asked about any  possible
    incentive to exaggerate, but that did  not  mean  that  their  evidence
    could not be relied on.  He preferred to use people with status.  AI do
    not have to apply a scientific method at all times.  If Mr Rawat wished
    to challenge the AI evidence he should ask them questions.

45. Asked why he had not mentioned the changes in age for  lawful  exit  in
    his February Report (these were added in the April revision),  PK  said
    he probably made the changes as a result of the research he did.  Asked
    why the only source he cited for this change was a  book  published  in
    2013 (The African Garrison State) which was not in any  event  sourced,
    PK then said that it was not the only source but  there  were  internet
    sources and that he had relatives in Eritrea who were over 70  carrying
    guns.  He referred to oral communications and common knowledge which he
    accepted that he had taken for granted and accepted that this  was  not
    "right." It was put to  PK  that  not  only  was  the  source  he  used
    inadequate, but he had had failed to mention the source in his February
    2016 Report and he was unable to give an explanation about this.

46. PK said he had other sources, e.g. the BBC.  He agreed he  should  have
    given a more recent  source.   He  had  had  oral  communications  with
    several persons in Eritrea that the age limit  for  women  was  now  60
    years because of the people's militia.  He had  friends  and  relatives
    affected by this.  It was common knowledge.  The fact that a person was
    not actually engaged in the people's militia did not exempt people.  It
    would only be a matter of time before they would be asked  to  carry  a
    gun.   He had heard Eritreans talking about the  possibility  of  women
    under 60 being granted an exit visa, but he was  not  aware  of  anyone
    himself.  He was not aware that  Landinfo  had  said  that  one  factor
    affecting whether men and women aged under 70 and 60 respectively could
    get an exit visa was whether they had done mandatory weapons  training.
    In any event, being able to apply  and  being  able  to  get  were  two
    different things. He would not rule out someone being able to obtain  a
    visa because there is a lot of corruption and it is arbitrary.

47. Asked why if he considered the USSD Report should be seen  as  relevant
    in relation to the age limit for children (five) he did not agree  with
    its April 2016 assessment that women over 30 could get exit  visas,  PK
    said that was not his information.  He  had  recently  had  to  help  a
    female relative in Eritrea over 40 years old and she had been told  she
    was not eligible because she was potentially liable  for  the  people's
    militia. He accepted that this amounted to evidence of one  person  and
    that he was generalising. He did not mention this communication in  his
    report. Although the people's militia  was  part-time  you  had  to  be
    available.  His aunt is in the people's militia and is not engaged on a
    full-time basis but has to be available whenever there  is  a  specific
    task and can be called up at any time.  He said he had never  found  it
    necessary to investigate the matter.  To say the age  limit  for  women
    was now 60 was not a "guestimate".  He did not agree with Mr  Bozzini's
    2012 analysis  that  women  when  they  reach  27  can  regularise  and
    demobilise.  People with connections might be able to achieve this, but
    it was not policy. He did not agree with the respondent's case that the
    upper age for women doing  compulsory  national  service  had  in  fact
    decreased to age 30.

48. Asked further about his treatment of the lower age limit for  children,
    PK accepted he had said eight years in  one  place,  between  five  and
    seven in another and was now saying five years.  "We  are  not  dealing
    with exact  figures  in  Eritrea".   The  USSD  Report  used  the  term
    "generally".  He considered it was appropriate to say between  five  to
    eight or eight.  Leaving aside the USSD Report which  did  not  cite  a
    source or sources, PK agreed the only source for the figure of five was
    the immigration officials interviewed by the UKFFM in February 2016.

49. Mr Rawat asked PK what  his  sources  were  for  saying  in  his  April
    'Conclusions' section  that  the  Eritrean  government  had  adopted  a
    stricter approach to exit visas.  PK said this is  what  he  had  heard
    from friends and relatives.  His information was  just  anecdotal.   He
    did not accept that this position was inconsistent  with  his  evidence
    about Eritreans travelling to Sudan for medical treatment. An exit visa
    is not needed to travel to Sudan  for  those  ineligible  for  national
    service or the people's militia. He did not agree with the evidence  of
    the immigration officer interviewed by the UK FFM about  this.   People
    needing medical treatment can travel to Sudan there  being  many  buses
    making the journey.  "Were the people on these buses confined to  those
    over 70 or under [five]?" asked Mr Rawat; PK said the visa  regime  was
    stricter for those affected by national service or people's militia. He
    expanded on this when questioned by Ms Dubinsky.  He said that to go to
    Uganda or Kenya a person needed an exit visa, but for  Sudan  a  travel
    permit would suffice. The criteria were the same for those  within  the
    national service age ranges, but outside of  these,  e.g.  for  elderly
    people it was much easier. A person who goes to Sudan without a  travel
    permit would be  regarded  as  having  left  illegally.  He  thought  a
    significant part of the movement between Eritrea  and  Sudan  comprised
    older people including former professionals who had  established  their
    own businesses and had left for South Sudan but still had  family  ties
    back in Eritrea, they could get documents.

50. The bench asked PK to expand on his evidence about travel to  and  from
    Sudan in light of his earlier evidence that there was presently  a  lot
    of traffic between the two countries. Were  those  on  the  buses  just
    people under five and over 70, he was asked. He said that  usually  the
    people would be older, they would be holding certificates from the  war
    of independence and notes from a doctor;  but  all  people  would  need
    travel permits. The border is very porous and people can  easily  cross
    and that is why so many people leave illegally. Asked if there would be
    a lot of checking at the border exit points to ensure  those  going  to
    Sudan were not evading or deserting  national  service,  he  said  that
    legal exits could only take place in particular places. Check points on
    the border are very limited.

51. Asked whether  he  had  any  view  of  the  accuracy  of  the  Eritrean
    government estimate that between 60,000  and  80,000  exit  visas  were
    issued per year, he said the range given did not suggest these  figures
    were based on fact but it was not within his knowledge.

52. PK said the  suggestion  in  some  diplomatic  sources  that  returning
    Eritreans used Eritrean passports was misplaced.

53. Asked about his citation that fewer students could now get exit  visas,
    PK said this was his observation on the consequences of more  Eritreans
    leaving the country and the introduction of people's  militia  service.
    In 2014 the government had realised the scale of  the  numbers  leaving
    was untenable. One of his sources was awate.com, which  is  run  by  an
    opposition group and he considered credible; but there were many  other
    sources, although none of them specify  anything  about  students.   He
    agreed that what was reported in awate.com was that there  had  been  a
    reduction in the size of the militia and the army and that there was in
    fact no reference to students or scholarships, but that he had  deduced
    from this that awards  of  scholarships  had  significantly  diminished
    because Eritrea relied on conscripts.  There was evidence  of  Eritrean
    students studying in the Gulf states, China, the  Far  East  and  other
    African states, but very few students return,  so  those  granted  were
    really only supporters of the government and its party. But as  regards
    applicants applying to study in Europe between  2011-2015,  he  had  no
    source of evidence as to whether numbers were going up or down; he just
    relied on common knowledge.

54. As regards his claim that the number of authority figures able  to  get
    exit visas had shrunk, he said he based this on phone calls he had  had
    with such people, but he could not quantify.

55. In reply to questions about demobilisation PK said he used this term to
    denote  complete  demobilisation.   Relocation  to  national   civilian
    service was not demobilisation.  The only basis for demobilisation  was
    ill-health - unless you factor in payment of bribes.  He did not accept
    there was a process for requesting demobilisation.  If there was such a
    process (as suggested by the UK Ambassador) it was a corrupted process.
     He would know from his sources if there was such a process.  There are
    no rules that regulate the process.  He did not accept that  there  was
    de facto demobilisation for married or pregnant women.  They  were  not
    called up to active military service, but they  would  be  called  into
    civilian national service, including women over 50. However some women,
    particularly those who are educated, are still called  up  to  work  in
    offices. Women were not  formally  demobilised  but  may  not  have  an
    assignment; the issue only became relevant if she wanted to travel. You
    may see women prohibited; there was a  lot  of  arbitrariness.  In  the
    majority of cases women could not get a  discharge  certificate  but  a
    minority may get travel permits and these were  not  generic  documents
    but were specific to the time they were applied for.

56. PK said he considered  that  the  2015  UNCOI  evidence  about  ad  hoc
    exemption  and  the  existence  of  a  "certificate  of  completion  of
    [national service]" was consistent with his own analysis. Some  may  be
    able to get these documents.  Exemption  certificates  would  not  mean
    persons got permission to exit, different rules  applied.  He  did  not
    think that centralised records existed of those  de  facto  allowed  to
    leave national service.  That was why there were round-ups.   Relatives
    of even pregnant women had to go to commanders to get permission.  If a
    woman below 47 were returned forcibly she was most likely to be treated
    as a deserter and would not be able to prove exemption on the basis  of
    de facto demobilisation. The punishment could not be  predicted.  There
    was no regularity

57. In cross examination Mr  Rawat  asked  PK  about  the  medical  illness
    exemption from de facto demobilisation. It was  easier,  he  said,  for
    people with visible detectable illnesses. One of the real problems  was
    that the processing of people to establish whether they were unfit took
    time and ill-treatment could happen meanwhile.  His research in Eritrea
    in September 2002 had included conversations with a nurse.  Since  that
    research his knowledge of  how  the  Eritrean  authorities  dealt  with
    mental illness came from his own life experiences.  (PK said  later  on
    that he had not retained notes from his interview in 2002, he relied on
    memory and had sought to paraphrase. He did not always cross-check). He
    did not accept the Minister of Health account to the UKFFM  that  there
    was a qualified psychiatrist in St Mary's hospital; he was  probably  a
    G.P.

58. Mr Rawat asked about Eritreans working in the embassies in Asmara.   He
    agreed that the position was that  these  embassies  could  not  employ
    those who had not completed their national  service/being  demobilised,
    but based on his intimate knowledge  the  government  liked  to  insert
    their supporters in the embassies, so the embassies would not know "the
    state wants the President everywhere".  Getting  documents  in  Eritrea
    saying one was demobilised was easy enough, but it did not mean one was
    actually demobilised.  He could not defend this claim  in  a  court  of
    law, but it was his understanding from discussions with fellow scholars
    and friends. Perhaps in  regards  to  international  organisations  the
    Eritrean government would  not  be  so  concerned  to  have  supporters
    inserted.  He did not think any credence could be attached to the UKFFM
    respondent he spoke to about being seconded  to  Nevsun.   He  accepted
    that at the Bisha Mines employees had been demobilised,  but  this  was
    not true of the work done by subcontractors, over whom Bisha Mines have
    no control certainly outside the main sites, who were  often  companies
    run by leading members of the ruling party.  This is common  knowledge.
    Segan is a sub-contractor and belongs to the ruling party and given how
    secretive this company is he did not accept the claim they did not  use
    conscripts.  He did not accept the findings of a Human Resources  audit
    that in his view had been commissioned by Nevsun (Human  Rights  Impact
    Assessment of the Bisha Mine in Eritrea (2015 Audit) - Nevsun Resources
    Ltd, 5 August 2015) and he had not read it.

59. PK said he did  not  accept  UKFFM  materials  that  suggested  it  was
    possible for families with only one breadwinner to be demobilised.   He
    had family members who were sole breadwinners, one of whom had been  in
    national service for 20 years, another for 16-17 years.  If there  were
    a sole breadwinner rule, most Eritreans would be demobilised.

60. As regards the extent of the private sector in Eritrea, PK said it  was
    banned in 2006, and  is  now  confined  to  local  level  small  family
    businesses, but ability to work in such businesses depended on the whim
    of the local commander, it was not common.  PK said he accepted that it
    was possible for foreigners like the British Ambassador to walk  around
    Asmara and even to travel outside with permission and to observe events
    and to speak  with  people  involved  in  business.   But  the  British
    Ambassador did not have a comparable 'dense  network'  of  sources.  He
    initially  asserted  that  the  likelihood   of   Eritreans   divulging
    information to foreigners was zero, but he accepted  in  oral  evidence
    that this was an overstatement  and  that  he  should  have  been  more
    careful.

61. PK confirmed his position which was that the  regime  does  not  punish
    people who  leave  illegally,  but  those  punished  are  deserters  or
    evaders.  Illegal exiters are not at risk unless  perceived  to  be  in
    this group.

62. PK was taken to his "Reflections" document where he had criticised  for
    having a "cavalier attitude" those who said that the  "shoot  to  kill"
    policy was no longer in existence or was applied less than  previously.
    The sources cited in support were not reliable.   He  believed  reports
    about its continued existence were the tip of the iceberg.  He did  not
    blame those who  asserted  this  using  normal  standards  of  evidence
    assessment, but Eritrea is different.  The UK Ambassador  may  honestly
    say this, but it was not a reality.  Asked if he understood that he was
    alleging in effect that the UK Ambassador  was  ignoring  evidence,  he
    agreed he could not disprove what had been said, by "cavalier" he meant
    about general violations of human rights.  He  could  have  put  it  in
    better language.  To say "single, isolated incident" with reference  to
    an incident resulting in the death  of  ten  people  (the  shooting  of
    conscripts in Asmara on 3 April  2016),  was  appalling.   It  was  not
    isolated; it was a pattern.  At least the Ambassador was only  entitled
    to say there was a decline in reported incidents. Very few people  know
    what is going on.  He accepted he himself was  not  in  a  position  to
    verify the 2014 incidents.

63. When questioned by the bench he said that perhaps "he had taken it  too
    far" in suggesting western representatives could not be objective,  but
    he stated that it is common knowledge that there are no  political  and
    civil rights in Eritrea and that this did not mean that people have  no
    right to claim asylum. He was asked whether it is possible for  western
    diplomats to be objective and  he  commented  on  the  rise  in  asylum
    seekers from Eritrea and that this has become a major topic of concern,
    but that he would not dare  to  homogenise  the  diplomatic  community.
    There may be others that think they cannot afford  to  accommodate  all
    these people, but he conceded that he was speculating, using (he  said)
    common sense and intuition.  His evidence is not that  those  compiling
    the CIGs are incapable of being objective and  having  given  talks  to
    them  in  various  different  location  he   is   familiar   with   the
    preoccupation of these people. He was asked whether the  main  interest
    of these people he describes is of stemming the flow of immigration and
    he stated that what he said was an observation.

64. He stated that there may be those  that  think  that  the  West  cannot
    afford  to  accommodate  Eritreans,  but  he  conceded  that   he   was
    "speculating and using common sense".

65. He was not suggesting that those who  compile  CIGs  are  incapable  of
    being objective, but  when  he  looked  at  the  Home  Office  CIGs  he
    considered the only explanation for the dramatic change was  a  concern
    about using numbers  of  Eritrean  asylum  seekers  coming  to  Europe.
    Governments in the West are determined to stem the flow of migrants and
    turn a blind eye to what is really going on in Eritrea.

66. Asked why he had relied on the Edmund Blair article of 25 February 2016
    to justify his view that recruitment to  national  service  had  become
    stricter, PK said even though Blair had not referred to  this,  it  was
    obvious from the article in which it  is  asserted  that  the  Eritrean
    government will not stop recruiting young people into national  service
    for lengthy periods. The Eritrean  government  continues  to  have  the
    rationale for being tough on national service, namely the  threat  from
    bigger neighbours. PK confirmed when cross examined by Ms Dubinsky that
    Eritrea still considered itself to be in a state of emergency. PK  said
    it was the first time since 1998 that an  Eritrean  minister  had  said
    recently that there was no threat, but the 'no war,  no  peace'  policy
    was still in place.

67. PK was asked questions about his treatment of reports about the 3 April
    2016.  He had phoned  a  contact  in  Eritrea  who  had  confirmed  the
    incident.  PK had described  the  victims  as  draft  dodgers,  but  he
    accepted that none of the reports referred to "draft  dodgers"  and  he
    apologised for doing so.  It was suggested to  him  by  Mr  Rawat  that
    there had been an element of planning by the conscripts because friends
    had blocked the convoy, but PK did not comment on this.

68. Mr Rawat asked PK about his evidence that families of  those  who  left
    illegally were no longer being asked to pay fines, or less so.  It  was
    less widespread.  The government is  unpredictable.   However  he  gave
    examples of family  members  of  others  who  have  been  arrested  and
    detained.

69. PK gave extensive evidence in cross examination and following questions
    by the bench about the paragraph in the DFFM.  We have referred to this
    when assessing the DFFM evidence (see [175] above) but it is  necessary
    to repeat the text here;

           "in the past two to three years the government's attitude towards
          national service seems to be more relaxed. It is now possible  for
          national service evaders  and  deserters  who  have  left  Eritrea
          illegally to return to their country. They must go to  an  embassy
          and sign a repentance letter in which they accept any penalty  for
          the offence committed. In addition they must pay the two per  cent
          diaspora  tax.  Finally,  they  are  obliged  to  participate   in
          festivals. In spite of  this  softer  approach  many  evaders  and
          deserters still do not  dare  to  return  to  Eritrea.  Individual
          circumstances play a role as well. Persons who did not participate
          in oppositional political activities abroad  and  people  who  are
          connected by  family  bonds  or  in  other  ways  with  government
          officials or members of the ruling party would be more inclined to
          return to Eritrea on visits. Gaim Kibreab [PK] was aware of a  few
          deserters who have visited Eritrea and  safely  left  the  country
          again. These are invariably people who have  been  naturalized  in
          their countries of asylum."

70. PK was questioned extensively about this paragraph. He stated that  the
    diaspora comprised two groups; one that came to the UK during  the  war
    of independence (they did not leave illegally and are not perceived  as
    evaders/deserters) which he described as the large majority and this is
    the only group who can safely return (he later  said  that  this  large
    majority did not include evaders and deserters  who  had  fled  Eritrea
    illegally having initially said it did).  He confirmed  that  they  did
    not have to pay the tax or sign the letter. They have been  naturalised
    by another state. The second group; the minority  are  the  others  who
    cannot safely return, having fled illegally. He said that  he  did  not
    rule out those  having  fled  illegally  and  having  been  naturalised
    returning (he knew of three people in this category),  but  they  would
    have to have links to the government and anyone in  this  second  group
    who was not well connected and who did not support the regime would not
    return as they would not be safe. It was this group that  had  to  sign
    the letter and pay the two per cent tax.

71. He was not referring to the large majority in that paragraph.

72.  Those  who  are  able  to  return  safely  are  those  who  have  been
    naturalised, but those who illegally left Eritrea would be reluctant to
    return and would not in any event  approach  an  embassy.  He  did  not
    accept the evidence of the  UKFFM  that  deserter  evaders  can  safely
    return.  He reiterated that he had never heard of anyone returning  for
    a holiday without having a foreign passport.  He based that on his  own
    research.

73. In respect of "some people" he referred to in  the  paragraph  who  had
    visited Eritrea and left safely, he knew of only three people  in  this
    group.

74. PK stated that the diaspora two per cent tax could be paid by those who
    left  Eritrea  illegally,  but  the  reality  is  only  those  who  had
    regularised their position would pay it. The payment  of  the  tax  and
    signing of the letter did not mean persons would be able to return.  It
    does  not  provide  any  immunity  from  ill-treatment.  The   Eritrean
    government would look at a person's activities and  whether  they  were
    connected with opposition groups and the like.  PK  re-emphasised  that
    the repentance letter required persons  to  admit  to  a  crime,  which
    reflected the vindictive and arbitrary nature of the Eritrean state.

75. PK was asked if the signing of the regret letter and payment of the tax
    was independent of gaining entry to Eritrea. He said it was; these acts
    were not a requirement for returning Eritreans to re-enter. He did  not
    think that the great majority of  those  returning  for  holidays  were
    required to pay anything and the same would be true of their  children.
    However, Mr Knafler asked whether Eritreans  who  left  Eritrea  before
    independence have to pay the diaspora tax he said yes and that he had a
    friend who needed an ID card and she was forced to pay the tax.

76. He was asked by the bench about any risk that members of  the  diaspora
    would have to confront and he said that if they stay longer than a year
    they would be required to do national service.  He  was  asked  whether
    people who left before the war of independence would have  to  pay  the
    two per cent tax and he stated that they are forced to when getting  an
    ID card.

77. Dr Bozzini was wrong in February 2012 to say many pay the tax; it is  a
    small fraction.  Dr Bozzini was right, however, that  this  tax  bought
    you access to consular services,  such  as  being  able  to  buy  land.
    Payment of the tax is not a prerequisite to being allowed to enter. The
    diaspora tax gives you access to services inside Eritrea but you do not
    need to pay it in order to  send  remittances,  although  the  Eritrean
    government has tried  unsuccessfully  to  block  informal  channels  of
    payment. The ICG report was wrong about this. He knew this through  his
    own family members and their experiences. In re-examination PK said  he
    had seen the UNCOI  Annex  VII  letter  of  apology  (regret)  document
    before. He did not know its source but he had seen it a long time  ago.
    (Source: the 2015 UNCOI Report (Advance version of the  Report  of  the
    detailed findings of the Commission  of  Inquiry  on  Human  Rights  in
    Eritrea, A/HRC/29/CRP.1, United Nations General Assembly  Human  Rights
    Council), 5 June 2015).

78. PK was asked about the incident cited at [436] of the 2016 UNCOI Report
    which suggested that payment of the  tax  prevented  ill-treatment.  He
    considered this reference inconclusive. PK said  that  because  such  a
    person does not face adverse treatment may not be because he  has  paid
    the tax therefore implying that there may be other reasons.  He implied
    that there was insufficient detail about the circumstances.

79. He confirmed his position in his DFFM interview  that  those  who  left
    illegally  could  obtain  a  passport  with  reference  to  a  facility
    introduced by the Eritrean government in 2001-2002 as  an  exercise  in
    reducing the appeal to such persons of Ethiopian citizenship.  However,
    it was not his evidence that those who left Eritrea  unlawfully  could,
    in 2014, approach an embassy and get a passport by signing a repentance
    letter and paying the tax and  that  this  would  ensure  safe  return.
    Unless confident that the government would protect  you  would  not  go
    down this route.

80. An Eritrean ID card doubles as a visa.  As regards Eritreans  obtaining
    Eritrean passports, this could be done abroad by those who needed  them
    for onward travel but the Eritrea government could refuse applications.
    Legally speaking a person returning to Eritrea on holiday in possession
    of a foreign passport could be required to do national service  in  the
    same way as the  resident  population  but  in  practice  the  Eritrean
    government treated dual nationals differently.

81. With specific reference to the paragraph (quoted in  full  at  [69]  of
    this Appendix) and the government attitude having relaxed, he confirmed
    that this applied  to  the  government's  attitude  to  supporters  and
    members of the party, people with connections in the context  of  those
    who had left illegally. As an example he cited the three deserters (see
    above). However, he referred to the paragraph  and  was  emphatic  that
    this applied "invariably to people who have been naturalised  in  their
    countries of origin". The  caveat  at  the  end  of  this  passage  was
    important; those  in  this  category  were  invariably  those  who  had
    naturalised.  Despite what he said at 6.1 of his Report of 23 September
    2015, about there being "no  evidence  whatsoever"  that  the  Eritrean
    government has now  a  relaxed  attitude  towards  those  returning  to
    Eritrea who left illegally,  there was  some  evidence,  but  only  for
    those who were well-connected.

82. He also further clarified that he had meant that only  those  who  were
    members, supporters of the government or connected with the party could
    sign the letter and pay the tax.  The great majority category  that  he
    had made reference to earlier are not required to sign anything

83.  PK was asked by the bench to give  more  detail  regarding  the  three
    persons who he knew had returned to Eritrea and whom he had in mind  in
    his interview for the DFFM Report. The  men  had  been  naturalised  as
    British citizens having been granted asylum. He said that  he  was  one
    hundred per cent sure that the first man was  naturalised.  The  second
    man, according to the information that he  had,  was  naturalised.  The
    third  man,  according  to  the  indirect  information  he   had,   was
    naturalised and he further stated  that  he  would  not  dare  to  have
    returned without a British passport. He did not speak with  the  second
    or the third man because he did not know them personally. They had  all
    safely returned to Eritrea for visits and had been able return  to  the
    UK. They are all very active members of the government of  Eritrea.  He
    is not aware whether they had  the  permission  of  the  government  to
    travel here, but the government sends people here amongst the diaspora.
    The government plants supporters everywhere.  He had met one through  a
    cousin, the other two he had not met directly. All three went just  for
    visits. He had never heard of Eritreans going back for good.

84. People could be granted refugee status without ever  having  a  dispute
    with the government and indeed could be pro-government.  He  said  that
    the Tribunal in MA noted  evidence  that  the  Eritrean  state  had  an
    incentive to send supporters to the diaspora;  the  government  has  an
    incentive to plant its supporters everywhere. But he had  many  friends
    who fled national service in Eritrea and applied for asylum.

85. PK was asked by the bench what percentage of the diaspora in the UK was
    pro and what percentage was anti the government. He said that this  was
    mysterious and he could not give an answer.  When those who oppose  the
    government have parties the attendance is small but  there  is  greater
    attendance at pro government parties. However,  from  this  one  cannot
    conclude that they are all supporters of the government.   Even  though
    you could not always tell by who attended different events, only a  few
    supported the government. PK was asked by the bench whether those going
    back would necessarily be naturalised; could they return if for example
    they had residence in the UK short of naturalisation.  He said  he  had
    no evidence about this although he had heard of one man  related  to  a
    nephew of his who had died in the UK and  his  wife  wanted  to  go  to
    Eritrea where there was to be his funeral, but she was advised  not  to
    go. People would need a secure status in the country  where  they  live
    before considering return.

86. PK said he did not know what attitude the Eritrean authorities took  to
    those who returned on a  foreign  passport;  the  Eritrean  authorities
    considered them as Eritrean regardless.  Asked if such people were  not
    taking a chance returning, he said the overwhelming majority would  not
    take such a risk.

87. PK was asked  by  the  bench  why  people   returning  to  Eritrea  for
    holidays,  even  if  they  travelled  on  foreign  passports  following
    naturalisation, would  risk going back to a country which he,  PK,  had
    described as arbitrary  and  vindictive.  He  said  that  opinions  are
    personal. Eritrean  society  is  not  homogenous  and  that  there  are
    different political, ethnic and religious groups. Some people  may  say
    his views are unreasonable and others may say the human  rights  record
    is appalling. They think that everything that is going on there is bad,
    but they want to take their children back.  They  are  not  politically
    active. As long as they are not politically active  he  did  not  think
    that the government would go out of its way because it  targets  people
    who undermine them, some would be pro-government; there may  be  others
    who think  that  as  long  as  they  are  not  politically  active  the
    government would not target them.  Mr Knafler asked PK if he  stood  by
    his statement that returning members of the diaspora were only at  risk
    of being required to do national service if they stayed for a  year  or
    more. He said he did. He knew people who had travelled out from Eritrea
    to Kenya or Sudan to make sure they had not stayed beyond a year.

88. PK was asked if the children of those who had fled Eritrea  during  the
    war of independence would  not  be  considered  eligible  for  national
    service (on the basis that they would not be exempt) and  his  evidence
    was that the government targets evaders. He said he did not  think  the
    government would target people in this category.  He said  that  to  be
    fair to the government if you grew up here  and  have  a  passport,  in
    practice national service does not apply to  you.  He  said  that  they
    would be one hundred  per  cent  safe.  The  government  would  not  be
    arbitrary in relation to them.

89. It was suggested that  in  his  evidence  not  many  successful  asylum
    seekers would be returning because they would be deserters/evaders  and
    illegal exiters. His evidence was that they would be taking a very high
    risk if they returned. Successful asylum seekers are not likely to want
    to approach the Eritrean embassy, but PK stated that "we can't talk  in
    absolute terms" there are  those  who  claimed  asylum  but  have  lost
    parents and now the question of inheritance arises and they would  need
    to produce documents. It was put to him that successful asylum  seekers
    would be considered anti-regime, but he said that he would not go  that
    far and on the contrary and having fled Eritrea may not be a political.



90. He was asked whether in his view was it not  the  case  that  the  most
    typical claim was based on rejection of the regime. He said that once a
    person gets status here he becomes preoccupied with working and keeping
    his family. Very few engage in  politics.  He  was  asked  why,  if  he
    accepts that a typical asylum  claimant  is  someone  who  rejects  the
    regime, why they would not be in the large majority of Eritreans in the
    UK. PK stated that whether they act to bring about political change  is
    another thing.

91. He did not accept what was said by the Minister of Foreign Affairs  who
    was interviewed in the DFFM who had not indicated  that  naturalisation
    is a prerequisite for safe return  and  who  asserted  that  those  who
    illegally exited were not punished. In respect of evaders/deserters  PK
    found it difficult to accept what was said by the Minister  of  Foreign
    Affairs. He stated that this Ministry is  not  responsible  for  policy
    relating to national service in any event. He stated that there may  be
    a "policy" but he had never seen it. PK  referred  to  the  immigration
    officials having said that  leaving  the  country  (whilst  subject  to
    national service) is illegal. It follows that  illegal  exit  would  be
    subject to punishment which contradicts what was said by the Minister.

92. PK said that he strongly disputed  the  evidence  given  by  diplomatic
    representatives, (meeting with diplomatic  sources  B,  C  and  D)  who
    stated that anecdotal evidence from the US Embassy is that 85 per  cent
    of Americans of  Eritrean  descent  travel  on  an  Eritrean  passport.
    Returnees have to show an Eritrean ID card and  in  practice  returnees
    show both passports, their Eritrean one and the one they have  obtained
    through naturalisation.  The effect of a person  using  a  non-Eritrean
    passport was that the  authorities  do  not  check  whether  they  left
    illegally.

93. PK was asked if he agreed the distinction the respondent seeks to  draw
    between Eritreans returning having been outside  Eritrea  for  more  or
    less than three years.  PK said he was aware that persons who  go  back
    to Eritrea who stayed more than one year were required to  do  national
    service, but he knew of no three year rule of the kind referred  to  in
    the UKFFM.  Most members of the diaspora going back for  holidays  were
    going for vacations of two-three up to a maximum of five  weeks  during
    the summer.  There was another group of retired people who tend  to  go
    back for longer periods; his own brother went back for two  months.  He
    thought a large number of holidaymakers were those who had left Eritrea
    during the war and their children. PK was asked about a  paper  he  had
    given to EASO  in  2014  where  he  estimated  the  proportion  of  the
    population who had gone into national service over a period of 20 years
    as 9.2 per cent of the population. He was not the  only  one  who  gave
    high figures, for example a German source had estimated 600,000 people.



94. PK was asked to what extent his  "dense  network"  of  contacts  inside
    Eritrea comprised family and friends.  He indicated  that  friends  and
    family comprised a "small part" and the network spreads across  diverse
    groups. He replied that he had sources outside the  family  and  inside
    his family some were pro-government.

95. PK was asked questions by Ms Dubinsky relating to his understanding  of
    the present legal provisions in force in Eritrea regarding  punishments
    of desertion and draft evasion with reference to the penal code of  the
    state of Eritrea 2015 Articles 118 and 119 (inciting  to  mutiny  which
    carries a sentence of not less than 13 years and not more than  16  and
    interference with military service which carries a sentence of not less
    than one year and not more than three). PK confirmed that  it  was  not
    implemented, but said, it did not matter which  provision  of  national
    law they applied because victims  would  never  be  produced  before  a
    court; they were just put in detention with no recourse. The laws  were
    not implemented at all. Arbitrariness prevailed and it  was  impossible
    to predict what the State would do, except  that  punishment  would  be
    "rigorous" and  that  could  mean  detention  in  containers,  in  high
    temperatures or  underground  cells  and  could  mean  death,  torture,
    indefinite incarceration.

96. PK was asked about forcible returns and said that despite  inquires  he
    had made, he only knew of only one forced return to Eritrea since  2011
    and referred to the case of (Berhane Embaye cited in his  Report  of  4
    April 2016). He was asked why it was he had  little  information  about
    forced returns generally and he suggested two reasons; first  that  the
    government is secretive and secondly because of  Eritrea's  poor  human
    rights record and people were likely to be detained  if  they  returned
    and so most governments were reluctant  to  deport  Eritreans  back  to
    Eritrea. It was almost the norm not to.  In  the  last  decade  it  has
    generally been accepted that returns would result in ill-treatment.  He
    was of the view that the second reason was more likely to  reflect  the
    position. He had tried to find out about  other  deportations  but  had
    been successful. He stated that there had  been  to  deportations  from
    Sudan

97. PK said that should a person  be  forcibly  returned  whether  they  do
    military or civilian service depended on their skills and  what  suited
    the government. In reality even the person sent  to  civilian  national
    service belonged to a platoon or battalion unit. He  could  only  guess
    what assignments might be made.

98. He had said the September CIG was not substantially different from  the
    March CIG.

99. Asked about the level of surveillance in Eritrea, PK said it was heavy.
    Asked  if  he  thought  his  relatives  there  might  be   kept   under
    surveillance or treated differently by the regime because  of  him,  he
    said he did not think the regime saw  him  as  important  enough;  they
    ignored his books. It was suggested that by  any  account  he  must  be
    embarrassing to the regime. He said that the government  ignored  these
    things and that one of his books was in their  library.  In  any  event
    they did not detain family members except in  exceptional  cases.   His
    relatives were  safe.  He  was  not  politically  active.  He  was  not
    concerned that their welfare was affected by  their  relationship  with
    him. Eritrean families are often divided in their opinion, and you  can
    find within  the  one  family  some  pro-government,  some  anti,  some
    apolitical. He had many friends who were members of the government, but
    he did not talk with them about each other's political views.  He had a
    brother who was pro-government but they were  very  close  nonetheless.
    PK said that he was not important or sufficiently high profile to be  a
    threat to the government and to cause a problem for his family.

100. PK was asked whether he considered the system of  national  service  in
    Eritrea amounted to forced labour. He said that when it was  introduced
    national service was innovative and the national service system was  at
    the heart of the ability of  the  independence  movement  to  become  a
    separate state.  It was a way of getting people from  different  ethnic
    groups and occupations to come together and put aside  differences  and
    had strong core values that  were  the  building  blocks  for  the  new
    country. But it all went wrong and once the regime began extending  the
    national service beyond 18 months  problems  developed  and  it  became
    forced labour. National service for the first 18 months  is  very  much
    supported by the populations, but beyond that it  is  seen  as  forcing
    people to do something against their will. It has degenerated  and  the
    fact that military commanders use  national  service  labour  to  build
    their own homes and  to  recruit  labour  to  their  private  projects,
    illustrates the abuse. Asked to what extent  people  who  did  national
    service did so voluntarily, PK said that he could not say. People  were
    not against national service  but  they  were  against  punishment  and
    against the fact that it was open-ended. There was a lot of  abuse.  He
    accepted that there were examples of women  choosing  to  stay  in  the
    people's militia to ensure they had a wage, but that was not a  general
    rule.

101. PK was asked by Mr Knafler if  he  had  any  reservations  about  fact-
    finding missions in Eritrea. He had said yes there was a risk of round-
    tripping and because of the general lack of freedom of expression.  But
    if such missions followed correct methodology their findings could have
    value although there were constraints.  In Eritrea there  are  so  many
    concerns about getting reliable information,  leaving  aside  diplomats
    because it is a closed society.




                                 APPENDIX IV

                       Schedule of Background Evidence

        *Hyperlinks have been included where furnished by the parties

|Item  |Document              |Source                    |Date           |
|2016                                                                    |
|      |Country Information   |UK Home Office            |4 August 2016  |
|      |and Guidance: Eritrea:|                          |               |
|      |Illegal Exit, Version |https://www.gov.uk/governm|               |
|      |3.0                   |ent/uploads/system/uploads|               |
|      |                      |/attachment_data/file/5438|               |
|      |                      |54/CIG_-_Eritrea_-_Illegal|               |
|      |                      |_Exit_-_v3.0__August_2016_|               |
|      |                      |.pdf                      |               |
|      |Country Information   |UK Home Office            |4 August 2016  |
|      |and Guidance: Eritrea:|                          |               |
|      |National              |https://www.gov.uk/governm|               |
|      |(incl.Military)       |ent/uploads/system/uploads|               |
|      |Service, Version 3.0  |/attachment_data/file/5438|               |
|      |                      |58/CIG_-_Eritrea_-_Nationa|               |
|      |                      |l_service_-_v3.0__August_2|               |
|      |                      |016_.pdf                  |               |
|      |Information from the  |UK Home Office            |4 August 2016  |
|      |Home Office's Fact    |https://www.gov.uk/governm|               |
|      |Finding Mission to    |ent/uploads/system/uploads|               |
|      |Eritrea (7-20 February|/attachment_data/file/5438|               |
|      |2016). FFM Team's     |63/Report_of_UK_FFM_to_Eri|               |
|      |observation note.     |trea__7-20_February_2016.p|               |
|      |Notes of interviews   |df                        |               |
|      |with sources.         |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea-Ministry of   |Shabait                   |23 June 2016   |
|      |Information           |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.shabait.com/new|               |
|      |                      |s/local-news/22063-press-r|               |
|      |                      |elease                    |               |
|      |Fear of return to war |The Times                 |14 June 2016   |
|      |over border attack    |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.thetimes.co.uk/|               |
|      |                      |article/fear-of-return-to-|               |
|      |                      |war-over-border-attack-7dx|               |
|      |                      |jg8rrn#                   |               |
|2     |Heavy fighting        |Sridharan, Vasudevan      |13 June 2016   |
|      |reported along        |International Business    |               |
|      |Eritrea-Ethiopia      |Times                     |               |
|      |border raising fears  |                          |               |
|      |of war                |http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/h|               |
|      |                      |eavy-fighting-reported-alo|               |
|      |                      |ng-eritrea-ethiopia-border|               |
|      |                      |-raising-fears-war-1565066|               |
|3     |Ethiopia and Eritrea  |Aljazeera                 |13 June 2016   |
|      |trade blame over      |                          |               |
|      |border clashes        |http://www.aljazeera.com/n|               |
|      |                      |ews/2016/06/ethiopia-eritr|               |
|      |                      |ea-trade-blame-border-clas|               |
|      |                      |hes-160613145824702.html  |               |
|4     |UPDATE: Casualties in |ENCA, Reuters             |13 June 2016   |
|      |Eritrea border clash, |                          |               |
|      |says Ethiopia         |https://www.enca.com/afric|               |
|      |                      |a/eritrea-accuses-ethiopia|               |
|      |                      |-of-attack                |               |
|5     |Detailed findings of  |UN General Assembly Human |8 June 2016    |
|      |the Commission of     |Rights Council,           |               |
|      |Inquiry on Human      |thirty-second session,    |               |
|      |Rights in Eritrea,    |agenda item 4, Human      |               |
|      |A/HRC/32/CRP.1        |rights situations that    |               |
|      |                      |require the Council's     |               |
|      |                      |attention                 |               |
|6     |Has Eritrea's         |BBC News                  |8 June 2016    |
|      |migration problem been|                          |               |
|      |exaggerated?          |http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/|               |
|      |                      |world-africa-36469286     |               |
|7     |What the UN Gets Wrong|Atlantic Council          |7 June 2016    |
|      |About Rights in       |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea               |http://www.atlanticcouncil|               |
|      |                      |.org/blogs/new-atlanticist|               |
|      |                      |/what-the-un-gets-wrong-ab|               |
|      |                      |out-rights-in-eritrea     |               |
|8     |UNHCR concerned by    |UNHCR Press Release       |2 June 2016    |
|      |expulsions from Sudan |                          |               |
|9     |Note on the Testimony |                          |June 2016      |
|      |of Helen Gembreamlak  |                          |               |
|      |and the video of the  |                          |               |
|      |transcription from the|                          |               |
|      |YouTube testimony     |                          |               |
|      |which was transcribed |                          |               |
|      |directly into English |                          |               |
|      |by Legal Interpreting |                          |               |
|      |on 9 June 2016        |                          |               |
|10    |Sudan: Hundreds       |Human Rights Watch        |30 May 2016    |
|      |Deported to Likely    |                          |               |
|      |Abuse                 |                          |               |
|11    |The Work of the       |House of Commons Home     |25 May 2016    |
|      |Immigration           |Affairs Committee         |               |
|      |Directorates (Q4      |                          |               |
|      |2015-2016) (Second    |                          |               |
|      |Report of Session     |                          |               |
|      |2016-17)              |                          |               |
|12    |Sudan and Eritrea     |IRIN News                 |25 May 2016    |
|      |crackdown on migrants |                          |               |
|      |amid reports of EU    |                          |               |
|      |incentives            |                          |               |
|13    |Eritreans rounded up  |Plaut, Martin             |24 May 2016    |
|      |in Sudan              |                          |               |
|14    |Transcript of         |                          |21 May 2016    |
|      |testimony of Helen    |                          |               |
|      |Gebreamlak with       |                          |               |
|      |Certificate of        |                          |               |
|      |Translation           |                          |               |
|15    |Europe's secret deal  |Plaut, Martin             |19 May 2016    |
|      |with Africa's         |New Statesman             |               |
|      |dictators             |                          |               |
|16    |Advance Edited Version|UN General Assembly Human |9 May 2016     |
|      |of the Report of the  |Rights Council,           |               |
|      |Commission of Inquiry |thirty-second session,    |               |
|      |on Human Rights in    |agenda item 4, Human      |               |
|      |Eritrea, A/HRC/32/47  |rights situations that    |               |
|      |                      |require the Council's     |               |
|      |                      |attention                 |               |
|17    |Fact-Finding Mission -|SwissInfo                 |9 May 2016     |
|      |Official trip finds   |                          |               |
|      |few rights            |http://www.swissinfo.ch/en|               |
|      |improvements in       |g/fact-finding-mission_off|               |
|      |Eritrea               |icial-trip-finds-few-right|               |
|      |                      |s-improvements-in-eritrea-|               |
|      |                      |/42141642                 |               |
|18    |Translation of        |Cited in SwissInfo article|9 May 2016     |
|      |interview with Mario  |                          |               |
|      |Gattiker (head of the |                          |               |
|      |Swiss State           |                          |               |
|      |Secretariat for       |                          |               |
|      |Migration (SEM)) with |                          |               |
|      |the Tages-Anzeiger    |                          |               |
|      |newspaper             |                          |               |
|      |Translation obtained  |                          |               |
|      |by Home Office        |                          |               |
|19    |Statement on Danish   |Jens Weise Olesen and Jan |28 April 2016  |
|      |Eritrea Report        |Olsen                     |               |
|20    |2015 Country Reports  |US Department of State    |13 April 2016  |
|      |on Human Rights       |                          |               |
|      |Practices: Eritrea    |                          |               |
|21    |Statement from the    |Tesfa News                |9 April 2016   |
|      |Embassy of the State  |                          |               |
|      |of Eritrea in UK      |http://www.tesfanews.net/e|               |
|      |                      |ritrea-embassy-uk-april-3r|               |
|      |                      |d-incident/               |               |
|22    |More Shooting of      |Human Rights Concern      |7 April 2016   |
|      |Innocents Because Of  |Eritrea                   |               |
|      |Forced Conscription in|                          |               |
|      |Eritrea: Eleven Shot  |http://hrc-eritrea.org/mor|               |
|      |Dead in Asmara        |e-shooting-of-innocents-be|               |
|      |Including Woman And   |cause-of-forced-conscripti|               |
|      |Child, Many Severely  |on-in-eritrea-eleven-shot-|               |
|      |Wounded               |dead-in-asmara-including-w|               |
|      |                      |oman-and-child-many-severe|               |
|      |                      |ly-wounded/               |               |
|23    |Eritrea: naming the   |Plaut, Martin             |7 April 2016   |
|      |dead and injured      |                          |               |
|      |conscripts in Asmara  |https://martinplaut.wordpr|               |
|      |shooting              |ess.com/2016/04/07/eritrea|               |
|      |                      |-naming-the-dead-and-injur|               |
|      |                      |ed-conscripts-in-asmara-sh|               |
|      |                      |ooting/                   |               |
|24    |Eritrean army         |BBC News                  |6 April 2016   |
|      |conscripts 'killed in |                          |               |
|      |Asmara escape bid'    |http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/|               |
|      |                      |world-africa-35977605     |               |
|25    |Shots Fired, Stoning  |Awate                     |5 April 2016   |
|      |in Eritrea's Capital  |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://awate.com/shots-fir|               |
|      |                      |ed-stoning-in-eritreas-cap|               |
|      |                      |ital/                     |               |
|26    |Asmara Killing and    |Assenna                   |5 April 2016   |
|      |further details       |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://assenna.com        |               |
|27    |Radio Transcript '11  |Medrek News               |4 April 2016   |
|      |youths killed and 20  |                          |               |
|      |seriously injured in  |                          |               |
|      |Asmara'               |                          |               |
|28    |Procedure for         |Independent Chief         |April 2016     |
|      |commissioning review  |Inspector of Borders and  |               |
|      |of Iran CIG           |Immigration               |               |
|29    |Procedure for         |Independent Chief         |April 2016     |
|      |commissioning review  |Inspector of Borders and  |               |
|      |of Nigeria CIG        |Immigration               |               |
|30    |Procedure for         |Independent Chief         |April 2016     |
|      |commissioning review  |Inspector of Borders and  |               |
|      |of Ukraine CIG        |Immigration               |               |
|31    |Israel's shame - the  |Plaut, Martin             |24 March 2016  |
|      |treatment of Eritrean |                          |               |
|      |Refugees              |                          |               |
|32    |Opening Statement by  |Office of the United      |15 March 2016  |
|      |Kate Gilmore, Deputy  |Nations High Commissioner |               |
|      |High Commissioner for |for Human Rights          |               |
|      |Human Rights, 31st    |                          |               |
|      |session of the Human  |                          |               |
|      |Rights Council, Item  |                          |               |
|      |4, Eritrea and DPRK   |                          |               |
|33    |Human Rights Council  |UK Mission to the United  |14 March 2016  |
|      |31, UK Statement      |Nations Geneva            |               |
|      |Following the Update  |                          |               |
|      |by the Special        |https://www.gov.uk/governm|               |
|      |Rapporteur on Human   |ent/world-location-news/hu|               |
|      |Rights in Eritrea     |man-rights-council-31-uk-s|               |
|      |                      |tatement-following-the-upd|               |
|      |                      |ate-by-the-special-rapport|               |
|      |                      |eur-on-human-rights-in-eri|               |
|      |                      |trea-14-march-2016        |               |
|34    |Statement by Ms.      |Office of the United      |14 March 2016  |
|      |Sheila B. Keetharuth, |Nations High Commissioner |               |
|      |Special Rapporteur on |for Human Rights          |               |
|      |the Situation of Human|                          |               |
|      |Rights in Eritrea at  |http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Ne|               |
|      |the 31st Session of   |wsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews|               |
|      |the Human Rights      |.aspx?NewsID=17224&LangID=|               |
|      |Council (agenda item  |E                         |               |
|      |4, Geneva)            |                          |               |
|35    |Joint Motion for a    |European Parliament       |8 March 2016   |
|      |Resolution: on the    |                          |               |
|      |situation in Eritrea  |                          |               |
|      |(2016/2568(RSP))      |                          |               |
|36    |The Work of the       |House of Commons Home     |4 March 2016   |
|      |Immigration           |Affairs Committee         |               |
|      |Directorates (Q3 2015)|                          |               |
|      |Sixth Report of       |http://www.publications.pa|               |
|      |Session 2015-16 (HC   |rliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cm|               |
|      |772)                  |select/cmhaff/772/772.pdf |               |
|37    |Representing Eritrea: |Mu?ller, Tanja Review of  |3 March 2016   |
|      |geopolitics and       |African Political Economy |               |
|      |narratives of         |Vol 139(133) September    |               |
|      |oppression            |2012, p. 455              |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.tandfonline.com|               |
|      |                      |/doi/abs/10.1080/03056244.|               |
|      |                      |2015.1111201?journalCode=c|               |
|      |                      |rea20                     |               |
|38    |Crises give Eritrea   |Blair, Edmund             |29 February    |
|      |routes for closer     |Reuters                   |2016           |
|      |global engagement     |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.reuters.com/art|               |
|      |                      |icle/us-eritrea-diplomacy-|               |
|      |                      |insight-idUSKCN0W21FW     |               |
|39    |Eritrea looks to build|Blair, Edmund             |26 February    |
|      |mining sector to      |Reuters                   |2016           |
|      |kick-start economy    |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.reuters.com/art|               |
|      |                      |icle/us-eritrea-mining-idU|               |
|      |                      |SKCN0VZ13S                |               |
|40    |Eritrea won't shorten |Blair, Edmund             |25 February    |
|      |national service      |Reuters                   |2016           |
|      |despite migration     |                          |               |
|      |fears                 |http://www.reuters.com/art|               |
|      |                      |icle/us-eritrea-politics-i|               |
|      |                      |nsightidUSKCN0VY0M5       |               |
|41    |Eritrea: Youth        |AfricaNews with Reuters   |25 February    |
|      |Threaten to Leave     |                          |2016           |
|      |Country over Prolonged|http://www.africanews.com/|               |
|      |National Service      |2016/02/25/eritrea-youth-t|               |
|      |                      |hreaten-to-leave-country-o|               |
|      |                      |ver-prolonged-national-ser|               |
|      |                      |vice/                     |               |
|42    |List of questions and |Country Policy and        |23 February    |
|      |responses to questions|Information Team (CPIT),  |2016           |
|      |addressed by email    |Home Office               |               |
|      |from the Country      |                          |               |
|      |Policy and Information|                          |               |
|      |Team (CPIT), Home     |                          |               |
|      |Office, to the        |                          |               |
|      |Population,           |                          |               |
|      |Immigration and Border|                          |               |
|      |Authority (PIBA),     |                          |               |
|      |Israel                |                          |               |
|43    |Swiss Migration office|SWI                       |16 February    |
|      |criticises            |                          |2016           |
|      |politicians' Eritrea  |                          |               |
|      |visit                 |                          |               |
|44    |Allegations of        |CBC News                  |12 February    |
|      |Conscripted Labour in |                          |2016           |
|      |Canadian Mine: The    |http://www.cbc.ca/news/wor|               |
|      |Fifth Estate          |ld/eritrea-fifth-estate-1.|               |
|      |                      |3444779                   |               |
|46    |World Report 2016 -   |Human Rights Watch        |27 January 2016|
|      |Eritrea               |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |                      |cid/56bd994215.html       |               |
|47    |Denmark adopts law    |Damon, Arwa and Hume, Tim |26 January 2016|
|      |approving seizure of  |Edition                   |               |
|      |migrant assets        |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://edition.cnn.com/201|               |
|      |                      |6/01/26/europe/denmark-vot|               |
|      |                      |e-jewelry-bill-migrants/  |               |
|48    |Skepticism before     |Solomon, Salem and        |22 January 2016|
|      |sympathy: why         |Frechette, Casey          |               |
|      |journalists should    |                          |               |
|      |verify figures from   |Poynter                   |               |
|      |the U.N., NGOs and    |                          |               |
|      |nonprofits            |http://www.poynter.org/201|               |
|      |                      |6/why-journalists-should-t|               |
|      |                      |reat-nonprofits-un-agencie|               |
|      |                      |s-and-ngos-with-greater-sk|               |
|      |                      |epticism/392551/          |               |
|49    |72 students acquire   |Shabait                   |9 January 2016 |
|      |scholarship in UAE    |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.shabait.com/new|               |
|      |                      |s/local-news/21024-72-stud|               |
|      |                      |ents-acquire-scholarship-i|               |
|      |                      |n-uae                     |               |
|50    |Country Summary,      |Human Rights Watch        |January 2016   |
|      |Eritrea               |                          |               |
|51    |List of Eritrean      |Embassy of the State of   |2016           |
|      |Ministries, 'Eritrea -|Eritrea (Stockholm -      |               |
|      |Government offices'   |Sweden)                   |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.eritrean-embass|               |
|      |                      |y.se/government-agencies/ |               |
|52    |Responsibility -      |Nevsun Resources Ltd      |2016           |
|      |Policy on human rights|                          |               |
|      |and employment at     |http://www.nevsun.com/resp|               |
|      |Bisha Mine (as        |onsibility/human-rights/  |               |
|      |published on website) |                          |               |
|53    |Some Eritrean         |Erimederek                |2016           |
|      |nationals visiting the|                          |               |
|      |homeland have         |https://erimedrek.com/2016|               |
|      |reportedly been denied|/03                       |               |
|      |exit visas            |                          |               |
|54    |Nationals from Kuluku,|Erimederek                |2016           |
|      |Denbe Doran, Shanbuko,|                          |               |
|      |Adi Teklay taken      |                          |               |
|      |blindly for forced    |                          |               |
|      |conscription - Radio  |                          |               |
|      |Medrek                |                          |               |
|55    |Amnesty International |Amnesty International     |2016           |
|      |Report 2015/16: The   |                          |               |
|      |State of the World's  |                          |               |
|      |Human Rights - Eritrea|                          |               |
|2015                                                                    |
|56    |UNHCR Eligibility     |Shabait                   |17 December    |
|      |Guidelines: Factual   |                          |2015           |
|      |Findings or Recycled  |http://www.shabait.com/new|               |
|      |Defamation? (Eritrea  |s/local-news/20954-unhcr-e|               |
|      |Ministry of Foreign   |ligibility-guidelines-fact|               |
|      |Affairs, Asmara)      |ual-findings-or-recycled-d|               |
|      |                      |efamation                 |               |
|57    |Country Report Eritrea|Swedish Migration Agency  |15 December    |
|      |Lifos 2(3) (Version   |                          |2015           |
|      |1.0) (Landrapport     |http://lifos.migrationsver|               |
|      |Eritrea)              |ket.se/dokument?documentSu|               |
|      |                      |mmaryId=36406             |               |
|      |Translation obtained  |                          |               |
|      |by Home Office.       |                          |               |
|58    |EU announces support  |European Commission -     |11 December    |
|      |for poverty           |Press Release             |2015           |
|      |eradication in Eritrea|                          |               |
|      |                      |http://europa.eu/rapid/pre|               |
|      |                      |ss-release_IP-15-6298_en.h|               |
|      |                      |tm                        |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |https://ec.europa.eu/europ|               |
|      |                      |eaid/countries/eritrea_en |               |
|59    |My visit to the Bisha |Facebook                  |10 December    |
|      |Mine - Facebook post  |                          |2015           |
|      |by US Embassy Asmara's|https://www.facebook.com/u|               |
|      |Chief of Mission Louis|sembassyasmara/posts/10153|               |
|      |Mazel                 |719775550120              |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|60    |Minutes arising from  |Independent Chief         |3 December 2015|
|      |the Independent Chief |Inspector of Borders and  |               |
|      |Inspector of Borders  |Immigration               |               |
|      |and Immigration,      |                          |               |
|      |Independent Advisory  |                          |               |
|      |Group on Country      |                          |               |
|      |Information (IAGCI)   |                          |               |
|61    |Eritrea: Refugees     |Amnesty International     |1 December 2015|
|      |fleeing indefinite    |                          |               |
|      |conscription must be  |https://www.amnesty.org/en|               |
|      |given safe have       |/latest/news/2015/12/eritr|               |
|      |                      |ea-refugees-fleeing-indefi|               |
|      |                      |nite-conscription-must-be-|               |
|      |                      |given-safe-haven/         |               |
|62    |United Nations Eritrea|UN Country Team In Eritrea|December 2015  |
|      |Newsletter:           |                          |               |
|      |"Supporting Eritrea's |                          |               |
|      |Development and       |http://reliefweb.int/repor|               |
|      |Self-Reliance" UN in  |t/eritrea/united-nations-e|               |
|      |Eritrea finalizes Mid |ritrea-newsletter-december|               |
|      |Term Review (MTR) for |-2015                     |               |
|      |the current Strategic |                          |               |
|      |Partnership           |                          |               |
|      |Cooperation Framework |                          |               |
|      |(SPCF) in preparation |                          |               |
|      |for the new SPCF      |                          |               |
|63    |Just Deserters: Why   |Amnesty International     |December 2015  |
|      |indefinite national   |                          |               |
|      |service in Eritrea has|                          |               |
|      |created a generation  |                          |               |
|      |of Refugees           |                          |               |
|64    |Home Office Response  |UK Home Office            |24 November    |
|      |to IAGCI Review -     |                          |2015           |
|      |Covering Note         |                          |               |
|65    |Letter in response to |Danish Parliamentary      |23 November    |
|      |The Ministry of       |Ombudsman                 |2015           |
|      |Immigration,          |                          |               |
|      |Integration and       |                          |               |
|      |Housing's letter of 29|                          |               |
|      |October 2015 with     |                          |               |
|      |comments to Jorgen    |                          |               |
|      |Steen Sorensen's      |                          |               |
|      |Report of 15 September|                          |               |
|      |2015 on the Eritrean  |                          |               |
|      |case                  |                          |               |
|      |Translation obtained  |                          |               |
|      |by Home Office.       |                          |               |
|66    |Subject report -      |Swedish Migration Agency  |23 November    |
|      |People's Army in      |(Migrationsverket)        |2015           |
|      |Eritrea (version 1.0) |                          |               |
|      |Translation obtained  |                          |               |
|      |by Home Office.       |                          |               |
|67    |Speech by H.E. Mr.Qiu |Chinese Embassy in the    |21 November    |
|      |Xuejun, Chinese       |State of Eritrea          |2015           |
|      |Ambassador to Eritrea,|                          |               |
|      |at the Seminar of     |http://er.chineseembassy.o|               |
|      |FOCAC Summit and      |rg/eng/sghd/t1317164.htm  |               |
|      |China-Africa          |                          |               |
|      |Relations, 20 November|                          |               |
|      |2015 Asmara           |                          |               |
|68    |Review of UK Home     |The Independent Chief     |15 November    |
|      |Office Country        |Inspector of Borders and  |2015           |
|      |Information and       |Immigration               |               |
|      |Guidance - "Eritrea:  |                          |               |
|      |National (incl.       |http://icinspector.indepen|               |
|      |Military) Service"    |dent.gov.uk/wpcontent/uplo|               |
|      |(version 2.0e,        |ads/2016/01/Review-of-Home|               |
|      |September 2015) and   |-Office-CIGs-on-Eritrea-De|               |
|      |"Eritrea: Illegal     |c-2015.pdf                |               |
|      |Exit" (version 2.0e,  |                          |               |
|      |September 2015).      |                          |               |
|      |Prepared for the Chief|                          |               |
|      |Inspector of Borders  |                          |               |
|      |and Immigration and   |                          |               |
|      |the Independent       |                          |               |
|      |Advisory Group on     |                          |               |
|      |Country Information   |                          |               |
|      |(IAGCI)               |                          |               |
|69    |Blog post - reporting |Mu?ller, Tanja            |1 November 2015|
|      |from the global       |                          |               |
|      |fringes - observations|https://tanjarmueller.word|               |
|      |from Eritrea and      |press.com/2015/11/01/media|               |
|      |beyond                |-reporting-from-the-global|               |
|      |                      |-fringes-observations-from|               |
|      |                      |-eritrea-and-beyond/      |               |
|70    |Home Office Response  |UK Home Office            |November 2015  |
|      |to IAGCI Review.      |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea CIG: National |                          |               |
|      |Service and illegal   |                          |               |
|      |exit, September 2015  |                          |               |
|71    |Letter to the         |Inger Stojberg            |29 October 2015|
|      |Ombudsman of the      |                          |               |
|      |Danish Parliament     |                          |               |
|72    |African Dictatorship  |Stevis, Matina and        |21 October 2015|
|      |Fuels Migrant Crisis: |Parkinson, Joe            |               |
|      |Thousands flee        |Wall Street Journal       |               |
|      |isolated Eritrea to   |                          |               |
|      |escape life of        |http://www.wsj.com/article|               |
|      |conscription and      |s/eritreans-flee-conscript|               |
|      |poverty               |ion-and-poverty-adding-to-|               |
|      |                      |the-migrant-crisis-in-euro|               |
|      |                      |pe-1445391364             |               |
|73    |Letter dated 9 October|UN Security Council       |19 October 2015|
|      |2015 from the Chairman|                          |               |
|      |of the Security       |                          |               |
|      |Council Committee     |                          |               |
|      |pursuant to           |                          |               |
|      |resolutions 751 (1992)|                          |               |
|      |and 1907 (2009)       |                          |               |
|      |concerning Somalia and|                          |               |
|      |Eritrea addressed to  |                          |               |
|      |the President of the  |                          |               |
|      |Security Council      |                          |               |
|      |enclosing the Report  |                          |               |
|      |of the Monitoring     |                          |               |
|      |Group on Somalia and  |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea pursuant to   |                          |               |
|      |Security Council      |                          |               |
|      |resolution 2182       |                          |               |
|      |(2014): Eritrea       |                          |               |
|      |(S/2015/802)          |                          |               |
|74    |Eritrea in 2015: Where|Poplak, Richard           |28 September   |
|      |the streets have many |Daily Maverick            |2015           |
|      |names                 |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.dailymaverick.c|               |
|      |                      |o.za/article/2015-09-28-er|               |
|      |                      |itrea-in-2015-where-the-st|               |
|      |                      |reets-have-many-names/ -  |               |
|      |                      |.V06_f2Yqj-k              |               |
|75    |Ex-official says      |Reuters                   |17 September   |
|      |forced labour built   |                          |2015           |
|      |Canada mine in Eritrea|http://www.dailymail.co.uk|               |
|      |test case             |/wires/reuters/article-323|               |
|      |                      |8408/Ex-official-says-forc|               |
|      |                      |ed-labour-built-Canada-Eri|               |
|      |                      |trea-test-case.html       |               |
|76    |The Eritrea Case      |Report of the Danish      |15 September   |
|      |Translation obtained  |Parliamentary Ombudsman   |2015           |
|      |by Home Office.       |(Folketingets Ombudsman)  |               |
|      |                      |(Jorgen Steen Sorensen)   |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.ombudsmanden.dk|               |
|      |                      |/find/nyheder/alle/eritrea|               |
|      |                      |/redegoerelse/            |               |
|77    |Jens Weise Olesen og  |Amnesty International     |10 September   |
|      |Jan Olsen Interview   |                          |2015           |
|      |                      |http://amnesty.dk/nyhedsli|               |
|      |                      |ste/2015/vi-skulle-jo-ogsa|               |
|      |                      |a-kunne-sove-om-natten    |               |
|78    |Eritrea rapporten: Vi |Amnesty International     |10 September   |
|      |skulle jo ogsa kunne  |                          |2015           |
|      |sove om natten (We    |                          |               |
|      |should have been able |                          |               |
|      |to sleep at night)    |                          |               |
|79    |Britain refusing      |Lyons, Kate               |10 September   |
|      |asylum to Eritreans on|The Guardian              |2015           |
|      |back of discredited   |                          |               |
|      |report                |http://www.theguardian.com|               |
|      |                      |/uk-news/2015/sep/10/brita|               |
|      |                      |in-refusing-asylum-eritrea|               |
|      |                      |ns-discredited-report     |               |
|80    |Country Information   |UK Home Office            |September 2015 |
|      |and Guidance -        |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea: National     |https://www.gov.uk/governm|               |
|      |(incl. Military)      |ent/uploads/system/uploads|               |
|      |Service (version 2.0e)|/attachment_data/file/4594|               |
|      |                      |88/Eritrea_-_National__inc|               |
|      |                      |l__Military__Service_-_v2_|               |
|      |                      |0e.pdf                    |               |
|81    |Country Information   |UK Home Office            |September 2015 |
|      |and Guidance -        |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea: Illegal Exit |https://www.gov.uk/governm|               |
|      |(version 2.0e)        |ent/uploads/system/uploads|               |
|      |                      |/attachment_data/file/4594|               |
|      |                      |86/Eritrea_-_Illegal_Exit_|               |
|      |                      |-_v2_0e.pdf               |               |
|82    |Migration figures:    |Amnesty International UK  |27 August 2015 |
|      |government urged to   |Press Release             |               |
|      |'show some basic      |                          |               |
|      |humanity' over global |http://www.amnesty.org.uk/|               |
|      |refugee crisis        |press-releases/migration-f|               |
|      |                      |igures-government-urged-sh|               |
|      |                      |ow-some-basic-humanity-ove|               |
|      |                      |r-global-refugee          |               |
|83    |UK Government Relying |Soltenbert, Anne          |20 August 2015 |
|      |on Discredited Danish |Migrant Voice             |               |
|      |Report to Process     |                          |               |
|      |Eritrean Asylum       |http://www.migrantvoice.or|               |
|      |Applications          |g/home/pagenews/to-process|               |
|      |                      |-eritrean-asylum-applicati|               |
|      |                      |ons.html                  |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.migrantvoice.or|               |
|      |                      |g/blog/uk-government-relyi|               |
|      |                      |ng-on-discredited-danish-r|               |
|      |                      |eport-to-process-eritrean |               |
|84    |Tale of two Eritreans |Mark, Monica              |17 August 2015 |
|      |offers glimpse inside |The Guardian              |               |
|      |Africa's most         |                          |               |
|      |secretive state       |http://www.theguardian.com|               |
|      |                      |/world/2015/aug/17/inside-|               |
|      |                      |eritrea-glimpse-africas-mo|               |
|      |                      |st-secretive-state-two-men|               |
|85    |Human Rights Impact   |Nevsun Resources Ltd      |5 August 2015  |
|      |Assessment of the     |                          |               |
|      |Bisha Mine in Eritrea |http://nevsuncsr.com/case-|               |
|      |(2015 Audit)          |studies/bisha-hria/       |               |
|86    |The Eritrea report:   |Rosset, Damien and Maia   |August 2015    |
|      |Symbolic uses of      |Liodden, Tone Oxford      |               |
|      |expert information in |Monitor of Forced         |               |
|      |asylum politics       |Migration, Vol 5(1) pp    |               |
|      |                      |26-32                     |               |
|87    |Letter to the UK      |Human Rights Watch        |2 July 2015    |
|      |Independent Chief     |                          |               |
|      |Inspector of Borders  |                          |               |
|      |and Immigration on    |                          |               |
|      |Flawed UK Country     |                          |               |
|      |Information and       |                          |               |
|      |Guidance Reports on   |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea               |                          |               |
|88    |Britain's flawed      |Plaut, Martin             |2 July 2015    |
|      |policy on Eritrean    |                          |               |
|      |refugee claims        |https://martinplaut.wordpr|               |
|      |                      |ess.com/2015/07/02/britain|               |
|      |                      |s-flawed-policy-on-eritrea|               |
|      |                      |n-refugee-claims/         |               |
|89    |The True Human Rights |S.P. Arapiles, (University|July 2015      |
|      |Situation in Eritrea: |of London, School of      |               |
|      |The New UK Home Office|Advanced Studies: Refugee |               |
|      |Guidance as a         |Law Initiative Working    |               |
|      |Political Instrument  |Paper No.14)              |               |
|      |for the Prevention of |                          |               |
|      |Migration             |http://hrc-eritrea.org/the|               |
|      |                      |-true-human-rights-situati|               |
|      |                      |on-in-eritrea-the-new-uk-h|               |
|      |                      |ome-office-guidance-as-a-p|               |
|      |                      |olitical-instrument-for-th|               |
|      |                      |e-prevention-of-migration/|               |
|90    |Guidance Note 2011 No |Upper Tribunal Immigration|July 2015      |
|      |2 - Reporting         |and Asylum Chamber        |               |
|      |Decisions of the Upper|                          |               |
|      |Tribunal Immigration  |                          |               |
|      |and Asylum Chamber    |                          |               |
|91    |Home Office guidance  |Anderson, Mark            |30 June 2015   |
|      |on Eritrea based on   |The Guardian              |               |
|      |flawed reports, says  |                          |               |
|      |watchdog              |http://www.theguardian.com|               |
|      |                      |/global-development/2015/j|               |
|      |                      |un/30/home-office-guidance|               |
|      |                      |-eritrea-based-on-flawed-r|               |
|      |                      |eports-watchdog-asylum-see|               |
|      |                      |kers                      |               |
|92    |2014 Country Reports  |US Department of State    |25 June 2015   |
|      |on Human Rights       |                          |               |
|      |Practices - Eritrea   |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |                      |cid/559bd56c28.html       |               |
|93    |Police in Geneva guard|Miles, Tom                |24 June 2015   |
|      |U.N. investigators    |Reuters                   |               |
|      |into Eritrea's human  |                          |               |
|      |rights after threats  |http://www.reuters.com/art|               |
|      |                      |icle/us-eritrea-un-idUSKBN|               |
|      |                      |0P427S20150624            |               |
|94    |House of Lords Chief  |UK Government Whip's      |24 June 2015   |
|      |Whip's letter         |Office, House of Lords    |               |
|      |referencing Foreign   |                          |               |
|      |and Commonwealth      |http://data.parliament.uk/|               |
|      |Office (FCO) meeting  |DepositedPapers/Files/DEP2|               |
|      |with Nevsun.          |015-0526/Letter_on_forced_|               |
|      |                      |labour_in_foreign_owned_mi|               |
|      |                      |nes_in_eritrea.pdf        |               |
|95    |Report of the Special |United Nations General    |19 June 2015   |
|      |Rapporteur on the     |Assembly Human Rights     |               |
|      |situation of human    |Council, twenty-ninth     |               |
|      |rights in Eritrea,    |session, agenda item 4,   |               |
|      |Sheila Keetharuth*.   |Human rights situations   |               |
|      |A/HRC/29/41           |that require the Council's|               |
|      |                      |attention                 |               |
|96    |Eritrea - Last in the |Reporters Without Borders |12 June 2015   |
|      |World Press Freedom   |                          |               |
|      |Index for the Past    |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |Eight Years           |cid/557ad4b84.html        |               |
|97    |Diaspora tax for      |Jones, Sam                |9 June 2015    |
|      |Eritreans living in UK|The Guardian              |               |
|      |investigated by       |                          |               |
|      |Metropolitan police   |                          |               |
|98    |Advance version of the|United Nations General    |5 June 2015    |
|      |Report of the detailed|Assembly Human Rights     |               |
|      |findings of the       |Council, twenty-ninth     |               |
|      |Commission of Inquiry |session, agenda item 4,   |               |
|      |on Human Rights in    |Human rights situations   |               |
|      |Eritrea,              |that require the Council's|               |
|      |A/HRC/29/CRP.1        |attention                 |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.ohchr.org/Docum|               |
|      |                      |ents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/Co|               |
|      |                      |IEritrea/A_HRC_29_CRP-1.pd|               |
|      |                      |f                         |               |
|99    |Report of the         |United Nations General    |4 June 2015    |
|      |commission of inquiry |Assembly Human Rights     |               |
|      |on human rights in    |Council, twenty-ninth     |               |
|      |Eritrea, A/HRC/29/42  |session, agenda item 4,   |               |
|      |                      |Human rights situations   |               |
|      |                      |that require the Council's|               |
|      |                      |attention                 |               |
|101   |Forced Labour         |International Labour      |May - June 2015|
|      |Convention, 1930      |Organization              |               |
|      |(No.29) - Eritrea     |                          |               |
|      |(Ratification: 2000)  |http://www.ilo.org/dyn/nor|               |
|      |Individual Case (CAS) |mlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:131|               |
|      |- Discussion: 2015,   |01:0::NO::P13101_COMMENT_I|               |
|      |Publication: 104th ILC|D:2337201                 |               |
|      |session 2014          |                          |               |
|102   |Penal Code of the     |Eritrean National         |15 May 2015    |
|      |State of Eritrea,     |Legislative Bodies /      |               |
|      |Articles 119-120      |National Authorities      |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |                      |cid/55a51ccc4.html        |               |
|103   |Report by the         |The Independent Chief     |13 May 2015    |
|      |Independent Advisory  |Inspector or Borders and  |               |
|      |Group on Country      |Immigration               |               |
|      |Information on Eritrea|                          |               |
|      |Country Information   |http://icinspector.indepen|               |
|      |and Guidance Reports  |dent.gov.uk/wp-content/upl|               |
|      |produced by the Home  |oads/2015/06/Eritrea-repor|               |
|      |Office                |t-IAGCI-19-May-2015.pdf   |               |
|104   |Home Office response  |UK Home Office            |13 May 2015    |
|      |to the Report by the  |                          |               |
|      |Independent Advisory  |                          |               |
|      |Group on Country      |                          |               |
|      |Information on Eritrea|                          |               |
|      |Country Information   |                          |               |
|      |and Guidance Reports  |                          |               |
|      |produced by the UK    |                          |               |
|      |Home Office           |                          |               |
|105   |GOE Puts into Effect  |Shabait                   |11 May 2015    |
|      |Civil and Penal Codes |                          |               |
|      |and Associated        |http://www.shabait.com/new|               |
|      |Procedures            |s/local-news/19792-goe-put|               |
|      |                      |s-into-effect-civil-and-pe|               |
|      |                      |nal-codes-and-associated-p|               |
|      |                      |rocedures                 |               |
|106   |Eritrea Travel Warning|US Department of State    |6 May 2015     |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |https://travel.state.gov/c|               |
|      |                      |ontent/passports/en/alerts|               |
|      |                      |warnings/eritrea-travel-wa|               |
|      |                      |rning.html                |               |
|107   |'Living risk to risk':|The Guardian              |6 May 2015     |
|      |the new wave of       |                          |               |
|      |African migrants      |                          |               |
|      |deported from Israel  |                          |               |
|108   |USCIRF Annual Report  |United States Commission  |1 May 2015     |
|      |2015 - Tier 1 CPCs    |on International Religious|               |
|      |designated by the     |Freedom                   |               |
|      |State Department and  |                          |               |
|      |recommended by USCIRF:|http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |Eritrea               |cid/554b356615.html       |               |
|109   |EASO Country of Origin|European Asylum Support   |May 2015       |
|      |Information Report -  |Office (EASO)             |               |
|      |Eritrea Country Focus |                          |               |
|      |                      |https://easo.europa.eu/lat|               |
|      |                      |est-news/easo-issues-count|               |
|      |                      |ry-of-origin-information-r|               |
|      |                      |eport-on-eritrea-country-f|               |
|      |                      |ocus/                     |               |
|110   |Eritrea Report: A     |Strategic Initiative for  |May 2015       |
|      |Chronic State of      |Women in the Horn of      |               |
|      |Agony. A Report to the|Africa (SIHA)             |               |
|      |Commission of Inquiry |                          |               |
|      |on Human Rights in    |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea               |                          |               |
|111   |Minutes arising from  |Independent Chief         |27 April 2015  |
|      |the Independent Chief |Inspector of Borders and  |               |
|      |Inspector of Borders  |Immigration               |               |
|      |and Immigration,      |                          |               |
|      |Independent Advisory  |                          |               |
|      |Group on Country      |                          |               |
|      |Information (IAGCI)   |                          |               |
|112   |Eritrea: Utstedelse av|LandInfo                  |15 April 2015  |
|      |utreisetillatelse og  |                          |               |
|      |ulovlig utreise       |http://landinfo.no/asset/3|               |
|      |[Eritrea: Issuance of |122/1/3122_1.pdf          |               |
|      |exit visas and the    |                          |               |
|      |illegal departure]    |                          |               |
|113   |Udsk�ldt dansk        |Nyheder DR dk, Politik    |1 April 2015   |
|      |Eritrea-rapport i brug|                          |               |
|      |i Storbritannien - Den|http://www.dr.dk/nyheder/p|               |
|      |kritiserede           |olitik/udskaeldt-dansk-eri|               |
|      |Eritrea-rapport blev  |trea-rapport-i-brug-i-stor|               |
|      |afvist af             |britannien#               |               |
|      |Udl�ndingestyrelsen,  |                          |               |
|      |men nu bruges den i   |                          |               |
|      |Storbritannien (The   |                          |               |
|      |criticised report on  |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea was rejected  |                          |               |
|      |in Denmark but is used|                          |               |
|      |in the UK)            |                          |               |
|114   |Where there is No Free|The Hotline for Refugees  |April 2015     |
|      |Will - Israel's       |and Migrants/ASSAF        |               |
|      |"Voluntary Return"    |                          |               |
|      |procedure for asylum  |                          |               |
|      |seekers               |                          |               |
|115   |WHO Model List of     |World Health Organization |April 2015     |
|      |Essential Medicines   |                          |               |
|      |(19th Ed), (April     |http://www.who.int/medicin|               |
|      |2015) (Amended August |es/publications/essentialm|               |
|      |2015) Part 24:        |edicines/en/              |               |
|      |Medicines for Mental  |                          |               |
|      |and Behavioural       |                          |               |
|      |Disorders             |                          |               |
|116   |Israeli government to |The Washington Post       |April 2015     |
|      |refugees: Go back to  |                          |               |
|      |Africa or go to prison|                          |               |
|117   |Freedom in the World  |Freedom House             |31 March 2015  |
|      |2015 - Eritrea        |                          |               |
|      |                      |https://freedomhouse.org/r|               |
|      |                      |eport/freedom-world/2015/e|               |
|      |                      |ritrea                    |               |
|118   |Statement on EU Asylum|Europe External Policy    |31 March 2015  |
|      |and Aid Policy to     |Advisers (EEPA)           |               |
|      |Eritrea               |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.eepa.be/wcm/ima|               |
|      |                      |ges/publications/Statement|               |
|      |                      |-on-Eritrean-Refugees-and-|               |
|      |                      |Aid2.pdf                  |               |
|119   |Some Reflections on   |Professor Gaim Kibreab,   |25 March 2015  |
|      |the UK Home Office's  |Human Rights Concern      |               |
|      |Country Information   |Eritrea                   |               |
|      |Guidance Eritrea:     |                          |               |
|      |National (incl.       |http://hrc-eritrea.org/som|               |
|      |Military) Service &   |e-reflections-on-the-uk-ho|               |
|      |Illegal Exit, March   |me-offices-country-informa|               |
|      |2015                  |tion-guidance-eritrea-nati|               |
|      |                      |onal-incl-military-service|               |
|      |                      |-illegal-exit-march-2015/ |               |
|120   |Temanotat Eritrea:    |LandInfo                  |23 March 2015  |
|      |Nasjonaltjeneste      |                          |               |
|      |[Thematic note        |http://landinfo.no/asset/3|               |
|      |Eritrea: National     |097/1/3097_1.pdf          |               |
|      |service]'             |                          |               |
|121   |Eritrea: Reaksjoner   |LandInfo                  |23 March 2015  |
|      |mot hjemvendte        |                          |               |
|      |asyls�kere [Eritrea:  |http://landinfo.no/asset/3|               |
|      |Sanctions             |095/1/3095_1.pdf          |               |
|      |against returnees     |                          |               |
|      |asylum seekers]       |                          |               |
|122   |Response - Eritrea:   |LandInfo                  |23 March 2015  |
|      |Reactions towards     |                          |               |
|      |returning asylum      |                          |               |
|      |seekers               |                          |               |
|123   |Report - Eritrea:     |LandInfo Country of Origin|23 March 2015  |
|      |National Service      |Information Centre        |               |
|124   |Two Danish officials  |Caperi                    |21 March 2015  |
|      |resign over Eritrea   |                          |               |
|      |fact finding report   |http://www.caperi.com/two-|               |
|      |                      |danish-officials-resign-ov|               |
|      |                      |er-eritrea-fact-finding-re|               |
|      |                      |port/                     |               |
|125   |Eritrea: Follow-up    |Amnesty International     |16 March 2015  |
|      |measures needed to    |                          |               |
|      |address systematic    |                          |               |
|      |human rights          |                          |               |
|      |violations: Amnesty   |                          |               |
|      |International's oral  |                          |               |
|      |statement to the 28th |                          |               |
|      |Session of the UN     |                          |               |
|      |Human Rights Council  |                          |               |
|      |(2 - 27 March 2015)   |                          |               |
|126   |Oral Update by Mr.    |Office of the United      |16 March 2015  |
|      |Mike Smith, Chair of  |Nations High Commissioner |               |
|      |the Commission of     |for Human Rights          |               |
|      |Inquiry on Human      |                          |               |
|      |Rights in Eritrea at  |                          |               |
|      |the 28th session of   |                          |               |
|      |the Human Rights      |                          |               |
|      |Council               |                          |               |
|127   |Country Information   |UK Home Office            |13 March 2015  |
|      |and Guidance -        |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea: Illegal Exit |https://www.gov.uk/governm|               |
|      |                      |ent/uploads/system/uploads|               |
|      |                      |/attachment_data/file/4127|               |
|      |                      |16/CIG_-_Eritrea_-_Illegal|               |
|      |                      |_Exit_-_March_2015_-_v1_0.|               |
|      |                      |pdf                       |               |
|128   |Country Information   |UK Home Office            |13 March 2015  |
|      |and Guidance -        |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea: National     |https://www.gov.uk/governm|               |
|      |(incl. Military)      |ent/uploads/system/uploads|               |
|      |Service               |/attachment_data/file/4127|               |
|      |                      |15/CIG_-_Eritrea__National|               |
|      |                      |__incl__Military__Service_|               |
|      |                      |-_March_2015_-_v1_0.pdf   |               |
|129   |Israel deal to deport |Mezzofiore, Gianluca      |13 March 2015  |
|      |Eritrean and Sudanese |International Business    |               |
|      |refugees to Uganda and|Times                     |               |
|      |Rwanda is 'just scare |                          |               |
|      |tactics'              |                          |               |
|130   |Eritrea - Country of  |UK Foreign and            |12 March 2015  |
|      |Concern               |Commonwealth Office       |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |https://www.gov.uk/governm|               |
|      |                      |ent/publications/eritrea-c|               |
|      |                      |ountry-of-concern--2/eritr|               |
|      |                      |ea-country-of-concern     |               |
|131   |Human Rights and      |UK Foreign and            |12 March 2015  |
|      |Democracy Report -    |Commonwealth Office       |               |
|      |Eritrea               |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |                      |cid/551a52ff15.html       |               |
|132   |Subcommittee on       |House of Commons (Canada) |12 March 2015  |
|      |International Human   |                          |               |
|      |Rights of the Standing|http://www.parl.gc.ca/Hous|               |
|      |Committee on Foreign  |ePublications/Publication.|               |
|      |Affairs and           |aspx?DocId=7880351&Languag|               |
|      |International         |e=E&Mode=1                |               |
|      |Development (SDIR,    |                          |               |
|      |Number 060, 2nd       |                          |               |
|      |Session, 41st         |                          |               |
|      |Parliament. Session   |                          |               |
|      |regarding human rights|                          |               |
|      |in Eritrea (with      |                          |               |
|      |specific reference to |                          |               |
|      |Bisha Mine))          |                          |               |
|133   |Head of division      |Nyheder, DR dk, Politik   |5 March 2015   |
|      |defends Eritrea report|                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.dr.dk/Nyheder/A|               |
|      |                      |ndre_sprog/English/2015/03|               |
|      |                      |/05/122325.htm            |               |
|134   |The situation for     |Refugees Welcome          |15 January 2015|
|      |Eritrean refugees in  |                          |               |
|      |Denmark: NEW UPDATE!  |http://refugeeswelcome.dk/|               |
|      |Also in Tigrinya      |aktuelt/the-situation-for-|               |
|      |                      |eritrean-refugees-in-denma|               |
|      |                      |rk                        |               |
|135   |World Report 2015:    |Human Rights Watch        |2015           |
|      |Eritrea - Events of   |                          |               |
|      |2014                  |https://www.hrw.org/world-|               |
|      |                      |report/2015/country-chapte|               |
|      |                      |rs/eritrea                |               |
|136   |Eritrea 2014 Human    |US Department of State    |2015           |
|      |Rights Report         |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.state.gov/docum|               |
|      |                      |ents/organization/236568.p|               |
|      |                      |df                        |               |
|137   |2015 UNHCR country    |UNHCR                     |2015           |
|      |operations profile -  |                          |               |
|      |Sudan                 |                          |               |
|2014                                                                    |
|138   |Eritrea - Delivering  |United Nations Development|31 December    |
|      |Together for Eritrea's|Programme (UNDP)          |2014           |
|      |Development and       |                          |               |
|      |Self-Reliance         |http://reliefweb.int/repor|               |
|      |                      |t/eritrea/united-nations-e|               |
|      |                      |ritrea-newsletter-deliveri|               |
|      |                      |ng-together-eritrea-s-deve|               |
|      |                      |lopment-and-self          |               |
|139   |English translation of|Madote                    |30 December    |
|      |President Isaias      |                          |2014           |
|      |Afwerki's comments on |http://www.madote.com/2015|               |
|      |the new Eritrean      |/01/english-translation-of|               |
|      |Constitution          |-president-isaias.html    |               |
|140   |Harsh criticism of the|Simon Bendsten, Lars      |18 December    |
|      |Danish Immigration    |Norgarrd Pedersen and     |2014           |
|      |Service for           |Morten Crane              |               |
|      |retaliation (H�rd     |Politico                  |               |
|      |kritik af             |                          |               |
|      |Udl�ndingestyrelsen   |http://www.politiko.dk/nyh|               |
|      |for modangreb)        |eder/haard-kritik-af-udlae|               |
|      |                      |ndingestyrelsen-for-modang|               |
|      |                      |reb                       |               |
|141   |Eritrea: Drivers and  |Danish Immigration Service|18 December    |
|      |Root Causes of        |                          |2014           |
|      |Emigration, National  |                          |               |
|      |Service and the       |https://www.nyidanmark.dk/|               |
|      |Possibility of Return |NR/rdonlyres/B28905F5-5C3F|               |
|      |(Report from the      |-409B-8A22-0DF0DACBDAEF/0/|               |
|      |Danish Immigration    |EritreareportEndeligversio|               |
|      |Service's fact finding|n.pdf                     |               |
|      |missions to Ethiopia  |                          |               |
|      |and Eritrea August and|                          |               |
|      |October 2014) Appendix|                          |               |
|      |edition               |                          |               |
|142   |Denmark: Eritrea      |Human Rights Watch        |17 December    |
|      |Immigration Report    |                          |2014           |
|      |Deeply Flawed -       |http://www.hrw.org/news/20|               |
|      |European Governments  |14/12/17/denmark-eritrea-i|               |
|      |Should Rely on UN     |mmigration-report-deeply-f|               |
|      |Reports, Support UN   |lawed                     |               |
|      |Inquiry               |                          |               |
|143   |Eritrea report        |Professor Gaim Kibreab,   |12 December    |
|      |untrustworthy         |Politiken                 |2014           |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://politiken.dk/debat/|               |
|      |                      |ECE2481865/derfor-er-eritr|               |
|      |                      |ea-rapporten-utrovaerdig  |               |
|144   |Open Letter to the    |Human Rights Concern      |10 December    |
|      |Danish Immigration    |Eritrea                   |2014           |
|      |Service               |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://hrc-eritrea.org/ope|               |
|      |                      |n-letter-to-danish-immigra|               |
|      |                      |tion-service/             |               |
|145   |Eritreans sue Canadian|The Guardian              |9 December 2014|
|      |mining firm Nevsun    |                          |               |
|      |over human rights     |http://www.theguardian.com|               |
|      |abuses                |/global-development/2014/d|               |
|      |                      |ec/09/eritrea-canadian-min|               |
|      |                      |ing-nevsun-human-rights-ab|               |
|      |                      |uses                      |               |
|146   |Danish Immigration    |Danish Immigration Service|9 December 2014|
|      |Service Press Release:|                          |               |
|      |The Danish Immigration|                          |               |
|      |Service's assessment  |                          |               |
|      |of certain general    |                          |               |
|      |aspects concerning    |                          |               |
|      |asylum seekers from   |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea               |                          |               |
|147   |Danish Immigration    |Danish Immigration Service|9 December 2014|
|      |Service Press Release |                          |               |
|      |regarding             |                          |               |
|      |correspondence with   |https://www.nyidanmark.dk/|               |
|      |Professor Kibreab.    |da-dk/nyheder/pressemeddel|               |
|      |                      |elser/udlaendingeservice/2|               |
|      |                      |012/december/udlaendingest|               |
|      |                      |yrelsens_vurdering_af_viss|               |
|      |                      |e_generelle_forhold_vedroe|               |
|      |                      |rende_asylansoegere_fra_er|               |
|      |                      |itrea.html                |               |
|148   |Blog post - 'But my   |Mu?ller, Tanja            |7 December 2014|
|      |trip is still not     |                          |               |
|      |over, because I don't |https://tanjarmueller.word|               |
|      |get the rights I am   |press.com/2014/12/07/but-m|               |
|      |entitled to' - what   |y-trip-is-still-not-over-b|               |
|      |the row over a        |ecause-i-dont-get-the-righ|               |
|      |Country-of-Origin-Repo|ts-i-am-entitled-to-what-t|               |
|      |rt on Eritrea reveals |he-row-over-a-country-of-o|               |
|      |about human rights    |rigin-report-on-eritrea-re|               |
|      |politics.             |veals-about-human-rights-p|               |
|      |                      |o/                        |               |
|149   |Tidslinje. Sadan har  |Lange Olsen, T., Nielsen, |3 December 2014|
|      |Eritrea-sagen udviklet|N. and Blem Larsen, J.    |               |
|      |sig (Timeline. How the|Politik                   |               |
|      |Eritrea case          |                          |               |
|      |developed)            |http://www.dr.dk/Nyheder/P|               |
|      |                      |olitik/2014/12/03/102320.h|               |
|      |                      |tm                        |               |
|150   |Denmark: Anger over   |World Bulletin            |2 December 2014|
|      |bid to curb asylum for|                          |               |
|      |Eritreans.            |http://www.worldbulletin.n|               |
|      |Danish-Eritrea report |et/denmark/149687/denmark-|               |
|      |faces heaving         |anger-over-bid-to-curb-asy|               |
|      |criticism from experts|lum-for-eritreans         |               |
|      |for being             |                          |               |
|      |discriminatory and    |                          |               |
|      |disregarding facts    |                          |               |
|151   |Professor: �Rapporten |Schmidt, Legarth          |1 December 2014|
|      |om Eritrea er ikke det|Politiken                 |               |
|      |papir v�rd, den er    |                          |               |
|      |skrevet p�           |http://politiken.dk/indlan|               |
|      |(Professor: "The      |d/politik/ECE2470684/profe|               |
|      |report on Eritrea is  |ssor-rapporten-om-eritrea-|               |
|      |not worth the paper it|er-ikke-det-papir-vaerd-de|               |
|      |is written on")       |n-er-skrevetpaa/          |               |
|152   |Eritrea-rapport tegner|Amnesty International     |1 December 2014|
|      |misvisende billede    |                          |               |
|      |[Eritrea report paints|www.amnesty.dk/artikel/eri|               |
|      |misleading picture]   |trea/eritrea-rapport-tegne|               |
|      |                      |r-misvisende-billede      |               |
|153   |Danish report on      |The Local                 |1 December 2014|
|      |Eritrea faces heavy   |                          |               |
|      |criticism             |http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-b|               |
|      |                      |in/texis/vtx/refdaily?pass|               |
|      |                      |=52fc6fbd5&id=5481667c8   |               |
|154   |Fact Finding Mission  |UNHCR                     |December 2014  |
|      |Report of the Danish  |                          |               |
|      |Immigration Service,  |http://www.ft.dk/samling/2|               |
|      |"Eritrea - Drivers and|0141/almdel/uui/bilag/41/1|               |
|      |Root Causes of        |435206                    |               |
|      |Emigration, National  |                          |               |
|      |Service and the       |                          |               |
|      |Possibility of Return,|                          |               |
|      |Country of Origin     |                          |               |
|      |Information for Use in|                          |               |
|      |the Asylum            |                          |               |
|      |Determination         |                          |               |
|      |Process", UNHCR's     |                          |               |
|      |perspective           |                          |               |
|155   |United Nations Eritrea|UN Communications Groups  |December 2014  |
|      |Newsletter -          |                          |               |
|      |Delivering Together   |                          |               |
|      |for Eritrea's         |                          |               |
|      |Development and       |                          |               |
|      |Self-Reliance,        |                          |               |
|156   |An Eritrean official  |Werede, F.                |24 November    |
|      |'promises' policy     |Stop Slavery in Eritrea   |2014           |
|      |changes on the        |                          |               |
|      |indefinite national   |http://asmarino.com/news/4|               |
|      |service               |078-an-eritrean-official-p|               |
|      |                      |romises-policy-changes-on-|               |
|      |                      |the-indefinite-national-se|               |
|      |                      |rvice                     |               |
|157   |Sharp increase in     |Edwards, Adrian           |14 November    |
|      |number of Eritrean    |UNHCR Press Release       |2014           |
|      |refugees and          |http://www.unhcr.org/5465f|               |
|      |asylum-seekers in     |ea1381.html               |               |
|      |Europe, Ethiopia and  |                          |               |
|      |Sudan                 |                          |               |
|158   |Eritrea: Drivers and  |Danish Immigration Service|November 2014  |
|      |Root Causes of        |                          |               |
|      |Emigration, National  |                          |               |
|      |Service and the       |                          |               |
|      |Possibility of Return |                          |               |
|      |(Report from the      |                          |               |
|      |Danish Immigration    |                          |               |
|      |Service's fact finding|                          |               |
|      |missions to Ethiopia  |                          |               |
|      |and Eritrea August and|                          |               |
|      |October 2014)         |                          |               |
|159   |Intense Anxiety       |Awate.com                 |23 October 2014|
|      |Engulfing Eritrea     |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://awate.com/intense-a|               |
|      |                      |nxiety-engulfing-eritrea/ |               |
|160   |The Open-Ended        |Professor Gaim Kibreab,   |October 2014   |
|      |Eritrean National     |European Country of Origin|               |
|      |Service: The Driver of|Information Network       |               |
|      |Forced Migration.     |                          |               |
|      |Paper for the European|https://www.ecoi.net/file_|               |
|      |Asylum Support Office |upload/90_1416473628_gaim-|               |
|      |Practical Cooperation |kibreab-the-open-ended-eri|               |
|      |Meeting on Eritrea,   |trean-national-service-the|               |
|      |15-16 October 2014    |-driver-of-forced-migratio|               |
|      |Valleta, Malta.       |n.pdf                     |               |
|161   |Eritrea: Situation of |Immigration and Refugee   |10 September   |
|      |people returning to   |Board of Canada           |2014           |
|      |the country after they|                          |               |
|      |spent time abroad,    |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |claimed refugee       |cid/54295d754.html        |               |
|      |status, or sought     |                          |               |
|      |asylum (2012-August   |                          |               |
|      |2014) (ERI104941.E)   |                          |               |
|162   |Eritrean Border Guards|Sudan Tribune             |22 August 2014 |
|      |Shoot Dead 10         |                          |               |
|      |Civilians Trying to   |http://www.sudantribune.co|               |
|      |Flee                  |m/spip.php?article52134   |               |
|163   |Eritrean female       |Shabait.com               |20 August 2014 |
|      |student receives      |                          |               |
|      |academic award in     |http://www.shabait.com/new|               |
|      |Sudan                 |s/local-news/17711-eritrea|               |
|      |                      |n-female-student-receives-|               |
|      |                      |academic-award-in-sudan-  |               |
|164   |Update Briefing       |International Crisis Group|8 August 2014  |
|      |(Africa briefing No   |                          |               |
|      |100) Eritrea: Ending  |                          |               |
|      |the Exodus?           |http://www.crisisgroup.org|               |
|      |                      |/en/regions/africa/horn-of|               |
|      |                      |-africa/ethiopia-eritrea/b|               |
|      |                      |100-eritrea-ending-the-exo|               |
|      |                      |dus.aspx                  |               |
|165   |The Law of the        |Harris, O'Boyle and       |24 July 2014   |
|      |European Convention of|Warbrick, The Law of the  |               |
|      |Human Rights          |European Convention of    |               |
|      |                      |Human Rights (Oxford, 3rd |               |
|      |                      |Edition) p 286            |               |
|166   |26/24 Situation of    |United Nations General    |14 July 2014   |
|      |human rights in       |Assembly Human Rights     |               |
|      |Eritrea,              |Council, twenty-sixth     |               |
|      |A/HRC/RES/26/24       |session, agenda item 4,   |               |
|      |                      |Human rights situations   |               |
|      |                      |that require the Council's|               |
|      |                      |attention                 |               |
|167   |Norway Minister       |The Guardian              |27 June 2014   |
|      |Threatens to Deport   |                          |               |
|      |Eritrean Migrants     |http://www.theguardian.com|               |
|      |                      |/global-development/2014/j|               |
|      |                      |un/27/norway-deport-eritre|               |
|      |                      |an-migrants-asylum-seekers|               |
|      |                      |-immigration              |               |
|168   |Report of the Special |UN Human Rights Council   |13 May 2014    |
|      |Rapporteur on the     |                          |               |
|      |situation of human    |https://www.hrw.org/world-|               |
|      |rights in Eritrea,    |report/2013/country-chapte|               |
|      |Sheila B. Keetharuth  |rs/eritrea                |               |
|169   |Sudan: Stop Deporting |Human Rights Watch        |8 May 2014     |
|      |Eritreans - 30 Forced |                          |               |
|      |Back to Eritrea,      |https://www.hrw.org/news/2|               |
|      |Including 6 Registered|014/05/08/sudan-stop-depor|               |
|      |Refugees              |ting-eritreans            |               |
|170   |Country Cooperation   |World Health Organisation |5 May 2014     |
|      |Strategy at a Glance  |                          |               |
|      |(Eritrea)             |http://www.who.int/country|               |
|      |                      |focus/cooperation_strategy|               |
|      |                      |/ccsbrief_eri_en.pdf      |               |
|171   |Large Numbers of      |Awate                     |30 April 2014  |
|      |Trafficked Eritreans  |                          |               |
|      |Expected in Europe    |http://awate.com/large-num|               |
|      |                      |bers-of-trafficked-eritrea|               |
|      |                      |ns-expected-in-europe/    |               |
|172   |Eritrea: how the      |Plaut, Martin             |16 February    |
|      |London embassy forced |                          |2014           |
|      |Eritreans to pay the  |                          |               |
|      |illegal 2% tax - full |                          |               |
|      |report                |                          |               |
|173   |Human Rights &        |Tronvoll, K., and         |2014           |
|      |Political Development |Mekonnen, D.R., The       |               |
|      |in Eritrea            |African Garrison State    |               |
|      |                      |pp 100-103                |               |
|174   |Report 2014-15, The   |Amnesty International     |2014           |
|      |State of the World's  |                          |               |
|      |Human Rights - Eritrea|http://www.ecoi.net/local_|               |
|      |                      |link/297399/444527_de.html|               |
|175   |The Law of Refugee    |Hathaway and Foster       |2014           |
|      |Status                |(Cambridge University     |               |
|      |                      |Press, 2nd edn, 2014), pp |               |
|      |                      |481-489                   |               |
|176   |Eritrea 2013 Human    |US Department of State    |2014           |
|      |Rights Report         |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.state.gov/docum|               |
|      |                      |ents/organization/220321.p|               |
|      |                      |df                        |               |
|177   |Guidance on Article 4 |European Council /        |2014           |
|      |of the Convention -   |European Court of Human   |               |
|      |Prohibition of Slavery|Rights                    |               |
|      |and Forced Labour     |                          |               |
|178   |World Report 2014:    |Human Rights Watch        |2014           |
|      |Eritrea - Events of   |                          |               |
|      |2013                  |                          |               |
|2013                                                                    |
|179   |Researching Country of|The Austrian Red          |23 October 2013|
|      |Origin Information -  |Cross/Austrian Centre for |               |
|      |Training Manual, 2013 |Country of Origin and     |               |
|      |edition               |Asylum Research and       |               |
|      |                      |Documentation (ACCORD)    |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.coi-training.ne|               |
|      |                      |t/handbook/Researching-Cou|               |
|      |                      |ntry-of-Origin-Information|               |
|      |                      |-2013-edition-ACCORD-COI-T|               |
|      |                      |raining-manual.pdf        |               |
|180   |Eritrea Mental Health |Psychology in Africa      |13 August 2013 |
|      |Profile               |                          |               |
|181   |More PhD Scholars from|TesfaNews                 |18 July 2013   |
|      |Eritrea Begin Studies |                          |               |
|      |at JKUAT              |http://www.tesfanews.net/m|               |
|      |                      |ore-phd-scholars-from-erit|               |
|      |                      |rea-begin-studies-at-jkuat|               |
|      |                      |/                         |               |
|182   |Eritrea: Submission to|Human Rights Watch        |20 June 2013   |
|      |the Universal Periodic|                          |               |
|      |Review                |http://www.hrw.org/news/20|               |
|      |                      |13/06/20/eritrea-submissio|               |
|      |                      |n-universal-periodic-revie|               |
|      |                      |w                         |               |
|183   |Country Report -      |Article 19                |3 June 2013    |
|      |Eritrea: A Nation     |                          |               |
|      |Silenced              |https://www.article19.org/|               |
|      |                      |resources.php/resource/349|               |
|      |                      |4/en/eritrea:-a-nation-sil|               |
|      |                      |enced                     |               |
|184   |Report of the Special |UN Human Rights Council   |28 May 2013    |
|      |Rapporteur, Sheila B. |                          |               |
|      |Keetharuth, on the    |                          |               |
|      |situation of human    |                          |               |
|      |rights in Eritrea, pp |                          |               |
|      |11 - 12               |                          |               |
|185   |Eritrea jailed 10,000 |TVC News (Asmara)         |9 May 2013     |
|      |political prisoners:  |reporting information from|               |
|      |Amnesty               |Amnesty International     |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://tvcnews.tv/?q=artic|               |
|      |                      |le/eritrea-jailed-10000-po|               |
|      |                      |litical-prisoners-amnesty |               |
|186   |Eritrea: 20 Years of  |Amnesty International     |9 May 2013     |
|      |Independence, But     |                          |               |
|      |Still No Freedom      |                          |               |
|187   |Hear No Evil: Forced  |Human Rights Watch        |15 January 2013|
|      |Labor and Corporate   |                          |               |
|      |Responsibility in     |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |Eritrea's Mining      |cid/50f950a22.html        |               |
|      |Sector                |                          |               |
|188   |The National          |Professor Gaim Kibreab    |2013           |
|      |Service/Warsai-Yikealo|Journal of Eastern African|               |
|      |Development Campaign  |Studies Vol 7(4) pp       |               |
|      |and Forced Migration  |630-649                   |               |
|      |in Post-Independence  |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea               |http://cdrie.net/index.php|               |
|      |                      |?option=com_content&view=a|               |
|      |                      |rticle&id=320:the-negative|               |
|      |                      |-effects-of-the-national-s|               |
|      |                      |ervice-and-the-warsai-yike|               |
|      |                      |alo-development-campaign-a|               |
|      |                      |nd-forced-migration-in-pos|               |
|      |                      |t-independence-eritrea&cat|               |
|      |                      |id=34:english-articles&Ite|               |
|      |                      |mid=53                    |               |
|189   |Only in Asmara        |Stallard, Natasha         |2013           |
|      |                      |Brownbook                 |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://brownbook.me/only-i|               |
|      |                      |n-asmara/                 |               |
|190   |Eritrea 2012 Human    |US Department of State    |2013           |
|      |Rights Report         |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.state.gov/docum|               |
|      |                      |ents/organization/204328.p|               |
|      |                      |df                        |               |
|191   |World Report 2013:    |Human Rights Watch        |2013           |
|      |Eritrea               |                          |               |
|      |                      |https://www.hrw.org/world-|               |
|      |                      |report/2013/country-chapte|               |
|      |                      |rs/eritrea                |               |
|2012                                                                    |
|192   |Beyond the siege state|Mu?ller, Tanja Review of  |12 September   |
|      |- tracing hybridity   |African Political Economy |2012           |
|      |during a recent visit |Vol 39(133) September     |               |
|      |to Eritrea            |2012, p 455               |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.tandfonline.com|               |
|      |                      |/doi/abs/10.1080/03056244.|               |
|      |                      |2012.710839               |               |
|193   |Home Office COI Report|UK Home Office            |17 August 2012 |
|      |on Eritrea, paragraph |                          |               |
|      |9.23 onwards          |http://www.ukba.homeoffice|               |
|      |                      |.gov.uk/sitecontent/docume|               |
|      |                      |nts/policyandlaw/coi/eritr|               |
|      |                      |ea/report-08-112.pdf?view=|               |
|      |                      |Binary                    |               |
|194   |EASO Country of Origin|European Asylum Support   |July 2012      |
|      |Information report    |Office (EASO)             |               |
|      |methodology           |                          |               |
|195   |Agreed Minutes.       |Presentation to Federal   |28 June 2012   |
|      |Presentation by David |Office for Migration,     |               |
|      |Bozzoni, 16 February  |Berne                     |               |
|      |2012 - National       |                          |               |
|      |Service and State     |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |Structures in Eritrea |cid/5084f4d72.html        |               |
|196   |Escaping Eritrea: Why |Connell, Dan Middle East  |2012           |
|      |They Flee and What    |Report, Fall 2012, p 264  |               |
|      |They Face             |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.danconnell.net/|               |
|      |                      |sites/default/files/connel|               |
|      |                      |l-eritrea refs 8.17.12.pdf|               |
|2011                                                                    |
|197   |Resolution 2023 (2011)|UN Security Council       |5 December 2011|
|198   |Egypt: Don't Deport   |Human Rights Watch        |15 November    |
|      |Eritreans - Those     |                          |2011           |
|      |Forcibly Returned Face|https://www.hrw.org/news/2|               |
|      |Likely Persecution    |011/11/15/egypt-dont-depor|               |
|      |                      |t-eritreans               |               |
|199   |Letter dated 18 July  |UN Security Council       |18 July 2011   |
|      |2011 from the Chairman|                          |               |
|      |of the Security       |                          |               |
|      |Council Committee     |                          |               |
|      |pursuant to           |                          |               |
|      |resolutions 751 (1992)|                          |               |
|      |and 1907 (2009)       |                          |               |
|      |concerning Somalia and|                          |               |
|      |Eritrea addressed to  |                          |               |
|      |the President of the  |                          |               |
|      |Security Council      |                          |               |
|      |enclosing the Report  |                          |               |
|      |of the Monitoring     |                          |               |
|      |Group on Somalia and  |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea pursuant to   |                          |               |
|      |Security Council      |                          |               |
|      |resolution 1916 (2010)|                          |               |
|      |(S/2011/433)          |                          |               |
|200   |Eligibility Guidelines|UNHCR                     |20 April 2011  |
|      |for Assessing the     |                          |               |
|      |International         |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |Protection Needs of   |cid/4dafe0ec2.html        |               |
|      |Asylum-Seekers from   |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea               |                          |               |
|      |(HCR/EG/ERT/11/01)    |                          |               |
|201   |Mental Health Atlas   |World Health Organization |2011           |
|      |2011 - Department of  |                          |               |
|      |Mental Health and     |                          |               |
|      |Substance Abuse, World|                          |               |
|      |Health Organization.  |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea - General     |                          |               |
|      |Information           |                          |               |
|202   |Direct Request (CEACR)|International Labour      |2011           |
|      |- adopted 2010,       |Organisation              |               |
|      |published 100th ILC   |                          |               |
|      |session (2011). Forced|http://www.ilo.org/dyn/nor|               |
|      |Labour Convention,    |mlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:131|               |
|      |1930 - Eritrea        |00:0::NO::P13100_COMMENT_I|               |
|      |(Ratification: 2000)  |D:2337201                 |               |
|2010                                                                    |
|203   |EU common guidelines  |European Country of Origin|November 2010  |
|      |on (Joint) Fact       |Sponsorship (ECS)         |               |
|      |Finding Missions: a   |                          |               |
|      |practical tool to     |                          |               |
|      |assist member states  |                          |               |
|      |in organizing (joint) |                          |               |
|      |Fact Finding Missions |                          |               |
|204   |Eritrean National List|ENLM 5th edition          |2010           |
|      |of Medicines          |                          |               |
|2009                                                                    |
|205   |Denmark's             |West-info                 |9 September    |
|      |anti-immigration      |                          |2009           |
|      |adverts               |http://www.westinfo.eu/den|               |
|      |                      |marks-anti-immigration-adv|               |
|      |                      |erts/                     |               |
|206   |Eritrea - Service for |Human Rights Watch        |16 April 2009  |
|      |Life - State          |                          |               |
|      |Repression and        |https://www.hrw.org/sites/|               |
|      |Indefinite            |default/files/reports/erit|               |
|      |Conscription in       |rea0409webwcover_0.pdf    |               |
|      |Eritrea               |                          |               |
|207   |Eritrea: A Dream      |Professor Gaim Kibreab    |2009           |
|      |Deferred              |(Oxford: James Currey,    |               |
|      |                      |2009)                     |               |
|208   |Forced labour in      |Professor Gaim Kibreab The|2009           |
|      |Eritrea *             |Journal of Modern African |               |
|      |                      |Studies, Vol 47(1) pp 41 -|               |
|      |                      |72                        |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://ehrea.org/force.pdf|               |
|209   |The lasting struggle  |Tronvoll, K, Oslo Center  |2009           |
|      |for freedom in        |for Peace and Human Rights|               |
|      |Eritrea, pp 83 - 85   |                          |               |
|2008                                                                    |
|210   |General Sebhat Ephrem,|Meadna                    |2008           |
|      |'Kelemetiyk mis       |                          |               |
|      |General Sebhat Ephrem"|http://www.meadna.com/busi|               |
|      |(Interview with       |ness%20page/medna%20news%2|               |
|      |General Sebhat        |0pages/sphatinterview/spha|               |
|      |Ephrem), Teatek, 18-19|teinterview-teatek.html   |               |
|      |June 2008, Parts 1-13 |                          |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |(The interview was    |                          |               |
|      |conducted when        |                          |               |
|      |General Sebhat Ephrem |                          |               |
|      |was a Minister of     |                          |               |
|      |Defence)              |                          |               |
|211   |Common EU Guidelines  |European Commission       |April 2008     |
|      |for Processing Country|                          |               |
|      |of Origin Information |                          |               |
|      |(COI)                 |                          |               |
|      |http://www.refworld.or|                          |               |
|      |g/docid/48493f7f2.html|                          |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|2007                                                                    |
|212   |The Refugee in        |Goodwin-Gill and McAdam   |2007           |
|      |International Law.    |(Oxford University Press, |               |
|      |Loss and Denial of    |3rd edn, 2007), p 139 and |               |
|      |Refugee Status and its|143                       |               |
|      |Benefits              |                          |               |
|2006                                                                    |
|213   |Three More Orthodox   |World Watch Monitor       |19 May 2006    |
|      |Church Leaders Jailed |                          |               |
|      |                      |https://www.worldwatchmoni|               |
|      |                      |tor.org/2006/05-May/newsar|               |
|      |                      |ticle_4374.html/          |               |
|214   |WHO - AIMS Report on  |World Health Organization |2006           |
|      |Mental Health System  |                          |               |
|      |in Eritrea            |                          |               |
|2004                                                                    |
|215   |ERITREA - 'You have no|Amnesty International     |May 2004       |
|      |right to ask'         |                          |               |
|      |Government resists    |http://web.amnesty.org/lib|               |
|      |scrutiny on human     |rary/Index/ENGAFR640032004|               |
|      |rights                |                          |               |
|2003                                                                    |
|216   |Expert roundtable     |UNHCR                     |June 2003      |
|      |organized by the      |                          |               |
|      |United Nations High   |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |Commissioner for      |cid/470a33bcd.html        |               |
|      |Refugees and the      |                          |               |
|      |Carnegie Endowment for|                          |               |
|      |International Peace   |                          |               |
|      |UNHCR Expert          |                          |               |
|      |Roundtable (3-4 May   |                          |               |
|      |2001)                 |                          |               |
|      |Summary Conclusions:  |                          |               |
|      |Cessation of Refugee  |                          |               |
|      |Status                |                          |               |
|217   |Guidelines on         |UNHCR                     |10 February    |
|      |International         |                          |2003           |
|      |Protection No. 3:     |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |Cessation of Refugee  |cid/3e50de6b4.html        |               |
|      |Status under Article  |                          |               |
|      |1C(5) and (6) of the  |                          |               |
|      |1951 Convention       |                          |               |
|      |relating to the Status|                          |               |
|      |of Refugees (the      |                          |               |
|      |"Ceased Circumstances"|                          |               |
|      |Clauses),             |                          |               |
|      |HCR/GIP/03/03         |                          |               |
|2002                                                                    |
|218   |Decision regarding    |REPORTS OF INTERNATIONAL  |13 April 2002  |
|      |delimitation of the   |ARBITRAL AWARDS - RECUEIL |               |
|      |border between Eritrea|DES SENTENCES ARBITRALES, |               |
|      |and Ethiopia          |United Nations, volume XXV|               |
|      |                      |pp 83-195                 |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://legal.un.org/riaa/c|               |
|      |                      |ases/vol_XXV/83-195.pdf   |               |
|1997                                                                    |
|219   |The Constitution of   |Constitution Finder       |23 May 1997    |
|      |Eritrea Ratified by   |                          |               |
|      |the Constituent       |http://confinder.richmond.|               |
|      |Assembly on May 23,   |edu/admin/docs/Eritrea1997|               |
|      |1997                  |English.pdf               |               |
|1995                                                                    |
|220   |Translation of        |Eritrean Gazette No 11    |23 October 1995|
|      |Proclamation          |                          |               |
|      |No.82/1995,           |                          |               |
|      |Proclamation on       |                          |               |
|      |National Service      |                          |               |
|1992                                                                    |
|221   |Eritrea, Regulation No|Eritrean National         |15 July 1992   |
|      |4/1992 on Travel      |Legislative Bodies /      |               |
|      |Documents and         |National Authorities      |               |
|      |Immigration           |                          |               |
|      |                      |http://www.refworld.org/do|               |
|      |                      |cid/3ae6b4e02a.html       |               |
|222   |Eritrea, Proclamation |Eritrean National         |1992           |
|      |No 24/1992 issued to  |Legislative Bodies /      |               |
|      |regulate the issuing  |National Authorities      |               |
|      |of travel documents,  |                          |               |
|      |entry and exit visa   |http://www.refworld.org/cg|               |
|      |from Eritrea, and to  |i-bin/texis/vtx/rwmain/ope|               |
|      |control residence     |ndocpdf.pdf?reldoc=y&docid|               |
|      |permits of foreigners |=54c0d9d44                |               |
|      |in Eritrea            |                          |               |
|223   |Cessation of Status - |UNHCR's Executive         |1992           |
|      |Executive Committee   |Committee                 |               |
|      |Conclusion No 69      |                          |               |
|      |(XLIII)               |http://www.unhcr.org/3ae68|               |
|      |                      |c431c.html                |               |
|1957                                                                    |
|224   |Articles 296-302 of   |Eritrean National         |23 July 1957   |
|      |Proclamation No. 158  |Legislative Bodies /      |               |
|      |of 1957, the Penal    |National Authorities      |               |
|      |Code of Ethiopia      |                          |               |
|1930                                                                    |
|225   |Forced Labour         |International Labour      |1930           |
|      |Convention, 1930      |Organization              |               |
|      |(No.29) Convention    |                          |               |
|      |concerning forced or  |http://www.ilo.org/dyn/nor|               |
|      |compulsory labour     |mlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:121|               |
|      |(Entry into force: 01 |00:0::NO:12100:P12100_INST|               |
|      |May 1932) Adoption:   |RUMENT_ID:312174:NO       |               |
|      |Geneva, 14th ILC      |                          |               |
|      |Session (28 Jun 1930) |                          |               |
|1926                                                                    |
|226   |Slavery Convention    |United Nations Human      |1926           |
|      |Signed at Geneva on 25|Rights Office of the High |               |
|      |September 1926        |Commissioner              |               |
|      |Entry into force: 9   |                          |               |
|      |March 1927            |                          |               |
|Undated                                                                 |
|227   |Procedure for         |Independent Chief         |Undated        |
|      |commissioning reviews |Inspector of Borders and  |               |
|      |and Independent       |Immigration               |               |
|      |Advisory Group on     |                          |               |
|      |Country Information   |                          |               |
|      |(IAGCI) terms of      |                          |               |
|      |reference             |                          |               |
|228   |The Home Office's     |                          |Undated        |
|      |covering response to  |                          |               |
|      |the IAGCI reviews of  |                          |               |
|      |Eritrea, Syria, Libya |                          |               |
|      |and Iraq              |                          |               |
|229   |Response of the       |                          |Undated        |
|      |Population,           |                          |               |
|      |Immigration and Border|                          |               |
|      |Authority of Israel to|                          |               |
|      |questions put by the  |                          |               |
|      |Home Office's Country |                          |               |
|      |Policy and Information|                          |               |
|      |Team                  |                          |               |
|230   |Eritrea -             |European Commission       |Undated        |
|      |International         |Article                   |               |
|      |Cooperation and       |                          |               |
|      |Development - European|                          |               |
|      |Commission            |                          |               |
|231   |Foreign Travel Advice |Gov.UK                    |Undated        |
|      |- Eritrea             |                          |               |
|      |(accessed 6 June 2016)|https://www.gov.uk/foreign|               |
|      |                      |-travel-advice/eritrea/ent|               |
|      |                      |ry-requirements           |               |
|232   |Critical Observation  |Professor Gaim Kibreab    |Undated        |
|      |on the Report of the  |Fithinews.com             |               |
|      |Danish Immigration    |                          |               |
|      |Service's Alleged Fact|http://fithinews.com/docs/|               |
|      |finding Missions to   |Critical_Observation_on_th|               |
|      |Ethiopia and Eritrea  |e_Report_of_the_Danish_Imm|               |
|      |(August and October   |igration_Services_Alleged_|               |
|      |2014)                 |Fact_finding_Missions_to_E|               |
|      |                      |thiopia_and_Eritrea_Final.|               |
|      |                      |docx                      |               |
|233   |Corruption by Country |Transparency International|Undated        |
|      |/ Territory           |                          |               |
|      |                      |                          |               |
|      |                      |https://www.transparency.o|               |
|      |                      |rg/country/#ERI           |               |
|234   |Appendix I -          |The Independent Chief     |Undated        |
|      |Translation of        |Inspector of Borders and  |               |
|      |Proclamation 17 (1991)|Immigration               |               |
|      |and Proclamation 1    |                          |               |
|      |(1995)                |                          |               |


