

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Restivo (EEA - prisoner transfer) [2016] UKUT 00449(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 8 September 2016                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                       Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DANILO RESTIVO

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Strachan QC, counsel instructed by SSHD
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkin, counsel instructed by David Wyld & Co,
solicitors

The European Framework Decision  2008/909/JHA  has  replaced  the  framework
previously set out in the Council of Europe Convention on  the  Transfer  of
Sentenced Persons, itself supplemented by the Protocol of 18 December  1997,
to provide the framework within which a  request  may  be  made  to  another
Member State for the transfer of an EEA national  sentenced  in  the  United
Kingdom to serve that sentence in his own country.  In  the  United  Kingdom
context, it is a precondition for making a transfer request  that  there  be
in place a deportation order. A decision to make a deportation order is  not
a decision to transfer a serving prisoner to another Member State  to  serve
his prison there and  so  in  any  appeal  against  a  decision  to  make  a
deportation order the Tribunal is not concerned with whether  there  is  any
legal impediment to such a transfer taking place.

Where the personal conduct of a person represents  a  genuine,  present  and
sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of
society, the fact that such threat is managed while that person  serves  his
or her prison sentence is not itself  material  to  the  assessment  of  the
threat he or she  poses.  The  threat  exists,  whether  or  not  it  cannot
generate further  offending  simply  because  the  person  concerned,  being
imprisoned, has significantly less opportunity to  commit  further  criminal
offences.

                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

   1. On 29 June 2011, before the Crown Court at Winchester, the  respondent
      was convicted of murder, an offence committed on 12 November 2002, for
      which he was sentenced to life imprisonment, the  term  to  be  served
      being subsequently amended by the Court of Appeal from the whole  life
      term imposed by the trial judge to a minimum term of 40 years.


   2. The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  ("SSHD")  has  been
      granted permission to appeal against the decision of a  panel  of  the
      First-tier  Tribunal,  by  a  determination  promulgated  following  a
      hearing on 23 April 2014, to allow the respondent's appeal  against  a
      decision to  make  a  deportation  order  as  a  consequence  of  that
      conviction. Permission  was  granted  by  Haddon-Cave  J  following  a
      successful "Cart challenge" to the decision of an Upper Tribunal judge
      who had refused to grant permission to appeal.  In granting permission
      to bring the application for judicial review Cobb J said:


           "The  application  raises  important  points  of  principle   in
           relation to the correct interpretation of the relevant statutory
           instruments for the  deportation  and  transfer  of  a  prisoner
           within  the  EEA;  given  the   particular   context   of   this
           offence/offender,  there  is  a  compelling  reason  to  achieve
           clarity."


      Which view was echoed by Hadden-Cave J who said in granting permission
      to appeal:

           "In my view Cobb J was right to find that the application in the
           present case raised important points  of  principle  as  to  the
           correct interpretation of  the  [Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
           2006] and the Framework Agreement leading to the deportation and
           transfer of prisoners within the EEA."


   3. Before examining the reasons given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      allowing the appeal and the grounds upon which  permission  to  appeal
      was sought and granted it is necessary to set out some detail  of  the
      nature of the respondent's offending, both in the United  Kingdom  and
      in Italy, because this becomes relevant to the discussion that  is  to
      be conducted below.


   4. As can be seen from how the trial judge, Burnett J, expressed  himself
      when  passing  sentence,  this  was  a  particularly  brutal   murder,
      disclosing behaviour by the respondent that seriously  aggravated  the
      offence of murder itself. The judge said  that  the  evidence  of  the
      respondent's guilt was overwhelming. The jury had heard also  that  he
      had murdered another young woman in  Italy  in  September  1993  in  a
      manner that bore striking resemblance to the way in which  the  murder
      of Ms Barnett had been carried out. The judge said that the respondent
      had gone to Ms Barnett's flat intending to murder her and to  mutilate
      her body:


           "... You made careful preparations. You had with you  a  hammer,
           or something similar, with which you killed her by  beating  her
           repeatedly about the head. You had with you the knife with which
           you mutilated her after her death. You cut off her  breasts  and
           cut her throat. You also left carefully  incised  marks  on  her
           abdomen.
           ...
           You carefully arranged her body in a way strikingly  similar  to
           the way in which you had arranged Elisa Claps' body in 1993. Her
           body was not found until last year. You cut  both  bras  at  the
           front. You lowered the trousers  and  underwear  to  expose  the
           pubic hair. Most strikingly, perhaps, you cut Heather  Barnett's
           hair and placed some of it under her left hand, just as you  had
           done with Elisa Claps. You also  left  a  lock  of  hair  of  an
           unknown person in Heather Barnett's right hand.


           ... There is no doubt that at least in part your motivation  was
           sexual. You had a long-standing hair fetish which  you  indulged
           by cutting the hair of women on public transport and in  cinemas
           in England and in Italy."


      Burnett J then explained how the careful planning  of  the  respondent
      had included that he had sought to set up for  himself  an  alibi  and
      continued:


           "... you knew that she had children at school, and you knew that
           the children would return after school on the day you had killed
           their mother. You knew that an 11-year old girl  and  a  14-year
           old boy would find their mother butchered on the bathroom floor.
           That feature of this case will haunt those who have sat  through
           it.
           ...


           ...Why you picked out Heather Barnett as a victim I do not know,
           but it is clear that you did so to  satisfy  a  sadistic  sexual
           appetite. The evidence in this case is  that  you  are  a  cold,
           depraved, calculating killer..."


   5. The SSHD had concluded, in the light  of  this  conviction,  that  the
      respondent was a person whose removal  was  justified  on  grounds  of
      public  policy  or  public  security  so  that  the  requirements   of
      Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regs") were met. It  was  accepted  by  all
      concerned that, in view of the time the respondent had  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom, he had secured a permanent right  of  residence  under
      Regulation 15 and so the relevant test was that  in  Regulation  21(3)
      that the decision may not be taken except on serious grounds of public
      policy or public security. As the SSHD was satisfied  that  this  test
      was met, a decision to make a Deportation Order pursuant to section  5
      Immigration Act 1971 was made. It is important to recognise, given the
      issues that arise in this appeal, that the decision under challenge is
      one to make a deportation order and not the actual making of  such  an
      order.

   6. Although the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
      decision to make a deportation order, it was clear from the  documents
      before the tribunal that the SSHD's purpose in so doing was  in  order
      to explore the  possibility  of  securing  agreement  of  the  Italian
      Government to the transfer of this respondent  to  Italy  so  that  he
      could serve in Italy the sentence imposed by the British court for the
      murder of Ms Barnett. The respondent had been  sentenced  also  by  an
      Italian court to 30 years imprisonment for the murder of Elisa  Claps.
      Although the respondent had been  convicted  of  that  murder  in  his
      absence, he had been subject to temporary extradition arrangements  in
      March 2013 so that he could participate in what proved to be  for  him
      an unsuccessful appeal against that conviction.


   7. The position as at the date  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  was that the rejection of that challenge had  not  exhausted
      the respondent's rights of appeal in Italy and  that  he  intended  to
      pursue a final further onward right of appeal against  conviction.  Mr
      Hawkin informed us that final appeal available to  the  respondent  in
      Italy was finally dismissed on 7 March  2016  which  was,  of  course,
      after the date of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


The legal framework.


   8. As we shall see, it becomes plain from the determination of the First-
      tier  Tribunal  that  the  panel  misunderstood  the  legal  framework
      relating to the process for the transfer of EEA nationals sentenced to
      imprisonment in the United Kingdom to serve their  sentence  in  their
      own Member State. That framework was  originally  established  by  the
      Council of Europe Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced  Persons  of
      21 March 1983. That provided for such transfers only with the  consent
      of the person concerned. A  Protocol  of  18  December  1997  allowing
      transfers without the serving prisoner's consent, subject  to  certain
      conditions, although ratified by the United Kingdom, was not  ratified
      by all Member States and those States who had  chosen  not  to  ratify
      that Protocol were under no duty to accept such transfers. The Council
      of Europe resolved that the time had come to impose such  a  duty  and
      this resulted in the  Council  Framework  Decision  2008/909/JHA,  the
      fifth recital of which included that:


           "Notwithstanding the need to provide the sentenced  person  with
           adequate safeguards, his or her involvement in  the  proceedings
           should no longer be dominant by requiring in all  cases  his  or
           her consent..."


      This Framework Decision did not require to be  ratified  in  order  to
      take effect. The only Member State excused from the  duty  to  accept,
      where appropriate, such transfers was Poland, because:


           "Poland needs more time than the other Member States to face the
           practical  and  material  consequences  of  transfer  of  Polish
           citizens convicted in other Member  States,  especially  in  the
           light of an increased mobility of  Polish  citizens  within  the
           Union. For that reason, a temporary derogation of limited  scope
           for a maximum period of five years should be foreseen."


      Before leaving the recitals to the Framework Decision, it  is  helpful
      to set out what is said in recital 13:


           "This  Framework  Decision  respects  fundamental   rights   and
           observes the principles recognised by Article 6 of the Treaty on
           European Union and  reflected  by  the  Charter  of  Fundamental
           Rights of the European Union..."


   9. Regulation 19 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  provides,  so
      far as is relevant for present purposes:


           Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom
           ...
           (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an EEA national  who  has
           entered the United Kingdom... may be removed if-
           ...


           (b) the Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal
           is justified on grounds of public  policy,  public  security  or
           public health in accordance with regulation 21;


      Regulation 21 provides, again so far as is relevant:


           Decisions taken on public policy,  public  security  and  public
           health grounds
           21. -(1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA
           decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security
           or public health.

               (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic
           ends.

           (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person
           with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 except
           on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

           (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
           grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

           (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
           at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

           (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is
           necessary in his best interests, as provided for in the
           Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General
           Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989

           (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public
           policy or public security it shall, in addition to complying
           with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in
           accordance with the following principles-

                 (a) the decision must comply with the principle of
                 proportionality;

                 (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;

                 (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must
                 represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                 threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of
                 society;

                 (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;

                 (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                 themselves justify the decision.

            (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
           policy or public  security  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
           resident in the United Kingdom  the  decision  maker  must  take
           account of considerations such as  the  age,  state  of  health,
           family and economic situation of the person, the person's length
           of residence in the United  Kingdom,  the  person's  social  and
           cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent  of
           the person's links with his country of origin.
      Article 33(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC ("the Citizens Directive")
      provides:
           If an expulsion order,  as  provided  for  in  paragraph  1,  is
           enforced more than two years after it  was  issued,  the  Member
           State shall check that the individual concerned is currently and
           genuinely a threat to public policy or public security and shall
           assess whether  there  has  been  any  material  change  in  the
           circumstances since the expulsion order was issued.
      The Council Framework Decision 2008/909/JHA:
           Article 6
           Opinion and notification of the sentenced person
           1.   Without prejudice to paragraph 2, a judgment together with
           a certificate may be forwarded to the executing State for the
           purpose of its recognition and enforcement of the sentence only
           with the consent of the sentenced person in accordance with the
           law of the issuing State.
           2.   The consent of the sentenced person shall not be required
           where the judgment together with the certificate is forwarded:
|(a|to the Member State of nationality in which the sentenced person lives; |
|) |                                                                        |


           |(|to the Member State to which the sentenced person will be deported once |
|b|he or she is released from the enforcement of the sentence on the basis |
|)|of an expulsion or deportation order included in the judgment or in a   |
| |judicial or administrative decision or any other measure consequential  |
| |to the judgment;                                                        |


           |(|to the Member State to which the sentenced person has fled or|
|c|otherwise returned in view of the criminal proceedings       |
|)|pending against him or her in the issuing State or following |
| |the conviction in that issuing State.                        |


           3.   In all cases where the sentenced person is still in the
           issuing State, he or she shall be given an opportunity to state
           his or her opinion orally or in writing. Where the issuing State
           considers it necessary in view of the sentenced person's age or
           his or her physical or mental condition, that opportunity shall
           be given to his or her legal representative.
           The opinion of the sentenced person shall be taken into account
           when deciding the issue of forwarding the judgement together
           with the certificate. Where the person has availed him or
           herself of the opportunity provided in this paragraph, the
           opinion of the sentenced person shall be forwarded to the
           executing State, in particular with a view to Article 4(4). If
           the sentenced person stated his or her opinion orally, the
           issuing State shall ensure that the written record of such
           statement is available to executing State.
           4.   The competent authority of the issuing State shall inform
           the sentenced person, in a language which he or she understands,
           that it has decided to forward the judgment together with the
           certificate by using the standard form of the notification set
           out in Annex II. When the sentenced person is in the executing
           State at the time of that decision, that form shall be
           transmitted to the executing State which shall inform the
           sentenced person accordingly.
           5.   Paragraph 2(a) shall not apply to Poland as an issuing
           State and as an executing State in cases where the judgement was
           issued before the lapse of five years from 5 December 2011.
           Poland may at any time notify the General Secretariat of the
           Council that it will no longer avail itself of this derogation.
The grounds of appeal

  10. Both parties are, of course, aware of the full detail of the reasoning
      that led the First-tier Tribunal to conclude that the appeal should be
      allowed, and for present purposes the following summary will suffice:


        a. The First-tier Tribunal considered that the decision to  make  a
           deportation order was premature, first because agreement of  the
           Italian  authorities  under  the  Framework  Decision  for   the
           respondent to serve his sentence  in  Italy  had  not  yet  been
           secured (indeed, the  Italian  authorities  had  not  even  been
           approached concerning such a request) and secondly  because  the
           appeal  process  in  Italy  in  respect  of   the   respondent's
           conviction for the murder of Elisa Claps had not been exhausted.
           The First-tier Tribunal said, at paragraph 55:


                 "We do find that it is premature for the Secretary of State
                 to seek to deport the Appellant until that final appeal  is
                 determined by the Italian Courts."


        b. Regulation 21(5)(c) of the 2006 regulations  required  that  the
           personal conduct of the respondent represent a genuine,  present
           and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental
           interests of society. As the  respondent  was  imprisoned  as  a
           Category A prisoner serving a 40 year minimum  term,  that  risk
           "cannot and has not been properly and comprehensively and fairly
           assessed at the present time";


        c. The conditions in which the respondent would  be  imprisoned  in
           Italy would be such as to infringe rights protected by Article 3
           of the ECHR;


        d. The appeal fell to be allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR  also,
           on the basis that since his transfer to serve his sentence in an
           Italian prison  would  subject  him  to  treatment  contrary  to
           Article 3, therefore the decision was not in accordance with the
           law and so not a lawful decision for the purposes of  Article  8
           of the ECHR either.

  11. The essence of the grounds upon which the SSHD sought and was  granted
      permission to appeal may be summarised as follows:


        a. This was an appeal against a  decision  to  make  a  deportation
           order and not against a decision to  request  a  transfer  of  a
           serving prisoner to Italy. Therefore the First-tier Tribunal was
           not concerned with issues  that  might  possibly  arise  in  the
           future consequent to a transfer decision,  if  one  were  to  be
           made, and was wrong to conflate the two issues. The approach  of
           the  First-tier  Tribunal  represents  a   potentially   serious
           impediment  to  the  proper  operation  of   proposed   prisoner
           transfers under the Framework Decision.


        b. The First-tier Tribunal  were  wrong  in  law  to  approach  the
           assessment of risk posed by the respondent on the basis that  as
           a prisoner at the start of a long sentence there is no  genuine,
           present  and  sufficiently  serious   threat   because   he   is
           incarcerated.   This   is   said   to    be    "a    fundamental
           misinterpretation of the requirement in Regulation  21  and  one
           that would  defeat  the  object  and  purpose  of  the  European
           prisoner  transfer  arrangements".  Alternatively,  Mr  Strachan
           submits that the First-tier Tribunal made an  error  of  law  in
           failing to carry out such an assessment at all.


        c. The First-tier Tribunal erred in principle in seeking to resolve
           the issue of whether a prison transfer would breach  Articles  3
           or 8 of the ECHR as these were dependent upon a possible  future
           transfer decision and did not arise from the decision to make  a
           deportation order.

Discussion

  12. At paragraph 46 of their decision the First-tier Tribunal said:


           "... We find that the proposed deportation of the  Appellant  to
           Italy under the Convention is premature until it is  established
           that Italy has signed up to the Additional Protocol  and/or  has
           accepted that they will accept the transfer of the Appellant  in
           compliance with the Framework  Decision  and/or  would  make  an
           application on their own behalf for the return of the  Appellant
           to serve the sentence imposed by  the  Italian  courts  for  the
           murder of Elisa Claps."


      Thus, two reasons were given for considering that the decision to make
      the deportation order was  premature.  First,  arrangements  were  not
      already in place for the transfer of the respondent to Italy  for  him
      to serve his sentence there. Indeed, the First-tier Tribunal  observed
      that they could not be because Italy, unlike the United  Kingdom,  had
      not by then ratified the Protocol of 1997.  As we have said, the First-
      tier Tribunal were wrong about that. The Protocol had  been  overtaken
      by the Framework Decision, precisely because some  Member  States  had
      not ratified it.


  13. Thus,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  that  the  making  of  a
      deportation order before the transfer arrangements were in  place  was
      premature and so, presumably, unlawful. For the reasons  that  follow,
      we are in no doubt at all that in that regard  the  reasoning  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal discloses material and fundamental legal error.


  14. It is important to recognise that the decision of the SSHD to  make  a
      deportation order is not a decision to make a request for,  let  alone
      to secure the transfer of a serving prisoner  to  another  EEA  Member
      State to serve his sentence in that country. Indeed, that is not  even
      a decision to be taken by the SSHD because it is a  decision  for  the
      Secretary of State for  Justice  to  make,  she  being  the  competent
      authority notified to the General Secretariat of the Council  pursuant
      to Article 2 (1) of the Framework  Decision.  In  conflating  the  two
      issues the First-tier Tribunal fell into legal error. If a deportation
      order is made, that will enable the Secretary of State for Justice  to
      consider whether or not to seek to pursue a transfer request.


  15. Although the First-tier Tribunal, wrongly, thought the making  of  the
      deportation order was premature because the transfer request  had  not
      been agreed, in fact precisely the opposite is the case. It  would  be
      premature, for two reasons, for the Secretary of State for Justice  to
      have sought to secure  agreement  of  the  Italian  authorities  to  a
      transfer request where no deportation order had  been  made.  That  is
      because it had to  be  established,  regardless  of  any  ambition  to
      transfer the respondent to  Italy,  that  a  deportation  order  could
      properly be made in the light of the requirements of Regulation 21  of
      the 2006 Regulations. Secondly, a  transfer  request  cannot  be  made
      unless and until a removal or deportation decision is in place.


  16. In his  oral  submissions  Mr  Hawkin  advanced  an  argument  to  the
      contrary, seeking to demonstrate that there was no requirement in  the
      form of a precondition that a deportation order be in place  before  a
      transfer request is made. We reject that submission.  Article  6(2)(b)
      of the  Framework  decision  enables  the  transfer  of  EEA  national
      prisoners to  their  own  Member  State,  without  their  consent,  in
      consequence of an expulsion decision. It is clear from Article 6  that
      the mechanism of transfer depends upon a prior  deportation  decision.
      This is reinforced by the format of the certificate found at  Annex  1
      to  the  Framework  Decision  which,  at  section  (g)  (b)   requires
      confirmation of the "expulsion or deportation order..."  and,  if  the
      order is not included in the judgment itself, as will be the case  for
      those convicted in the United Kingdom, "the name of the authority that
      issued the order, the date of issue and, if available,  the  reference
      number" from which it is clear that the order must have been issued.

  17. Therefore a deportation decision is a necessary pre-condition for  the
      transfer of a prisoner, without his consent, under Article 6(2)(b)  of
      the Framework Decision. Thus, the making of a deportation decision was
      not premature but an essential step to taken before the  mechanism  of
      the Framework Decision could be engaged. It follows  that  it  was  an
      error of law for the First-tier Tribunal to proceed on the basis  that
      the transfer request should have  been  made  before  the  deportation
      decision was taken.

  18. The second reason given by the First-tier Tribunal  for  finding  that
      the making of  the  deportation  order  was  premature  was  that  the
      respondent's onward appeal in Italy in respect of his conviction there
      for the murder of Elisa Claps was unresolved. We  are  satisfied  that
      this reasoning was also  fundamentally  flawed  such  as  to  disclose
      material legal error. The deportation order was made as a  consequence
      of the respondent's conviction for the murder of Ms Barnett.  Although
      the jury that convicted the respondent of that murder were  told  also
      of the murder committed by the respondent in Italy, the conviction for
      the murder of Ms Barnett stands  regardless  of  the  outcome  of  any
      appeal to the Italian courts. Further confirmation of this, should  it
      be required, is found in the decision of the Court of Appeal (Criminal
      Division) in David Oakes and Others v R [2012] EWCA  Crim  2435.  This
      was a special constitution  of  the  court,  the  Lord  Chief  Justice
      sitting with Hallett, Hughes, Leveson and Rafferty  LJJ,  convened  to
      consider:


           "...  sentences  which  were  imposed  on  different   occasions
           following very grave crimes..."


      The outcome for the respondent was that the whole life term imposed by
      Burnett J was varied to a minimum term of 40 years. At para 78 The LCJ
      said:


           "When the judge summed the case up  to  the  jury,  he  directed
           them, quite correctly, that the only court with jurisdiction  to
           try DR for the murder of Elisa Clap[s] and to convict him of the
           offence was an Italian court. It is also clear that there was  a
           vast body of evidence which provided strong evidence that he was
           indeed guilty of that murder. However, as the case was  left  to
           the jury, it was clearly open to  them  to  convict  DR  of  the
           murder of Heather Barnett even if they were not sure that he had
           murdered Elisa Clap[s]. In short, therefore, DR  was  not  tried
           for or convicted of the murder of Elisa Clap[s] (a murder  which
           he denied), and the verdict did not and could not carry with  it
           the inevitable conclusion that the jury must have been sure that
           he murdered her..."


      Put another way, as did Mr Strachan in his  submissions,  it  was  not
      open to the SSHD to approach the matter in any way other than that the
      respondent had been convicted of the murder of  Ms  Barnett  and  that
      would remain to be the case regardless of the outcome of  any  further
      appeal pursued  by  the  respondent  against  conviction  for  another
      offence in another country.


  19. Therefore, the fact that the  respondent  was  seeking  to  pursue  an
      appeal against his conviction in Italy was no basis at all to consider
      that the SSHD was  not  lawfully  entitled  to  proceed  to  make  the
      deportation decision she did. Indeed, if it were otherwise,  the  SSHD
      would be precluded from making a deportation decision where any person
      had unresolved  criminal  proceedings  or  appeal  rights  in  another
      country. There is nothing in the domestic or European jurisprudence to
      justify such a proposition.


  20. For these reasons we are also satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      fell into material legal error in concluding that the decision to make
      a deportation order was  premature  because  the  respondent's  appeal
      rights in Italy in respect of a different offence altogether were  not
      yet exhausted.


  21. Next, we address the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal that as  the
      respondent had a further 37 years of his sentence to serve,  therefore
      the risk posed by  him  could  not  and  had  not  been  properly  and
      comprehensively and fairly assessed so that it is not established  for
      the purposes of Regulation 21(5)(c)  that  he  represents  a  genuine,
      present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one   of   the
      fundamental interests of society. There are two aspects to this issue.
      Mr Strachan submits that it is implicit from the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal, although not specifically articulated, that  the  panel
      considered there was  no  genuine,  present  or  sufficiently  serious
      threat posed by the respondent to a fundamental  interest  of  society
      because, as the respondent was a Category A serving prisoner, any risk
      that he may represent is adequately managed so that there was no  risk
      to the public at large. Alternatively, it was their task to carry  out
      an assessment of the  level  of  threat  for  the  purposes  of  their
      consideration of the EEA Regs and it was an error of law for  them  to
      decide not to do so. At paragraph 53 the panel said:


           "... At the present time the Appellant  is  in  a  high-security
           prison. The risk assessments have not been carried out and  they
           are unlikely to  be  done  for  a  period  of  time.  What  risk
           assessments we have could be described as  contradictory  as  we
           have outlined above but in any event the Appellant has 37  years
           of his sentence left.  We  find  that  the  risk  posed  by  the
           Appellant, at the very beginning of an extremely lengthy  prison
           sentence, cannot and has not been properly  and  comprehensively
           and fairly assessed at the present time."


  22. It is plain both that the First-tier Tribunal was  required  to  carry
      out the assessment of threat or risk that they declined to,  and  that
      there was ample material before them to inform that  assessment.  That
      material was in the form of the decision letter which  identified  all
      that the SSHD relied upon in asserting that  threat  was  established,
      the sentencing remarks of the  judge,  the  "Categorisation  Document"
      representing  the  decision  of  the  Prison  Governor   as   to   the
      respondent's designation as a Category A prisoner, explaining why  the
      conclusion reached was that:


           "Mr Restivo continues to pose a high risk to the  public  and  a
           serious risk of re-offending in a similar  unlawful  way  if  at
           large."


      and the NOMs report, discussed by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph
      48 of  the  determination.  The  fact  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      detected tensions in some of the views expressed as to the risk of re-
      offending is no basis upon which to consider  that  no  assessment  of
      risk should be made.

  23. That alone is sufficient to identify legal error in the approach taken
      to this issue by the First-tier Tribunal.


  24. It is apparent also that the  First-tier  Tribunal  have  fallen  into
      error in conflating issues of the existence of risk  or  the  risk  of
      reoffending and the management of that risk. It may well be that while
      he serves his sentence as a Category A prisoner there is a  very  much
      reduced risk of any reoffending, even though he was described  by  the
      sentencing judge as "a man capable of inhuman depravity" and "a  cold,
      depraved, calculating killer". As Mr Strachan submits, if the approach
      of the First-tier Tribunal were  maintained,  that  would  defeat  the
      objective and purpose of the European prisoner  transfer  arrangements
      because, if it were the case that a serving prisoner must be  regarded
      as a person who, on account of being in prison, did not represent such
      a risk, then no removal or deportation decision could be made  and  so
      the result would be that no deportation  order  could  be  made  until
      release from  prison  was  imminent  and  so  no  transfer  under  the
      Framework Decision could ever be made.


  25. The third reason given by the First-tier  Tribunal  for  allowing  the
      appeal was that on being transferred to serve his sentence  in  Italy,
      the respondent would be subjected to treatment  such  as  to  infringe
      Article 3 of the ECHR. At paragraph 58 of their  decision  the  First-
      tier Tribunal said:


           "In any event we find that the decision does not comply  at  the
           present  time  with  the  principle  of  proportionality   under
           Regulation 21(5) as it does not,  for  reasons  which  we  shall
           give, comply with Article 3 of the European Convention on  Human
           Rights."


      This is not altogether easy to  follow  as  the  rights  protected  by
      Article 3 are absolute and not qualified so the  question  of  whether
      there is a real risk of infringement of Article  3  is  not  a  matter
      informed by the principle of proportionality.


  26. In reaching  its  conclusion  concerning  Article  3,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal made a further material error of law  because  there  was  no
      arrangement in place for the applicant to serve his sentence in  Italy
      and that was not the basis upon which their assessment was to be made.
      Put another way, the consequence of the deportation order was not that
      the respondent would be sent to  serve  his  sentence  in  an  Italian
      prison. Such a transfer could take place only if a subsequent decision
      were made under the Framework Decision and if such a decision was made
      the respondent would have an opportunity to raise any legal  challenge
      he thought appropriate at that stage. As we have observed, that  would
      be a challenge not to a decision of the SSHD but to a decision of  the
      Secretary of State for Justice.


  27. In discussion at the hearing before us, Mr Hawkin submitted  that,  by
      analogy with the position is asylum appeals, there should have been  a
      theoretical assessment of the respondent's circumstances on the  basis
      that he was returned to Italy. As he has been sentenced to  30  years'
      imprisonment by the Italian courts, on arrival he would be detained to
      serve that sentence and the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  find,
      on the basis of the material before them, that  he  would  serve  that
      sentence in conditions that were in breach of Article 3 of  the  ECHR.
      Therefore, the issue of prison conditions arose whether  the  position
      of the respondent is assessed on the basis that he was returned  under
      the Framework Decision to serve the sentence  imposed  by  the  United
      Kingdom  court  or  whether  his  position  is   considered   on   the
      hypothetical basis of being in Italy without regard being had  to  the
      United Kingdom sentence. In  either  case,  Mr  Hawkins  submits,  the
      respondent faces a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3  while
      serving a lengthy prison sentence.


  28. As Mr Strachan submitted, the reality of the  situation  is  that  the
      respondent will return to Italy only if a transfer request is accepted
      by the Italian authorities and that will occur only if the  processing
      of the request establishes that  there  is  no  Article  3  risk.  The
      Secretary of State has no power to set aside a prison sentence imposed
      by the court and so the alternative scenario simply does not arise.


  29. Thus, any assessment of the existence of any article 3 risk is one  to
      be carried out at a future  date  as  part  of  the  transfer  request
      mechanism.  An illustration of the fact that the approach of the First-
      tier Tribunal in having regard to a possible future  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State for  Justice  was  itself  premature  is  found  in
      Elashmawy & Riva  v Italy  [2015]  EWHC  28  (Admin).  In  giving  the
      judgement of the court Aikens LJ said, at paragraph 101:


           "Taken overall, and bearing in mind the high threshold,  we  are
           satisfied that the evidence  demonstrates  that  there  are  not
           substantial grounds for believing that there is a real risk that
           the appellant, or Mr Riva, would  face  prison  conditions  that
           were in breach of Article 3 upon extradition to Italy..."


      In reaching the conclusion that they did, the First-tier Tribunal made
      clear, at paragraph 60, that they placed reliance on the  decision  in
      Badre  v  Court  of  Florence,  Italy  [2014]  EWHC  614  (Admin),  an
      extradition case, which found that the  burden  was  on  the  SSHD  to
      provide evidence to satisfy the court that the relevant real  risk  of
      incarceration in conditions contrary to Article 3  did  not  arise  in
      that particular case and she had failed to  do  so.    The  First-tier
      Tribunal  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  as  the  court  had  found,
      therefore, that there were substantial  grounds  for  believing,  that
      there was a real risk  of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3,  those
      findings were pertinent to the  appeal  and  so  should  be  followed.
      However, in Elashmawy Aitkens LJ said, at paragraph 91 that events had
      moved on since Badre. This  illustrates  that  in  wrongly  conflating
      issues arising from the making of the deportation order, which were in
      play, with the position in which the respondent may find himself if  a
      decision were subsequently made for his transfer to Italy,  the  error
      of the First-tier Tribunal was a material one.

  30. Mr Hawkin submitted that a decision to make a deportation order can be
      made lawfully only if the SSHD is able to  move  immediately  to  give
      effect to it by removing the person from the United Kingdom. Thus  the
      First-tier Tribunal were correct to consider all that  might  possibly
      flow from that as at the date of the hearing so that they were correct
      to conflate consideration of both the deportation arrangements and the
      possibility of transfer under the Framework Decision. We  reject  that
      submission also because it is clear that there are various reasons why
      that cannot be correct.  For  example,  there  are  obvious  pragmatic
      reasons for making a deportation decision  in  respect  of  a  serving
      prisoner sufficiently before his earliest release  date  so  that  any
      appeal process pursued can run its course before  then,  avoiding  the
      possible need for him to be moved  into  immigration  detention,  thus
      extending the length of time he is detained. There  may  be  pragmatic
      obstacles to removal by the SSHD of a nature that  do  not  prevent  a
      voluntary departure should the person concerned choose  to  do  so  at
      some future date. The making of a deportation order would prevent  re-
      entry. There may be good reason why the SSHD, even though removal  for
      one reason or another cannot be effected immediately, wishes to make a
      deportation order, not simply to establish the principle  inherent  in
      it, but also  to  invalidate  any  leave  previously  given.  Further,
      Article 33(2) of the Citizens' Directive,  which  we  have  reproduced
      above, plainly recognises that an expulsion order  may  not  be  acted
      upon for some time, providing  that  it  is  to  be  reviewed  if  not
      executed within two years to see if there has been any material change
      in circumstances.


  31. We can dispose of the final plank of the reasoning of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal shortly. The appeal was allowed on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds
      because, as the tribunal had found that prison conditions were such as
      to infringe Article 3 of the ECHR, the Tribunal said:


           "In particular we find that it would not be in  accordance  with
           the law under the Razgar provisions to return him  to  Italy  as
           his Article 3 rights would be breached."


      In allowing the appeal on that basis,  the  Tribunal  made  a  further
      error of law. The finding that the respondent faced  a  real  risk  of
      being subjected to treatment such as to infringe article  3  was,  for
      the reasons we have given, one not reasonably  open  on  the  evidence
      since he would not, on account of the making of a  deportation  order,
      find himself in an Italian prison and no other reason was offered  for
      fearing an  infringement  of  Article  3.  Therefore,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was plainly wrong to allow the appeal on  Article  8  grounds
      for that reason alone.

  32. For all of these reasons we are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal
      made errors of law material to the outcome of this  appeal  such  that
      the decision to allow the appeal must be set aside.  It  is  therefore
      necessary for the  Upper  Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision  on  the
      respondent's appeal against the deportation order made against him.




   Summary of conclusions on the points of principle identified in the grant
   of permission


  33.  The  European  Framework  Decision  2008/909/JHA  has  replaced   the
      framework previously set out in the Council of  Europe  Convention  on
      the Transfer of Sentenced Persons, itself supplemented by the Protocol
      of 18 December 1997, to provide the framework within which  a  request
      may be made to another  Member  State  for  the  transfer  of  an  EEA
      national sentenced in the United Kingdom to serve that sentence in his
      own country. In the United Kingdom context, it is a  precondition  for
      making a transfer request that there be in place a deportation  order.
      A decision to make a deportation order is not a decision to transfer a
      serving prisoner to another Member State to serve his prison  sentence
      there and so in any appeal against a decision to  make  a  deportation
      order the Tribunal is not concerned with whether there  is  any  legal
      impediment to such a transfer taking place.


  34. Where the personal conduct of a person represents a  genuine,  present
      and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
      interests of society, the fact that such threat is managed while  that
      person serves his or her prison sentence is not itself material to the
      assessment of the threat he or she poses. The threat  exists,  whether
      or not it cannot generate further offending simply because the  person
      concerned, being imprisoned, has  significantly  less  opportunity  to
      commit further criminal offences.

Summary of decision:

  35. The First-tier Tribunal made material errors of law and  the  decision
      to allow the appeal against the deportation order is set aside.


  36. The appeal will be listed for a resumed hearing after which the  Upper
      Tribunal will substitute a fresh decision to allow or to  dismiss  the
      respondent's appeal against the decision to make a deportation order.


Directions




     1. The Upper Tribunal will now refer to Mr Restivo as "the  appellant"
        and to the SSHD as "the respondent".


     2. The appellant's representatives are to serve  upon  the  respondent
        and file with the Tribunal, not  later  than  14  October  2016,  a
        witness statement in respect of any witness relied upon,  including
        the appellant himself, to be drawn in sufficient detail to stand as
        evidence-in-chief.


     3. The respondent is to respond in writing, no later than  21  October
        2016, indicating to what extent, if at all, she  takes  issue  with
        any assertion of fact made in any such witness statement.


     4. Any skeleton argument is to be served on the other party and  filed
        with the Tribunal no later than 2 working days before  the  resumed
        hearing.
                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 9 September 2016

