
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

 R(on the application of Natalia Heritage)v Secretary of State for the Home
        Department and First-tier Tribunal IJR [2014]UKUT 00441(IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                15 July 2014

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE storey
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                              natalia heritage

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     and

                             FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 Respondents
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Symes of Counsel, instructed by Wilton Solicitors, appeared  on  behalf
of the Applicant.

Mr J Lewis of Counsel, instructed by  the  Treasury  Solicitor  appeared  on
behalf of the first Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE STOREY:

   1. In this substantive  judicial  review  hearing,  the  applicant  is  a
      Russian citizen. She married a British citizen in  July  1989,  but  a
      Russian court terminated their marriage on 16 November 2011.  She  has
      two adult sons by this marriage who are at university in  the  UK,  A,
      born on 20 August 1991 and G, born 15 February 1994.   Both  the  sons
      are British citizens.

2.   The applicant arrived in the UK in August 2008 as a spouse.

3.   She was granted leave to  remain  on  that  basis  until  her  divorce.
    Subsequently she was granted leave to remain until  13  April  2012  in
    order for her to exercise rights of access to her sons.   On  12  April
    2012, one day before her leave  to  remain  expired,  she  applied  for
    further leave to remain on the same basis, both of her sons still being
    in education. She completed and signed the relevant part of the form to
    authorise  payment  of  the  application  fee  of  �561.00.  The  first
    respondent acknowledged receipt of her application on 24 April 2012 but
    on 8 May 2012 wrote to tell her her application was  considered  to  be
    invalid because the specified fee had not been paid. It was stated that
    the bank which had issued her credit card had rejected the payment.

4.   On 9 May 2012 the applicant resubmitted her application. On 1 May  2013
    the first respondent refused it with no right of appeal.   On  14  June
    2013 the applicant lodged a late appeal against that decision with  the
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT). On  19  July  2013  the  FtT  (Judge  Kaler)
    refused to grant extension of time for an appeal.

5.    Against  this  background,  the  applicant  launched  judicial  review
    proceedings.  On  22  January  2014  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted  her
    permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Storey stating that  it  was  arguably
    wrong of the first respondent not to treat the applicant's  application
    of 12 April 2012 as valid and  arguably  irrational  for  her  decision
    letter of 1 May 2012  not  to  contain  any  "second-stage"  Article  8
    consideration  outside  the  Rules  as  to  whether  there   were   any
    exceptional circumstances.  Reference was made to the Court  of  Appeal
    judgment in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192. On  11  March  2014  the
    first respondent issued  a  supplementary  decision  letter  addressing
    whether the applicant's circumstances were exceptional so as to justify
    a grant of leave outside the Rules and concluding they were not. On  30
    May the applicant sent a statement which applied to amend  the  grounds
    in light of the permission decision and the further  decision  made  by
    the first respondent on 11 March 2014. The first respondent stated that
    she had no objection to amendment of the grounds and we proceed on that
    basis.

The invalidity issue

6.   The judicial review claim form sealed in September 2013 identified  two
    "defendants": the FtT, in respect of its decision of 19  July  2013  to
    refuse to extend time to lodge a statutory  appeal;  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Office, for  what  was  described  as  her  "ongoing
    failure to properly notify the applicant of an  immigration  decision".
    So drafted, the principal target of the claim was the decision  of  the
    first respondent to treat the applicant's application of 12 April  2012
    as invalid and in consequence to classify her as an overstayer with  no
    right of appeal.

7. In the amended  grounds,  the  applicant  no  longer  disputes  that  the
    decision of the first respondent of 1 May 2012 to treat the application
    as invalid was lawful. The applicant now accepts that on  the  relevant
    date there were insufficient funds in her bank  account  to  cover  the
    payment of the requisite fee.  She continues to assert that she was  an
    innocent victim of circumstances because her ex-husband was supposed to
    have put funds into this account; but she accepts that  that  point  is
    only relevant if at all to her Article 8 grounds of challenge.

Challenge to the First-tier Tribunal decision

8.  Hence there is no longer any basis for the challenge  to  the   decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  Being an overstayer the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse her further leave to remain was not an immigration
    decision and did not  attract  a  right  of  appeal.   The  applicant's
    amended grounds sought to maintain her challenge to  the  FtT  decision
    because Judge Kaler "made comments arguably touching on the  merits  of
    the human rights claim", but since as a matter of law Judge  Kaler  had
    no jurisdiction to consider the  (late)  application  for  a  statutory
    appeal in the first place, her comments regarding Article 8, which were
    cursory at best in any event, are decidedly  irrelevant.  The  judicial
    review  challenge  to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    accordingly dismissed. Throughout the rest of this decision we refer to
    the first respondent as "the respondent".

Challenge to ongoing failure to make an immigration decision

9.   It is also apparent from  the  applicant's  amended  grounds  that  the
    second ground of challenge as stated in the original claim  form  -  to
    the ongoing failure of the respondent to properly notify the  applicant
    of an immigration decision - has also fallen away, being  dependent  on
    the  first  ground  challenging  the  respondent's  rejection  of   the
    applicant's application for leave to remain as invalid.




The supplementary letter of 11 March 2014

10.  We come then to the fact that on 11 March 2014 the respondent issued  a
    supplementary letter stating it was to be read in conjunction with  her
    decision  letter  of  1  May  2013  and    addressing  the  applicant's
    application insofar as it raised exceptional circumstances which  might
    merit leave to remain on Article  8  grounds  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules. This letter states that there were no such circumstances because
    contact could be maintained between the  applicant  and  her  sons  and
    friends in the UK "by alternative methods such as telephone,  internet,
    letters or visits."  It was observed that the sons had  their  paternal
    grandparents living relatively close by with whom  they  could  discuss
    personal issues.  Adverting to the reference in the original claim that
    the sons had psychological problems necessitating the presence  of  the
    applicant, the respondent's letter stated that such problems  had  "not
    seriously impinged upon their  lives  as  shown  by  their  ability  to
    succeed at school and university".

11. In her amended grounds  the  applicant  stated  that  in  her  view  the
    supplementary decision letter  did  not  rectify  the  failings  as  to
    "second-stage [Article 8] consideration" that were the subject of  (the
    second reason stated before) the permission grant.  It was argued  that
    this  letter  failed  to  take  account  of  a   number   of   relevant
    considerations and a quashing order was sought quashing  the  decisions
    of 1 May 2013  and  11  March  2014  as  being  incompatible  with  the
    applicant's right to respect for private and  family  life.  We  should
    mention at this stage that in the course of the hearing it became clear
    that the points at issue between the parties touched on certain EU  law
    issues that had not been raised hitherto and we granted  both  a  short
    time to submit further  submissions,  which  for  Mr  Symes  in  effect
    contained a request to amend the grounds further.

The issue of the "moving target"
12.  It is appropriate at this point to highlight the fact that as a  result
    of the series of events just described the decision under challenge has
    become a "moving target", that of 1 May 2013 being augmented by one  of
    11 March 2014.  Strictly speaking, because the challenge  made  in  the
    claim form was confined to decisions (or lack  of  them)  made  by  the
    respondent up to that point (September 2013), it  cannot  be  the  case
    that the applicant has a right within such proceedings to  challenge  a
    later decision.  Nor can it be said that  the  respondent  possesses  a
    "right to rectify" the decision under challenge by  producing  another,
    especially when (as here) the supplementary decision  letter  was  only
    produced in response to the terms of the permission grant.  In  general
    terms it might be thought that for the Administrative  Court  or  Upper
    Tribunal exercising judicial  review  functions  freely  to  allow  the
    respondent to produce and rely upon supplementary decision  letters  in
    this way could encourage laxity  on  the  part  of  original  decision-
    makers, who might think that any shortcomings  on  their  part  do  not
    matter as they can be put right if there is  any  challenge.   Such  an
    approach might be thought to be the very opposite of  the  respondent's
    ongoing commitment to improvement to the quality of decisions  made  by
    her officials ("Getting It Right First Time"). It will be important  to
    consider the motivation behind the further decision and what  was  said
    in this regard by Beatson J in  Omar,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWHC  3448  at  [46],
    although in a somewhat  different  context,  may  be  thought  to  have
    resonance here:

       "It cannot be an efficient use of resources to create situations  in
         which individuals are forced often at public expense  to  institute
         legal proceedings and take up the  time  of  a  grossly  overworked
         Administrative  Court,  only  to  find  at  a  late  stage  in  the
         proceedings that the Secretary of State had made a  decision  which
         arguably makes the issue moot".

13. At the same time, the practice of the Secretary of State  relying  on  a
    supplementary  decision  letter  is  commonplace  and  so  long  as  an
    applicant has proper opportunity to respond to it, there is  rarely  an
    issue regarding it. For judges to take too rigid a  view  as  to  their
    admission may well result in a cost to the public purse resulting  from
    the possible need arising for further judicial review proceedings to be
    brought against a further decision if the original decision is quashed.
    Obviously any acceptance of such decisions must depend on  there  being
    no issue of procedural unfairness, with an  applicant  being  taken  by
    surprise and having no proper opportunity to respond.

14.  Mindful  of  such  competing  considerations  the  higher  courts  have
    emphasised the need for a flexible, pragmatic approach: see  e.g.  R  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte Turgut [2001] 1 All
    ER 719; E v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA  Civ
    49. The need to adopt a flexible approach in this case can be  said  to
    be strengthened by the fact that the respondent was  only  put  in  the
    position of having to  consider  furnishing  a  supplementary  decision
    letter dealing with Article 8 as a result of  a  grant  of  permission.



15.  In those cases where the Upper Tribunal considers that the  balance  of
    competing considerations makes clear that the  respondent's  action  in
    seeking to rely on a supplementary  decision  letter  is  unreasonable,
    then, even if it is decided to treat the decision as a  moving  target,
    that may have implications when it comes to awarding  costs,  although,
    we hasten to add, that is not an issue  which  arises  in  the  instant
    case.

Article 8 consideration outside the Immigration Rules

16.   On  the  logic  of  the  Master  of  the  Roll's   reasoning   in   MF
    (Nigeria),[2013] EWCA Civ 1192, as supplemented by the judgment in MM &
    Ors, R (On the Application Of)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985, in  assessing  whether  the  respondent
    acted reasonably in rejecting the applicant's application for leave  to
    remain, it is necessary to have regard to what she said in relation  to
    the applicant's position both under the Immigration Rules  and  outside
    the Rules.  In her 1 May 2012 letter the  respondent  first  considered
    the applicant's eligibility under the "parent route" and concluded  she
    could not qualify as both sons were over 18.  In  respect  of  "private
    life" under paragraph 276ADE, she next stated that  the  applicant  did
    not have twenty years' residence in the UK, had not spent half  of  her
    life in the UK and had not shown she had lost all  social  or  cultural
    ties with Russia. Within that decision it can be seen, therefore,  that
    the respondent did give substantive  consideration  to  at  least  some
    essential  elements  of  the  applicant's  family  and   private   life
    circumstances.

17.  The reasons given in her supplementary letter  of  11  March  2014  for
    maintaining the original decision of 1 May 2013 in  respect  of  family
    life ties were that contact could be maintained  with  the  applicant's
    sons from Russia. In giving reasons for concluding that the applicant's
    case did not disclose any compelling or exceptional circumstances,  the
    supplementary letter stated:

         "Although there may be a degree of hardship for your client in that
         she would be away from her family if she  were  to  return  to  the
         Russian Federation, there is nothing to  prevent  her  from  having
         contact with her family  and  friends  in  the  UK  by  alternative
         methods such as telephone, internet, letters and visits if  she  so
         wishes. Furthermore, the sons of your client  have  their  father's
         parents living relatively close by ... with whom they  can  discuss
         personal issues. The psychological problems each has suffered  from
         the break up of their parents' marriage has not seriously  impinged
         upon their lives as shown by their ability to succeed at school and
         university".

18.  Before deciding whether these  two  decision  letters,  read  together,
    amounted to a rational response,  it  is  necessary  to  summarise  the
    evidence (and representations) that had been put before the  respondent
    prior to the decision of 1 May 2013.

19.  That evidence noted that the applicant was a  highly  qualified  person
    who had worked in several jobs in Russia and Israel.  She  had  married
    her husband in July 1989.  He had a thriving career as an international
    correspondent.  As a result she and her husband  and  their  two  sons,
    travelled extensively during their early years.  She had  been  granted
    entry clearance as a visitor to the UK on a number of occasions between
    1989 and 2009.  She had eventually been granted entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse valid from 21 August 2008 until 21 November 2010.   From  August
    2008 their children had commenced education in the UK.   The  applicant
    would have been eligible to apply for indefinite leave to remain  as  a
    spouse by September 2010 but her husband took senior jobs  abroad  with
    the result that she could not meet the requirement that he be  "present
    and settled".  By that time her husband had also begun  a  relationship
    with another woman and in the summer of 2011 he filed  for  divorce  in
    Russia, which was not  contested,  the  divorce  being  granted  on  16
    November 2011.  On 29 September 2010 the applicant made an  application
    for further leave to remain as a person exercising rights of access  to
    children.  The respondent decided to grant  her  leave  to  remain  for
    twelve months outside the Immigration Rules on 13 April 2011.

20.  The applicant had also pointed out  to  the  respondent  that  she  had
    built up a private and family life  in  the  UK.   Her  sons'  paternal
    grandparents and their uncle resided in the UK and the family ties with
    them were close knit.  In addition, the applicant  had  a  strong  bond
    with a number of friends and had a cohesive social network in  the  UK.
    Letters of  support  from  members  of  the  family  and  friends  were
    supplied.

21.  The  respondent's  attention  was  particularly  drawn  to  the  strong
    relationship between the applicant and her children and the  fact  that
    they were still in education, G being due to take his A levels and keen
    to go on to university to study philosophy; A currently studying at the
    University of Brighton.  It was said that both G  and  A  continued  to
    rely on their mother for emotional and financial  support.  With  their
    father being absent from their lives for long periods their mother  was
    their only immediate family. G continued to live with his mother as did
    A except during term time.

22.  It was also pointed out  that  with  the  near-permanent  departure  of
    their father, both sons had  begun  to  exhibit  signs  of  withdrawal,
    depression and other psychological symptoms and were both at  different
    times, referred to child psychiatrists and family  therapists.  Letters
    were provided confirming this.

23.  In short there was significant  evidence  submitted  pointing  to  both
    sons, notwithstanding their age, remaining dependent  on  their  mother
    and neither having started to lead an independent life.

The EU dimension

24.  As already noted, a question arose at the hearing as  to  the  possible
    significance for the applicant's case of the rulings of  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union (CJEU) decision in Case C-34/09  Zambrano
    v Office national de l'emploi (Case C-34/09) and Case C-529/11 Alarape.
    At paragraphs 28 and 30 of Alarape the court ruled that in relation  to
    Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68:

         "28....as regards the derived right of residence of  a  parent  who
         cared for a child who has reached the age of majority  and  who  is
         exercising the right to continue his or her education in  the  Host
         Member State the Court has held that,  although  the  child  is  in
         principle assumed to be capable of meeting his or  her  own  needs,
         the right of residence  of  that  parent  may  nevertheless  extend
         beyond that age if the child continues to need the presence and the
         care of that parent in order to be able to pursue and complete  his
         or her education.
         ...
         30. As the Advocate General stated  in  points  35  to  37  of  his
         Opinion, determining whether an adult child continues to  need  the
         presence and care of his parent in order to pursue and complete his
         education is a question of fact that falls to be  resolved  by  the
         national courts.  In that regard the national courts may take  into
         account the particular  circumstances  and  features  in  the  main
         proceedings which might indicate that the need was genuine, such as
         inter alia, the age of the child, whether the child is residing  in
         the family here or whether the child needs financial  or  emotional
         support from the parent in order to be  able  to  continue  and  to
         complete his education".

25.  Zambrano established that the  third  country  national  parents  of  a
    Union citizen child could derive a right to reside in the Member  State
    where the child was a national so long as a decision requiring them  to
    leave would have the effect of causing the child to leave the territory
    of the Union. In the applicant's case, however, her children are  Union
    citizens, but they are young adults, not minors.  Alarape,  of  course,
    addressed the meaning of Article 12; Regulation 1612/68 which  concerns
    a right of access to education predicated on the child concerned having
    a Union citizen/ EEA national parent who has been employed in the  host
    Member State.

26. We take Mr Symes' further submissions as a request to further amend  the
    grounds so as to take account of the EU law dimension to the Article  8
    consideration and in deciding to permit him to do so we  note  that  Mr
    Lewis in his further submissions did not seek to argue that they should
    be treated as outwith the pleadings.

27. Mr Symes re-emphasised the extent  of  the  evidence  showing  that  the
    applicant's sons remained dependent on her and argued that (i) she  was
    entitled to benefit from the Zambrano ruling firstly  because  although
    over 18 her sons were still in education and in that  way  came  within
    that ruling's personal scope; and secondly because  there  was  a  real
    chance that if the respondent did not permit their mother  to  stay  in
    the UK they would be driven out of the territory of the  Union  and  so
    forced to lose the benefits of their Union citizenship  and  travel  to
    the only other country they could go to, which was Russia,  where  they
    would face compulsory conscription for 12 months; (ii) but in any event
    the applicant had an EU right of residence deriving from the fact  that
    during their marriage her former spouse had worked elsewhere in the EU,
    for example in Brussels and Paris, before returning to the UK  to  work
    in London and he was thus exercising Treaty rights on the basis  of  C-
    370/90 Surinder Singh, whether he was there providing services (Case C-
    60/00 Carpenter [2002] ECR I-6279) or pursuing professional  activities
    as a worker (Case C-457/12,  S v Minster voor Immigratie [2014] EUECJ).
    The ex-husband's exercise of EU rights whilst they were married brought
    directly into play the  provisions  of  Article  10  of  Regulation  No
    492/2011 (formerly 1612/68)  which  had  been  held  in  Case  C-480/08
    Teixeira [2010] ECR I-1107 and Case C-310/08 Ibrahim [2010] ECHR I-1065
    to bestow a derived right of  residence  on  the  primary  carer  of  a
    migrant worker's children in education, including university education.
    His submissions concluded that the fact that the Respondent's  decision
    overlooked the EU law dimension altogether made them unlawful for  that
    reason, for failing to take account of the distinct EU law character of
    the applicant's historic and present residence here when  treating  her
    presence here as precarious.

28. Mr Lewis submitted that the evidence showed that the  primary  financial
    support for the sons' education and living  expenses  came  from  their
    father and their situation overall was not one  of  dependency  on  the
    applicant. As regards the relevance of the Zambrano case, he  submitted
    that the applicant had never asserted that her removal would result  in
    her two sons, as a matter of necessity, having to leave the EU; on  the
    contrary they provided evidence that they could not live in  Russia  as
    there they would have to do military service to which they were averse.
    Whilst not addressing the  Surinder  Singh  point  as  such,  Mr  Lewis
    accepted that the boys' father had previously been employed in  another
    Member State and "hence, he was a migrant  worker".  Finally  Mr  Lewis
    submitted that the respondent had committed no  error  of  law  in  not
    expressly considering these EU law  issues  in  her  decision  letters,
    especially given that they were not raised by the applicant and because
    her decisions were actually fully in accordance with EU  law.  Had  the
    applicant wished to rely  on  such  rights  she  should  have  made  an
    application on the correct form.

29. We now turn to evaluate the submissions.  In  what  follows  we  confine
    ourselves to the level of EU law without considering, as  it  would  be
    necessary to do in a fuller examination, the  equivalent  domestic  law
    provision under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

30. We are unable to agree with Mr Lewis that the failure of  the  applicant
    to make an application for EEA residence rights can have no  impact  on
    the lawfulness of the respondent's  decision:  It  is  well-established
    that EEA rights of residence exist even if not  asserted  or  made  the
    subject of residence documentation:see Royer, Case  48/75,  [1976]  ECR
    497; Secretary of State for Work and Pensions v Dias  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    807 at [33]. We would accept that  if  the  respondent  had  sought  to
    object to the applicant being permitted at a late stage of proceedings,
    to deal with the EU law point at all, we would have had to think  twice
    about whether we allowed it, but Mr Lewis did  not  do  that.  Further,
    although we describe it as an EU law point, it is not a discrete  point
    but is confined to its potential impact on the Article 8 assessment.

31. As regards the potential relevance of Zambrano, we consider that  whilst
    the CJEU in Alarape was dealing with Regulation 1612/68,not the  rights
    of Union citizens, its observations on  children  in  education  are  a
    strong indication that, as  in  Alarape,  the  question  whether  Union
    citizen children come within the personal scope of the Zambrano ruling,
    so that their primary carer can derive a right of residence, is not  to
    be decided by reference to whether they are still minors by age but  by
    reference to a factual examination of  whether  they  are  still  in  a
    situation of dependency in which they continue to  need  the  care  and
    presence of a primary carer (parent). However, leaving  aside  for  the
    moment, the issue of dependency,  we  agree  with  Mr  Lewis  that  the
    applicant could not be said to have shown that if she was not permitted
    to stay in the UK her sons would be forced to leave  the  territory  of
    the Union, as they had made clear that  their  anxiety  about  military
    service in Russia would mean they would not return there. Thus Zambrano
    does not avail the applicant.

 32. There remains, however, the  significance  of  the  acceptance  by  the
    respondent that whilst still married to the applicant, her husband  was
    a "migrant worker" exercising Treaty rights by working elsewhere in the
    EU and then returning to the UK. There are two dimensions to that,  one
    relating to the applicant's immigration history (what Mr  Symes  called
    the "historic position") and one relating to the situation  as  at  the
    date of the two  decision  letters.  As  regards  the  latter,  without
    further information we cannot resolve the matter of whether at the date
    of the decision letters the applicant stood to benefit from  a  derived
    right of residence as the primary carer of children (of  a  EU  migrant
    worker) still in education (although if she came within  the  scope  of
    Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 it would not matter  that  she  became
    divorced or even that her husband had left the UK).  We  are,  however,
    able to be sure as regards her historic position that at least for some
    of the period when she was in the UK she had a right of residence as  a
    family member of an EEA national. As we  have  seen,  the  respondent's
    consideration of the applicant's Article 8 case has proceeded  hitherto
    on the assumption that she  was  subject  to  immigration  control  and
    entitled only to leave under domestic law provisions governing visitors
    and spouses and carers of children. Had the respondent appreciated that
    the applicant was exercising Treaty rights as a family member for  some
    of that period, that may have had a material effect on how  she  viewed
    the applicant's immigration history (which was  in  any  event  one  of
    lawful stay at  all  times  until  rejection  of  her  application  for
    invalidity) and her overall proportionality  assessment.  That  in  our
    judgement is sufficient to establish that the  decisions  made  by  the
    respondent were  Wednesbury  unreasonable,  in  failing  to  take  into
    account a relevant legal consideration. The fact that the evidence  put
    before the respondent also raised at least an arguable  case  that  the
    applicant had a derived EU  right  of  residence  as  a  primary  carer
    reinforces us in this view.

33. Given the above finding  relies  on  EU  case  law  which  itself  draws
    heavily on Article 8 jurisprudence (see e.g. Carpenter), it may  assist
    the respondent to know how we have viewed other aspects of the  Article
    8 claim at issue in this case.

Family life

34.  The respondent in  her  decision  letters  did  not  dispute  that  the
    applicant's ties with her adult sons amounted to family life within the
    meaning of Article 8(1) ECHR. In his  submissions  at  the  hearing  Mr
    Lewis initially sought to argue to  the  contrary  on  the  basis  that
    Article 8 case law, e.g.  Kugathas v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31, only accepted that there could be family
    life between a parent and adult children when there were ties over  and
    above normal emotional  ties.   During  discussions  he  accepted  that
    reliance on Kugathas was misplaced because the respondent had  accepted
    in her two decision letters that the applicant  did  have  family  life
    notwithstanding that her sons were young adults. In further submissions
    dealing with the EU  dimension,  by  re-asserting  the  view  that  the
    application had not established that her sons were dependent, Mr  Lewis
    would seem to have reverted to his initial positon, but in  any  event,
    applying Kugathas, there was strong evidence that had been sent to  the
    respondent indicating that there were indeed emotional ties between the
    applicant and her sons over and above those  normally  found  and  also
    that the sons were in continued need of her presence and care.  In  his
    EU law-related further submissions, Mr Lewis pointed out  that  at  the
    hearing Mr Symes had confirmed that the younger son, G, was  no  longer
    attending university and so could not  benefit  from  EU  jurisprudence
    concerning children still in  education.  Leaving  aside  that  we  are
    concerned with decision letters written at a time when G was  still  in
    education, we would observe that even if G is no longer  in  university
    education, we do not know  whether  he  is  still  in  a  situation  of
    dependency; and even if he is not, the applicant's eldest son was still
    in education and that suffices to make necessary still for there to  be
    an assessment within the  context  of  Article  8  of  the  present  EU
    dimension to the applicant's case.

Continuation of family life by indirect means

35.  The respondent's position in relation to  the  proportionality  of  the
    interference her decision posed for the  applicant's  family  life  was
    that it was open to the applicant to continue her ties with her sons by
    alternative means from Russia.

36. It is  sometimes  asserted  by  reference  to  reported  Upper  Tribunal
    decisions such as LD (Article  8-  best  interest  of  child)  Zimbabwe
    [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) and Omotunde (best interests - Zambrano applied -
    Razgar)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  247  (IAC)  that  it  is  in  principle
    disproportionate to expect family ties especially between  parents  and
    children to be continued by alternative means.  Such an assertion  goes
    further than what these  cases  hold.  It  is  integral  to  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence on Article 8 that families  do  not  have  the  right  to
    choose the country where they live (other than in  their  own  country)
    and hence can only succeed on Article 8 grounds if  able  to  establish
    that it would be disproportionate not to allow them to  remain  in  the
    contracting state. And the extent to which it can be  proportionate  to
    expect family life to be maintained abroad by  alternative  means  will
    depend, among other factors, on the relative  strength  of  the  family
    ties in question and of the connections family members  have  with  the
    UK. In the applicant's case, as we have seen,  the  evidence  presented
    indicated that her sons were British citizens  who  were  in  education
    here and that her ties with them were strong and were characterised  by
    their continuing need for her presence and care. There was therefore at
    least some factual basis for considering that the reasoning set out  in
    LD and Omotunde had analogical bearing.

37.  The only two reasons given by the respondent pertaining  to  the  issue
    of the strength of the family ties were that the two sons continued  to
    benefit from family life ties  with  their  paternal  grandparents  and
    their apparent ability to pursue their education notwithstanding  their
    psychological difficulties.  The difficulty with the  first  reason  is
    that it does not address the nature of the tie  between  the  applicant
    and her sons and secondly, it appears to have been offered in ignorance
    of the evidence as to the age of the grandparents.  In a letter sent to
    the respondent the grandfather had stated that they were 79  years  old
    and  due  to  their  circumstances   were   unable   to   house   their
    grandchildren. In addition, although it is evidence that postdates  the
    two decision letters, Mr Lewis did not object to  the  Tribunal  having
    regard to further letters indicating that both grandparents had  health
    problems,  the  grandfather  having  recently  been  in  hospital  with
    pneumonia and pleurisy.  The  grandfather's  stated  opinion  was  that
    "these boys still need the guidance and love of their mother".

38.  The other reason given by the respondent was that the  evidence  as  to
    the boys' psychological difficulties "has not seriously  impinged  upon
    their lives as  shown  by  their  ability  to  succeed  at  school  and
    university",  but  educational  performance  is  not   necessarily   an
    indicator of the seriousness of psychological  difficulties  (We  would
    add by way of comment on Mr Lewis's further  submissions  dealing  with
    the EU law dimension, that if the youngest son is known to be no longer
    in education,  then  that  does  raise  questions  as  to  whether  his
    psychological difficulties have in  fact  impinged  on  his  life.)  In
    relation to the point regarding the evidence showing that the boys were
    not financially dependent on the applicant but on  their  father,  that
    does not in our view negate the strong evidence  of  ongoing  emotional
    dependency.

39.  It is true that the respondent had stated in her decision letters  that
    in her assessment the problems facing the applicant and her sons  would
    give rise to hardships but not ones that  were  exceptional;  but  this
    statement appears to have been based on the two reasons whose  validity
    we have just doubted.

Article 8 case law on adult children continuing in education

40.  We  should  make  it  clear  that  even  if  we  had  not  treated  the
    respondent's failure  to  deal  with  the  EU  law  dimensions  of  the
    applicant's basis of residence in the UK as  vitiating  her  decisions,
    the proposition  that  Alarape  advances  in  respect  of  children  in
    education is also to be found in Article 8 jurisprudence.  As the Grand
    Chamber stated in Maslov v Austria 1638/03 [2008] ECHR 546 at [62]  and
    as the ECtHR stated in AA v United Kingdom (app.  no.  8000/08)  [2011]
    ECHR 1345, family life can still be said to exist between a parent  and
    an adult child who is still involved  in  education.  We  have  already
    indicated  that  we  consider  that  the  evidence  placed  before  the
    respondent pointed strongly to the two children continuing to need  the
    presence and care of their mother.

Other aspects of the respondent's consideration of the  applicant's  Article
8 circumstances outside the Rules

41. We have already explained that we consider the respondent's  failure  to
    take into account the applicant's undoubted historic right of residence
    under EU law rendered her decisions Wednesbury  unreasonable  and  that
    there was also a failure to give adequate consideration to  the  nature
    and extent of the applicant's family life ties with her British citizen
    children who were still in education. Whilst  we  do  not  need  to  go
    further, we would add two observations. First,  even  in  domestic  law
    terms, it is clear that the respondent had previously been prepared  to
    grant the applicant further  leave  to  remain  in  order  for  her  to
    continue to have access to her sons and at a time when one of them,  A,
    was already over 18. If (as seems likely) that grant was  made  on  the
    basis that the  sons  were  in  education  and  needed  her  continuing
    presence and care, then it is difficult to follow  why  the  subsequent
    decision letters of 1 May 2013 and 11 March 2014 did  not  explain  why
    they considered that situation had changed. Second, which is  a  matter
    going to the  proportionality  of  the  decision  letters,  whilst  the
    applicant did submit evidence relating to her own private life ties  in
    the UK, it is clear that the principal basis of Mr  Symes'  submissions
    was that her sons needed her presence and care whilst they  were  still
    in education. Inherently that was a time-limited matter. The respondent
    was being asked to grant her limited leave only  for  so  long  as  her
    sons' pursuit of education required her continued  presence  and  care.
    She was not asking for, nor could she expect to be granted,  indefinite
    leave to remain. Whatever EU rights she had were likewise  time-limited
    in the same way, by reference to her sons' ongoing pursuit of education
    (and we have heard that the youngest is no longer in education).

Edgehill and the pre 9 July 2012 Article 8 jurisprudence

42.  Mr Symes submitted that the decisions of the respondent were flawed  by
    a failure to decide the applicant's application by reference to the new
    Immigration Rules in force from 9 July  2012.   He  accepted  that  the
    applicant cannot benefit from  the  Rules  in  force  at  the  date  of
    application  (which  also  excluded  as  ineligible  spouses  who  were
    overstayers) but argued that the ambit of the Court of Appeal  judgment
    in Edgehill & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 402 covered not just the pre-9 July 2012 Rules but  the  state
    of the pre-9 July 2012 case law.

43. Whilst we discern  some  force  in  Mr  Symes'  submission,  it  is  not
    necessary for us to decide on it here because even if such a reading of
    Edgehill is right, it can only have a  limited  legal  effect.   It  is
    clear that even under pre-9 July 2012 case law on  Article  8,  for  an
    immigration decision to give rise  to  a  breach  of  a  third  country
    national's right to respect for family life, it would be  necessary  to
    show compelling circumstances, the expectation being that only a  small
    minority of cases would succeed: see Huang v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2007] UKHL 11.  It would be wrong to say that the  new
    Rules impose legal tests of exceptional circumstances or insurmountable
    obstacles contrary to Huang or VW  (Uganda)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5:  see
    Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC).

44. That said, it is clear from MF (Nigeria) in  the  Court  of  Appeal  and
    subsequent cases on Article 8 that the new Rules did herald  a  greater
    emphasis on the importance of the public interest in the maintenance of
    effective immigration control. Whilst we think therefore  that  failure
    to apply pre-9 July 2012 case law to the applicant's case did represent
    a failure on the part of the respondent, we do not find that it was not
    one that made a material difference. Our earlier finding considers that
    even under the post-9 July 2012 regime applied  by  the  respondent  in
    this case, the decision she made was an irrational one.
The intense scrutiny issue

45. Mr Symes sought in his skeleton argument  and  submissions  to  persuade
    the Tribunal that we should apply a degree of judicial review  scrutiny
    at the most intensive end of the scale such that it was equivalent to a
    merits review.  In  support  he  cited  Lord  Hoffmann's  statement  in
    Nasseri v SSHD [2009]  UKHL  23  that  on  judicial  review,  when  the
    challenge is based on an alleged infringement of  a  Convention  right,
    the  position  was  different  from  normal  domestic  judicial  review
    proceedings. He also cited  Lord Mance's observation in  Miss  Behavin'
    [2007] UKHL 19 that where the court is deprived of the  assistance  and
    reassurance  provided  by  the  primary  decision-maker's   'considered
    opinion' on Convention issues "...its scrutiny is bound to be  closer".
    In the event we have not found it necessary to decide this  issue,  but
    we would point out that Mr Symes' submission was somewhat  weakened  by
    his failure to  object  to  the  respondent  seeking  to  rely  on  her
    supplementary refusal letter which (unlike that of 1 May 2012) did  set
    out the respondent's 'considered opinion' on Article 8.
The  new  provisions  giving  statutory  effect   to   certain   Article   8
considerations

46. Mr Symes finished  his  submissions  at  the  hearing  by  alerting  the
    Tribunal to the coming into force on 28 July 2014 of Article  8-related
    provisions inserted in the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014, namely ss.117A-C.  It suffices  to
    say that we have considered and  applied  those  provisions.  The  only
    provision that  might  possibly  have  a  significant  bearing  on  the
    applicant's case is new s.117B(6), which provides that in the case of a
    person who is not liable to deportation, the public interest  does  not
    require the person's removal where - "(a) the person has a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying child, and (b) it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  United  Kingdom".  But
    even  assuming  we  considered  this  provision  could  not  avail  the
    applicant, that does not impact  on  the  reasons  we  have  given  for
    finding  the   decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  this  case
    Wednesbury unreasonable.

47. For the above reasons:
   We refuse the judicial review challenge to the decision of the First tier
   Tribunal;
   We grant judicial review against the decisions of the Secretary of  State
   for the Home Department dated 1 May 2013 and 11 March 2014  and  make  an
   order quashing them.

  Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
  11 September 2014
                            ~~~~0~~~~

