
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Singh (No immigration decision- jurisdiction) [2013] UKUT 00440 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                DIMPLE SINGH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent: Ms H. Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer

(i) An appeal under section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002 requires there to be an immigration decision, as there defined.
Where no immigration decision has been made, the First-tier Tribunal has no
jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

(ii) Judges considering an appeal (or applications for permission to
appeal) should ensure that a copy of the notice of the immigration decision
under appeal exists and is produced.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 16  January  1986.  She
       arrived in the UK on 11 November 2009 with leave as  a  spouse.  She
       made an in-time application on 14 November 2009 for indefinite leave
       to remain as a spouse.

    2. She purported to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against what  was
       considered by the First-tier Tribunal to be an immigration  decision
       refusing her application. The First-tier judge described the  appeal
       as an appeal against a decision to refuse to vary leave  to  remain.
       She dismissed the appeal on the basis that  she  was  not  satisfied
       that the appellant had established that she is married to  a  person
       settled in the UK. This was an issue raised in the refusal letter.

    3. Neither the appellant nor her spouse, whom it  is  asserted  by  the
       appellant is a British citizen, attended the hearing.  There  was  a
       psychiatric report before the First-tier judge which said  that  the
       appellant was not fit to attend a hearing, although it is  a  report
       that is tailored to criminal  proceedings  rather  than  immigration
       proceedings before a Tribunal.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by a designated judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal on the basis of the judge's consideration of Article 8
       ECHR.

    5. For the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the appellant submitted  a
       typed response to the grant of permission. It asserts  that  she  is
       unfit to attend, citing the psychiatric report that was  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal and asking that the hearing be adjourned  for  a
       minimum of six months. That period was said to be necessary not only
       in relation to the appellant's mental health but also because it was
       said that her husband is appealing against various  convictions  for
       identity and documentary offences. Evidence of those convictions was
       put before the First-tier  Tribunal,  another  matter  of  complaint
       raised in relation to the First-tier judge's  decision,  given  that
       the appellant did not attend and was not served with that evidence.

    6. This is all part of the background. However, the  outcome  of  these
       proceedings does not depend on any of those  matters,  nor  does  it
       depend on whether the appellant is/was fit to attend any hearing.

    7. On the Tribunal file there is no  notice  of  immigration  decision.
       Amongst the file papers it is clear that the issue of  the  validity
       of the appeal was flagged up before listing  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. A First-tier judge gave directions to the  respondent  for
       service of a notice of immigration decision. There is  a  memo  from
       the UKBA with a fax date of 27 November  2012  briefly  stating  the
       appellant's name and Home Office reference number and  stating  that
       there  is  no  immigration  decision  evident.  A  further  internal
       administrative document indicates that  a  (presumably)  duty  judge
       indicated that the question of the validity of the appeal  could  be
       resolved at the hearing.

    8. Before  me  Ms  Horsley  was  not  able  to  locate  any  notice  of
       immigration decision on the respondent's file. Enquiries made of the
       Home Office computer after a short adjournment revealed  that  there
       was in fact no immigration decision. It seems  that  none  was  ever
       issued. Ms Horsley agreed that the result is that there is no  valid
       appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

    9. In the circumstances, neither was there a valid  appeal  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. Although I was  not  referred  to  it,  I  have
       considered the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Rashid  Anwar
       [2010] EWCA Civ 1275. However, that case was  concerned  with  quite
       different issues, involving the question of whether there was an in-
       country right of appeal against an immigration decision and  whether
       a  notice  of  immigration  decision  was  in  fact  an   appealable
       immigration decision within the meaning  of  section  82(2)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act").  In
       passing it is worth pointing out that at [31] Sedley  LJ  said  that
       the rejection of a human rights claim is not of itself an appealable
       immigration decision, although it may lead to such a decision in due
       course. Likewise here, the rejection of the application for  further
       leave to  remain  in  the  refusal  letter  is  not  an  immigration
       decision.

   10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in this case  was  erroneous
       in purporting to determine an appeal when there was no  jurisdiction
       to do so. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must
       be set aside. I re-make the decision by dismissing  the  appeal  for
       want of jurisdiction.

   11. This appeal has found its way to the Upper Tribunal in circumstances
       where there was never any valid appeal in the first place. That  has
       been wasteful of time and resources,  not  only  the  administrative
       resources of the Home Office but of the Tribunal, and  in  terms  of
       judicial resources. This case illustrates how important it  is  that
       immigration judges ensure that there is an immigration  decision  in
       existence  when  considering  an  appeal  or  an   application   for
       permission to appeal. The reasons for  refusal  letter  is  not  the
       (notice of) immigration decision and does not generate the right  of
       appeal. A notice  of  immigration  decision  must  comply  with  the
       provisions of The  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003.  Under
       section 82(1) of  the  2002  Act  it  is  the  immigration  decision
       (contained within the notice of decision) that generates  the  right
       of appeal to the Tribunal.

   12. Where a judge considering an appeal finds that there is no notice of
       decision on the Tribunal file, at the hearing the parties should  be
       asked to check to see if  either  has  a  copy  of  the  immigration
       decision. Failing that, the  Home  Office  representative  can  make
       appropriate enquiries which can be done on the day  of  the  hearing
       without any further adjournment of the matter to another day.  Where
       there is no Home Office  representative,  there  is  no  reason  why
       Tribunal  administrative  staff  cannot  contact  the  Home   Office
       directly for enquiries to  be  made.  If  there  is  no  immigration
       decision  the  appeal  will  usually  be  able  to  be  disposed  of
       immediately by a decision that the Tribunal has no  jurisdiction  to
       hear the appeal.

   13. When considering an application for permission to appeal, a grant of
       permission can be expressed to be predicated  on  the  premise  that
       there is in existence a notice of  immigration  decision.  With  the
       grant of permission a direction can be given  for  the  same  to  be
       filed and served within a short specified time.

Decision

   14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and the decision re-made dismissing the appeal for want of
       jurisdiction.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 26/06/13
