

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Nare (evidence by electronic means) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 00443 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 May 2011                                 |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb
                          Immigration Judge Holmes



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                THABANG NARE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Brown, instructed by Howells Solicitors


The decision whether to allow evidence to be given by electronic means is  a
judicial  one,  requiring  consideration  of  the  need  to   do   so,   the
arrangements at the distant site, and the ability to assess  such  evidence,
by reference to guidance such as that set out here.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The rules governing procedure in the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005, as amended (SI  2005/230)  Rule  45  is  headed
    "Directions", and by Rule 45(4)(h), directions may:

        "provide for a  hearing  to  be  conducted  or  evidence  given  or
        representations made by video link or by other electronic means".

 2. This appeal raises issues as to the circumstances in  which  directions
    should be given for the taking of evidence by electronic means.

The Appeal

 3. Thabang Nare ("the claimant") is a national of Zimbabwe.   He  came  to
    the United Kingdom as a visitor, obtained an extension  to  his  leave,
    but has had no leave since 2005.  In 2009 he decided to  claim  asylum.
    Since then he has pursued two appeals on asylum grounds:  this  is  the
    second of them.  He has a sister who is in the United  Kingdom,  as  is
    his mother.  His sister also claimed asylum  in  2009.   She  has  been
    granted  asylum  following  a  successful  appeal  against  an  earlier
    refusal.

 4. The claimant's first appeal was heard in his absence and dismissed.  He
    did not appeal the adverse determination  of  Immigration  Judge  Boyd.
    The  present  appeal  results  from  further  submissions  put  to  the
    Secretary of State at a later date.  As Immigration Judge Zucker  ("the
    IJ") recognised when the present appeal came before  him,  there  is  a
    clear  tension  between  the  judgement  of  Immigration   Judge   Boyd
    dismissing  the  claimant's  first  appeal,  and   the   judgement   of
    Immigration Judge A E  Walker,  who  allowed  the  claimant's  sister's
    appeal.   Both appeals were based, to an extent on  similar  underlying
    facts, the evidence of which was rejected  in  the  one  judgement  and
    accepted in the other.

 5. When the claimant's appeal came before the IJ, he sought to support  it
    by evidence from his sister, who did not attend the  hearing.   It  was
    said that she was unable to afford to travel to the  hearing  in  North
    Shields.  The history of this difficulty, and of the IJ's  solution  to
    it, is not easy to discover from the file.  The note of proceedings  at
    a case management review hearing on 19 April  2010  has  the  following
    entries:

        "7.  Are any witnesses aside from the appellant to be called?
        Possibly sister
        ...
        11. Special court requirements (e.g. all female  preference,  video
        link or player required)
        No."

 6. Following that hearing, the appellant's  then  representative,  Refugee
    and Migrant Justice, wrote to the First-tier Tribunal on 23 April 2010,
    stating as follows:

        "As was indicated at the Case Management hearing, his  sister  will
        be available as a witness in this case but due to travel costs  and
        time this would have to be by telephone"

        The letter is endorsed:


        "called  Rep  to  explain  witness  auth  to  give   evidence   via
        telephone".


    That note is dated "23/4/10" and signed "JA".  We have  not  been  told
    who "JA" is, or on what  basis  he  or  she  was  able  to  "auth"  (sc
    authorise) the giving of evidence by telephone.

 7. By 28 April 2010 the matter was being treated  as  settled.   A  letter
    from the claimant's then representatives on  that  date  describes  the
    claimant's sister as "available as a telephone witness".  The IJ's note
    of the hearing records evidence from  the  claimant's  sister,  and  no
    cross-examination of it.  The note does not indicate  that  the  sister
    was not present in the hearing room, and does not indicate that the  IJ
    heard any submissions on whether the taking of  evidence  by  telephone
    was appropriate in this case.  The IJ's determination  says,  at  [39],
    "the appellant's sister gave evidence by telephone". It summarises  her
    evidence, and records  that  the  Presenting  Officer  did  not  cross-
    examine.

 8. In his determination, which appears to have been sent  out  on  11  May
    2010, the IJ allowed the claimant's appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State then applied for permission to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal.  The grounds are as follows:

        "Ground 1


        The IJ has failed correctly to apply procedure rules and materially
        prejudiced the Secretary of State.


        A key witness the sister of the appellant was not  present  at  the
        hearing to give evidence.


        The presenting officer refused to cross examine by telephone as  he
        was not satisfied with the witness's identity or  the  authenticity
        of her evidence.


        It is submitted that the IJ should have called the witness to  give
        evidence or should have placed less weight on her written evidence.


        The IJ has found adverse  'findings  of  fact'  as  the  Presenting
        Officer did not cross examine the witness (Paragraphs 42, 43 and 44
        of the determination).


        Paragraph 43


        In the absence of any challenge to the appellants sister  I  accept
        and find as a fact that the appellants is the son of Colonel Nare.


        Paragraph 44


        I accept and find as a fact in the absence of any  challenges  that
        the  appellants  sister  was  raped  and  was  raped   by   Zanu-PF
        supporters.


        The IJ has failed to consider the overriding objective - The Asylum
        and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  subsection  4.
        Where the interests of all parties to  the  proceedings  should  be
        considered.


              4  Overriding objective


              The overriding objective of these Rules  is  to  secure  that
              proceedings  before  the  Tribunal  are  handled  as  fairly,
              quickly and efficiently as possible; and, where  appropriate,
              that members of the Tribunal have responsibility for ensuring
              this, in the interests of the parties to the proceedings  and
              in the wider public interest.


        By allowing this appeal the IJ has  incorrectly  applied  procedure
        rules and inadvertently prejudiced the respondent.


        I request a material error of law is found."


10. SIJ Perkins, sitting as a judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted
    permission, giving his reasons as follows:


        "It appears that the Immigration Judge permitted a witness to  give
        evidence by telephone.  Arguably he had no power  to  do  that  and
        should not have received evidence in that way or,  if  he  did,  he
        should have made it plain that he could not give the  evidence  the
        weight that would be afforded to  someone  who  attended  and  gave
        evidence.  There are many reasons to be wary of evidence given away
        from the hearing room including the possibilities of  impersonation
        that could not be proved later or of a  witness  being  coached  or
        threatened.


        That said, the Presenting Officer's refusal  to  cross-examine  the
        witness was, on face of things,  bizarre.   The  Immigration  Judge
        would certainly have risked criticism if he had  rejected  evidence
        that the Presenting Officer had decided not to challenge.


        I note as well that the witness's assertion that she had been raped
        had been accepted on a previous occasion.  It may be hard  for  the
        respondent to show that any error was material.


        Nevertheless, the grounds are arguable and  I  give  permission  to
        argue each point.

11. Thus it is that the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  comes  before  this
    Tribunal.

12. The hearing before us was brief, because neither Ms  Pettersen  nor  Mr
    Brown dissented from the view we had provisionally reached.  That  view
    is that, whatever error may have been made by the IJ  in  allowing  the
    claimant's sister to give evidence by telephone, the Secretary of State
    had disabled herself  from  pursuing  this  appeal  by  the  Presenting
    Officer's decision not to cross-examine.  There is simply no basis  for
    saying that the Presenting Officer was prevented from  cross-examining:
    and in the absence of any cross examination, there is no basis for  the
    Secretary of State to say that cross examination by telephone posed any
    disadvantages in this case.  The Presenting Officer's decision was  not
    to cross-examine, and that meant that before  the  IJ,  the  claimant's
    sister's evidence was not challenged.

13. For that reason, any error of law  made  by  the  IJ  in  allowing  the
    evidence to be given in this way was wholly immaterial, and the  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal cannot succeed.   We shall dismiss it.

14. Having said that, we are, however, confident that the IJ erred  in  his
    apparently ready acceptance of the proposal that the claimant's  sister
    should give evidence by telephone, on the basis of an assertion made by
    her representatives that she could not afford to travel to the hearing.
     It is  particularly  unfortunate  that  there  is  no  record  of  any
    procedural point taken at the hearing, or of any  proper  consideration
    given to the representative's request made by letter of 23 April  2010.
    Nor is there any record of directions given by the Tribunal under  Rule
    45(4)(h), save for the note by "JA"; and, unless "JA" is  a  member  of
    the Tribunal, there is no record of any authorisation to "JA"  to  give
    directions of this sort.  The power to give directions for  the  taking
    of evidence by electronic link  is  a  judicial  power,  and  we  would
    normally expect to see that it has been  exercised  by  a  judge  after
    proper consideration of any issues raised.

15. We recognise that it may be that in the particular hearing centre where
    the IJ was sitting, a certain nervousness about refusing  requests  for
    evidence to be taken by electronic link may have been engendered by the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in R (AM Cameroon) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 131.  But, as we read the judgements  in  that  case,  the  problem
    there too was that a decision was reached  too  readily.   In  AM,  the
    Immigration  Judge  appeared  to  have  refused  to   consider   making
    directions for evidence to be given by a live telephone  link,  without
    giving proper consideration to what the Court of  Appeal  thought  were
    submissions which required it.  AM is not authority for  a  proposition
    that directions should  routinely  be  made  for  the  giving  of  oral
    evidence other than by those present in a court room: on this point  it
    simply confirms what ought surely to be regarded as the position in any
    event, that a judicial discretion is to be exercised judicially.

Discussion

16. It seems to us that at least  the  following  points  are  relevant  in
    considering whether oral evidence should  be  given  other  than  by  a
    witness present in court.

17. First, the usual model in the common-law  system  is  for  direct  oral
    evidence to be given in the courtroom.  Departures from that model  are
    likely to reduce the quality of evidence, the ability of the parties to
    test it, and the ability of the judge to assess it, particularly  where
    it has to be assessed against other oral evidence.  Any application  to
    call oral evidence by electronic link therefore needs to be  justified.
    There is a measure of agreement across  common-law  jurisdictions  that
    the taking of evidence, or the hearing  of  submissions,  in  this  way
    requires regulation and ought not to be regarded as routine.  The Civil
    Procedure Rules provide at CPR 32.3 simply that:

        "The court may allow a witness to give  evidence  through  a  video
        link or by other means",


    but there is a lengthy practice direction  at  32PD.33.  That  practice
    direction gives quite detailed guidance,  and  is  itself  based  on  a
    protocol of the Federal Court of  Australia.   At  paragraph  2  is  an
    observation similar to that which we have made above:


        "[video conferencing] is,  however,  inevitably  not  as  ideal  as
        having the witness physically present in  court.   Its  convenience
        should not therefore be allowed to dictate its  use.   A  judgement
        must  be  made  in  every  case  in  which  [its  use]   is   being
        considered...".


18. Secondly, another aspect of the giving of oral  evidence  live  at  the
    hearing of the appeal is that it is subject to a measure  of  formality
    and supervision.  The witness attends what is clearly a formal (or semi-
    formal) room, stands or sits in the place used by those giving evidence
    from time to time, usually  quite  near  the  judge,  and  is  directly
    subject to the procedure in the hearing.  The setting  of  the  hearing
    room, and the judge's supervision of it, as well as the usual functions
    performed by Tribunal staff, and the presence of the parties  or  their
    representatives, ensure that the evidence given is the evidence of  the
    witness, unassisted save as may be clearly apparent.   If  evidence  is
    given electronically it ought to be subject  to  the  same  or  similar
    constraints.  It should be given from formal surroundings,  subject  at
    the very least to control by appropriate officials, and  it  should  be
    clear that nothing can be happening "off camera" (or  equivalent)  that
    could cast doubt on the integrity of the evidence.

19. Thirdly, because it is a departure from the model, it is  for  a  party
    seeking to adduce evidence by electronic link to  establish  that,  for
    the Tribunal to take evidence in  this  way,  is  in  the  interest  of
    justice, bearing in mind particularly the rights of  other  parties  to
    challenge the evidence.  It must also be for the party seeking to  call
    evidence by electronic link to make the  arrangements  at  the  distant
    end, and to pay any expenses.  Further, no party ought to expect to  be
    allowed  adjournments  simply  because  of   delay   in   making   such
    arrangements.

20. Fourthly, it is for the Tribunal to decide whether to allow evidence to
    be given by electronic link, and to give  the  appropriate  directions.
    The Tribunal needs to bear in mind the interest of all parties, and the
    overriding objective of the rules.  The  decision  will  not  be  taken
    lightly, and no party has a right to call evidence by electronic  link.
    If specific directions are given, they will be given in order to secure
    the interests of the parties and of justice, and it is  therefore  very
    unlikely that the Tribunal will allow  the  evidence  to  be  given  by
    electronic link if the directions have not been complied with.

Guidance

21. With these observations in mind, we  venture  to  offer  the  following
    guidance as to process.  It is not intended to be comprehensive, and we
    expect that it will require elaboration as practice  may  develop.   It
    owes a great deal to CPR 32PD. 33.  Our guidance does  not,  we  think,
    need to be so long or so detailed, but the following appear to us to be
    the minimum requirements:

           a. A party seeking to  call  evidence  at  an  oral  hearing  by
              electronic  link  must  notify  all  other  parties  and  the
              Tribunal at the earliest possible stage, indicating  (by  way
              of witness statement) the content of the  proposed  evidence.
              (If the evidence is uncontested, an indication of  that  from
              the other parties may enable  the  witness'  evidence  to  be
              taken wholly in writing.)

           b. An application to call evidence by electronic  link  must  be
              made in sufficient time before the hearing to allow it to  be
              dealt with properly.  The application should be made  to  the
              relevant judge  (normally  the  Resident  Senior  Immigration
              Judge) at the hearing centre at which the hearing is to  take
              place, and must give (i) the reason why the proposed  witness
              cannot  attend  the  hearing;  (ii)  an  indication  of  what
              arrangements have been made provisionally at the distant site
              (iii) an undertaking  to  be  responsible  for  any  expenses
              incurred.

           c. The expectation ought to be that the distant site will  be  a
              court or Tribunal hearing centre, and that the giving of  the
              evidence will be subject to on-site supervision by  court  or
              Tribunal staff.

           d. If the proposal is to give evidence from  abroad,  the  party
              seeking permission must  be  in  a  position  to  inform  the
              Tribunal that  the  relevant  foreign  government  raises  no
              objection to  live  evidence  being  given  from  within  its
              jurisdiction, to a Tribunal or court in the  United  Kingdom.
              The vast majority of countries with which immigration appeals
              (even asylum appeals) are concerned are countries with  which
              the United Kingdom has friendly diplomatic relations, and  it
              is not for an  immigration  judge  to  interfere  with  those
              relations by not ensuring that enquiries of  this  sort  have
              been made, and that the outcome was positive.   Enquiries  of
              this nature may be addressed to the Foreign and  Commonwealth
              Office (International Legal Matters Unit, Consular Division).
               If evidence is given from abroad, a  British  Embassy,  High
              Commission or Commonwealth may be able  to  provide  suitable
              facilities.

           e. The application must be served on all other parties, in  time
              for them to have a proper opportunity to respond to it.


           f. The decision whether to grant the application is  a  judicial
              one.  The judge making the decision will  take  into  account
              the reasons supporting the  application,  any  response  from
              other parties and the content of the  proposed  evidence,  as
              well as of the overriding objective of  the  rules.   If  the
              application  is  granted,  there  may  be  further   specific
              directions, which must be followed.

           g. If there is  a  direction  for  the  taking  of  evidence  by
              electronic link, the Tribunal will nevertheless  need  to  be
              satisfied that arrangements  at  the  distant  end  are,  and
              remain, appropriate for the  giving  of  evidence.   A  video
              link, if available, is more likely  to  be  suitable  than  a
              telephone link.   The  person  presiding  over  the  Tribunal
              hearing must be able to  be  satisfied  that  events  at  the
              distant site are, so far as may be,  within  the  observation
              and control of the Tribunal, and that there is no  reason  to
              fear any irregularity.


           h. There will need to be arrangements to ensure that all parties
              at the hearing, as well as the judge, have  equal  access  to
              the input from the  electronic  link.   Particular  attention
              needs to be given to the accommodation of any interpreter.

           i. In assessing any challenged evidence, the Tribunal  may  have
              to bear in mind any disadvantages arising from the fact  that
              it was given by electronic link, and should be ready to  hear
              and consider submissions on that issue.

           j. Nothing in this guidance is intended to affect  the  existing
              arrangements for the hearing of bail  applications  by  video
              link from secure video conferencing  suites.    Nor  is  this
              guidance  intended  to  affect  the  arrangements  for  video
              linking of one Tribunal room to another for the  purposes  of
              hearing submissions by video link.


Conclusion

22. For the reasons given earlier in this  determination,  we  dismiss  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.   The  IJ's  determination,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal stands.













                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

