
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MAH (dual nationality - permanent residence) Canada [2010] UKUT 445 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Belfast                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 October 2010                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                       MR CMG OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      MAH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Cox, Law Centre (NI)

British citizen born  in  Northern  Ireland  prior  to  2001  was  an  Irish
national from birth; when he terminated  his  activity  as  a  worker  as  a
result of permanent incapacity to work he  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
residence under reg 15(1)(c) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006; there was no requirement for him to have moved to the  UK;
on marriage his non-EEA  national  spouse  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
residence  under  reg  15(1)(d);  McCarthy  v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ   641
considered.







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This  is  an  appeal  against  a  determination  by  Immigration  Judge
    Farrelly.  The claimant was born on 8 May 1958 and  is  a  national  of
    Canada.  She appealed against a decision dated 2 February 2010  by  the
    Secretary of State refusing her a residence card under the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  Regulations").   Her
    appeal was allowed by the Immigration Judge.  Permission to appeal  was
    granted on the application of the Secretary of State.

 2. The claimant's application for  a  residence  card  was  based  on  her
    marriage on 26 August 2008 to Mr GO, from whom  she  separated  shortly
    afterwards.  Mr GO has lived all his life in  Northern  Ireland  except
    for a period from 2000-2003 when he lived in Scotland.  He is a citizen
    of the Republic of Ireland as well as being a British citizen.  It  was
    argued before the Immigration Judge on behalf of the claimant  that  as
    an EEA national Mr GO had acquired a permanent right  of  residence  in
    the United Kingdom under the Regulations and the claimant was  entitled
    to a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom as  his  family
    member.

The EEA Regulations

 3. Regulation 15 sets out categories of person who acquire  the  right  to
    reside in the  United  Kingdom  permanently.   These  include,  at  reg
    15(1)(c) "a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity" and
    at (d) "the family member of a worker or self-employed person  who  has
    ceased activity." The Regulations are designed to give  effect  to  the
    UK's obligations under the EU Citizens Directive 2004/38/EC.

 4. Regulation 5, so far as relevant to this appeal, states:

    "5 - (1) In these Regulations, "worker or self-employed person who  has
           ceased  activity"  means  an  EEA  national  who  satisfies  the
           conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
        ...


    3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -


          a) he terminates his activity in the United Kingdom as  a  worker
             or self-employed person as a result of permanent incapacity to
             work; and
          b) either :
              i) he resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than
                 2 years prior to the termination; or
             ii) the incapacity is the result of an accident at work  or  an
                 occupational disease that entitles him to a pension payable
                 in full  or  in  part  by  an  institution  in  the  United
                 Kingdom."


The IJ's findings

 5. The Immigration Judge found as a fact that the claimant is  married  to
    an Irish citizen who has dual nationality through having been  born  in
    Northern Ireland.  The claimant's husband, Mr GO, was born on  15  June
    1950.  He was described in his marriage certificate as a retired  lorry
    driver.  It appears that he  last  worked  around  1992.   He  gave  up
    working after he experienced a myocardial infarction and  has  been  in
    receipt of state benefits since 1992.  The Immigration Judge had before
    him a letter dated 29 December 2008 from Mr GO's GP stating that Mr  GO
    was permanently incapable of work owing to ill-health.  His  incapacity
    is based on ischaemic heart disease  and  arthritis.   The  Immigration
    Judge had other evidence before him relating to Mr GO's  condition  and
    to his receipt of state  benefits,  which  included  Disability  Living
    Allowance and Incapacity Benefit.  In the absence of  evidence  to  the
    contrary,  the  Immigration  Judge  found  Mr  GO  became   permanently
    incapable of work in 1992.

 6. On the basis of this finding, the Immigration Judge was satisfied  that
    Mr GO was a worker who had ceased  activity,  in  terms  of  reg  5(3),
    having terminated his activity in the United Kingdom as a worker  as  a
    result of permanent incapacity to work and having resided in the United
    Kingdom continuously for more than two years prior to the  termination.
    Mr GO had a permanent right of residence in terms of reg 15(1)(c) as  a
    worker who had ceased activity and the claimant, as his family  member,
    had a permanent right of residence under reg 15(1)(d).

 7. In reaching this conclusion the Immigration Judge made a finding to the
    effect that Mr GO, if not an Irish citizen, was at  least  entitled  to
    Irish citizenship in 1992 when he terminated his activity as a  worker.
    For the claimant to succeed she had to show that her husband was an EEA
    national who had resided in the United Kingdom  continuously  for  more
    than two years prior to terminating his activity as a worker.

The submissions

 8. In the application for permission to appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State
    submitted that the Immigration Judge erred in law in finding  that  the
    appellant's husband was exercising Treaty rights in 1992 as he did  not
    become  an  Irish  citizen  until  2008.   The  evidence   before   the
    Immigration Judge showed that Mr GO was issued with an  Irish  passport
    on 22 December 2008.  The Secretary of State contended that while Mr GO
    might have been entitled to claim Irish citizenship from birth, he  did
    not actually claim  citizenship  until  after  his  marriage  with  the
    claimant had taken place.  Accordingly, Mr GO was not exercising Treaty
    rights in the two years prior to terminating his activity as  a  worker
    in 1992 and did not meet the requirements of Regulation 15.

 9. On behalf  of  the  claimant,  Mr  Cox  laid  before  us  the  relevant
    provisions of Irish nationality law.  The starting point is  the  Irish
    Nationality and Citizenship Act 1956, section 6, which in its  original
    form states:

       "6. - (1)  Every person born in Ireland is  an  Irish  citizen  from
       birth.
               (2)  Every person is an  Irish  citizen  if  his  father  or
              mother was an Irish citizen at  the  time  of  that  person's
              birth or becomes an Irish citizen under  sub-section  (1)  or
              would be an Irish citizen under that sub-section if alive  at
              the passing of this Act.
             (3)       In the case of a person born before the  passing  of
              this Act, sub-section  (2)  applies  from  the  date  of  its
              passing.  In every other case, it applies from birth.
             (4)       A person born before the passing of this  Act  whose
              father or mother is an Irish citizen under  sub-section  (2),
              or would be if alive  at  its  passing,  shall  be  an  Irish
              citizen from the date of its passing.
             (5)       Sub-section (1) shall not confer  Irish  citizenship
              on the child of an alien who, at  the  time  of  the  child's
              birth, is entitled to diplomatic immunity in the State."

10. It is accepted that the reference in section 6(1) to Ireland refers  to
    the island of Ireland.


11. The 1956 Act was amended by the Irish Nationality and  Citizenship  Act
    2001 which substituted a new section 6, providing in part as follows:

       "6. - (1)  Every person born in the island of Ireland is entitled to
                 be an Irish citizen.
                  (2) (a) subject to sub-sections (4)  and  (5),  a  person
                 born in the island of Ireland  is  an  Irish  citizen  from
                 birth if he or she does, or if not of full age has done  on
                 his or her behalf, any act which only an Irish  citizen  is
                 entitled to do.
                         (b)  the fact that a person so born has not  done,
                 or has not had done on his or her behalf, such an act shall
                 not of itself give rise to a presumption that the person is
                 not an Irish citizen or is a citizen of another country.
                  (3)  A person born in the island of Ireland is  an  Irish
                 citizen from  birth  if  he  or  she  is  not  entitled  to
                 citizenship of any other country."

12. In terms of section 6(2) of the amended provision, an act which only an
    Irish citizen is entitled to do refers principally to applying  for  an
    Irish passport.  Further amendments to section 6, with which we are not
    concerned here, have been made by the Irish Nationality and Citizenship
    Act 2004.


Conclusions


13. In this appeal we are  concerned  primarily  with  the  nationality  or
    citizenship of the claimant's husband, Mr GO, from 1990 to 1992,  which
    covers the two years prior to his terminating his activity as a worker.
     This issue falls to  be  determined  under  section  6  of  the  Irish
    Nationality and Citizenship Act 1956 in its original form, prior to the
    2001 amendments.  Under sub-sections 6(1) and (3) of the 1956  Act,  it
    is apparent that the claimant's  husband  was  an  Irish  citizen  from
    birth.  It was not necessary  for  him  to  apply  for  a  passport  to
    complete that entitlement.  The claimant's husband was an Irish citizen
    prior to terminating his activity as a worker in 1992.

14. While this resolves the main issue before us, we  should  also  address
    some incidental or subsidiary matters which were raised at the hearing.
     The first of these  was  whether  there  was  sufficient  evidence  to
    support the finding  by  the  Immigration  Judge  that  the  claimant's
    husband terminated his activity as a worker in  1992  as  a  result  of
    permanent incapacity to work.  At paragraph 33  the  Immigration  Judge
    acknowledged the difficulty which is encountered by one  member  of  an
    estranged couple seeking to obtain evidence about  the  other  and  the
    Immigration Judge noted at paragraph 52 of his determination  that  the
    medical  evidence  was  "minimal".   Submissions  were  made   to   the
    Immigration Judge in relation to the burden of  proof.   Reference  was
    made in particular to Article 14(2) of the Directive 2004/38/EC on  the
    right of citizens of the Union and their family  members  to  move  and
    reside freely within the territory of the Member States, which includes
    the following provision:

           "In specific cases where there is reasonable doubt as to whether
           a  Union  citizen  or  his/her  family  members  satisfies   the
           conditions set out in Articles 7, 12 and 13, Member  States  may
           verify if these conditions  are  fulfilled.   This  verification
           shall not be carried out systematically."

15. On the basis of this  provision  the  Immigration  Judge  suggested  at
    paragraph 41 of his determination that the burden of proof  was  shared
    and that the host Member State needed to have reasonable  doubt  before
    enquiring if a person had a right of residence.  The Immigration  Judge
    then went on to find at paragraph 42 that "the applicant must  set  out
    the basic proofs to show that there is entitlement."


16. Before us Mrs O'Brien acknowledged  that  there  was  no  contradictory
    evidence before the Immigration Judge (or indeed before us) as  to  the
    claimant's husband's incapacity, or lack of it.  It could not be argued
    that the findings by the  Immigration  Judge  were  irrational  on  the
    material before him.  Accordingly, we accept that the findings made  by
    the Immigration Judge as to the claimant's husband's employment history
    and incapacity for work should stand.

17. The next issue was the question of whether the Regulations, which  came
    into force  on  30  April  2006,  apply  to  the  claimant's  husband's
    termination of activity as a worker in 1992.  In this  regard  we  note
    that the conditions to be satisfied in reg 5(3) are  expressed  in  the
    present tense and state a "person satisfies the conditions ... if - (a)
    he terminates his activity ..."  Did  it  follow  from  this  that  the
    provision of Community law to which we should have regard were those in
    effect at the time when the claimant's husband terminated his  activity
    in 1992?

18. In answering this question, we note that the Regulations give effect to
    the Citizen's Directive 2004 (cited  above),  which  itself  supersedes
    earlier provisions of Community law. In  particular,  Article  17.1(b),
    which makes provision for a permanent right of residence for  a  person
    who has resided continuously in the host Member State for more than two
    years and stopped working there as a result of permanent incapacity  to
    work, is  referred  to  in  Recital  19  as  deriving  from  Commission
    Regulation (EEC) No 1251/70 of 29 June 1970 on the right of workers  to
    remain in the territory of a Member State after having been employed in
    that State.  The relevant provision is to be found at reg 2.1(b) of the
    Commission Regulation of 1970.

19. This provision shows that although the current  Regulations  came  into
    force as recently as 30 April 2006, the relevant provision in reg  5(1)
    and (3) has a history going back to 1970,  some  20  years  before  the
    period with which we are concerned.

20. Further, Mr Cox put before us the judgment of  the  European  Court  of
    Justice in Case C-162/09 Lassal, 7 October 2010 in which  it  was  held
    that continuous residence for a period of  five  years  or  more  which
    ended prior  to  the  Citizen's  Directive  coming  into  effect  would
    nevertheless satisfy the period of continuous  residence  necessary  to
    acquire  a  permanent  right  of   residence   under   the   Directive,
    notwithstanding that the Directive itself was not in  effect  when  the
    period of residence came to an end.

21. We are satisfied for both these reasons that  the  terms  of  the  2006
    Regulations apply to the events of the period 1990-92 as found  by  the
    Immigration Judge.  Our view in relation to this is  further  supported
    by having regard to the Secretary of State's decision itself, which was
    made on 2 February 2010 under the 2006 Regulations as having effect  at
    the date of decision.  In this appeal in order to determine entitlement
    under the Regulations it is necessary to look  at  evidence  of  events
    which took place prior to the Regulations taking effect.  This evidence
    is material for the purpose of ascertaining entitlement and we are  not
    restricted  to  having  regard  only  to  events  occurring  after  the
    Regulations came into effect.

22.  The  final  argument  we  must  consider  is  potentially  of  greater
    significance.  The claimant's husband has lived all  his  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He has not moved from one Member State to  another  to
    exercise a right under the  Treaties.   This  raises  the  question  of
    whether  the  claimant's  husband  can  be  regarded  as  having   been
    exercising Treaty rights without ever  having  moved  from  one  Member
    State to another in order to do so.

23. In relation to this we have had regard to the judgments of the Court of
    Appeal in McCarthy v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]
    EWCA Civ 641 and the  subsequent  developments  in  that  case,  namely
    referral to the European Court of Justice on appeal  to  the  House  of
    Lords.  In McCarthy the appellant was a dual British/Irish national who
    had always resided in the United Kingdom.  Her husband,  as  a  non-EEA
    national, sought a residence card  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's
    residence in the United Kingdom as a national of a  Member  State.   It
    was conceded that the appellant was  not  a  "qualified  person"  under
    Regulation 6 of the Regulations.  Instead it was argued  that  she  had
    acquired a permanent right of residence under reg 15(1)(a)  as  an  EEA
    national who had resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

24. The Tribunal in McCarthy had previously found that  the  appellant  had
    never worked and had not been residing in the  United  Kingdom  in  the
    exercise of rights as an EEA national but as a citizen  of  the  United
    Kingdom.  Her rights were derived from her United  Kingdom  nationality
    and not from Community law.  Accordingly, she had not been residing  in
    the United  Kingdom  "in  accordance  with  the  Regulations",  nor  in
    accordance with the rights conferred by the Citizens  Directive  giving
    Union citizens  rights  of  free  movement  and  residence  within  the
    territory of the Member States.  This  conclusion  was  upheld  by  the
    Court of Appeal.  In the leading judgment, however, Pill LJ stated that
    if the appellant had been found to have been  residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom in the exercise of Treaty  rights,  he  would  not  have  found
    against her, as the Tribunal had done, on the basis that  she  had  not
    "moved" to the United Kingdom but had always  resided  here.   On  this
    point Pill LJ concluded, at paragraph 33 of the judgement:

          "On the second issue, I disagree with the Tribunal's  finding,  at
          paragraph 29, (though it may have been no more than an  additional
          reason for the finding on the  first  issue)  that  the  Directive
          invariably imposes a requirement that there is movement  from  one
          country to another and that "the movement  required  excludes  the
          appellant". "

    In summary it appears that what defeated Ms McCarthy's application  was
    that she  was  never  a  worker  within  the  meaning  of  EU  law  and
    consequently could not have exercised EU Treaty  rights  to  reside  in
    another State. We observe that the UT AAC  reached a similar conclusion
    as to this decision in the case of Secretary  of  State  for  Work  and
    Pensions v AA [2009] 249 (AAC), 27 November 2009 at [11]  to  [12].  We
    agree with this analysis.

25. Before us Mrs O'Brien pointed out that the Secretary of State was still
    a party to the McCarthy litigation.  As a matter  of  policy,  however,
    the Secretary of State did not take the view that a dual  British/Irish
    national residing in the United Kingdom could not in any  circumstances
    be treated as a Union citizen exercising Treaty rights.


26. Whereas in McCarthy the appellant had to show she was an  EEA  national
    who had been residing in the United Kingdom  "in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations", in terms of reg 15(1)(a),  by  contrast  in  the  present
    appeal the claimant has to show that her husband was  an  EEA  national
    who had resided in the United Kingdom continuously for  more  than  two
    years prior to terminating his activity as a worker, in  terms  of  reg
    5(3).  Regulation 5(3) is predicated on the person in question being an
    EEA national who is present in the United  Kingdom,  in  terms  of  reg
    5(1).  There is no specific requirement in reg 5(1) or  (3)  equivalent
    to the requirement in reg 15(1)(a) to the effect that the  person  must
    have been residing in  the  United  Kingdom  "in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations".  Accordingly, the claimant and her husband  do  not  fall
    within the parameters of the decision in McCarthy, as presently set out
    in the judgments of the Court of Appeal prior to the reference  to  the
    European Court of Justice, the outcome of which is awaited.

Error of law by the IJ

27. We have already set out above our conclusions on the application of the
    Regulations to the facts of this appeal.  The specific finding made  by
    the Immigration Judge which was challenged by the  Secretary  of  State
    was whether the claimant's husband was an Irish  citizen  in  1992  and
    therefore exercising Treaty rights at that time.  In our view, although
    in general  the  determination  is  carefully  argued  throughout,  the
    finding made by the Immigration Judge in relation to this point is  not
    sufficiently  clear.   At  paragraph  44  of  his   determination   the
    Immigration Judge wrote:

          "I am prepared to accept on the balance of probability  that  from
          birth her husband had the option of  claiming  Irish  citizenship.
          It is not known if he claimed  Irish  citizenship  earlier  but  I
          would accept on the balance of probabilities it  would  have  been
          granted had he sought it."

28. Then at paragraph 60 the Immigration Judge stated:


          "It has not been demonstrated that he  was  an  Irish  citizen  in
          1992.   I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  had  he  claimed  Irish
          citizenship then this would have been granted.  If he were not  an
          Irish citizen in 1992 then  he  would  not  have  been  exercising
          Treaty rights."


29. We are satisfied on the basis of the evidence put before us in the form
    of the Irish Nationality and Citizenship Act 1956 before amendment that
    the claimant's husband was an Irish citizen from  birth.  This  is  the
    provision that the Immigration Judge should  have  applied  if  it  was
    placed before him. It is not necessary for us to consider the  position
    of someone whose claim to Irish nationality depends on  the  amendments
    made to Irish nationality law in 2001.  We would accept generally  that
    a mere entitlement to acquire a nationality does not mean that you  are
    to be treated as a national at a time  before  you  applied.  The  IJ's
    reasoning appears therefore to have been erroneous. A  definitive  view
    of what Irish law provides on the question may have  to  await  a  case
    that depends on it.


30. Accordingly his decision is set aside and  we  remake  it  as  follows,
    based on the remaining findings of fact made by the Immigration  Judge.




31. The Claimant's husband was an  Irish  citizen  working  in  the  United
    Kingdom between 1990 and 1992.  In 1992 he terminated his  activity  in
    the United Kingdom as a worker as a result of permanent  incapacity  to
    work.  Accordingly he fell within the definition of a  worker  who  has
    ceased activity in terms of reg 5(1) and (3).   As  a  worker  who  had
    ceased activity he acquired the right to reside in the  United  Kingdom
    permanently under reg 15(1)(c).  His spouse acquired on marriage to him
    the right to reside in the United Kingdom  permanently  as  the  family
    member of a worker who has ceased activity, in terms of  reg  15(1)(d).
    The fact that the couple are separated has no material bearing and  the
    claimant remains her husband's family member by virtue of  marriage  in
    accordance with reg 7(1)(a).  The claimant is, accordingly, entitled to
    a residence card on this basis.

                                  DECISION

32. The decision of the Immigration Judge involved the making of  an  error
    on a point of law and is set aside.  Our decision is that the appeal is
    allowed under the Regulations.






Signed                                             Date
Senior Immigration Judge Deans
Judge of the Upper Tribunal





