
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

  R (on the application of Hoomragh Chua) v Secretary of State for the Home
                    Department IJR [2014] UKUT 00440(IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                    Friday, 5 September 2014


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                HOOMRAGH CHUA
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr E Munir, instructed by Bukhari Chambers Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Ms J Smyth, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE CRAIG: The applicant in this  case  Mr  Chua  is  a  national  of
    Mauritius who was born on 25 February 1964.  He arrived in this country
    lawfully in 2001 as a visitor.  It is said on his behalf that he had  a
    small extension of leave granted although this has not  been  confirmed
    by the respondent.  Whether or not this is the case is not relevant for
    the purposes of this application because it is common  ground  that  at
    any rate since 2002 his stay in this country  has  at  all  times  been
    without leave and during this period he has also worked although he has
    had no permission to do so.

 2. On 5 July 2012 the applicant applied to regularise his status by making
    an application for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.   The
    claim was essentially on the basis of his Article 8 rights and has been
    fairly summarised in a skeleton argument which  was  provided  for  the
    purposes of this hearing by Ms Smyth who represents the respondent  and
    reference will be made to the circumstances in which this was  produced
    below.  At paragraph  8  of  the  skeleton  the  applicant's  claim  is
    summarised as follows:

        "In essence the claimant's  Article  8  claim  boils  down  to  the
          following:

             (a)  He has been in the UK for over  eleven  years  (the  vast
                  majority of it unlawfully);

             (b)  he lives with his sister;

             (c)  he plays a role  in  the  lives  of  his  family  members
                  (principally his siblings and nieces  and  nephews  -  his
                  nephew submitted a letter saying that the claimant  helped
                  him with maths and 'pointed out the dangers  of  life  for
                  the youth') and

             (d)  he has a number of friends in the UK.  He does not  claim
                  to have a relationship with a British  citizen  or  person
                  settled and present in the UK, nor any children."

 3. This application was refused by the respondent on 12  August  2013  and
    the refusal letter is dated the same  date.   Turning  to  the  refusal
    letter the respondent first considered whether  or  not  the  applicant
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and  having
    considered that he did not for reasons which  I  will  summarise  below
    then considered whether or not the application raised or contained  any
    exceptional circumstances such  that  when  considering  the  right  to
    respect for private and family life contained in Article 8 of the ECHR,
    consideration was warranted outside the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules.

 4. With regard to the requirements under  paragraph  276ADE  the  relevant
    part of that paragraph under which the application had to be considered
    was paragraph 276ADE(vi) which requires that the applicant at the  date
    of application "is aged 18 years or above, has  lived  continuously  in
    the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)
    but has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country
    to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK".

 5. As the respondent noted within the refusal  letter  the  applicant  was
    aged over 18 and had lived continuously in  the  UK  for  under  twenty
    years and accordingly in order to succeed under the Rules would have to
    show (in order to meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(vi))  that
    he had no ties including social,  cultural  or  family  with  his  home
    country.

 6. With regard to this aspect of the claim the respondent's  decision  was
    as follows:

         "Having spent 37 years in your home country and in the  absence  of
         any evidence to the contrary, it is not accepted that in the period
         of time that you have been in the UK you have  lost  ties  to  your
         home country".

    For this reason the respondent was not  satisfied  that  the  applicant
    could meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi).

 7. With regard to whether or not his application  raised  any  exceptional
    circumstances such that consideration was  warranted  under  Article  8
    outside the requirements of paragraph 276ADE the respondent  considered
    that no such exceptional circumstances were raised and accordingly  the
    application had to be refused.

 8. The decision was made as noted on 12 August 2013 and these  proceedings
    were brought on 7 November 2013 nearly three months after the  date  of
    the decision being challenged.  Although the Rules provide  as  a  long
    stop that an application will be out of time if not made  within  three
    months of the date of the decision being challenged,  they  do  provide
    that the application  should  in  any  event  be  made  promptly  which
    arguably this application was not.  However, this is not a point  which
    has been taken on behalf of the respondent and so the application  fell
    to be considered on its merits.

 9. Permission to bring these proceedings was granted,  perhaps  generously
    on the facts of this case, by another  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  for  the
    following reasons:

         "(1) As to the  adequacy  of  the  reasoning  in  the  decision  of
             12/8/13,  the  extent  of  justification  contained   in   the
             Acknowledgment of Service contrasts with the decision itself.

         (2)  The applicant's criticism of the absence of a removal decision
             lacks reference to case law and to policy, but may be  capable
             of development."

10. I should note at this stage that in the decision granting permission to
    bring these proceedings case management directions  were  set  out  and
    these included the following:

         ".   The applicant must serve a skeleton argument and trial  bundle
             on the Tribunal and on any  other  person  provided  with  the
             application form, no later than 21 days before the date of the
             hearing of the judicial review.

         .     The  respondent  and  any  other  person  wishing   to   make
             representations at the hearing must serve a skeleton  argument
             on the Tribunal and on the applicant, no later  than  14  days
             before the date of the hearing of the judicial review.

         .    The applicant must file an agreed bundle of  authorities,  not
             less than 3 days  before  the  date  of  the  hearing  of  the
             judicial review."

11. Regrettably those representing the applicant took no  steps  to  comply
    with these directions.  No justification for  this  has  been  advanced
    before the Tribunal.  A skeleton argument was not served in advance  of
    the hearing and a bundle was not produced, and nor was  an  authorities
    bundle produced by the applicant.  The consequence  of  this  has  been
    that those representing the respondent  were  unable  to  submit  their
    arguments within the timeframe envisaged in  the  directions  and  they
    waited until they could wait no  longer  before  serving  the  skeleton
    argument to which I have already referred and a bundle  of  authorities
    which were very helpfully prepared  by  them  although  the  directions
    envisaged that this bundle would  be  produced  by  the  applicant.   I
    should note in this regard that the respondent's  solicitors  wrote  to
    the applicant's solicitors as long ago as 21 August 2014 in which  they
    stated as follows:

         "The applicant was due to file and serve his skeleton  argument  by
         15 August 2014.  Such skeleton argument has not  been  received  by
         the Treasury Solicitor's department.  The respondent is due to file
         and serve her skeleton argument by 22 August 2014 but is not  in  a
         position to do so without sight of that skeleton  prepared  by  the
         applicant.

         I should be grateful if the applicant's skeleton argument could  be
         provided forthwith so that the respondent has  the  opportunity  to
         both respond and to prepare the upcoming hearing."

12. Although the respondent was  not  able  to  have  prepared  a  skeleton
    argument on her  behalf  until  very  late  in  the  proceedings,  this
    document was prepared by Ms Smyth of Counsel and has dealt  with  every
    aspect of this  application,  although  had  the  respondent  known  in
    advance which of the applicant's submissions were being  pursued,  this
    document would not have had to be so lengthy.  I should state  in  this
    regard that Mr Munir who represented the applicant before the  Tribunal
    today was not instructed until yesterday and had had no involvement  in
    this application before then and I make no criticism whatsoever of  his
    representation.  He did the best he could in circumstances  which  must
    have been exceptionally embarrassing  for  him  as  he  was  put  in  a
    position where he had to submit a skeleton  argument  at  the  time  of
    hearing knowing full well that this document should have been  prepared
    and submitted some three weeks earlier.  As I say he did  the  best  he
    could and it is not his fault in any way that the directions given were
    not complied with.  However, it is reprehensible that they were not and
    that no proper explanation has been put before the Tribunal as  to  why
    not.  The upshot is that the substantive application is now  before  me
    and I have heard submissions on behalf of both parties  and  have  also
    had put before me, albeit very late in the day, skeleton  arguments  on
    behalf of both parties.

13. The applicant's case can be summarised as follows and this is  the  way
    in which the case was argued before me by Mr Munir.  The  applicant  no
    longer has any ties in Mauritius as he has been in this country now for
    about thirteen years.  He has no relatives in  Mauritius  now.   As  to
    "exceptional circumstances" the reason why the respondent  should  have
    considered his application properly under Article 8 is because  he  has
    been here a very long time and he lives with his sister and her  family
    as a family unit.  Although in the grounds, as referred to by the judge
    when granting permission to appeal, it is argued  that  the  respondent
    should have made a removal decision  carrying  with  it  an  in-country
    right of appeal, this argument was never developed and Mr  Munir  quite
    properly did not pursue this submission before the Tribunal.   Although
    permission was granted partly on the basis that such an argument  might
    be "developed" it has not been and indeed in my judgment  it  is  quite
    clear on the authority of the Court of Appeal in  R  (Daley-Murdock)  v
    SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 161 read in conjunction with the decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in Patel & Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, such an argument
    could not possibly  succeed.   It  is  now  well-established  that  the
    decision as to whether, and if so when to make a removal decision is  a
    matter for the respondent to decide  and  the  appropriate  course  for
    someone who has no right to remain in this country especially  once  an
    application  for  leave  to  remain  has  been  refused  is  to   leave
    voluntarily.  In the event that such a person does not, it is  for  the
    Secretary of State to decide at what stage it is appropriate to make  a
    removal decision and indeed  in  circumstances  where  such  a  removal
    decision might be appealed whether to certify that such an appeal would
    be without merit.

14. Accordingly I turn now to consider the merits of the claim itself which
    is essentially in two parts.   The  first  is  that  the  decision  was
    unlawful because the respondent failed to give  adequate  consideration
    as to whether  or  not  the  applicant  had  any  ties  remaining  with
    Mauritius.  The second part is that even if he did, on the basis of his
    having been here for eleven years before the decision and  living  with
    his sister, the respondent should have considered  that  these  factors
    were sufficient to warrant  consideration  outside  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules under Article 8.

15. Dealing with the first  submission  first,  this  seems  to  me  to  be
    completely unarguable.  I asked Mr Munir  if  he  could  point  to  any
    evidence at all within what had been submitted to the  respondent  with
    the application and prior to  the  decision  to  the  effect  that  the
    applicant no longer had any ties (including social, cultural or family)
    with Mauritius.  Mr Munir's initial response was that  it  was  "simply
    the fact that he has been away for  so  long  and  hasn't  been  back".
    Although Mr Munir then submitted that the applicant had no relatives in
    Mauritius and referred to a letter which had been sent and which was at
    page 57 of the bundle, in fact as he was eventually obliged to  concede
    the letter does not say (as Mr Munir put it "in so  many  words")  that
    the applicant does not have any family  ties  remaining  in  Mauritius.
    There was and remains no evidence at all that the  applicant  does  not
    have either social, cultural or family ties in Mauritius and, in  those
    circumstances, (and in the absence of any evidence  to  the  contrary),
    the respondent's decision not to accept that having spent some 37 years
    in Mauritius, the applicant had lost all ties to his  home  country  in
    the period of time he had been in the UK, was an entirely rational  one
    and is clearly within the range of reasonable decisions which were open
    to her.  In this regard, although I would have  reached  this  decision
    independently, I note that in a  different  application  before  Andrew
    Thomas QC sitting as  a  judge  of  the  High  Court  in  the  case  of
    Osawemwenze v SSHD [2014] EWHC 1564 (Admin) a similar argument was made
    which was determined as follows at paragraphs 18 and 19:

         "18. No evidence has been placed before the court  to  support  the
             claimant's case that he has lost all ties to  Nigeria.   I  am
             told, and I accept, that his  parents  in  Nigeria  have  both
             died.  However, his witness statement simply does not  address
             the issue of social,  cultural  or  family  ties  at  all.  Mr
             Bloomer [Counsel for the applicant in that case] invites me to
             draw the inference that after 15 years such ties as there were
             must have diminished. However, the difficulty with drawing  an
             inference based simply on the passage of years  is  that  sub-
             paragraph (iii) provides for a 20 year qualifying  period  for
             an applicant over the age of 25. The Defendant has in drafting
             the new rules considered the circumstances in which time alone
             might give rise to the relevant inference, and 15 years is not
             enough.
         19.  Mr Mandalia [Counsel for the Secretary of State]  referred  me
             to the decision of Burnett J in R (Kotecha) v SSHD [2011] EWHC
             2070 (Admin), in which it was held (at para 56)  that  'it  is
             ... for the applicant to place before the Secretary  of  State
             all  material  upon  which  he  relies  to  suggest  that  the
             consequences of removal would interfere  with  the  Article  8
             rights of the family'. The burden of proof is on the applicant
             to show that there are obstacles to relocating (see para  21).
             In my view there is no evidence to support the bare  assertion
             that the Claimant has lost all ties to Nigeria.  Indeed,  both
             Ms Andrew and Fred are Nigerian  citizens.  In  my  view,  the
             claim cannot succeed on this ground."
16. In this case, there is no reason to suppose that  merely  because  this
    applicant had been in this country for eleven years before  making  the
    application he would have lost all his social, cultural or family  ties
    with Mauritius.  There is simply no evidential basis upon which such  a
    finding could be properly made and certainly no basis for arguing  that
    the respondent's decision in this claim was in any way irrational.

17. I now turn to consider whether or not there is  any  possible  argument
    which could properly be advanced that the respondent failed properly to
    consider whether or not there were any factors outside  the  provisions
    of paragraph 276ADE as to warrant consideration under Article 8 outside
    the Rules and in my judgment it is entirely clear that it was  open  to
    the respondent to consider that there were not.  There is  now  a  very
    large body of case law which establishes that it is only in rare  cases
    (such as to make this the exception rather than the rule) where it  can
    be said that where a claim cannot succeed under paragraph 276ADE of the
    Rules, nonetheless it would be unjustifiably harsh to order the removal
    of an applicant.  These cases include MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192
    (the decision of the Court of Appeal), Nagre [2013]  EWHC  721  (Admin)
    (the decision of Sales J),  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC),  Ahmed
    [2014] EWHC 300 (Admin), Shahzad [2014] UKUT 00085, Haleemudeen  [2014]
    EWHC 558 and MM & Others [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  (the  last  two  being
    decisions of the Court of  Appeal).   It  is  instructive  to  set  out
    relevant paragraphs from the judgement of Beatson LJ in Haleemudeen, as
    follows:

         "These new provisions  in  the  Immigration  Rules  [in  particular
         referring  to  paragraph  276ADE]  are  a  central  part   of   the
         legislative  and  policy  context  in  which   the   interests   of
         immigration control are balanced against the interests  and  rights
         of people who have come to this country in which to settle  in  it.
         Overall the Secretary of State's policy as to when an  interference
         with an Article 8 right will be  regarded  as  disproportionate  is
         more particularised in the new  Rules  than  previously  had  been.
         The new Rules require stronger bonds with the United Kingdom before
         leave will be given under them... [40].

         In Nagre's case, Sales J stated ... that it is  necessary  to  find
         'particular factors in individual cases  of  especially  compelling
         force in favour of a grant of leave to remain'  even  though  those
         factors are not fully reflected in and dealt with in the new  Rules
         and 'to consider whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
         sufficiently recognised under the new rules to require the grant of
         such leave'....  Mr Richardson's preferred position  was  that  the
         Rules  are  only  the  starting  point   for   an   assessment   of
         proportionality.  It was with evident reluctance that  he  accepted
         that, at least in this court, in light of the  authorities,  it  is
         necessary to find 'compelling circumstances' for going outside  the
         Rules" [43 and 44].

18. It is accordingly clear that the decision maker is entitled not to  dot
    every "I" or cross every "T" with regard to any argument under  Article
    8 unless there are compelling circumstances which require that decision
    maker to consider factors outside the  substantive  paragraphs  of  the
    Rules.  In this case there  are  in  my  judgment  no  such  compelling
    circumstances.  The highest that this applicant's case can  be  put  is
    that he has now been here thirteen years (only eleven at  the  time  of
    the application) and that he lives with his sister as part of a  family
    unit.  Ms Smyth pointed out that the evidence  even  on  this  was  not
    wholly consistent because it was not at all clear whether or not he was
    living with his sister or sister-in-law and precisely who  that  person
    was, but I will assume in favour of the applicant that he does have  at
    least a private life in this country with some of his family with  whom
    he lives.  However there is nothing unusual about this and there is  no
    factor which could be said to be so compelling as to require a decision
    maker to consider whether Article 8 considerations might apply  outside
    the requirements of the Rules.  It is not suggested  that  he  has  any
    children in this country nor is it suggested that he has a relationship
    with either a British citizen or someone else who is  settled  in  this
    country.

19. For the sake of completeness I should also take into consideration that
    pursuant to sections 117A-117D  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 which was inserted by section 19 of the Immigration Act
    2014 and came into force on 20 July  2014,  it  is  provided  (sections
    117B(4) and (5)) that little weight should be given to a  private  life
    established by a person who is in the UK unlawfully, or at a time  when
    his immigration status is precarious.  However, it is not necessary  in
    this case for me to consider the effect of these provisions (which were
    not in force when the challenge was made but which nonetheless would be
    relevant were I  to  consider  granting  judicial  review  which  is  a
    discretionary remedy) because even in the absence of  these  provisions
    this application is completely hopeless.

20. In summary therefore I find that the decision under  challenge  was  in
    all respects a decision which was open to the respondent and there  was
    nothing irrational about it.

21. I would wish in conclusion to thank both Counsel for  their  assistance
    in this case.  Ms Smyth particularly has prepared this  case  extremely
    conscientiously (in the event more thoroughly than  was  necessary  but
    she cannot be criticised for that because until today she had  no  idea
    what arguments might be advanced on behalf of the  applicant)  and  her
    oral submissions have been both succinct and persuasive.  Mr Munir  has
    had the unenviable task of advancing a case which on  the  material  he
    had could not possibly succeed but where he was instructed far too late
    to give any meaningful advice as to whether or not it  was  even  worth
    proceeding.





Costs

22. Having given my judgment I have heard submissions  on  behalf  of  both
    parties with regard to  costs  and  I  summarily  award  costs  to  the
    respondent in the sum of �3,200.  This sum is inclusive of such VAT  as
    is payable in respect of Counsel's fees.  As the respondent was  unable
    to inform the court as to whether or not VAT would  be  recoverable  in
    respect of the other costs of the Treasury Solicitors I  do  not  award
    any other VAT in respect of costs  and  as  the  amounts  involved  are
    relatively small I do not consider it proportionate to delay  my  award
    of costs in order to consider this aspect of  costs  further.   I  have
    been told that there were costs wasted as a result of  the  failure  of
    the applicant's solicitors to comply with the directions which had been
    made as they should have done.  I am told that this is  in  respect  of
    some hours' work but that precisely what sum has been  wasted  has  not
    yet been quantified.  In these circumstances I give permission  to  the
    respondent to make an application for the applicant's solicitors to pay
    such costs as are attributable  to  this  failure  provided  that  such
    application is made within 7 days of today's date (and I make it  clear
    that this is from today's date and not from whatever date this judgment
    is in fact sent to the parties, which will not be today).  If  such  an
    application is made then the sum claimed and the basis on which  it  is
    claimed should be stated precisely within the application.

Permission to Appeal

23. Although no application has been made for permission to  appeal,  I  am
    nonetheless obliged to consider whether or not to grant  permission  to
    appeal pursuant to rule  44  (4B)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I refuse permission to appeal because  there  is
    no error of law in my judgment.



Signed:

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

Dated: 15 September 2014

