

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

     MR and ors (EEA extended family members) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 449
(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Laganside Court Centre, Belfast
on 28 October 2010


                                   Before

                         Mr Justice Blake, President
                       Mr CMG Ockelton, Vice President
                       Senior Immigration Judge Deans


                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MR
                                     FI
                                     MR
                                                                 Respondents
                                     and

                               THE AIRE CENTRE
                                                            Interested Party

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr McTaggart BL, instructed by Paul K Nolan and Co
For the Interested Party:    Ms N Mole, The AIRE Centre


This decision refers to the Court of Justice of the European Union the
questions set out at the end of it.


                             ORDER FOR REFERENCE
                TO THE COURT OF JUSTICE OF THE EUROPEAN UNION

Introduction

    1.    The Tribunal has  to  decide  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
       against a decision of IJ Fox  ("the  IJ")  given  on  6  April  2009
       allowing the appeal of each appellant before him to  the  extent  of
       remitting their cases for a decision on the merits of  their  claims
       to remain as dependent family members of an EEA National.  We  heard
       it  with  the  linked  case  of  Jahanara  Begum  where  a  separate
       determination has been made.

    2.    Jahanara Begum is the widowed mother  of  Mahbur  Rahman  who  is
       married to Roisin Patricia Rahman who is an Irish  national  working
       in Northern Ireland.  The  marriage  took  place  on  31  May  2006.
       Shortly thereafter she and the respondents applied  for  EEA  family
       permits to come to the United Kingdom as dependants  of  Mahbur  and
       Rosin Rahman. There was a dispute as to their eligibility  that  was
       resolved in their favour on appeal. She was admitted to  the  United
       Kingdom with entry clearance as a dependant mother.  There was  then
       an application made  for  a  residence  permit  and  that  was  also
       refused. The case came before the IJ who concluded that although the
       evidence was sparse she continued to be dependent since her  arrival
       in the UK. She, however,  was  a  dependent  family  member  in  the
       ascending line.

    3.    The cases of the respondents  raise  different  issues.  Muhammed
       Rahman is the brother of Mahbur Rahman; Fazly Islam is half  brother
       and Mohibullah Rahman the nephew of Mahbur Rahman. They  accordingly
       have a horizontal rather than a vertical family connection  with  Mr
       and Mrs Rahman. They do not fall within  the  definition  of  family
       members under reg. 7 but fall  to  be  treated  as  extended  family
       members under reg. 8 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
       Regulations 2006 SI 2006/1003  ("the  Regulations").  At  best  they
       claim consideration of the discretionary issue of a  residence  card
       under reg. 17 (4) if "in all the circumstances  it  appears  to  the
       Secretary of State appropriate".

    4.    They had also been issued with entry clearance to join Mr and Mrs
       Rahman as dependents of an EEA family member. Their applications for
       a residence card were refused on the basis that they did not qualify
       as extended family members and they appealed to the IJ. He concluded
       that they were in fact dependent and therefore directed their  cases
       be considered for the exercise of discretion under reg.  17(4).  The
       Secretary of State sought reconsideration by the AIT  on  the  basis
       that the evidence of dependency was unsatisfactory and none of these
       appellants qualified as extended family members.

    5.    Reconsideration was ordered in 2009 and the case now comes before
       us as an appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  A  precise  record  of  what
       happened on the  previous  occasion  has  been  lost,  but  for  the
       avoidance of doubt if the IJ's decision has  not  already  been  set
       aside, we set it aside now and will  remake  the  decision  for  the
       reasons given below.

    6.    Although as the IJ noted, the evidence  of  continued  dependency
       was thin, there was some  evidence  that  each  of  the  respondents
       resided  in  the  household  of  Mr  and  Mrs  Rahman  who  were  in
       remunerative employment and stated they continued to  support  their
       dependants. It is now accepted that the IJ was entitled to  conclude
       that the mother Jahanara Begum was a dependant. We would conclude it
       was open to the IJ to reach the factual findings he did  in  respect
       in the cases under consideration  in  this  judgment.  Although  the
       issue below was concerned with the essentially factual  question  of
       dependency, we pointed out to the parties at the hearing that  there
       were deeper problems about the cases of these appellants that needed
       examination.

The issue

    7.     Mr McTaggart in seeking to resist this appeal on behalf of these
       respondents submitted that each satisfied the terms of reg.  8(2)(a)
       and (c) of the Regulations and therefore qualified  as  an  extended
       family member because:

       (i)  Each is residing in an EEA State in which the EEA national also
            resides and is dependent upon the EEA national and
       (ii) Each continues to be dependent on him.

       The difficulty with that submission is that "EEA State" in  reg.  2,
       means a Member State other than the United  Kingdom.  It  is  common
       ground that none of the applicants has been a dependent or a  member
       of the household of his EEA spouse in an EEA state  other  than  the
       United Kingdom. If their cases are to be  determined  by  the  plain
       words of reg. 8 they do not qualify for the exercise of discretion.

    8.     If these respondents are to succeed, therefore, it would have to
       be on the basis that reg. 8 needs to be read down  in  order  to  be
       compatible with the relevant provisions of Directive  2004/83/EC  or
       that the Directive gives directly enforceable rights irrespective of
       national Regulations transposing them.

    9.    Article 3(1) of the Directive reads as follows:-

           "This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to or
           reside in a Member State other than that of  which  they  are  a
           national, and to their family members as defined in point  2  of
           Article 2 who accompany or join them. "

   10. Article 3(2) provides:

            "2.   Without prejudice  to  any  right  to  free  movement  and
                residence the persons  concerned  may  have  in  their  own
                right, the host Member State shall, in accordance with  its
                national legislation, facilitate entry  and  residence  for
                the following persons:

               (a)     any other  family  members,  irrespective  of  their
                  nationality, not falling under the definition in point  2
                  of Article 2 who, in the country  from  which  they  have
                  come, are dependants or members of the household  of  the
                  Union citizen having the primary right of  residence,  or
                  where  serious  health  grounds  strictly   require   the
                  personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;
               (b) the partner with whom the Union citizen  has  a  durable
                  relationship, duly attested.

            The host Member State shall undertake an  extensive  examination
            of the personal circumstances and shall justify  any  denial  of
            entry or residence to these people."

   11. The respondents are not family members within Article 2(2). None  of
       them have any freestanding right of their own to free  movement  and
       residence, so if Article 3(2) assists in the present case it must be
       because there is a duty on the United Kingdom to  'facilitate  entry
       and residence' 'in accordance with its national legislation'.

   12. If there is such a duty, it is  directed  at  other  family  members
       (hereafter "OFMs") who "in the country from which  they  have  come"
       are dependants or members of the  household  of  the  Union  citizen
       having the primary  right  of  residence  or  where  serious  health
       grounds strictly require the personal care of the family  member  by
       the Union citizen. We are not concerned in the  present  cases  with
       admission on health grounds or with unmarried partners in a  durable
       relationship.

   13. The Union citizen in this case is Roisin Rahman.  The  country  from
       which the OFMs have come is Bangladesh.  There  is  no  evidence  or
       reason to believe that the Union  citizen  has  ever  established  a
       household in Bangladesh. The duty under Article 3(2)  to  facilitate
       admission in accordance with national legislation applies only where
       there has been either previous residence in  the  household  of  the
       Union citizen or prior dependency. The text of  the  Directive  does
       not indicate that the household  or  the  dependency  should  be  in
       another EEA state. It is unclear from this text alone whether a duty
       to facilitate residence would extend to membership of a household or
       dependency that only began in the host state.

   14. However, the requirement of pre-admission dependency  or  membership
       of the household is indicated by Article 10  of the  Directive  that
       provides:

            "1.   The right of  residence  of  family  members  of  a  Union
                citizen who are not nationals of a Member  State  shall  be
                evidenced by the issuing of a  document  called  'Residence
                card of a family member of a Union citizen' no  later  than
                six  months  from  the  date  on  which  they  submit   the
                application. A certificate of application for the residence
                card shall be issued immediately.

            2.    For the residence card to be issued, Member  States  shall
                require presentation of the following documents:

                  (a)  a valid passport;
                  (b)  a document attesting to the  existence  of  a  family
                     relationship or of a    registered partnership;
                  (c)  the registration certificate or, in the absence of  a
                     registration system, any other proof  of  residence  in
                     the host member State of the Union  citizen  whom  they
                     are accompanying or joining;
                  (d)  in cases falling under points (c) and (d) of  Article
                     2(2), documentary evidence that  conditions  laid  down
                     therein are met;
                  (e)  in cases falling under Article  3(2)(a),  a  document
                     issued by the relevant  authority  in  the  country  of
                     origin  or  country  from  which  they   are   arriving
                     certifying that they are dependants or members  of  the
                     household  of  the  Union  citizen,  or  proof  of  the
                     existence of  serious  health  grounds  which  strictly
                     require the personal care of the family member  by  the
                     Union citizen;
                  (f)  in cases falling under Article 3(2)(b), proof of  the
                     existence of a  durable  relationship  with  the  Union
                     citizen."

       (emphasis supplied)

National case law

   15. The application of these provisions has given  rise  to  uncertainty
       and difficulty in the national  case  law  both  before  the  former
       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal and the Court of Appeal  in  England
       Wales. Strictly these decisions may not be  binding  on   the  Upper
       Tribunal when sitting in appeal on  a  case  arising  from  Northern
       Ireland and where any onward appeal would be to the Court of  Appeal
       of  Northern  Ireland  but  in  the   absence   of   any   pertinent
       jurisprudence of the Northern Ireland Court of  Appeal  we  have  no
       doubt that we should  follow  the  English  cases,  subject  to  any
       clarification of  Union law by the Court of Justice

   16.  In  AP  and  FP  (Citizens  Directive  Article  3(2);   discretion;
       dependence) India [2007] UKAIT 00048 a constitution  of  the  former
       AIT with the Vice President in the chair,  rejected  the  submission
       that "facilitate" means the same as the recognition of  a  right  of
       residence of OFMs. It concluded:-

                    i)  "Facilitate"  in  context  meant  ensuring  that  if
                       national  legislation  gave  a  right  of  entry   or
                       residence, national procedures were operated in  such
                       a way  as  to  ensure  that  they  could  be  readily
                       exercised  (12 -14).
                   ii) Jia v Migrationsverket, Case C-1/05 had departed from
                       C 316-85 Lebon [1987] ECR 2811,  and  indicated  that
                       dependency should be necessary and could not apply to
                       those who were self sufficient (28-33).


   17. In KG (Sri Lanka) and AK (Sri Lanka) [2008] EWCA Civ 13, 25  January
       2008, the Court of Appeal considered the scope of  Article  3(2)  of
       the Directive in a case where OFMs who had irregularly  entered  the
       UK as asylum seekers claimed a right of residence under Article 3(2)
       when their family members who  had  acquired  Union  citizenship  in
       another EU state relocated to the United Kingdom.  The  claims  were
       rejected for a number of reasons spelt out in the judgment of Buxton
       LJ:

        (i) The requirement of reg. 8(2)(a) of prior residence by  the  OFM
            in another EEA state was not incompatible with Article  3(2)  of
            the Directive  interpreted  in  the  light  of  its  policy  and
            objectives, save possibly in the case of EU  citizens  (such  as
            Portuguese nationals resident in Goa) who first entered  the  EU
            by coming to the host state rather than the state of nationality
             (paragraphs 63 - 69);

       (ii) The OFMs had not accompanied or joined the Union citizen in the
            Host State, rather the reverse; whereas the policy of EU law was
            to afford only those residence rights to OFMs that  might  deter
            the Union citizen exercising free movement rights (paragraphs 72
            - 74);

       (iii)     If prior dependency  in  Sri  Lanka  was  permissible  the
            appellants had not shown that they needed the  material  support
            of  the  sponsor  in  order  to  meet  their   essential   needs
            (paragraphs 75 - 76);

       (iv) The evidence did not show that the  OFMs  were  living  in  the
            household of the Union citizen. It  was  not  enough  that  they
            lived  under  the  same  roof  in  a  communal  household,  that
            household had to be headed by the Union citizen (paragraphs 77 -
            78);

       (v)  Historic  dependency  or  membership  of  the  Union  citizen's
            household was irrelevant to the Article  3(2)  test  (indeed  it
            seems in both cases such residence in Sri Lanka was  before  the
            family member became an Union citizen at all). There  should  be
            dependency or household living that is recent. The  use  of  the
            present tense in the Article assumes dependency at the  time  of
            the accompanying or joining (paragraph 79).

       (vi) If not an absolute rule, the Directive should be interpreted as
            only applying to cases where the Union citizen would be actually
            deterred or dissuaded from  exercising  treaty  rights  of  free
            movement, and this would generally  only  be  the  case  if  the
            relative had joined the citizen before the  free  movement  took
            place.

       Sedley LJ concurring in the conclusion observed that:

            "The policy of the Directive is to  be  found  as  much  in  the
            requirement to facilitate entry and residence as  in  the  place
            from which the applicant has come. If that place is the EU state
            from which the EU citizen himself  or  herself  has  moved,  the
            obligation to facilitate entry  and residence is a  strong  one;
            if not there seems to me  nothing in the policy  or  objects  of
            the Directive which requires a right of entry to be recorded  by
            way of implementation or transformation."

   18. In the case of Bigia and others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department [2009] EWCA Civ 79, 19 February 2009, the Court of Appeal
       considered the extent to which the decision in KG needed revision in
       the light of the judgment of the Court of Justice in  Case  C-127/08
       Metock v Minister of Justice decided a few days after  KG.  Most  of
       the appellants in this group of cases were family members within the
       meaning of Article 2(2) and the decisions were accordingly  governed
       simply by whether there was sufficient evidence of dependency at the
       material time.


   19. In paragraphs [37] to  [44]  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  the
       position of OFMs. TS was a  Sri  Lankan  national  resident  in  the
       United Kingdom supported by an uncle who was a German national.  The
       uncle moved to the UK and the nephew applied for a residence permit.
        In the case of GS the nephews of a Portuguese national by reason of
       connection with Goa were supported by him after he came to  the  UK.
       Their applications for residence permits were refused  because  they
       had not resided with the uncle in Portugal.

   20. On the basis of an acknowledgement by the Secretary  of  State  that
       the reasoning in Metock with respect to family members should  apply
       to OFMs, the Court concluded (at 41):

            "It follows that the provisions in Regulations 8 and 12  of  the
            2006 Regulations to the extent  that  they  require  an  OFM  to
            establish prior lawful residence in another Member State do  not
            accord with the Directive. It cannot be the case that the policy
            which produced the result in  relation  to  Article  2.2  family
            members in Metock is inapplicable in relation to OFMs."

   21.  The  court  nevertheless  concluded  (at  [43])  that  three  other
       propositions derived from KG remained good law despite Metock:

       (i)  "The tight relationship between the exercise of rights  by  the
            Union citizen  and  the  requirement  that  the  OFM  should  be
            dependants in the country from which  they  have  come  strongly
            suggests that  the  relationship  should  have  existed  in  the
            country from which the Union citizen  has  come  and  thus  have
            existed immediately before the Union citizen was accompanied  or
            joined by the OFM".

       (ii) The members of the household whose entry is to  be  facilitated
            will be members of the  Union  citizen's  household  immediately
            before the Union citizen leaves for another country.

       (iii)     Even if the OFM cannot still be  a  member  of  the  Union
            citizens' household at the moment of application  for  entry  to
            the EEA host Member State, both such membership  and  dependency
            should be very recent.

   22. In emphasising the first  of  these  three  requirements  the  Court
       observed:

            "Whilst  an  OFM  in  a  non-Member  State  may  be  financially
            dependent upon an Union citizen  because  he  is  provided  with
            accommodation or living expenses by the Union citizen, there  is
            no reason why the Union citizen's movement to  the  host  Member
            State would be discouraged. The OFM could  continue  to  benefit
            from the accommodation or the income after the Union citizen has
            exercised his rights in the host Member State.  I  accept  (the)
            submission that it is only those OFMs who have been present with
            the Union citizen with the union citizen  in  the  country  from
            which he has most recently come whose ability  or  inability  to
            move with him could impact on his exercise of a primary right".

   23. In the case of SM (India)  and others v ECO (Mumbai) [2009] EWCA Civ
       1426  one of the appellants  was  an  OFM  cousin  of  a  Portuguese
       national working in the United Kingdom.  The cousin  was  living  in
       the same house in India where the sponsor used to live and was  sent
       remittances. The IJ  dismissed  the  appeal  because  there  was  no
       dependency of necessity rather than  choice.  The  Court  of  Appeal
       concluded that  the  IJ  had  fallen  into  error  by  applying  the
       interpretation of Jia identified in AP  and  FP  (see  [16]  above).
       Dependency did not have to be of necessity.  The  Lebon  test  still
       applied and it was  sufficient  if  in  fact  the  sponsor  supplied
       support for the essential needs in the country of origin whether  he
       had the ability to supply his needs from his own labour or not.

   24. Consideration was given to the case of  Bigia.  The  Court  was  not
       satisfied that the lapse of one year between the sponsor arriving in
       the UK and the relative  seeking  to  come  was  such  to  make  the
       dependency historic or lapsed.  There was no judicial comment on the
       fact that Bigia seemed to require that the OFM be dependent  in  the
       country from which the Union citizen  had  most  recently  come  and
       dependence in the OFM's country of origin was not within the  policy
       of the Directive. The case was remitted for  detailed  consideration
       of the extent of the dependency.

   25. In the case of Pedro v Secretary of  State  for  Work  and  Pensions
       [2009] EWCA Civ 1358 the Court of  Appeal  was  concerned  with  the
       social security rights of the elderly mother of an EU national whose
       dependency had begun only after her arrival in the host  state.  The
       Court distinguished the decision of the Court of Justice in  Jia  on
       the basis that that case was concerned with  EC  legislation  before
       the Directive had extended free movement rights for family  members.
       The governing legislation in Jia was Directive 73/148/EEC but as the
       requirements of documentation for non-Union family members  was  not
       specific the Court of Justice turned to the documentation provisions
       of  Council  Directive  68/360  Article  4(3)  that  sets  out   the
       documentary requirements for family members of  workers  within  the
       meaning of Article 10 of Regulation 1612/68.

   26. Article  4(3) reads as follows:

            "For the issue of a residence permit for a national of a  Member
            State of the EEC, Member States may require only the  production
            of the following documents;

             - by the worker:
                  (a)  the document with which he entered their territory;
                  (b)  a confirmation of engagement from the employer  or  a
                      certificate of employment;
             - by the members of the worker's family:
                  (c)  the document with which they entered the territory;
                  (d)  a document issued by the competent authority  of  the
                      state of  origin  or  the  state  whence  they  came,
                      providing their relationship;
                  (e)  in the cases referred to in Article 10(1) and (2)  of
                      Regulation (EEC) No 12612/68, a  document  issued  by
                      the competent authority of the state of origin or the
                      state whence they  came,  testifying  that  they  are
                      dependent on the worker or that they live  under  his
                      roof in such country."

   27.  By  contrast  under  the  equivalent  provisions  of  the  Citizens
       Directive (Article 10 quoted at [14] above) family members only need
       to prove the relevant facts and did not need  documents  from  their
       state of origin or the state where they had come to do so. The Court
       of Appeal also accepted the submission from the applicants  that  an
       EU citizen may be deterred  from moving to the UK if he or  she  was
       aware that she could not bring over an elderly  mother  because  she
       would not be regarded as a dependent if dependency only arose  later
       and in the host Member State (see [59]).

   28. In VN (EEA rights - dependency) Macedonia [2010] UKUT 380 (IAC)  the
       Upper Tribunal reviewed this case law in  the  context  of  extended
       family members and concluded that the case law developments since KG
       primarily concerned family members as defined in Article  2  of  the
       Citizens Directive rather than  other  or  extended  family  members
       dealt with in Article 3. In particular Metock was not concerned with
       OFMs and Pedro specifically  distinguished  them  from.  SIJ  Storey
       accepted in the light of Maurice Kay LJ's comments in  Bigia  (cited
       at [22-23] above) that the IJ had fallen  into  error  in  requiring
       prior residence in another EEA state, the  error  was  not  material
       because there was a finding of no pre-entry dependency. He  rejected
       the submission that  Pedro  enabled  OFMs  to  rely  on  post  entry
       dependency.

   29. In RK (OFM - membership of household - dependency) India [2010] UKUT
       421 (IAC) the Tribunal drew attention to Article 10 of the  Citizens
       Directive and concluded that a daughter in law  of  an  EU  national
       might qualify for admission as an OFM if she was dependent.

Discussion

   30. We confess that this national case law  leaves  us  in  a  state  of
       uncertainty. If one assumes, as the Court of Appeal  in  Bigia  did,
       that an OFM can challenge  national  legislation  by  a  failure  to
       properly transpose Article 3(2) of the Citizens  Directive  and  the
       principles of the case law on family members apply  by  analogy,  we
       find  it  very  difficult  to  see  how  the  restrictions  on   the
       circumstances when an OFM who is dependent before seeking  admission
       to the United Kingdom identified in Bigia can apply  when  they  are
       not contained in Community legislation.

   31. In neither KG nor Bigia was attention paid  to  Article  10  of  the
       Citizens Directive or the assistance provided  by  such  subordinate
       measures to the scope of Article 3 (2). Article 10(2)(e) seems to us
       to be unambiguous in stating that proof of  dependency  by  the  OFM
       should be provided from documents in their state or origin or  state
       from which they have come. We cannot see how  an  ability  to  prove
       dependency in the OFM's state of origin can be cut by  reference  to
       general principles that the dependency must be so closely linked  to
       the exercise of Treaty rights by  the  Union  citizen  as  to  exist
       immediately before the exercise of Free Movement rights and  in  the
       place where the Union citizen was before he or she  exercised  those
       rights.

   32. In any event a close chronological link between prior dependency and
       the exercise of Treaty  rights  has  been  rejected  in  Pedro  with
       respect to family members, and we cannot see how the  scope  of  the
       general principle of avoiding measures that deter  the  exercise  of
       Treaty rights relied on to construe the Directive can  be  different
       depending on whether Article 2 or Article 3 is being examined.

   33. We recognise that OFMs must  demonstrate  that  dependency  preceded
       their admission to the host state and in this they are distinguished
       from family members but this is a consequence of the plain words  of
       the Directive itself  rather  than  the  application  of  a  general
       principle reading words into it.  As the Court of  Appeal  noted  in
       Pedro, Article  10(2)(d)  makes  a  notable  contrast  with  Article
       10(2)(e) as to where the dependency must be, according to how it  is
       proved.

   34. Further, it might well be said that the place of  residence  of  the
       dependant makes little difference in impact on a willingness to move
       to the United Kingdom by say an Italian national resident  in  Milan
       who is married to a Sri Lankan national who financially  supports  a
       non EU-national brother in law.  The brother in law or  similar  OFM
       might reside in Sicily or Sri Lanka and  might  continue  to  do  so
       after the Union citizen has moved to  the  United  Kingdom.  If  the
       restrictions in KG as upheld in Bigia are right , in  one  case  the
       dependent can come to the United Kingdom because  he  lived  in  the
       same country as the Union national when dependent and in  the  other
       case he cannot.

   35. We observe that in some parts of  the  judgments  in  KG  and  Bigia
       dependency and membership of the household are treated together  but
       as we read the  Directive  they  are  alternatives  with  materially
       different requirements. Membership of  the  household  must  be  the
       Union citizen's household while dependency  can  either  be  on  the
       Union citizen or his or her non national spouse. We  recognise  that
       membership  of  the  household  requires   at   least   a   physical
       cohabitation under the same space. If the OFM has never  lived  with
       the Union citizen before seeking admission this  requirement  simply
       cannot be met.  Although  it  is  not  impossible  that  an  Italian
       national married to a Sri Lankan national has set up a household  in
       Sri Lanka with his in laws, it may not be the most usual pattern  in
       such cases.

   36. By contrast dependency does not have to be on the  Italian  national
       directly but may also be on the remittances from  the  non  national
       spouse.  We see no over-riding policy reason to be  applied  to  the
       construction of the Directive why the place of dependency should not
       be  the  country  where  the  non-national  dependent  comes   from,
       irrespective of whether the Union citizen has ever lived there.   We
       note that this seems to have been  the  approach  of  the  Court  of
       Appeal in SM (India) despite observations to the contrary in Bigia.

   37. All this assumes that Article 3(2) requires the national  legislator
       to make provisions in domestic law to facilitate  the  admission  of
       OFMs who are dependents or members of the household. There are  some
       strong arguments in favour of that conclusion:


       (i)  The Directive uses the  word  "shall"  facilitate  rather  than
            "may".

       (ii) The  Directive  supplements  the  previous  Regulation  1612/68
            Article  10  of  which  referred  simply  to  "shall  facilitate
            admission" as  opposed  to  any  requirement  to  facilitate  in
            national legal provisions.

       (iii)     Regulation 1612/68 as a Regulation needs  no  implementing
            measures to give it effect.

       (iv) It is unlikely  that  a  measure  that  the  Court  of  Justice
            described in Metock at [59] as intended to strengthen the rights
            of free movement intended to  grant   a  broader  discretion  to
            national legislator whether to facilitate members of  the  class
            or not.

       (v)  The  addition  of  the  requirement  to  facilitate  entry  and
            residence in accordance with its national legislation, may  well
            be intended to  ensure  that  such  facilitation  is  judicially
            enforceable  rather  than  the  subject  of  an   administrative
            discretion that may not be.

       (vi) Article 10 of the Citizens Directive looks as if it establishes
            different  ways  in  which  different  classes  can  prove   the
            necessary elements to secure admission, and such a measure seems
            inconsistent with a broad national discretion as to  whether  to
            facilitate entry and residence.

   38. On the other hand, there must be some distinction between the  right
       of entry and residence accorded to close family members and the duty
       to facilitate entry and residence of a broad class of  other  family
       members, who may be related only very distantly.  These distinctions
       have never been teased out in national case law:

       (i)  The comments of the AIT in as to the duty being procedural have
            not  been  expressly  overruled  in  SM  (India)  (contrast  the
            observations about dependency).

       (ii) Preamble (6) to the Citizens Directive refers to "the situation
            of those who are  not  included  in  the  definition  of  family
            members  under this Directive and who therefore do not enjoy  an
            automatic right of entry  and  residence   in  the  host  Member
            State, should be examined by the host Member State on the  basis
            of its own national legislation,  in  order  to  decide  whether
            entry or residence could be granted to such persons, taking into
            consideration their relationship with the Union citizen  or  any
            circumstances, such as their financial or  physical  dependence"
            (our emphasis).

       (iii)     The concluding words of Article 3(2), requiring the Member
            State to "undertake an extensive  examination  of  the  personal
            circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or residence
            to these people"  suggest  a  broad  measure  of  discretion  is
            afforded to Member States as to who and when entry and residence
            can be denied.

   39. Apart  from  disputes  about  when  and  where   the  OFM   must  be
       dependent,  the cases coming before the AIT and  since  14  February
       2010 proceeding before then  First  tier  Tribunal  Immigration  and
       Asylum Chamber (FtTIAC) and   the  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and
       Asylum Chamber (UTIAC) suggest  that  there  are  frequent  contests
       about the nature of the dependency.  If dependency does not have  to
       be one of necessity as opposed to choice as the Court of  Appeal  in
       England and Wales has concluded in the case of SM (India), there  is
       considerable scope for contrived dependencies being created in order
       to gain admission and residence under  the  Directive.  If  an  able
       bodied male of working age, who may have financial resources of  his
       own, can chose to rely instead, for some part of  his  basic  living
       expenses, on remittances from a distant relative in the host  State,
       can the host state be afforded a  relevant  margin  of  appreciation
       when promulgating its national law to require in OFMs something more
       than the  minimal  dependence  identified  in  Lebon?  Even  if  the
       national  regulations  cannot  be  prescriptive  as  to  where   the
       dependency takes place, could it not set a reasonable  threshold  of
       what level  of  dependency  is  required  to  secure  admission  and
       residence?

   40. We recognise that Community law enables the national  legislator  or
       judge to prevent reliance on fraud or abuse of  rights,  but  cannot
       envisage how those principles can be engaged if there is  an  actual
       dependency that is genuine and effective as  opposed  merely  to  an
       artificial appearance of dependency.

   41. There is a further  problem  in  the  case  of  able  bodied  adults
       admitted as dependants who are then free to work under national law,
       as  these  appellants  were.  Do  they  have  to  remain   dependant
       throughout the period of the first residence  permit  to  obtain  an
       extension of stay and or permanent residence? Is enforced dependency
       required? If so could they be  required  to  leave  if  they  become
       independent in the host state  and  possibly  resume  dependency  in
       their country of origin.  These  are  not  problems  encountered  by
       family members where it seems that it is normally the biological  or
       social relationship that must continue.

Conclusions

   42. We  conclude  that  a  clear  understanding  of  the  Community  law
       provisions is necessary for us to determine these appeals:

       (i)  To succeed in their appeals the respondents need to rely on the
            Citizens Directive as national law does not  assist  them.   The
            issue is not simply the factual question of their dependency  or
            continued dependency but their eligibility for an  EU  residence
            document as a dependent OFM.

       (ii) Even if regs. 8 and 12 of the  national  regulations  are  read
            down to excise a reference to prior residence by  the  applicant
            in another EEA  state,  national  case  law  suggests  that  the
            respondents cannot come with the scope of the UK Regulations  as
            they were not dependent on the EEA national or her spouse  prior
            to admission in another country where the EEA national  resided,
            which the guidance from the court of Appeal suggests  may  still
            be a requirement.

       (iii)     The existence of such a requirement in (ii) above does not
            appear to be supported by the terms  of  Article  10(2)  of  the
            Citizens Directive. If  we  were  to  construe  the  matter  for
            ourselves without previous Court of Appeal authority we would be
            likely to reach this conclusion.

       (iv) We are uncertain whether Community law permits the words of the
            Directive to be  made  subject  to  an  implied  exception  that
            facilitation is only required in factual circumstances where the
            exercise of Treaty rights would be deterred.  If  comparison  is
            made between an OFM resident in an EEA state but not in the same
            immediate vicinity as the EEA national and an  OFM  resident  in
            his country of origin, we cannot see a distinction  between  the
            admission of the family member and the deterrent effect (if any)
            on the exercise of Treaty rights. The guidance from the Court of
            Appeal in this Bigia and Pedro does not appear  to  be  entirely
            consistent.

       (v)  We are unsure of  what  the  phrase  "in  accordance  with  its
            national legislation, facilitate entry  and  residence  for  the
            following persons" means. On one view it could mean that  it  is
            up to the national legislator to decide whether there should  be
            any facilitation of anybody or not,  in  which  case  rights  of
            admission and continued residence are entirely dependent on  the
            terms of such legislation.  The other view is that  there  is  a
            Community law duty to facilitate the admission  of  a  class  of
            OFMs and a duty to facilitate by enforceable laws as opposed  to
            discretionary policies. On this view  it  is  uncertain  whether
            there is a material distinction to rights of entry and residence
            by virtue of family membership and  membership  of  the  broader
            family categories covered by  being an OFM.

       (vi) If there is a Community law duty to  facilitate  entry  we  are
            unsure whether it is open to the  national  legislator  to  make
            particular  requirements  as  to  the  degree  and  duration  of
            dependency that may be required to obtain entry  and  residence.
            If dependency does not have  to  be  of  necessity  able  bodied
            adults who chose to rely on the support of their families may be
            able to enter and reside in a Member State and obtain a right of
            indefinite residence in the host Member State.

   43. The case law of the Court of Justice cited in the national cases and
       in particular the decisions in Jia and Metock concern family members
       rather than OFMs.  We are unaware of any jurisprudence of the  Court
       of Justice that specifically addressed Article 3(2) of the  Citizens
       Directive or its predecessor reg. 10(2) of Regulation 1612/68.

   44. We are able to make  reference  to  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
       European Union for a preliminary ruling under  Article  267  of  the
       Consolidated Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union.
       Applying the test in   R v Stock Exchange ex parte  Else  [1993]  QB
       534 we are unable with complete  confidence  to  decide  the  matter
       ourselves.

   45. We  further  recognise  that  the  issues  of  concern  to  us  have
       implications for  all  OFMs  of  EEA  nationals  and  Member  States
       throughout the Union. Although we  are  not  a  final  appeal  court
       obliged to make a reference we note that in Case 283/81 CILFIT Srl v
       Ministro della Sanita [1982] ECR  3415  at  paragraph  [16]  of  its
       judgment in that case, the ECJ  said:

            "The correct application of Community Law may be so  obvious  as
            to leave no scope for any reasonable doubt as to the  manner  in
            which the question raised is to be resolved. Before it comes  to
            the conclusion that such is the  case,  the  national  court  or
            tribunal must be convinced that the matter is equally obvious to
            the courts of the other  Member  States  and  to  the  Court  of
            Justice.  Only  if  those  conditions  are  satisfied,  may  the
            national court or tribunal refrain from submitting the  question
            to the Court of Justice and take upon itself the  responsibility
            for resolving it."

   46. In deciding whether to make such a reference we have had  regard  to
       the Information Note  on  references  from  national  courts  for  a
       preliminary  ruling   (OJ  2009/C-297/01,   5  December  2009).   We
       conclude:

       (i)  The facts of this present case have been determined by the IJ.

       (ii) The Community law issue is likely to be  determinative  of  the
            outcome of this appeal.

       (iii)     There is already a substantial procedural history to  this
            case and the applicants are no nearer to  knowing  whether  they
            can continue to reside in the UK.  If a reference  needs  to  be
            made then in our judgment the sooner it is made the better.

       (iv) We are conscious that there are many hundreds of similar  cases
            pending before both the First-tier and Upper Tribunal  that  may
            need to be adjourned until the  law  is  clarified.  This  is  a
            further reason why we consider we should make the reference  now
            as merely leaving the problem for the Court of Appeal or Supreme
            Court to resolve before a reference is made would merely add  to
            the delay that unfortunately has already been incurred  in  this
            case.

       (v)  We sent out  an  earlier  version  of  this  determination  and
            invited submissions on it and the questions we  were  minded  to
            pose in a reference.  None of the parties has opposed the making
            of a reference although the Home Office submitted that a  number
            of the questions posed were  unnecessary  to  determine  in  the
            present case.

   47. Accordingly we have decided to make a reference to the CJEU  on  the
       issues of Community law on which we need assistance.

   48. We have reconsidered  the  questions  posed  in  the  light  of  the
       representations  received.  We  disagree  with   the   Home   Office
       contention that the  questions  about  the  nature  of  the  state's
       obligation to make legislative provision  are  unnecessary  in  this
       case because the United Kingdom has promulgated reg. 8 of  the  2006
       Regulations.  The respondents cannot  comply  with  this  regulation
       even if we were to read it in the light of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
       judgment in Bigia. It is unfortunate that the Regulations do not set
       out what the Home Office believe the law to be. We seek the guidance
       of the Court of Justice on what Community requires in this area  and
       what room for legislative or judicial  discretion  is  left  to  the
       national authorities.

   49. We have received an application by the AIRE Centre to  intervene  in
       this case. It is a well known  organisation  based  in  London  with
       considerable expertise of European free movement  and  human  rights
       law and comparative practice in Europe. We note that it has recently
       intervened in important judgments of the Court of Appeal of  England
       and Wales in Quila [2010] EWCA  Civ  1482 and  the Supreme Court  of
       the United Kingdom in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 on  the  questions
       of family life and immigration. We aware that consider that  it  has
       been given leave to intervene in  proceedings  before  the  European
       Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, but that there is no  power  in
       the rules of the Court of Justice to join non state interveners once
       a reference has been made. We  conclude  that  the  AIRE  Centre  is
       likely to have a relevant contribution to  make  the  problems  that
       cause us difficulty; its application for joinder is supported by the
       respondents and not opposed by the Home Office. We have  accordingly
       made it a party to these proceedings in the  exercise  of  our  case
       management powers.

   50. We therefore refer the questions set out in  the  attached  schedule
       for the advisory opinion of the Court of  Justice  of  the  European
       Union pursuant to Article 267 of the Treaty on  the  Functioning  of
       the European Union.


                               Signed
                               [pic]


                               President of the Upper Tribunal,
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber





        SCHEDULE OF QUESTIONS TO BE REFERRED TO THE COURT OF JUSTICE

 1. Does Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC require  a  Member  State  to
    make legislative provision to facilitate entry to and or residence in a
    Member State to the class of other family members who are not nationals
    of the European Union who can meet the requirements of Article 10(2)?

 2. Can such other family member referred to in  Question  1  rely  on  the
    direct applicability of Article 3(2) of  Directive  2004/38/EC  in  the
    event that he cannot comply with any requirements imposed  by  national
    legislative provisions?

 3. Is the class of other family members referred to in  Article  3(2)  and
    Article 10(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC limited to those who have resided
    in the same country as the Union national and his or her spouse, before
    the Union national came to the host state?

 4. Must any dependency referred to in Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC
    on which the other family member relies to secure  entry  to  the  host
    state be dependency that existed shortly before the Union citizen moved
    to the host state?

 5. Can a Member State impose particular requirements as to the  nature  or
    duration of  dependency  referred  to  in  Article  3(2)  of  Directive
    2004/38/EC by such other family member so as to prevent such dependency
    being contrived or unnecessary to enable a non national to be  admitted
    to or continue to reside in its territory?

 6. Must the dependency on which the other family member relies in order to
    be admitted to the Member State continue for a period  or  indefinitely
    in the host state for a residence card to be issued or renewed pursuant
    to Article 10 of  Directive  2004/38/EC  and  if  so  how  should  such
    dependency be demonstrated?



