
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 10, 11, 12, 13, 25 February and 9 |                            |
|September 2014                       |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |

                                   Before

                The President, the Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                              MOJ, MAA AND SSM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                           (Anonymity order made)

Representation:

For the Appellant MOJ:     Mr M. Gill QC and Mr A.  Pretzell  (of  Counsel),
                      instructed by Duncan Lewis and Company, Solicitors

For the Appellant MAA: Ms S. Panagiotopoulou  (of  Counsel),  instructed  by
                      Trott and Gentry LLP

For the Appellant SSM:     Mr R. Toal and Ms G Loughran (both  of  Counsel),
                      instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP


For the Respondent:        Mr B.  Rawat  (of  Counsel),  instructed  by  the
                      Treasury Solicitor and  Mr  I.  Jarvis  (Senior  Home
                      Office Presenting Officer)

                               LEGAL GUIDANCE


        i) The operation of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and  Asylum
           Chamber Guidance Note no. 2 of 2011, "Reporting Decisions of the
           Upper   Tribunal   Immigration   and   Asylum   Chamber"    and,
           particularly, [11] thereof,  does  not  render  the  process  of
           composition of country guidance decisions  procedurally  unfair.




       ii) As a general principle, where attendance of an  appellant  is  a
           prerequisite to the vindication of the person's right to a  fair
           hearing, the appellant must be present.


                              COUNTRY GUIDANCE


        i) The country guidance issues addressed in this determination  are
           not identical to those engaged with by the Tribunal in  AMM  and
           others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)  Somalia
           CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore, where country guidance  has
           been given by the Tribunal in  AMM  in  respect  of  issues  not
           addressed in this determination then the  guidance  provided  by
           AMM shall continue to have effect.


       ii) Generally, a person who is  "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
           associated with the security forces; any aspect of government or
           official   administration   or   any   NGO   or    international
           organisation) on  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
           absence will face no real risk of persecution or  risk  of  harm
           such as to require protection under Article 3  of  the  ECHR  or
           Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. In particular,  he
           will not be at real risk simply on account of having lived in  a
           European location for a period of  time  of  being  viewed  with
           suspicion either by the authorities as a possible  supporter  of
           Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose
           Islamic integrity has been compromised by living  in  a  Western
           country.


      iii) There has been durable change in the sense that the  Al  Shabaab
           withdrawal from Mogadishu is  complete  and  there  is  no  real
           prospect of a re-established presence within the city. That  was
           not the case at the time of the country guidance  given  by  the
           Tribunal in AMM.

       iv)  The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding   non-military
           casualties that clearly fall within  Al  Shabaab  target  groups
           such as politicians, police officers, government  officials  and
           those associated  with  NGOs  and  international  organisations,
           cannot be precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence
           which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it  is  established
           by the evidence considered as a whole  that  there  has  been  a
           reduction in  the  level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
           largely due to the cessation of confrontational  warfare  within
           the city and Al Shabaab's  resort  to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
           carefully selected targets.  The  present  level  of  casualties
           does not amount to a sufficient risk to ordinary civilians  such
           as to represent an Article 15(c) risk.

        v) It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu to reduce further
           still his personal exposure to the risk of  "collateral  damage"
           in being caught up in an Al Shabaab attack that was not targeted
           at him by avoiding areas and  establishments  that  are  clearly
           identifiable as  likely  Al  Shabaab  targets,  and  it  is  not
           unreasonable for him to do so.

       vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to  Al  Shabaab  for
           civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for  recent  returnees
           from the West.

      vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence  will
           look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the  city,
           for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing   a
           livelihood. Although a returnee may also  seek  assistance  from
           his clan members who are not close relatives, such help is  only
           likely to be forthcoming for majority clan members, as  minority
           clans may have little to offer.

     viii) The significance of clan membership in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
           Clans now provide, potentially, social  support  mechanisms  and
           assist  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of   a
           protection function than previously. There are no clan  militias
           in Mogadishu, no clan violence, and no clan based discriminatory
           treatment, even for minority clan members.

       ix)  If it is accepted that a person facing a  return  to  Mogadishu
           after a period  of  absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
           relatives in the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself
           on return, there will need to be a careful assessment of all  of
           the circumstances. These considerations will  include,  but  are
           not limited to:

            . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
            . length of absence from Mogadishu;
            . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
            . access to financial resources;
            . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
              or self employment;
            . availability of remittances from abroad;
            . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
            . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
              enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.


        x) Put another way, it will be for  the  person  facing  return  to
           explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
           opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
           especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are
           taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.


       xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or family support
           who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and  who
           have no real prospect of securing  access  to  a  livelihood  on
           return who will face the prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
           falling  below  that  which  is   acceptable   in   humanitarian
           protection terms.

      xii)  The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those  who
           originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to  live
           in the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk  or
           facing a real risk of destitution. On the other hand, relocation
           in Mogadishu for a person of a minority  clan   with  no  former
           links to the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,
           family or social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the
           absence of means to establish a home and some  form  of  ongoing
           financial support there  will  be  a  real  risk  of  having  no
           alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP
           camp where there is a real possibility  of  having  to  live  in
           conditions   that  will  fall  below   acceptable   humanitarian
           standards.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

|INDEX                                                             |
|                                              |Paragraph number  |
|Introduction                                  |1                 |
|Anonymity                                     |2                 |
|Right to attend a hearing                     |5                 |
|Country Guidance Judgments                    |8                 |
|Duties of expert witnesses                    |23                |
|Legal Framework                               |29                |
|The law relating to Art 15(c) of the          |30                |
|Qualification Directive                       |                  |
|Law relating to Article 3 of the ECHR         |34                |
|Review of case law concerning Somalia         |35                |
|The Evidence                                                      |
|Introduction                                  |44                |
|Introductory comments concerning the expert   |46                |
|evidence                                      |                  |
|Dr Mullen's evidence                          |47                |
|Dr Hoehne's evidence                          |106               |
|Ms Harper's evidence                          |161               |
|The submissions of the parties:               |202               |
|On behalf of the respondent                   |203               |
|On behalf of MOJ                              |240               |
|On behalf of MAA                              |263               |
|On behalf of SSM                              |289               |
|Conclusions:                                  |333               |
|Significance of Clan membership               |337               |
|The "Economic Boom"                           |344               |
|Population Movements                          |353               |
|Sufficiency of Protection                     |355               |
|Al Shabaab                                    |366               |
|Level of civilian casualties                  |376               |
|Avoiding or reducing risk                     |387               |
|Forced recruitment to Al Shabaab              |395               |
|Assessment of the level of risk               |397               |
|IDPs                                          |409               |
|Mogadishu as a destination for relocation     |424               |
|Determination of the individual appeals       |                  |
|MOJ                                           |426               |
|MAA                                           |453               |
|SSM                                           |467               |

|Appendix A/B: Schedule of documentary evidence|Page 215           |
|Appendix C: Summary of written expert evidence|Page 262           |
|Appendix D: Error of Law decisions            |Page 273           |


 1. In this determination, to which each member of the  panel  has  made  a
    contribution, the Upper Tribunal addresses  the  current  situation  in
    Mogadishu in order to determine the  individual  appeals  and  to  give
    guidance limited to the following issues:


           Whether the current situation in Mogadishu is such as to entitle
           nationals of Somalia whose  home  area  is  Mogadishu  or  whose
           proposed area of relocation is Mogadishu  to  succeed  in  their
           claims for refugee status, humanitarian protection status  under
           Article 15(c) or protection against refoulment under Articles  3
           or 2 of the ECHR solely on the basis that they are civilians and
           do not have  powerful  actors  in  a  position  to  afford  them
           adequate protection.


 2. We should make clear, at the outset, that  the  Tribunal  has  made  an
    order under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 the effect of which is that nothing is to be  published  that  may
    lead to the identification of any of the appellants or any  person  who
    has contributed to the evidence submitted by  the  parties  other  than
    those whose names are disclosed in this determination.

 3. These appeals come before us because in each case the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal has been found to disclose legal error such  as  to
    require it to be set aside  and  remade  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
    decisions of the Upper Tribunal identifying those  errors  of  law  are
    reproduced in Annex D but for present  purposes  the  position  can  be
    summarised as follows:


        a. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss MOJ's  appeal
           against a deportation decision made  as  a  consequence  of  his
           conviction for an offence of robbery in January 2011  for  which
           he was sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment was set aside by Upper
           Tribunal Judge Storey, following a hearing on 5 July  2013.  The
           judge found that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  by  failing  to
           give sufficient reasons for departing from the Country  Guidance
           in force. The findings of fact made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           were preserved.


        b. MAA's appeal  against  the  removal  decision  that  accompanied
           refusal of his asylum and human rights claim  was  dismissed  by
           the First-tier Tribunal by a  determination  promulgated  on  23
           July 2013. Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  I.  A.  Lewis  found,
           following a hearing on 5 March 2013, that in doing so the First-
           tier Tribunal had erred in  law  but  only  in  respect  of  the
           humanitarian protection claim. That was because  the  First-tier
           Tribunal judge  had  failed  to  identify  a  cogent  basis  for
           concluding, in the light of  the  applicable  country  guidance,
           that the appellant fell within a class of persons who could live
           to a reasonable standard upon return. Once again,  the  findings
           of fact that had been made were preserved.

        c. SSM's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was against  a  decision
           of the respondent to refuse to revoke a deportation  order  that
           had been made as a result of his conviction on 28 November  2008
           of an offence of violent disorder for which he was sentenced  to
           3 years and 4  months  imprisonment.  On  4  November  2013  the
           decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal  was
           set aside by Upper Tribunal Judges Dawson and  Reeds.  That  was
           because they found that the First-tier Tribunal  had  failed  to
           resolve difference in the evidence offered by  the  parties  and
           failed to provide adequate reasons for  departing  from  current
           country guidance.

    There is  a  summary  of  agreed  facts  in  respect  of  each  of  the
    appellants, which is set out below.

 4. The appeal was heard over five days in February  and  the  hearing  was
    briefly reconvened on 9 September in order to provide the parties  with
    an opportunity to advance submissions concerning  section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, introduced by section  19
    of the Immigration Act 2014 which, having come into effect on 28  July,
    was potentially applicable. In the  event,  submissions  were  advanced
    only on behalf of MOJ and the respondent, as neither  MAA  or  SSM  are
    pursuing a claim under Article 8 of the ECHR before the Upper Tribunal.
    Before undertaking our analysis of the evidence, we will  address  some
    preliminary issues.

The Attendance of the Parties

 5. The Appellant MOJ is in custody, by virtue of having been convicted  of
    a criminal offence. Arrangements for his attendance at the hearing  lay
    with the Prison Service and its agents.  He  was  not  brought  to  the
    Tribunal Hearing Centre on the first day of  the  substantive  hearing,
    for reasons which are not entirely clear.  His  Counsel,  Mr  Gill  QC,
    while making clear that his client's  preference  was  to  be  present,
    acknowledged that his non-attendance was not a reason to  prevent  this
    long-arranged  and  important  hearing  from   proceeding.    Mr   Gill
    maintained the same stance on the second day  of  hearing,  the  second
    half whereof was  attended  by  his  client.   At  this  juncture,  the
    Tribunal acceded to Mr Gill's request to adjourn for a period to enable
    him to confer with his client.  This Appellant was also  in  attendance
    at the beginning of the third day of the hearing.  At  this  stage,  Mr
    Gill informed the Tribunal that, having conferred with his  client,  he
    would not be giving evidence.  Throughout the period of the Appellant's
    attendance, the hearing had proceeded in a secure hearing  room.  Given
    the proliferation of personnel attending and the abundance  of  bundles
    of documents, this was proving unsatisfactory because of the relatively
    small size  of  that  court  room.   The  Tribunal  invited  the  legal
    representatives to discuss this issue. Having done so, Mr  Gill  stated
    that there would be no objection to the hearing continuing in a larger,
    more satisfactory court room  in  his  client's  absence.  This  was  a
    sensible and practical stance which should properly be commended.

 6. We take this opportunity to reiterate what  we  said  at  the  hearing.
    Where attendance of an appellant is a prerequisite to  the  vindication
    of a person's right to a fair hearing, the appellant must  be  present.
    This is a general principle. While it has certain exceptions,  we  need
    not examine these in the present context.  From the perspective of  the
    Appellant MOJ, the hearing had certain  noteworthy  features.   In  the
    first place, witnesses were not testifying against him. Secondly,  this
    Appellant had testified at a previous  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which had found that he had not given a  credible  account  in
    certain respects.  Thirdly, the present appeal proceeded on  the  basis
    of  agreed  statements  of  facts  in  respect  all  three  Appellants.
    Fourthly, all of the witnesses who testified were doing so on behalf of
    this Appellant and the others.  Fifthly, a decision was made that  this
    Appellant would not give oral evidence.  Sixthly, he was represented by
    Senior Counsel, Junior Counsel and a  Solicitor  throughout.  In  these
    circumstances, his attendance was  not  essential  to  ensure  that  he
    received a fair hearing.  Mr Gill acknowledged this. We  consider  that
    he was correct to do so.

 7. We would add, by way  of  further  guidance,  that  there  are  several
    contexts in which hearings in the Upper Tribunal can  properly  proceed
    in the absence of the  litigant  concerned  without  compromising  such
    person's right to a fair hearing. Renewed applications  for  permission
    to apply for judicial review are a paradigm example. So  too  are  case
    management hearings.  Furthermore, most error of law  hearings  can  be
    fairly transacted in the litigant's absence.  Recent  examples  of  the
    latter, in the experience of panel members, include  deportation  error
    of law appeals where similar difficulties viz the non-production of the
    litigant at the hearing by the agents of the Prison Service, or heavily
    delayed arrivals, have  occurred.   This  is  not  designed  to  be  an
    exhaustive list.

The composition of judgments in country guidance cases

 8. The process whereby County Guidance Judgments of this  Chamber  of  the
    Upper Tribunal are composed is challenged on behalf of one of the three
    Appellants, SSM.  This  prompts  some  reflection  on  the  nature  and
    purpose of this distinctive species  of  judicial  decision.  In  brief
    compass, decisions of this kind are designed to provide guidance on the
    question of whether the  United  Kingdom  Government  would  be  acting
    unlawfully in compelling certain persons or classes of person to travel
    to and enter a specific country or area thereof.  Each decision of this
    kind constitutes "an authoritative ruling upon the state of affairs  in
    any given territory":  S  and  Others  v  SSHD  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  539,
    paragraph [29]. In HM (Iraq) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1536,  Richards  LJ
    observed that Country Guidance determinations ".... have a  status  and
    significance comparable to that which declarations can have  in  public
    law cases ....": paragraph [39].  See also SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA
    Civ 940; HF (Iraq) & Ors v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1276; and, KS (Burma) &
    Anor v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 67. In PO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2011] EWCA  Civ
    132, Carnwath LJ described the mechanism of Country Guidance  decisions
    as  "well  established"  and  commended  reading  of   chapter   7   of
    Administrative Justice and Asylum Appeals (Thomas).  Carnwath  LJ  also
    adverted to section 107(3) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, wherein lies the genesis for the Practice Directions  of  the
    Upper Tribunal:

           "(1)   The President of the Tribunal may give directions  as  to
                 the practice to be followed by the Tribunal ......


           (3)    A Practice Direction  may,  in  particular,  require  the
                 Tribunal to treat a specified decision of the  Tribunal  as
                 authoritative in respect of a particular matter."


     There is also a power, vested  in  the  Tribunal  President,  to  issue
    Guidance Notes: see paragraph 7 of Schedule 4 to the Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007.

 9. At this juncture, it is appropriate to  refer  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note No 2  of  2011,  which  is
    entitled "Reporting Decisions of the  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber".  For present purposes, the most pertinent provision is
    paragraph [11]:

           "Special arrangements are made  for  the  reporting  of  country
           guidance cases.  Before a case is promulgated and designated  as
           a Country Guidance case it is considered by the relevant country
           convenor and the Reporting Committee and advice may be  tendered
           to the determining judges.  Practice direction 12.2 states:


                 'A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or  the
                 IAT  bearing  the  letters  CG  shall  be  treated  as   an
                 authoritative  finding  on  the  country   guidance   issue
                 identified in the  determination,  based  on  the  evidence
                 before the members of the Tribunal  ....    that  determine
                 the appeal.  As a result,  unless  it  has  been  expressly
                 superseded or replaced by any less later CG  determination,
                 or is inconsistent with other authority that is binding  on
                 the Tribunal, such a Country Guidance case is authoritative
                 in any subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal:


                    a) relates to the country guidance  issue  in  question;
                       and


                    b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.'

           If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the  issue  that
           has not been considered in the Country Guidance  Case  or  if  a
           subsequent case includes  further  issues  that  have  not  been
           considered in the CG case, the judge will reach the  appropriate
           conclusion on the evidence, taking into account  the  conclusion
           in the CG case so far as it remains relevant."


    Paragraph [12] of the Guidance  note  provides  that  where  a  Country
    Guidance decision has become outdated by reason of developments in  the
    country in question, it is anticipated that a Judge of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal will have  considered  such  credible  fresh  evidence  as  is
    envisaged in paragraph [11]. Where there is a reasonable  doubt  as  to
    whether a Country Guidance decision is still applicable, the First-tier
    Tribunal will determine  the  appeal,  following  which  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal may well be appropriate.


10. The  submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  SSM  draw  particular
    attention to the initial passage in paragraph [11] of the Guidance Note
    relating to the role of the relevant country convenor and the Reporting
    Committee.  In summary, the  procedural  fairness  of  the  committee's
    interaction with the panel of  judges  is  questioned.  We  distil  the
    essence  of  Counsel's  submission  to  be  that   this   practice   is
    procedurally unfair. It was submitted that it is procedurally unfair to
    exclude appellants from this process and  that  they  should  have  the
    opportunity of making  further  representations  at  this  post-hearing
    stage. These submissions also relied in part on certain  decided  cases
    relating  to  improper  access  to  the  court  by  one  party  to  the
    disadvantage of the other.  We reject these arguments for  the  reasons
    elaborated in the following paragraphs.

11. There are certain texts and sources bearing  on  this  issue.  Assessed
    collectively, we consider that these  confirm  the  legitimacy  of  the
    practice described in paragraph [11]  of  the  aforementioned  Guidance
    Note. We are satisfied that this practice reflects  a  respected,  long
    standing tradition in the common law world. We consider  that  it  does
    not savour of the impropriety advanced in the submissions on behalf  of
    this Appellant. It is, rather, properly to be  viewed  as  a  mechanism
    which, judiciously employed and respecting the relevant principles,  in
    particular the inalienable duties of the  appointed  panel  of  Judges,
    ranks as a positive virtue in furtherance of the universally recognised
    aim of producing judgments which are of the  highest  quality  possible
    and of the maximum utility to all stakeholders as well as to the  wider
    society: in sum the very essence of the rule of law itself. We  preface
    our consideration of the available texts, the governing principles  and
    this Appellant's submissions in this way.

12. The tradition  and  practice  to  which  we  have  alluded  above  were
    specifically recognised some time ago by  Lord  Bingham  in  his  essay
    "Judicial Ethics" (published in The Business of Judging, page  69),  in
    which he stated (pages 82 - 83):

           "Fifthly, there has, particularly in  the  United  States,  been
           some debate about  the  ex  parte  communications  a  judge  may
           properly have when preparing his judgment.  The view there seems
           to be that a judge may consult with other judges  but  not  with
           any law teacher.  It is without doubt fundamental that  a  Judge
           should not decide a case on a point which has not been raised in
           argument without giving notice to the parties and allowing  them
           to make submissions.  That  is  a  rule  which  arbitrators  are
           expected to observe and so are judges.   But  subject  to  that,
           English practice would not, in my view, frown  on  a  judge  who
           sought to clear his mind or test his  views  by  discussing  the
           matter with a colleague or a law teacher. .....  I do not  think
           consultation with an appellate judge would be  thought  improper
           provided the trial judge did not  cede  the  responsibility  for
           decision which was properly his."


         [Emphasis added.]

    We consider that, in these passages, Lord  Bingham  was  acknowledging,
    with unmistakable approval, a well-established tradition in the  common
    law world. In our estimation, this practice is unobjectionable provided
    that it is harmonious with the principles of independent and  impartial
    judicial adjudication and does not infringe any party's right to a fair
    hearing.  We consider these to be the key touchstones by  reference  to
    which this practice is to be measured and evaluated.

13. We are of the opinion that the argument on  behalf  of  this  Appellant
    invites reflection on the judicial oath  of  office,  as  specified  by
    Schedule 8 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  This  is
    contained in the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 and is in the following
    terms:


           "I will do right to all manner of  people  after  the  laws  and
           usages of this Realm, without fear or favour, affection or  ill-
           will."

      By  virtue  of  this  oath,   independent   and   impartial   judicial
    adjudication is not a mere aspiration.  It is, rather, a solemn duty of
    constitutional stature.  In  this  context,  taking  into  account  the
    arguments developed on behalf of this Appellant, it is  appropriate  to
    reflect on the appearance of bias principle.  Impartiality connotes the
    absence of bias, actual or perceived.  The test, well  established,  is
    whether a reasonable, fair minded and informed person would  reasonably
    apprehend bias on the part of the  Court  or  Tribunal  concerned.   In
    Porter v Magill [2002] 2 AC 357 at [103], Lord Hope devised the test of
    whether:

           "...   the fair-minded and informed observer, having  considered
           the facts, would conclude that there was a real  possibility  of
           bias."

     It is well established that the hypothetical observer is  possessed  of
    certain traits: he  is  neither  complacent  nor  unduly  sensitive  or
    suspicious.   Furthermore,  and  of  some  importance  in  the  present
    context, the observer is well  informed  and  in  possession  of  quite
    extensive knowledge: Belize Bank Limited v Attorney General  of  Belize
    [2011] UKPC 36, at [38].  In the specific  context  under  scrutiny  in
    these proceedings, the fund  of  knowledge  held  by  the  hypothetical
    observer will include the terms of the judicial  oath  of  office,  the
    pedigree, scale and longevity of the practice and the alertness of  the
    Judges concerned to  the  constraints  imposed  by  principle  and  the
    overarching duties of the appointed panel.

14. A more distant gaze confirms  the  prevalence  of  the  practice  under
    scrutiny in other countries with a common law tradition.       We  draw
    attention to the judgment reporting system operated in the recent  past
    by the International Refugee Board ("IRB") of  Canada.   Under  section
    159(1)(h) of  the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Protection  Act  the  IRB
    Chairperson "may issue guidelines in writing to members  of  the  Board
    and identify decisions of  the  Board  as  jurisprudential  guides...to
    assist members in carrying out their  duties".  Since  March  2003  the
    Board has had a published policy on the use of jurisprudential  guides.
    It states that:
           "Guidelines and jurisprudential guides are complementary  tools,
           the purpose of which is to promote  consistency,  coherence  and
           fairness in the treatment of cases at the Board.  The  inclusion
           of such a statutory provision on guidelines and  jurisprudential
           guides indicates Parliament's intent that the Chairperson should
           be involved in the adjudication strategy of the IRB as a  whole,
           in order to assist decision makers on matters of substantive and
           procedural importance."
    The published policy states that the adjudication strategy "is aimed at
    identifying the  relatively  small  number  of  cases  that  merit  the
    division's particular attention because they are cases  that  have  the
    potential to shape the  Board's  jurisprudence.  These  cases  are  the
    exceptional, as opposed to the routine, cases". The policy identifies a
    range of "tools" that the Board has at its  disposal  in  administering
    its adjudication strategy: Chairperson's guidelines, identification  of
    decisions  as  jurisprudential  guides,  designation  of  decisions  as
    persuasive decisions, use of three-member panels,  conduct  of  a  lead
    case and "consultation amongst members on draft decisions in accordance
    with  the  principles  in Consolidated-Bathurst  Packaging   Ltd.   v
    International Woodworkers of America, Local 2-69, [1990] 1  S.C.R.282".
    While there are other aspects of the IRB's published policy, these  are
    not germane for present purposes.
15. As noted, the policy of the Canadian IRB makes express reference to the
    principles  enunciated  in  Consolidated-Bathurst  Packaging   (supra).
    This is a decision of the Canadian Supreme Court.  The  background  was
    that  the  Ontario  Labour  Relations  Board  ("the  Board")  had,   in
    accordance  with  convention,  convened  a  three  member  panel  which
    determined an application under  the  Labour  Relations  Act.   In  the
    course of deliberations about the  decision,  a  meeting  of  the  full
    Board, which has 48 members,  was  held  to  discuss  a  draft  of  the
    proposed reasons.  In accordance with practice, the facts contained  in
    the draft decision were accepted and discussions were  limited  to  the
    policy implications of the draft decision.  The  Board's  decision  was
    then promulgated.  It was challenged by  an  application  for  judicial
    review grounded on a contention that the rules of natural  justice  had
    been infringed.

16. The Supreme Court, by a majority of 5/2, held that the Board's decision
    was lawful.  The majority decided that where deliberations of this kind
    occur, the members of the panel which heard the parties'  evidence  and
    arguments must be in attendance.  There was no objection to other Board
    members attending the subsequent discussions.   A  discussion  of  this
    kind does not prevent a decision maker from adjudicating in  accordance
    with his own conscience and does not constitute  an  obstacle  to  this
    freedom.   Whatever  the  content  of  the  discussions,  the  ultimate
    decision is that of the decision maker.  The criteria  for  independent
    judicial adjudication are not the  absence  of  influence,  rather  the
    freedom to decide according to one's own conscience and  opinions.  The
    Court decided that the full Board meeting was an important element of a
    legitimate  consultation  process   which   was   not   tantamount   to
    participation in the decision of the panel.  There  was  no  reasonable
    apprehension of bias or lack of independence.  Furthermore,  there  was
    no breach of  the  audi  alteram  partem  rule.  This  was  ensured  by
    excluding from the ambit of the full Board deliberations the  facts  as
    found by the panel.  The  purpose  of  these  discussions  was  not  to
    determine which of the parties should succeed, rather to  identify  the
    various legal standards which may  be  adopted  by  the  Board  and  to
    discuss their relative value.   These  safeguards  were  sufficient  to
    allay any fear of violations of the rules of natural  justice  provided
    that the parties were alerted  to  any  new  evidence  or  grounds  not
    already addressed in their arguments and given an opportunity to do so.
     Thus there  was  a  reconciliation  between  the  characteristics  and
    exigencies of the decision making of this specialised tribunal and  the
    procedural rights of the parties.

17. The Canadian Supreme Court held that the practice  under  scrutiny  had
    the additional virtue of  promoting  consistency  of  decision  making,
    thereby increasing public  confidence  in  the  Board's  decisions  and
    respecting the principle of equality  before  the  law.   The  judgment
    cited with approval the statement  of  Meredith  CJCP  in  Toronto  and
    Hamilton Highway Commission v Crabb [1916] 37 OLR 656 (CA),  p659:
           "If every judge's judgment were vitiated  because  he  discussed
           the case with some other judge, a good many  judgments  existing
           as valid and unimpeachable ought  to  fall;  and  that  if  such
           discussions were prohibited  many more judgments might  fall  in
           an appellate court because of a  defect  which  must  have  been
           detected if the subject had been so discussed."
    This prompted the following observation (p245):
           "... Discussions with colleagues do not constitute,  in  and  of
           themselves, infringements of  the  panel  member's  capacity  to
           decide the issues at stake independently.  A discussion does not
           prevent a decision maker from adjudicating  in  accordance  with
           his own conscience  and  opinions  nor  does  it  constitute  an
           obstacle to this freedom. Whatever discussion  may  take  place,
           the ultimate decision will be that of  the  decision  maker  for
           which he assumes full responsibility."
     The Supreme Court was also satisfied that (p347):
           "...  the  danger  that  full  board  meetings  may  fetter  the
           individual independence of panel  members  is  not  sufficiently
           present to give rise to a reasonable  apprehension  of  bias  or
           lack of independence ...."

    With specific reference to the audi alteram partem rule,  the  Justices
    considered that there was no contravention:

           ".... provided that factual issues are not discussed at  a  full
           board meeting and  that  the  parties  are  given  a  reasonable
           opportunity to respond to any new ground  arising  from  such  a
           meeting."

    Their Lordships were satisfied that  the  process  entailed  advantages
    which  were  "obvious".   These  were  the  avoidance  of   inadvertent
    contradictory decisions, the enhancement  of  the  overall  quality  of
    individual decisions and  the  attainment  of  the  highest  degree  of
    coherence possible (at p 347).  They gave the final word to the authors
    of "La Decision Institutionnelle" (Professors Blache and Comtois), page
    708:


           "The institutionalising of  decisions  exists  in  our  law  and
           appears to be there to stay.  The problem is  thus  not  whether
           institutional decisions should be sanctioned,  but  to  organise
           the process in such a way as to limit  its  dangers.   There  is
           nothing revolutionary in this approach: it falls naturally  into
           the tradition of English and  Canadian  jurisprudence  that  the
           rules of natural justice should be flexibly interpreted."

     [Emphasis added.]

18. The Ethical Principles for Judges published by  the  Canadian  Judicial
    Council explicitly recognise the necessity  of  Judges  enhancing  "the
    skill and knowledge necessary for effective judging" (page 18 - and see
    also page 19). This is a  universally  recognised  requirement  of  all
    judicial office holders.  In  an  interesting  treatise  entitled  "The
    Effects of Collegiality on Judicial  Decision  Making"  (University  of
    Pennsylvania Law Review, May  2003),  Professor  Edwards  highlights  a
    telling nexus.  Developing the  concept  of  a  "collegial  court",  he
    states:
           "........   What I mean is that judges have a  common  interest,
           as members of the judiciary, in getting the law right and  that,
           as  a  result,  we  are  willing  to  listen,  persuade  and  be
           persuaded,  all  in  an  atmosphere  of  civility  and  respect.
           Collegiality is a process that helps to  create  the  conditions
           for principled agreement, by allowing all points of view  to  be
           aired and considered ....
           Collegiality helps ensure that results are not preordained.  The
           more collegial the court, the more likely it is that  the  cases
           that come before it will be determined  solely  on  their  legal
           merits (page 1644 - 1645) ......
           While a judge  spends  much  time  working  alone,  the  crucial
           decisional points in appellate judging occur in the company  of,
           and in active engagement with, one's colleagues."

     We consider that the  sentiments  and  principles  expressed  in  these
    passages reflect the  widespread  and  established  tradition   in  the
    common law world, embracing both members  of  the  allocated  panel  of
    Judges and other members of the chamber from which the panel  is  drawn
    which we have identified above.

19. Against this backdrop, we turn  to  examine  the  central  elements  of
    Counsel's submissions. These draw attention to, inter alia In  Re  Dyce
    Sombre [1849] 1 MAC & G, where Lord Cottenham LC stated, p1209:

           "Every private communication to a  Judge,  for  the  purpose  of
           influencing his decision upon  a  matter  publicly  before  him,
           always  is,  and  ought  to  be,  reprobated;  it  is  a  course
           calculated, if tolerated, to divert the course of justice and is
           considered and ought more frequently than it is to be treated as
           what is really is, a high contempt of Court".


     We consider that this passage belongs to the  quite  different  context
    of a party seeking, by private communication, to improperly influence a
    judicial decision by conduct ranking as contumelious.  This expresses a
    long-established and fundamental prohibition which we  consider  to  be
    distant from the present context.  So too is the statement  in  In  the
    matter of the Ludlow Charities [1837] 2 MY and CR 316, p 342,  that  it
    is a contempt of the highest order to engage in  conduct  designed  "to
    taint  the source of justice".  Our attention was  also  drawn  to  the
    statement of Lord Diplock in Attorney General v Times Newspapers [1974]
    1 AC  273, p309:

          "Once the dispute has been submitted  to  a  court  of  law,  [the
           parties] should be able to rely upon their being  no  usurpation
           by any other person of the function of that court to  decide  it
           according to law".


     Once again, this statement was made  in  the  context  of  contempt  of
    court.  The law of contempt of court has, as its  overarching  purpose,
    the maintenance of the authority and dignity  of  the  Courts.   It  is
    designed to prevent interference with the  administration  of  justice.
    We are satisfied that the practice described in paragraph [11]  of  the
    Guidance Note does not entail any usurpation by any other agency of the
    function of the designated  judicial  panel,  does  not  undermine  the
    authority or dignity of  the  Tribunal  and,  fundamentally,  does  not
    constitute an interference with the administration of justice  in  this
    context. It is far removed  from  conduct  which  would  be  considered
    contumelious and, properly understood, does not entail  any  usurpation
    of the duties of the adjudicating judges.

20. This Appellant's argument also relies on the following passage in  Wade
    and Forsyth's Administrative Law (10th edition), p 259:

         "....The participation of non-members in  the  deliberations  of  a
           collective body may invalidate its acts.  The  decision  of  the
           disciplinary committee, for example, is likely to be invalid  if
           any  non-member  of  the  committee  has  taken  part   in   its
           proceedings ....".

     A correct appreciation of the context of this passage establishes  that
    it provides no support to the Appellant's argument.  The main focus  of
    the authors' attention is a  combination  of  the  doctrine  of  "ultra
    vires" and the principle "delegatus non potest delegare".   Neither  of
    these principles is infringed in the present context.  Furthermore,  as
    the  quotation  from  Middlesex  County  Evaluation  Committee  v  West
    Middlesex Assessment Area Committee [1937]  Ch  361  makes  clear,  the
    practice described in the Guidance Note does not  entail  any  improper
    influence on the  part  of  any  interested  person.   We  are  further
    satisfied that this practice does not entail,  in  the  words  of  Lord
    Upjohn in Re K (Infants) [1965] AC  201  any  withholding  of  material
    "information" from any of the parties.  As the decision in Re  K  makes
    clear, "information" equates with evidence:  in the present context  we
    would emphasise that all of the parties have had access to all  of  the
    evidence.  Furthermore, we are satisfied  that  this  practice  accords
    with the  long  standing  principle  articulated  by  Lord  Bingham  in
    Davidson v Scottish Ministers [2004] UKHL 34,  [2004]  UKHRR  1079,  at
    [7], also invoked in this Appellant's arguments:

         "In maintaining the confidence of the parties  and  the  public  in
           the integrity of the  judicial  process  it  is  necessary  that
           judicial tribunals should be independent and impartial and  also
           that they should appear to be so.  The Judge must be free of any
           influence which could  prevent  the  bringing  of  an  objective
           judgment to bear or which could distort the Judge's judgment and
           must appear to be so".

     We are confident that the practice described in the Guidance  Note  and
    approved by Lord Bingham himself in his essay (paragraph  [12],  supra)
    is harmonious with this principle.

21. Finally, we consider that the practice described in the  Guidance  Note
    is distorted in Counsel's  submissions.   The  word  "advice"  must  be
    considered both in the discrete context in which  it  appears  and  the
    broader context formed by the principles and practices to which we have
    referred above.  It is to be distinguished from,  for  example,  advice
    tendered by a professional adviser, legal or  otherwise.   Furthermore,
    it  does  not  contemplate   either   interested   representations   or
    adversarial argument.  Nor does it accommodate  the  reception  of  any
    evidence  not  available  to   the   parties   or   comments   thereon.
    Metaphorically,  the  impugned  practice  neither  disrupts  the  level
    playing field nor moves the goal posts. We would further  observe  that
    the arguments developed on behalf of this Appellant were not  based  on
    any authoritative judgment or respected academic text  challenging  the
    propriety of the arrangements specified in paragraph 11 of the Guidance
    Note.

22. For the reasons elaborated above we are satisfied that the arrangements
    described in paragraph 11 of Guidance Notes No. 2 of 2011 and  operated
    in practice do not infringe any  legal  rule  or  principle.   Thus  we
    reject the contrary submission on behalf of the Appellant SSM.


The duties of the expert witness

23. We consider it appropriate to draw attention to this subject, given the
    prevalence and importance of expert evidence in Country Guidance cases.
    Mindful that substantial quantities of judicial ink have  been  spilled
    on this subject, we confine ourselves to highlighting  and  emphasising
    what appear to us to be amongst the most important considerations.  The
    general principles are of some vintage. In National Justice CIA Naviera
    SA v Prudential Assurance Company Limited [1993] 2 Lloyds  Reports  68,
    Cresswell J stated, at pp 81 - 82:

           "The duties and responsibilities of expert  witnesses  in  civil
           cases include the following:


              1. Expert evidence presented  to  the  court  should  be,  and
                 should be seen to be, the independent product of the expert
                 uninfluenced as to form or content  by  the  exigencies  of
                 litigation ....


              2. An expert witness should provide independent assistance  to
                 the Court by way of objective unbiased opinion in  relation
                 to matters within his expertise ....


              An expert witness in the High Court should never  assume  the
                 role of an advocate ...


              3. An expert witness should state the facts or assumption upon
                 which his opinion is based.  He should not omit to consider
                 material facts  which  could  detract  from  his  concluded
                 opinion. ....


              4. An expert witness should make it clear  when  a  particular
                 question or issue falls outside his expertise.


              5. If an expert's opinion is not properly  researched  because
                 he considers that insufficient data is available, then this
                 must be stated with an indication that the  opinion  is  no
                 more than a provisional one.   In  cases  where  an  expert
                 witness who has prepared a report could not assert that the
                 report contained the truth, the whole truth and nothing but
                 the truth without some  qualification,  that  qualification
                 should be stated in the report ....


              6. If, after exchange of reports, an  expert  witness  changes
                 his view on a material matter having read the other  side's
                 expert's report, or for any other reason,  such  change  of
                 view should be communicated (through legal representatives)
                 to the other side without delay and when appropriate to the
                 Court."

    This code was duly approved by the Court of Appeal: see [1995] 1 Lloyds
    Reports 455, at p496. It has been considered in a series of  subsequent
    report cases: see, for example, Vernon v Bosley (No 2) [1997] 1 All  ER
    577, at page 601.  In the latter case, Evans LJ stated, at page 603:


           "....  Expert witnesses are armed with the court's readiness  to
           receive the expert evidence which it needs in order to  reach  a
           fully informed decision, whatever the nature of  the  topic  may
           be.  But their evidence ceases to be useful, and it  may  become
           counter-productive, when it is not marshalled  by  reference  to
           the issues in the particular case and kept within the limits  so
           fixed."

    Judicial  condemnation  of  an  expert  who  does  not  appreciate  his
    responsibilities is far from uncommon:  see,  for  example,  Stevens  v
    Gullis [2000] 1 All ER 527, where Lord Woolf MR  at  pp.532-533  stated
    that the expert in question had:

       -


           "... demonstrated by his conduct that he had  no  conception  of
           the requirements placed upon an expert under the CPR .....


           It is now clear from the rules that, in  addition  to  the  duty
           which an expert owes to a party, he is also under a duty to  the
           court."


24. The requirements of CPR 31 also featured in Lucas  v  Barking Hospitals
    NHS Trust [2003] EWCA Civ 1102, where the emphasis was on  CPR  31  and
    CPR 35.  These provide (inter alia) that:

        i)    a party may apply for an order for inspection of any document
           mentioned in an expert's  report  which  has  not  already  been
           disclosed,


       ii)    every  expert's  report  must  state  the  substance  of  all
           material instructions, whether written or oral, on the basis  of
           which the report was written, and


      iii)    such instructions are not privileged against disclosure.


    Laws LJ made the following noteworthy observation:


           "[42]  As it seems to me the  key  to  this  case  ....  is  the
           imperative of transparency, a general theme of the CPR but  here
           specifically applied to  the  deployment  of  experts'  reports.
           Thus the aim of rule 35.10(3) and (4) is broadly to ensure  that
           the factual basis on which the expert has prepared his report is
           patent."

25.  Thus in the contemporary  era  the  subject  of  expert  evidence  and
    experts' reports  is  heavily  regulated.  The  principles,  rules  and
    criteria highlighted above are of general application.  They  apply  to
    experts giving evidence at every tier  of  the  legal  system.  In  the
    specific sphere of the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber),
    these standards apply  fully,  without  any  qualification.   They  are
    reflected in the Senior President's Practice  Direction  No  10  (2010)
    which, in paragraph 10, lays particular emphasis on a series of duties.
    We summarise these duties thus:

        i) to  provide  information  and  express  opinions  independently,
           uninfluenced by the litigation;


       ii) to consider all material  facts,  including  those  which  might
           detract from the expert witness' opinion ;


      iii) to be objective and unbiased;


       iv) to avoid trespass into the prohibited territory of advocacy;


        v) to be fully informed;


       vi) to act within the confines of the witness's area  of  expertise;
           and


      vii) to modify, or abandon  one's view, where appropriate.

26. In the realm of expert testimony, important duties are also imposed  on
    legal practitioners. These too feature in the  aforementioned  Practice
    Direction.   These duties may be summarised thus:

        i) to  ensure  that  the  expert  is  equipped  with  all  relevant
           information and materials, which will  include  information  and
           materials adverse to the client's case;


       ii) to vouchsafe that the expert  is  fully  versed  in  the  duties
           rehearsed above;


      iii) to  communicate,  promptly,  any  alterations  in  the  expert's
           opinion to the other parties and the Tribunal, and


       iv) to ensure  full  compliance  with  the  aforementioned  Practice
           Statement, any other relevant Practice Statement,  any  relevant
           Guidance Note, all material requirements of the  Rules  and  all
           case management directions and orders of the Tribunal.

    These duties, also unqualified in nature, are a reflection of the  bond
    between Bench and Representatives which features throughout the  common
    law world.


27. The interface between the role of the expert witness and  the  duty  of
    the Court or Tribunal features in the following passage in the judgment
    of Wilson J in Mibanga  v  Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2005], EWHC 367:

           "[24]  It seems to me to be axiomatic that a  fact  finder  must
                 not reach his or her conclusion before  surveying  all  the
                 evidence relevant thereto....


              The Secretary of  State  argues  that  decisions  as  to  the
                 credibility of an account are to be taken by  the  judicial
                 fact finder and that, in their reports, experts, whether in
                 relation to medical matters or in  relation  to  in-country
                 circumstances, cannot usurp the fact finder's  function  in
                 assessing credibility. I agree.  What,  however,  they  can
                 offer is a factual context in which it may be necessary for
                 the fact finder to survey  the  allegations  placed  before
                 him; and such context  may  prove  a  crucial  aid  to  the
                 decision whether or not to accept the truth of them. ......


              It seems to me that a proper fact  finding  enquiry  involves
                 explanation as to the reason for which an  expert  view  is
                 rejected and indeed placed beyond  the  spectrum  of  views
                 which could reasonably be held."

    To this we would add that,  as  the  hearing  of  the  present  appeals
    demonstrated, this Tribunal will always  pay  close  attention  to  the
    expert's  research;  the  availability  of  empirical  data  or   other
    information bearing on the expert's views; the quality and  reliability
    of such material; whether the  expert  has  taken  such  material  into
    account; the expert's willingness to modify or withdraw  certain  views
    or conclusions where other evidence, or expert opinion,  suggests  that
    this is appropriate; and the attitude of the expert, which will include
    his willingness to engage with the Tribunal.  This is not  designed  to
    be an exhaustive list.


28. In the present appeal, the Appellants relied on the testimony of  three
    expert witnesses. The constituent elements of this  evidence  were  the
    experts' reports; their written responses to questions posed on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State; examination  in  chief;  cross  examination;
    supplementary materials produced during the course of the hearing;  and
    their responses to the Judges' questions.



LEGAL FRAMEWORK

Introduction

29. As identified earlier, the country guidance  issue  addressed  in  this
    case is focussed on the general situation as it  affects  the  civilian
    population  in  Mogadishu.  This  must  not  lead  us  to  confine  our
    assessment of Article 15(c). We would sound the same  note  of  warning
    that the Tribunal gave in HM and others  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  [2012]
    UKUT 00409 (IAC) at [260]:

              "260. Our primary focus in these appeals is strictly  confined
       to Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive,  and  a  discrete
       issue relating to risk on return to BIAP. However, since  this  case
       deals with the current situation in Iraq it  will  inevitably  be  a
       reference point for decision-makers deciding asylum-related  appeals
       brought by Iraqis that are not confined to the Article 15(c)  issue.
       In this context we would reiterate the observations made recently by
       the Tribunal in AK (Afghanistan) at [154]-[156] that in the  general
       run of appeals decision-makers should ordinarily deal first with the
       issue of refugee  eligibility  and  only  deal  with  the  issue  of
       subsidiary protection (including Article 15(c) second.  They  should
       not deal with Article 3 until last:

     "154.    That is so for two  main  reasons.  First  of  all,  decision-
                 makers are obliged by the structure  of  the  Qualification
                 Directive to give primacy to the issue of  eligibility  for
                 refugee protection; whereas  Articles  15(b)  and  (c)  are
                 species of "subsidiary"  protection:  see  recitals  3,  5.
                 Second, to skip over refugee eligibility would be  to  lend
                 support to the misconception  that  persons  fleeing  armed
                 conflict cannot  fall  within  the  Article  1A(2)  Refugee
                 Convention definition. That has  never  been  so,  even  if
                 there has been recurrent hesitation about the criteria that
                 should apply to such cases: see AM &  AM  (armed  conflict:
                 risk categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091,  paras  17,
                 68.

     155.     In relation to why Article 3 ECHR should be dealt  with  last,
                 the reason is simple. By virtue of  Article  15(b)  of  the
                 Qualification Directive, a  person  who  can  establish  an
                 Article 3 risk, will (save in one limited respect  relating
                 to  heath  cases)  be  able  to  show  he  is  entitled  to
                 subsidiary  (humanitarian  protection)  under   15(b).   By
                 contrast  with  Article  3  ECHR,   subsidiary   protection
                 (humanitarian protection), including under  Article  15(b),
                 entitles the beneficiary to a  legal  status  both  at  the
                 level  of  EU  law  (Article  24(2)  of  the  Qualification
                 Directive) and in UK law (paragraph 339C of the Immigration
                 Rules).

     156.     As regards whether or not to deal with Article 15(b) or  15(c)
                 first, it might seem that because the Court of  Justice  in
                 Elgafaji has held that  Article  15(c)  has  an  additional
                 scope to Article 3 ECHR that it would always be  easier  to
                 address Article 15(c) first as having  broader  scope.  But
                 establishing  subsidiary   protection   eligibility   under
                 Article 15(b) may sometimes be  more  straightforward  than
                 seeking to do so under Article 15(c). This may arise where,
                 for example, the claimant falls within a risk category  but
                 cannot show a Refugee Convention ground (e.g. where  he  is
                 at real risk of persecution/serious harm at the hands of  a
                 powerful criminal gang). It may also arise where there is a
                 recent ECHR  case  that  establishes  comprehensively  that
                 there  is  an  exceptionally  high  level  of   generalised
                 violence in  the  claimant's  country  that  amounts  to  a
                 violation of Article 3 ECHR (see NA v  UK  Application  no.
                 25904/07, paras 115-116; Sufi and Elmi  v  UK  Applications
                 nos. 8319/07 and 11449/07, paras 218, 250) and there is  no
                 valid reason to take a different view. Another  problem  is
                 that whilst it is now established that Article 15(c) has an
                 additional scope to Article 3 ECHR (a  near  equivalent  to
                 Article  15(b)  of  the   Qualification   Directive),   the
                 ascertainment of that additional scope may not always be  a
                 simple matter."


The law relating to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive

30.  Article 15(c) provides as follows:

    "Serious harm consist of


    (a)  death penalty or execution;


    (b)  torture or inhuman or degrading  treatment  or  punishment  of  an
           Applicant in the country of origin; and


    (c)  serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person  by
           reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international
           or internal armed conflict."


    Article 15 is applied by Article 2(e) which defines a  person  eligible
    for subsidiary protection  (described  as  humanitarian  protection  in
    paragraph 339C of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as  amended)  ("the
    Immigration Rules") which applies Article 15 using the same terminology
    save for the addition of 'unlawful killing') as follows:

           "... a third country national ... person who does not qualify as
           a refugee but in respect of whom substantial grounds  have  been
           shown for disbelieving that the person concerned, if returned to
           his or her country of origin ...  would  face  a  real  risk  of
           suffering serious harm as defined  in  Article  15  ...  and  is
           unable or, owing to  such  risk,  unable  to  avail  himself  or
           herself of the protection of the country."

    There are now two decisions of the Court of  Justice  of  the  European
    Union (CJEU) which deal with Article 15(c): Case (C-465/07) Elgafaji  v
    Staatssecretaris van Justitie [2009] 1 WLR 2100,  and  Case  (C-285/12)
    Diakite v Commissaire general aux refugies [2014] WLR(D) 37, [2014].


31. In Elgafaji, the ECJ construed Article15(c)  as  dealing  with  a  more
    general risk of harm than that covered by 15(a) and (b).

     The essence of the Court's ruling in Elgafaji was:

                "43.       Having   regard   to   all   of   the   foregoing
                 considerations, the answer to  the  questions  referred  is
                 that Article 15(c) of the Directive,  in  conjunction  with
                 Article 2(e) of  the  Directive,  must  be  interpreted  as
                 meaning that: the existence of  a  serious  and  individual
                 threat to the life or person of an applicant for subsidiary
                 protection is  not  subject  to  the  condition  that  that
                 applicant adduce evidence that he is specifically  targeted
                 by  reason  of   factors   particular   to   his   personal
                 circumstances;  the  existence  of  such   a   threat   can
                 exceptionally be considered to  be  established  where  the
                 degree of indiscriminate violence characterising the  armed
                 conflict taking place assessed by  the  competent  national
                 authorities before  which  an  application  for  subsidiary
                 protection is made, or by the courts of a Member  State  to
                 which a decision refusing such an application  is  referred
                 reaches such a high  level  that  substantial  grounds  are
                 shown for  believing  that  a  civilian,  returned  to  the
                 relevant country or, as the case may be,  to  the  relevant
                 region, would, solely on account of  his  presence  on  the
                 territory of that country or region, face a  real  risk  of
                 being subject to that threat."

32. In Diakite, the Court, having provided a definition of  internal  armed
    conflict at [28], reaffirmed in [30] its view  that  for  civilians  as
    such to qualify for protection under Article 15(c) they would  need  to
    demonstrate that indiscriminate violence was at a high level:

          "30.      Furthermore,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
                 existence of an internal armed conflict can be a cause  for
                 granting subsidiary protection  only  where  confrontations
                 between a State's armed forces and one or more armed groups
                 or between two  or  more  armed  groups  are  exceptionally
                 considered to create a serious and individual threat to the
                 life or person of an applicant  for  subsidiary  protection
                 for the purposes of  Article 15(c)  of  Directive  2004/83
                 because  the  degree  of  indiscriminate   violence   which
                 characterises those  confrontations  reaches  such  a  high
                 level that substantial grounds are shown for believing that
                 a civilian, if returned to the relevant country or, as  the
                 case may be, to the relevant  region,  would  -  solely  on
                 account of his presence in the territory of that country or
                 region - face a real risk of being subject to  that  threat
                 (see, to that effect, Elgafaji, paragraph 43)."

    At [31] the Court reaffirmed the view it expressed in Elgafaji at  [39]
    that Article 15(c) also contains (what UNHCR  has  termed)  a  "sliding
    scale" such that "the more the applicant is able to  show  that  he  is
    specifically affected by reason of factors particular to  his  personal
    circumstances, the lower the level of indiscriminate violence  required
    for him to be eligible for subsidiary protection."   The Court  thereby
    recognised that a person may still be accorded protection even when the
    general level of violence is not very high if they  are  able  to  show
    that there are  specific  reasons,  over  and  above  them  being  mere
    civilians, for being affected by the indiscriminate violence.  In  this
    way the Article 15(c) inquiry is two-pronged: (a) it asks  whether  the
    level of violence is so high that  there  is  a  general  risk  to  all
    civilians; (b) it asks that even if there is not such a  general  risk,
    there is a specific risk based on the "sliding-scale" notion.

33. In the United Kingdom, the principal  decision  of  the  higher  courts
    dealing with Article 15(c) remains QD (Iraq) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department  [2011]  1  WLR  689.  QD  helpfully  explains  and
    indicates how Elgafaji should be  applied.  In  addition  we  have  the
    guidance set out in HM and others (Article 15(c) Iraq  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    409 (IAC). At [42]-[45] of HM (Iraq) the Tribunal stated that:

         "42.     We recognise that the threat  to  life  or  person  of  an
                 individual need not come directly from armed conflict.   It
                 will  suffice  that  the  result  of  such  conflict  is  a
                 breakdown of law and order which has the effect of creating
                 the necessary risk.  It is obvious that the  risk  is  most
                 likely  to   result   from   indiscriminate   bombings   or
                 shootings.    These   can   properly   be    regarded    as
                 indiscriminate in the sense  that,  albeit  they  may  have
                 specific or general targets,  they  inevitably  expose  the
                 ordinary civilian who happens to be at the  scene  to  what
                 has been described in argument as  collateral  damage.   By
                 specific targets, we refer to individuals or gatherings  of
                 individuals such as army  or  police  officers.  The  means
                 adopted may be bombs, which can affect others  besides  the
                 target,  or  shootings,  which   produce   a   lesser   but
                 nonetheless real risk of  collateral  damage.   By  general
                 targets we refer to more  indiscriminate  attacks  on,  for
                 example, Sunnis or Shi'as or vice versa.  Such attacks  can
                 involve explosions of  bombs  in  crowded  places  such  as
                 markets or where religious processions  or  gatherings  are
                 taking place. "

              43. The CJEU requires us  to  decide  whether  the  degree  of
                 indiscriminate violence characterising the  armed  conflict
                 taking place reaches such a  high  level  as  to  show  the
                 existence for an  ordinary  civilian  of  a  real  risk  of
                 serious harm in the country  or  in  a  particular  region.
                 When we refer below to the "Article 15(c) threshold",  this
                 is what we have in mind. Thus it  is  necessary  to  assess
                 whether the level of violence is such as to meet the test.

               ...

              44.      In HM1 at [73] the Tribunal decided that  an  attempt
                 to  distinguish  between  a  real  risk  of  targeted   and
                 incidental killing of civilians during armed  conflict  was
                 not a helpful exercise.  We agree, but in assessing whether
                 the risk reaches the level required by the CJEU,  focus  on
                 the evidence about  the  numbers  of  civilians  killed  or
                 wounded is obviously of prime importance. Thus we have been
                 told that each death can be multiplied up  to  seven  times
                 when considering injuries to bystanders.  This is  somewhat
                 speculative and it must be obvious that the  risk  of  what
                 has been called collateral damage will differ depending  on
                 the nature of the killing.  A bomb is likely to  cause  far
                 greater  "collateral  damage"  than  an  assassination   by
                 shooting.  But the incidence and numbers  of  death  are  a
                 helpful starting point.

              45. The harm in question  must  be  serious  enough  to  merit
                 medical treatment.  It is not limited to physical harm  and
                 can include serious mental harm such as, for example, post-
                 traumatic stress disorder.  We repeat and  adopt  what  the
                 Tribunal said in HM1 at [80]:

              "In our judgment  the  nexus  between  the  generalised  armed
                       conflict and the  indiscriminate  violence  posing  a
                       real risk to life or person is met when the intensity
                       of the conflict involves  means  of  combat  (whether
                       permissible under  the  laws  of  war  or  not)  that
                       seriously endanger non-combatants as well  as  result
                       in such a general breakdown of law and  order  as  to
                       permit  anarchy  and  criminality   occasioning   the
                       serious harm referred  to  in  the  Directive.   Such
                       violence is indiscriminate  in  effect  even  if  not
                       necessarily in aim.  As  the  French  Conseil  d'Etat
                       observed in Baskarathas, it is not necessary for  the
                       threat to life or person to derive from  protagonists
                       in the armed conflict in question: it can simply be a
                       product of the breakdown of law and order."


The law relating to Article 3 ECHR

34. Being well-established, it is unnecessary to set out the relevant  case
    law on Article 3 except to highlight that in NA (UT Rule  45:  Singh  v
    Belgium) Iran [2014] UKUT 00205 (IAC) the Court recognised that if  the
    level of violence in a country or an  area  of  a  country  reaches  an
    exceptionally high level, that could  mean  anyone  being  required  to
    return there could face a real risk of serious  harm,  irrespective  of
    their individual circumstances. It remained the case  that  individuals
    could  also  succeed  on  Article  3  grounds  by  showing  they  faced
    particular harms personal to them  or  a  combination  of  general  and
    personal dangers.

Leading cases dealing with Somalia

 a)  Mogadishu and Article 15(c)


35. In AM & AM (armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
    00091 at [178]-[179], decided in October 2008, the AIT  held  that  the
    situation in Mogadishu was such that it would  amount  to  persecution,
    serious harm and ill treatment contrary to Article 3 to  return  anyone
    there unless they have close connections with powerful actors:
           "178.  In light of the  above,  we  accept  that  since  HH  the
           situation in Mogadishu has changed significantly, both in  terms
           of the extent of population displacement away from the city, the
           intensity of the fighting and of the security conditions  there.
           On the present evidence we consider that Mogadishu is no  longer
           safe as a place to live for the great majority of its  citizens.
           We do not rule out that notwithstanding the above there  may  be
           certain individuals who on the facts may  be  considered  to  be
           able to live safely in the city, for example if they are  likely
           to have close connections with  powerful  actors  in  Mogadishu,
           such  as  prominent  businessmen  or  senior  figures   in   the
           insurgency or in powerful criminal gangs. However, barring cases
           of this kind, we consider that in the case of persons  found  to
           come from Mogadishu who are returnees from the  UK,  they  would
           face on return to live there  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
           serious harm and it is reasonably likely, if they tried  staying
           there, that they would soon be forced  to  leave  or  that  they
           would decide not to try and live there in the first place.
           179.   It will be evident from the above  findings  relating  to
           Mogadishu that although we follow KH (Iraq) in considering  that
           Article 15(c) has a protective scope additional to that afforded
           by the Refugee Convention and Article 15(b) of the Qualification
           Directive (and Article 3 of the ECHR), it is unnecessary on  the
           facts of this case to  rely  on  such  additional  scope,  since
           return to that city for the great majority  would  amount  to  a
           real risk of persecution, serious harm and ill-treatment."
36. In AMM and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
    Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT  445  (IAC),  decided  in  November  2011,  the
    Tribunal decided that it should take the previous country guidance case
    of AM & AM as  a  starting-point  to  be  read  in  the  light  of  the
    subsequent decision of the Strasbourg Court in Sufi and Elmi. At  [345]
    it stated that:

         345. Despite our rejection of the appellants'  submissions  to  the
           effect that the respondent bears a legal burden of showing  that
           a place previously unsafe has become safe, it is  the  case,  as
           the Tribunal said in EM and others,  that  any  assessment  that
           material circumstances have changed, will  need  to  demonstrate
           that  "such  changes  are  well  established  evidentially   and
           durable".

37. The Tribunal then went on to conclude that given the recent history  of
    Mogadishu and the starting point provided by the conclusions  in  AM  &
    AM, taken together with  the  most  up-to-date  evidence,  "as  at  the
    present time, an Article 15(c) risk exists, as  a  general  matter,  in
    respect of the majority of those in Mogadishu and, as a general matter,
    as to those returning there from the United Kingdom." ([350]).

38. At [357]-[358] the Tribunal identified a category of person  who  would
    not face a general Article 15(c) risk:

              "357.    Nevertheless, the evidence before us points to  there
           being a category of middle  class  or  professional  persons  in
           Mogadishu  who  can  live   to   a   reasonable   standard,   in
           circumstances where the Article 15(c) risk, which exists for the
           great majority of the population, does not  apply.   A  returnee
           from the United Kingdom to such a milieu would  not,  therefore,
           run an Article 15(c) risk, even if forcibly returned. Into  this
           category we place those who by reason of their  connection  with
           "powerful actors", such as the TFG/AMISOM, will be able to avoid
           the  generalised  risk.  The  appellants  argued  that  no  such
           category exists; but we  reject  that  submission.  Indeed,  the
           category that emerges  from  the  evidence  is  wider  than  the
           "powerful actors"  exception,  and  covers  those  whose  socio-
           economic position provides them with the  requisite  protection,
           without running the risk of assassination faced by those  in  or
           associated with the TFG.

     358.     The significance of the category  we  have  identified  should
           not, however, be overstated.  For most people in  Mogadishu  the
           Article 15(c) risk persists, at the present time.  In  the  case
           of a claimant for international protection, a fact-finder  would
           need to be satisfied that there were cogent grounds for  finding
           that the claimant fell within such a category. "

39. At [363] the Tribunal added this caveat:

              "363.      Before  leaving  the  issue  of  Article  15(c)  in
           Mogadishu, it is necessary to say something with an eye  to  the
           use that will be made of our country guidance  findings  in  the
           next few weeks and  months.  In  assessing  cases  before  them,
           judicial fact-finders will have to decide whether  the  evidence
           is the same or similar to that  before  us  (Practice  Direction
           12). To the extent it is not, they are not  required  to  regard
           our findings as authoritative. As  we  have  emphasised,  it  is
           simply not possible on the evidence before us to state that  the
           changes resulting from Al-Shabab's withdrawal from Mogadishu are
           sufficiently durable. Far too much is presently  contingent.  As
           time passes, however, it may well be that judicial  fact-finders
           are able to conclude that the necessary  element  of  durability
           has been  satisfied.  How,  if  at  all,  that  impacts  on  the
           assessment of risk on return will, of course, depend on all  the
           other evidence."


 b)  Mogadishu and  Article 3 ECHR

40. As already noted, the  Tribunal  in  AM  and  AM  considered  that  the
    situation in Mogadishu was such that it would be contrary to Article  3
    (and also contrary to Article  1A(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive)  to  require  anyone  to
    return there save for those connected with powerful actors.

    In Sufi and Elmi the ECtHR confirmed that it did not  exclude  that  in
    exceptional circumstances characterised by a high degree of generalised
    violence it was possible to consider that all persons were at Article 3
    risk of harm:

         "Therefore, following NA v the United Kingdom,  the  sole  question
         for the Court to consider in an expulsion case is whether,  in  all
         the circumstances of the case before it, substantial  grounds  have
         been shown for believing that the person  concerned,  if  returned,
         would face a real risk of being subjected to treatment contrary  to
         Article 3 of the Convention. If the existence of  such  a  risk  is
         established,  the  applicant's  removal  would  necessarily  breach
         Article 3, regardless of whether the risk emanates from  a  general
         situation of violence, a personal characteristic of the  applicant,
         or a combination of the two. However, it is clear  that  not  every
         situation of general violence will give rise to such a risk. On the
         contrary, the Court has made it clear that a general  situation  of
         violence would only be of sufficient intensity  to  create  such  a
         risk "in the most extreme cases" where there was a real risk of ill-
         treatment simply by virtue of an individual being exposed  to  such
         violence on return (ibid.,  115)."


    At [248]-[250] the ECtHR concluded:
          "248.    The Court considers that the large quantity of  objective
           information overwhelmingly indicates that the level of  violence
           in Mogadishu is of sufficient intensity to pose a real  risk  of
           treatment reaching the Article 3  threshold  to  anyone  in  the
           capital. In reaching this conclusion the Court has had regard to
           the indiscriminate bombardments and military offensives  carried
           out by all parties to the conflict, the unacceptable  number  of
           civilian casualties, the substantial number of persons displaced
           within and from the city, and the unpredictable  and  widespread
           nature of the conflict.
          249.     The Court notes that in AM & AM (Somalia) the Asylum  and
           Immigration Tribunal left  open  the  possibility  that  certain
           individuals who were exceptionally well-connected  to  "powerful
           actors" in Mogadishu might be able to obtain protection and live
           safely in the city. The Court has not received  any  submissions
           specifically addressed to this issue and observes that it is one
           on which the  country  reports  have  been  largely  silent.  As
           Article  3  requires  the  decision-maker  to   focus   on   the
           foreseeable  consequences  of  removal   for   each   individual
           applicant, it would not exclude that it might be  shown  that  a
           well-connected  individual  would  be  protected  in  Mogadishu.
           However, it considers it likely that this would be rare.  First,
           in the light of the Tribunal decision it would appear that  only
           connections at the highest level  would  be  in  a  position  to
           afford such protection. For example, it would not be  enough  to
           show that an  individual  was  a  member  of  a  majority  clan.
           Secondly, it recalls that in HH (Somalia) and Others v Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 426  the  Court
           of Appeal found that an applicant who had not  been  to  Somalia
           for some time was unlikely to have  the  contacts  necessary  to
           afford him protection on return. It is therefore unlikely that a
           Contracting State could  successfully  raise  such  an  argument
           unless the individual in question had recently been in Somalia.
           250.   Consequently, the Court concludes that  the  violence  in
           Mogadishu is of such a level of intensity  that  anyone  in  the
           city, except possibly those who are exceptionally well-connected
           to "powerful  actors",  would  be  at  real  risk  of  treatment
           prohibited by Article 3 of the Convention."


41. In AMM,  reported  in  November  2011,  The  Tribunal's  conclusion  in
    relation to Article 3 was as follows:

         "366.    In any event, the Al-Shabab withdrawal in August  2011  in
           our view constitutes evidence which means that it can no  longer
           be said that any person in Mogadishu, regardless of his  or  her
           circumstances, is at Article 3  risk  from  the  armed  conflict
           there.  As we have already explained, we do  not  consider  that
           the evidence of the withdrawal means, as at  the  present  date,
           that it can safely be said that the generality of the population
           no longer faces an Article 15(c) risk.  Those reasons,  however,
           do not apply in relation to Article 3. This is  so  despite  the
           issue of the "durability" of the new situation being,  at  first
           sight, the same for both provisions.  It  is  plain  from  NA  v
           United Kingdom that the circumstances required in order to  make
           good an Article  3  claim  purely  by  reference  to  a  general
           situation of violence need to be exceptionally grave.  There  is
           on any rational view  a  significant  and  immediately  apparent
           difference between an armed conflict  between  opposing  forces,
           contending  for  a  city  (albeit  with  attendant  asymmetrical
           attacks by one of the parties)  and  the  absence  (or  relative
           absence) of overt conventional conflict. There is no evidence we
           have seen  to  indicate  that  Al-Shabab's  conventional  forces
           remain poised outside Mogadishu, ready to re-enter the  city  at
           any time. The situation  is,  thus,  sufficiently  "durable"  to
           compel us to find that - even  if  (contrary  to  paragraph  364
           above) an Article 3 risk  had  existed  immediately  before  Al-
           Shabab's withdrawal - it does not exist at present.

           367.   The consequence of the latest turn of events seems to  us
           to be a good illustration of the different "field of  operation"
           for Article 15(c),  identified  by  the  CJEU  in  Elgafaji,  as
           examined by us at paragraphs 328 to 335 above. The  availability
           of Article 15(c) enables international protection to be afforded
           in  circumstances  where  the  truly  exceptional  circumstances
           required by NA v United Kingdom do not pertain. There is thus no
           justification for succumbing to the temptation of  diluting  the
           test for finding an Article 3  risk  by  reason  of  generalised
           violence (or, we  might  add,  of  the  corresponding  test  for
           Article 15(b) harm). "

42. In KAB v Sweden (Application no.886/11),  [2013]  ECHR  814  the  Court
    noted what its view had been in Sufi and Elmi and what the view of  the
    Tribunal in AMM had been regarding safety in Mogadishu and Central  and
    Southern Somalia more generally. The Court decided that there had  been
    a significant change in the situation in Mogadishu since the  Sufi  and
    Elmi judgment. It gave its reasons as follows:
           "86.   Therefore, the Court is now called upon to assess whether
           the violence in Mogadishu is, at present, still of such a  level
           of intensity that anyone in the city would be at  real  risk  of
           treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention. In doing  so,
           it will have regard to, among  other  things,  the  criteria  it
           applied in the case of Sufi and Elmi (see paragraph 77 above).
           87.    The most recent information suggests  that  the  security
           situation in Mogadishu has improved since 2011 or the  beginning
           of 2012. Al-Shabaab withdrew from the city in  August  2011  and
           the withdrawal was complete by the end  of  May  2012  (see  the
           joint report from the Danish and Norwegian immigration  services
           of May 2013, paragraph 39 above).  Thereafter  the  Transitional
           Federal Government (TFG) and AMISOM had control of the whole  of
           Mogadishu  (see,  among  other  authorities,  Lifos'  report  of
           24 October 2012, paragraph 33 above). TFG's mandate ended on 20
           August 2012 and a new administration was  inaugurated  (see  the
           Human Rights Watch World Report, paragraph 46 above).  The  main
           challenge for the new Somali National  Government  is  improving
           security (ibid) and at least one source states that the security
           situation deteriorated again in the first two months of the  new
           administration, i.e. September and October 2012 (see  the  joint
           report from the Danish and  Norwegian  Immigration  services  of
           January 2013, paragraph 35 above, referring  to  a  director  of
           operations of a local NGO).
           88.    The sources appear to agree that  the  general  level  of
           violence in the city has decreased. There is no frontline in the
           city anymore (see Lifos' report,  paragraph  33  above  and  the
           joint reports from the Danish and Norwegian Immigration services
           of January 2013 and of May 2013, paragraph  34  and  40  above).
           Consequently, there have  been  improvements  for  the  ordinary
           citizens and a certain normalisation of the daily  life  in  the
           city (same sources, paragraphs 33 to  35  above).  However,  al-
           Shabaab is still present in the city and  does  perform  attacks
           which are mainly targeted against specific groups but  can  also
           affect the ordinary citizen. The violence  in  the  city  mainly
           consists of bomb attacks  but  can  also  consist  of  shootings
           between different militias, TFG or AMISOM (Lifos,  paragraph  33
           above).
           89.    Exact figures about civilian casualties do not appear  to
           be readily available but sources indicate  that  the  number  of
           civilian casualties has decreased  because  front-line  fighting
           has moved out of the city (see paragraph 34 above) and there  is
           no shelling any more (see paragraph 44 above). However, civilian
           casualties do  remain  a  daily  occurrence  (see  paragraph  34
           above). Sources also appear to agree that al-Shabaab  does  not,
           in general,  target  civilians  deliberately;  its  attacks  are
           directed against government affiliates,  the  police,  SNAF  and
           other such groups (see paragraph 41 and 42 above).
           90.    Moreover, the relevant country information indicates that
           people are returning to Mogadishu, although it is not yet  clear
           to which extent. Reports mention that people from  the  diaspora
           are returning as are also some refugees from across  the  border
           in Kenya. The numbers do not appear to be high  at  the  moment,
           seen in light of the significant number of displaced persons.
           91.    The Court is aware that the  human  rights  and  security
           situation in Mogadishu is serious and fragile and in  many  ways
           unpredictable. However, in the light of the above, in particular
           the fact that al-Shabaab is no longer  in  power  in  the  city,
           there is no front-line fighting or shelling any longer  and  the
           number of civilian casualties has gone down, it finds  that  the
           available  country  information  does  not  indicate  that   the
           situation is, at present, of such a nature as to place  everyone
           who is present in the city at a real risk of treatment  contrary
           to Article 3 of the Convention.  Therefore,  the  Court  has  to
           establish whether the applicant's  personal  situation  is  such
           that  his  return  to  Somalia  would  contravene  the  relevant
           provisions of the Convention.
           92.    The Court notes that the applicant was heard by both  the
           Migration Board and the Migration Court, that  his  claims  were
           carefully examined by these instances and  that  they  delivered
           decisions containing extensive reasons  for  their  conclusions,
           albeit  on  the  basis  of  a  return  to  Somalia  and  not  to
           Somaliland.
           93.    The Court agrees with the Swedish  authorities  that  the
           applicant has substantiated that he originates  from  Mogadishu.
           However,  as  noted  by  the  authorities,  he  has  failed   to
           substantiate that he lived there in the years prior  to  leaving
           the country in 2009.  In  that  context,  the  Court  notes,  in
           particular, the inconsistencies in the  applicant's  submissions
           and the conflicting information submitted by his brother and his
           nephew's wife. The  Court  also  notes  that  he  has  submitted
           conflicting information on the whereabouts of his  children.  In
           the light of this, the Court finds that  there  are  credibility
           issues concerning a number of the applicant's submissions.
           94.    Moreover, the  Court  finds,  as  noted  by  the  Swedish
           authorities, that the applicant's submissions regarding his work
           for the  American  Friends  Service  Community  were  vague  and
           lacking in detail. He had not been able  to  submit  information
           about the nature of his work or how the Islamist courts and  al-
           Shabaab had  become  aware  of  it.  The  Court  also  finds  it
           surprising that al-Shabaab would start to threaten the applicant
           on the ground of his work four years after he stopped the work.
           95.    The Court further notes, as did the Swedish  authorities,
           that the threats against the applicant allegedly took place in a
           period during which he has not substantiated  that  he  in  fact
           lived in Mogadishu.
           96.    Lastly, the Court  notes  that  the  applicant  does  not
           belong to any group that is at risk of  being  targeted  by  al-
           Shabaab and that allegedly he has a home in Mogadishu, where his
           wife lives.
           97.    Having regard to the above, the Court concludes that  the
           applicant has failed to make it plausible that he would  face  a
           real risk of being killed or  subjected  to  ill-treatment  upon
           return to Somalia. Consequently, his deportation to that country
           would not  involve  a  violation  of  Article  2  or  3  of  the
           Convention."
(c)  Mogadishu and the interrelationship between Article 15(c)  and  Article
    3 ECHR

43.  In Sufi and Elmi at [226] The Court observed:

          "The jurisdiction of this Court is limited to  the  interpretation
           of the Convention and it would not,  therefore,  be  appropriate
           for it to express any views on the ambit  or  scope  of  Article
           15(c) of the Qualification  Direction.  However,  based  on  the
           ECJ's interpretation in Elgafaji, the  Court  is  not  persuaded
           that Article 3 of the Convention, as interpreted in NA, does not
           offer  comparable  protection  to  that   afforded   under   the
           Directive. In particular, it notes that  the  threshold  set  by
           both provisions may, in exceptional circumstances,  be  attained
           in consequence of  a  situation  of  general  violence  of  such
           intensity that any  person  being  returned  to  the  region  in
           question would be at risk simply on account  of  their  presence
           there."


    In AMM the Tribunal considered whether this development  in  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence meant that there was no longer any basis for  considering
    that Article 15(c) had an additional scope to Article 3 ECHR.


    At [366]-[367] it concluded that whilst for the great majority  of  its
    citizens the situation in Mogadishu reached the  threshold  of  Article
    15(c) general risk, the same could not be said for Article 3 threshold:

          "366.    In any event, the Al-Shabab withdrawal in August 2011  in
           our view constitutes evidence which means that it can no  longer
           be said that any person in Mogadishu, regardless of his  or  her
           circumstances, is at Article 3  risk  from  the  armed  conflict
           there.  As we have already explained, we do  not  consider  that
           the evidence of the withdrawal means, as at  the  present  date,
           that it can safely be said that the generality of the population
           no longer faces an Article 15(c) risk.  Those reasons,  however,
           do not apply in relation to Article 3. This is  so  despite  the
           issue of the "durability" of the new situation being,  at  first
           sight, the same for both provisions.  It  is  plain  from  NA  v
           United Kingdom that the circumstances required in order to  make
           good an Article  3  claim  purely  by  reference  to  a  general
           situation of violence need to be exceptionally grave.  There  is
           on any rational view  a  significant  and  immediately  apparent
           difference between an armed conflict  between  opposing  forces,
           contending  for  a  city  (albeit  with  attendant  asymmetrical
           attacks by one of the parties)  and  the  absence  (or  relative
           absence) of overt conventional conflict. There is no evidence we
           have seen  to  indicate  that  Al-Shabab's  conventional  forces
           remain poised outside Mogadishu, ready to re-enter the  city  at
           any time. The situation  is,  thus,  sufficiently  "durable"  to
           compel us to find that - even  if  (contrary  to  paragraph  364
           above) an Article 3 risk  had  existed  immediately  before  Al-
           Shabab's withdrawal - it does not exist at present.

          367.     The consequence of the latest turn of events seems to  us
           to be a good illustration of the different "field of  operation"
           for Article 15(c),  identified  by  the  CJEU  in  Elgafaji,  as
           examined by us at paragraphs 328 to 335 above. The  availability
           of Article 15(c) enables international protection to be afforded
           in  circumstances  where  the  truly  exceptional  circumstances
           required by NA v United Kingdom do not pertain. There is thus no
           justification for succumbing to the temptation of  diluting  the
           test for finding an Article 3  risk  by  reason  of  generalised
           violence (or, we  might  add,  of  the  corresponding  test  for
           Article 15(b) harm)."

    The Court in KAB did not take the opportunity to add  anything  further
    to what it had said about this interrelationship in Sufi & Elmi.

The Evidence

44. To assist and inform the resolution of the  question  set  out  at  the
    beginning  of  this  determination  concerning  the  country   guidance
    questions to be addressed, the parties have put before the  Tribunal  a
    substantial body of documentary  evidence:  this  is  itemised  in  the
    Appendices to this determination. Such is the scale and extent of  that
    documentary evidence that it is not possible to discuss all  of  it  in
    this determination, although, for the avoidance of any possible  doubt,
    we have had regard to all that has been put before us. In addition,  we
    have the benefit of expert  evidence,  written  and  oral,  from  three
    expert witnesses as well as extensive oral and written  submissions  on
    behalf of each party to this appeal. A summary of  the  written  expert
    evidence is set out in the annex to this determination.

45. There has not been a complete consensus in the  expert  evidence.  This
    illustrates an  important  point.  Simply  because  an  expert  witness
    asserts something does not mean that it must or should be  accepted  to
    be correct. As we shall  see,  well  informed  and  objectively  minded
    witnesses  can  reach  different  views  even   though   drawing   upon
    substantially the same body of evidence. It is the task of the Tribunal
    to assess all of the evidence available and reach conclusions. In doing
    so careful regard is had to the  opinions  expressed  by  each  of  the
    expert witnesses, but in resolving tensions  in  that  evidence,  where
    they arise, the Tribunal may have to, in some respects, depart from  an
    expert view expressed.

The expert evidence

46. We received expert evidence from three witnesses, each of whom prepared
    lengthy  written  reports  and  then  provided  written  responses   to
    questions posed by the respondent. Two of those experts  have  produced
    reports on behalf of more than one appellant, and so  inevitably  there
    is some duplication of the ground covered in those  reports.  Thus,  in
    addition to  the  advantage  of  very  detailed  written  evidence,  we
    received oral evidence at some considerable length from each. Although,
    as we have observed, this evidence was not completely in  alignment  in
    every respect, there were a number  of  clear  threads  common  to  the
    evidence of each expert witness:


              a. First, the relevance of clan membership,  though  remaining
                 important  in  some  respects,  has  changed   in   overall
                 significance for those  living  in  Mogadishu.  Significant
                 population movements have changed the numerical presence of
                 clans in districts in Mogadishu and Al Shabaab has referred
                 to discrimination on the basis of clan membership as  being
                 "un-Islamic" because everyone  is  equal  in  the  eyes  of
                 Allah;


              b. Second, an accurate assessment of the reach of  Al  Shabaab
                 into Mogadishu is central to any assessment of the level of
                 risk  facing  those  living  in  that  city.  Although  the
                 withdrawal of Al Shabaab was mainly completed by mid  2012,
                 in the sense that it no longer purported to be  in  control
                 of areas of the city other than those districts from  which
                 withdrawal  was  completed  later,  it  is  plain  that  it
                 continues to be capable of launching attacks upon carefully
                 chosen targets within the city;


              c. Third, the nature of the way in which Al Shabaab  seeks  to
                 inflict damage has changed from classic battle  methods  in
                 which armed combatants confront  each  other  and  exchange
                 fire  to  what  is  described  as  "complex   attacks"   or
                 "asymmetrical   warfare"    associated    with    guerrilla
                 activities. In short, this often involves a combination  of
                 elements involved in an attack with either multiple targets
                 hit  simultaneously  or  successive  attacks  on  the  same
                 target, for example with a grenade attack following on from
                 a suicide bomb attack, a technique that those  representing
                 the appellants submit is  designed  to  inflict  casualties
                 upon the civilians who  gather  in  the  aftermath  of  the
                 initial incident.


              d. There is a broad spectrum of circumstances in which  people
                 are  living  in  Mogadishu  today.  At  one  end  are   the
                 dispossessed living in IDP camps. As we shall see, there is
                 a discussion to be had about who is and who is not an  IDP.
                 The evidence discloses references to "wealthy IDPs".  It is
                 plainly the  case,  though,  that  significant  numbers  of
                 people continue to live in Mogadishu in  conditions  of  or
                 close to destitution. At the  other  end  of  the  spectrum
                 there  are  those  who  have  been  referred  to  by   some
                 commentators  as  living  in  "privileged"   circumstances,
                 either because they enjoy the very  significant  levels  of
                 protection provided by the African Union Mission in Somalia
                 ("AMISOM") or because  they  have  access  to  considerable
                 resources which enable them to assemble  personal  security
                 arrangements and to live in safe and secure  areas  of  the
                 city behind high walls and guarded  gates  to  ensure  that
                 those gaining  entry  are  carefully  monitored.  There  is
                 evidence  of  a  very  considerable  economic  "boom"  with
                 significant numbers of people returning from  the  Diaspora
                 to take advantage of business and investment  opportunities
                 that are presently available in Mogadishu  as  land  prices
                 are  said  to  be  rocketing  and  a  good  deal   of   new
                 construction work proceeds.


              e. Finally, there was agreement between the  expert  witnesses
                 that statistics available concerning numbers  of  civilians
                 killed or injured as a consequence of the  violent  attacks
                 perpetrated by Al Shabaab and others are not  comprehensive
                 or necessarily a reliable indication of overall casualties.



Dr Joseph Mullen

47. Dr Mullen  has  maintained  a  longstanding  professional  interest  in
    Somalia and is well placed to express  an  expert  opinion  on  current
    country conditions. He sets out in his report a  full  account  of  his
    researches and sources. For present purposes it is  sufficient  to  say
    that he has  conducted  primary  research  in  Somalia  and  has  drawn
    extensively upon a wide range of contacts in Somalia and  elsewhere  as
    well as having carried out a comprehensive  study  of  the  documentary
    evidence available. He has not himself visited Mogadishu since 2005 but
    that does not disqualify him  from  offering  an  expert  view  of  the
    current conditions in that city based on his research  and  network  of
    contacts.


48. At paragraph 6 of his report, Dr Mullen explains his approach:

           "In the light of the improved  governance  in  Somalia  and  the
           enhanced security measures in Mogadishu with the departure of Al
           Shabaab, it appears to be the intention of the Courts to  update
           the country guidance given in AMM and, by implication,  that  of
           AM & AM and  HH  in  relation  to  the  Refugee  Convention  and
           associated serious harm issues (Art 15(c)) of the  Qualification
           Directive and humanitarian considerations....
           ...


           This paper will summarise the security parameters upon which AMM
           was  historically  based  and  compare  these  to  the   current
           situation, focussing  in  particular  on  the  influence  of  Al
           Shabaab,    changed    humanitarian    situation,     increasing
           stabilisation and eliciting a risk assessment in  the  event  of
           returning Somali citizens..."

49. The initial conclusion reached by Dr Mullen  is  to  be  found  at  the
    section of his report beginning at paragraph 93:


           "... the critical question is whether there  are  currently  any
           factors which would justify the broadening of the AMM  exclusion
           which previously applied to businessmen, politicians  and  those
           of  substantial  economic  means,  to  include   the   returning
           citizenry  at  large....  Do  the  improvements  in  governance,
           security,  increased  territorial  control,  relocation  of  aid
           agency and diplomatic offices  from  Nairobi  to  Mogadishu  and
           large influx of Diaspora members warrant a  universal  retention
           of Art. 3 and arts. 15(c) eligibility?


    Having observed that:


           "No life solution in Mogadishu is without some degree of risk"


    Dr Mullen said this:


           "... In current circumstances of supposed improved  security  in
           Mogadishu, in contrast to that of July 2011 at the time of  AMM,
           it would be unreasonable to  assume  that  virtually  the  whole
           population (apart from the exceptional groups cited in  AMM)  of
           Mogadishu  would  qualify  under  this  definition  for  Art.  3
           treatment...
           ...
           The ultimate question is whether the level of  safety  currently
           prevailing is adequately robust and sustainable. On the basis of
           the evidence submitted, its quality, coherence, it is my opinion
           that  there  are  cogent  evidential  facts   to   support   the
           proposition that Mogadishu remains unsafe for certain vulnerable
           groups of returning asylum seekers.... Which would suggest  that
           AMM's analysis of risk and its correlation to Art. 2, Art. 3 and
           Art.  15(c)  continues  to  subsist   for   certain   vulnerable
           categories but the exceptions should be widened."


50. Having given oral evidence over two days during which he was questioned
    closely about his report and invited to comment upon other material now
    available to the Tribunal, Dr Mullen was asked whether, in  his  expert
    opinion, there had in fact been  a  durable  change  in  conditions  in
    Mogadishu since the period under consideration in AMM. He said:


           "Proportionately, given that the  population  of  Mogadishu  has
           increased,  level  of  economic  activity  has  increased,   the
           currency has increased, visible  returning  diaspora,  decisions
           being made by people's pockets and choices do suggest there is a
           degree of durability."


    Dr Mullen then posed for himself the question  of  whether  one  should
    extend the group of  those  identified  in  AMM  as  not  being  at  an
    unacceptable level of risk on return and provided the following answer:


           "Yes, I think that the groups at risk currently in Mogadishu are
           those linked to  poverty.  Those  lacking  in  resources.  Those
           without social capital. In other words, without a clan framework
           to fall back on... groups who would be candidates for IDP camps.
           If one would be consigned to an  IDP  camp  on  return  then  he
           should be entitled to protection.... A case by  case  assessment
           is required to ensure those applying for  protection  are  those
           who would not receive it from other sources."


51. In order to place that carefully considered  conclusion,  reached  upon
    reflection of all that he had been asked to comment upon, into context,
    it is necessary to look closely at Dr Mullen's evidence in  respect  of
    the complex nature of country conditions  in  Mogadishu  since  country
    guidance was last given, and in particular at the trends  that  can  be
    detected in changing events.

52. Initially, Dr Mullen's position was more  guarded,  reflecting  a  view
    echoed by each of the expert witnesses that the security situation  had
    worsened in 2013. At paragraph 32 of his report he said:

           "However, as the security situation has improved to a degree  in
           Mogadishu since the departure of Al Shabaab in July/August 2011,
           there is speculation that AMM findings in relation to Art  15(c)
           are no longer relevant to the current situation because  of  the
           change in the level of security. The facts  cited  above,  which
           refer to post August 2011 and up  to  April  2013,  after  which
           security benefits appear to taper off, would suggest a situation
           of security that is temporary and fragile and falls short of the
           standard of durability required under AMM. Furthermore, there is
           a trend to understate security risks in the  general  enthusiasm
           to  support  the  new  government  and  to  attract  development
           funding...."

53. It is clear from Dr Mullen's evidence that Mogadishu saw an improvement
    in the security situation following the withdrawal from the city of  Al
    Shabaab. This was not just because the withdrawal heralded  an  end  of
    classic  confrontational  warfare  within  the  city  which  manner  of
    fighting gave rise to cross-fire in which civilians could be caught up.
    There was then, before that withdrawal, an additional  risk  no  longer
    present,  from  the  forces  deployed  by  the   Transitional   Federal
    Government (TFG) as they shelled  areas  of  the  city  from  where  Al
    Shabaab launched rocket  attacks.  This  improvement  in  the  security
    situation was described by  Dr  Mullen  as  "the  key  driver"  in  the
    assessment of the current situation:


           "With the withdrawal of Al Shabaab from Mogadishu in  Aug  2011,
           the security situation in Mogadishu has unquestionably  improved
           but in a rather eclectic manner.... Mogadishu has seen a  period
           of relative stability over the last 24 months in contrast to the
           last 21 years... but from a very low base. The  city  has  moved
           away from its recent history of running street battles involving
           mortars, rockets and tanks and indiscriminate bombing between Al
           Shabaab and the allied  forces  of  the  SNA  and  AMISOM.  More
           significantly, with the election  of  a  new  President,  Hassan
           Sheikh Mohamud, and the selection of a new Prime Minister with a
           newly  reduced  cabinet  in  November  2012,  there  have   been
           substantive changes in governance for  the  better  underpinning
           the improved security situation."

    In his oral evidence, Dr Mullen added that the withdrawal of Al Shabaab
    from the last few districts of Mogadishu  where  it  had  maintained  a
    presence was completed in January 2013.  In  his  report,  noting  that
    President Mohamud had spoken of Somalia "entering a new era with a more
    legitimate government and progress on security",  he  pointed  to  less
    optimistic  views  of  improvements  that  were  to  be  detected,  one
    commentator having observed that it "would take  decades  to  establish
    functioning institutions", but his own view was that:

           "It would  be  disingenuous  to  argue  that  the  Human  Rights
           situation in Somalia has not improved, particularly at the level
           of legislation since AMM. The report  of  the  UN  Human  Rights
           Commission's Independent Expert, Shamsul Bari of 29 August 2011,
           or close to the date of AMM, considers that there  has  been  an
           "unending saga of human rights  deprivation.  By  contrast,  the
           same Expert, Shamsul Bari, two years later is now full of  hope"
           on  the  issue  of  human  rights....  Within  this  legislative
           framework,  the  protection  of  vulnerable  sections   of   the
           population such as IDPs, minorities, failed asylum  seekers  and
           women would be ensured...."


54. It is also clear from  Dr  Mullen's  evidence  that  Mogadishu  saw  an
    improvement in what Dr Mullen  termed  the  humanitarian  situation  in
    Mogadishu, although significant numbers of people  remain  in  need  of
    some form of food aid. The declared state of famine was rescinded  with
    effect  from  January  2013.  The  evidence  disclosed  a   substantial
    disparity in quality of life  for  citizens  of  Mogadishu  with  those
    living in the IDP camps coping with the worse  conditions.  We  examine
    below in more detail what Dr Mullen has to  say  about  that  group  of
    people.

The reach of Al Shabaab into Mogadishu

55. We next consider Dr Mullen's evidence in respect of the second  of  the
    issues identified at paragraph 42 above: the reach of Al  Shabaab  into
    Mogadishu subsequent to its  withdrawal  from  an  established  visible
    presence in the city. At paragraph 17 of his report, Dr Mullen referred
    to an Inter Press Service Report  published  on  3  August  2013  which
    confirmed that:

           "...  there  has  been  a  rise  in  the  number  of   ambushes,
           assassinations and suicide bombs in the Somali capital. The city
           has experienced its deadliest attacks in recent times during the
           last two weeks."


    In this context he referred also to one of the trilogy of joint reports
    from the Danish  Immigration  Service  and  Norwegian  Landinfo's  fact
    finding mission to Nairobi and Mogadishu  (to which reference  is  made
    as Danish 1, 2 and 3), which have featured prominently  in  the  expert
    evidence generally, saying:

           "As outlined in section 2.1 of Danish 2 there has been a  litany
           of  armed  attacks  bearing  the  hallmark  of  a  sophisticated
           terrorist cell, including  suicide  bombings  remote  controlled
           IEDs and assassinations.  Soldiers  travel  around  in  armoured
           personnel carriers and  not  on  foot,  targeted  assassinations
           continue, civilian casualties far outnumber  military  ones,  as
           late as May 2013  a  series  of  attacks  have  taken  place  in
           Mogadishu. 34 people were killed  in  a  series  of  coordinated
           suicide attacks on 14 April 2013. So far, it was  the  deadliest
           attack since the inauguration of the new government..."

    In cross-examination Dr Mullen was invited to identify where in  Danish
    2 it was asserted that civilian casualties "far  outnumbered"  military
    ones and he was unable to do so. He was referred to a report suggesting
    that there had been, in fact, a decrease in civilian casualties but  Dr
    Mullen dismissed this as being a report by a "briefcase NGO" with no in-
    depth knowledge of the situation. This, therefore, is his own  view  of
    the balance of casualties between the military  and  the  civilian  and
    that view needs to be assessed in the light  of  the  discussion  below
    about that which is known of what has  been  referred  to  as  weapons-
    related casualties or fatalities.

56. Drawing upon information provided in the Danish 1 report, Dr Mullen set
    out what he described in his report as "a taster" of the incidents that
    took place in one week, that being the week  between  1  January  to  8
    January 2012. His purpose in doing so was to illustrate the instability
    to be found in Mogadishu and the ability of Al  Shabaab  to  carry  out
    attacks  throughout  the  city,  notwithstanding  its  withdrawal  from
    Mogadishu. The following incidents or events are listed:


              1.  armed conflict in Hurwaa and Karan  Districts  between  Al
                 Shabaab and TFG/AMISOM
              2.  hand grenade attacks against TFG troops in Hawalwadag
              3.  mortar shelling of the Burundian AMISOM compound in Hoosh
              4.  armed clashes and  shelling  at  SOS  hospital  in  Hurwaa
                 District
              5.  hand grenade attacks on hotel in Waberi District
              6.  heavy gunfire  and  shelling  between  TFG/AMISOM  and  Al
                 Shabaab near Dayniile
              7.  criminal murders (3) of random minibus passengers
              8.  IED devices targeted at AMISOM soldiers in Wardighley
              9.  TFG/AMISOM and AS exchanged heavy shelling and gunfire  in
                 Karan
             10. Heavy exchange of fire between TFG/AMISOM and AS
             11. Exchange of fire between Somali National  Police  and  clan
                 militia over illegal checkpoint at Dharkenley
             12. IED in Hodan District and IED near Tarbubka IDP camp


    Dr Mullen observed that in all there were 25 fatalities  and  "numerous
    unreported injured" which constituted a  significant  bedrock  of  risk
    applicable to all citizens irrespective of clan or occupation.

57. As was  pointed  out  in  cross-examination,  there  are  a  number  of
    difficulties about this evidence. First, it is not altogether  easy  to
    see why events that took place more than two years ago  are  indicative
    of the present  position.  It  is  common  ground  between  the  expert
    witnesses, and plain from the documentary evidence  as  a  whole  that,
    generally, the exchange of mortar shelling and gunfire in the  form  of
    direct confrontational clashes between Al Shabaab and  forces  deployed
    on behalf of the Somali authorities is  no  longer  to  be  encountered
    within  Mogadishu.  Second,  and  again  generally  but   not   without
    exception, there are no longer checkpoints to be routinely  encountered
    within Mogadishu. Also, this was a week during which Al Shabaab had not
    completed its withdrawal from Mogadishu. For those reasons it might  be
    thought that this was unlikely  to  be  illustrative  of  the  position
    today.

58. The third problem with Dr Mullen's reliance on this evidence is that it
    discloses a difficulty  with  his  approach  to  information  or  other
    reports. The documentary material to which  Dr  Mullen  had  regard  to
    support his evidence that in all there were 25 fatalities  during  this
    period in fact did not say that at  all.  That  evidence  spoke  of  11
    fatalities only, of which 2  were  military,  and  15  people  injured.
    Pressed to explain how his evidence could be as asserted in  the  light
    of that, Dr Mullen said  that  in  the  light  of  under  reporting  of
    casualties he:

           " ... then  looked  at  the  data  sheet  and  where  there  was
           ambiguity I adjusted numbers to give a more  likely  picture  of
           what might have occurred. "


    In his written response to questions raised by the  respondent  arising
    from his report, Dr Mullen had said (Q18) that:

           "In reporting casualties AMISOM often  equates  casualties  with
           fatalities.  Many  military  casualties  bypass  the   Mogadishu
           hospitals.... AMISOM reporting of incidents regularly  uses  the
           vague expression "exact number  of  casualties/fatalities  could
           not be established"  Al  Shabaab  generally  underestimates  the
           number of its own casualties and exaggerates the damage  it  has
           inflicted on AMISOM while ignoring the casualties it has  caused
           to civilians..."

    In cross-examination it was put to Dr Mullen that he was  simply  wrong
    to  say  that  AMISOM  did  not  distinguish  between  casualties   and
    fatalities, a criticism he appeared, at least in  part,  to  accept  in
    responding:

           "This is, admittedly, a more rounded interpretation."

59. A further difficulty is that, as Dr  Mullen  accepted  in  his  written
    response to the questions arising from his report that he was asked  to
    address, the term "numerous unreported injured" was  not  used  in  the
    Danish 1 report relied upon as the source of his comments.

60. That Dr Mullen's focus may  not  have  been  sufficiently  current,  is
    reinforced by the words he used at paragraph  24  of  his  report  when
    recording an asserted concern that the President was not in control  of
    all of Mogadishu as being expressed "as late  as  3-4  December  2012",
    which is more than a year ago.

61. There is, though, ample evidence identified by Dr Mullen of  continuing
    recent attacks being carried out in Mogadishu by Al Shabaab. He  points
    to an Al Shabaab attack on the United Nations Headquarters in Mogadishu
    on 14 April 2013 which  led  to  the  deaths  of  29  people  including
    international staff. At paragraph 28 of his report he cites from  a  UN
    Security Body report:

           "There are on average several  targeted  killings  per  week  in
           Mogadishu, four to five weekly hand grenade attacks in Mogadishu
           and usually more."


    And from the Danish 3 report:


           "Targeted assassinations could be undertaken by anyone who could
           pay for this."

62. We observe that, of course, targeted killings  and  assassinations  are
    precisely that. The question to be grappled with is who is at  risk  of
    being targeted, or if not  personally  targeted,  at  risk  of  getting
    caught up in the targeted attack, even though it was not aimed at them.



The level of weapons-related civilian casualties

63. It is Dr Mullen's  evidence  that,  although  Al  Shabaab  carried  out
    targeted attacks in Mogadishu, the targets being recognisable groups or
    categories of people or locations, it is in  the  very  nature  of  the
    manner in which those attacks are carried out that civilian  casualties
    and fatalities are inevitable. Indeed, his opinion, as we have  pointed
    out, was that civilian casualties far  outnumber  military  casualties.
    Therefore we must look closely at his evidence relating to the analysis
    that can be carried out of casualty levels due to the activities of  Al
    Shabaab in Mogadishu.

64. At paragraph 60 of his report Dr Mullen reproduces a chart  taken  from
    the Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project ("ACLED") (and readily
    accessible on the ACLED website) depicting conflict events and reported
    fatalities between 2009 and March 2013. In this chart the  bars  relate
    to the number of fatalities and the line to the number of events.  This
    is said to provide support for the view that the risk of getting caught
    up in a violent attack remains undiminished.

                 [pic]


65. But this is of very little assistance because it relates to  the  whole
    of Somalia and not  just  Mogadishu.  Indeed,  the  two  "unprecedented
    spikes" to which Dr Mullen referred to in support of his view that "the
    risk of violence is not confined to a  pre  AMM  timeframe"  relate  to
    events outside Mogadishu.  Although the trend in that  chart,  relating
    to the whole of Somalia, is said to be upwards, in the Danish 2  report
    a chart relating to events in Mogadishu alone is said by the respondent
    to indicate that the situation in Mogadishu  since  February  2012  "is
    reversing". Dr Mullen was referred to comment in the  Danish  2  report
    made by an international organisation :

           "However, the international organisation believed that there  is
           a decrease in the number of civilian  casualties  in  Mogadishu,
           relative to the last few years. This decrease is due  to  front-
           line fighting having moved out of Mogadishu. There are now fewer
           mass-casualty attacks and killings, in  particular  due  to  the
           cessation of shelling in Mogadishu..."

    It is important to note the overall context in which that view had been
    expressed, the report continuing:

           "Still  civilian   casualties   remain   a   daily   occurrence,
           principally due to assassinations, improvised explosive  devices
           (IEDs) and suicide attacks, and reactions to  these  attacks  by
           the armed forces. Recent grenade and  suicide  bomb  attacks  on
           theatres and cafes, such as the August 2012 attack on the Jezira
           Hotel, cause numerous civilian casualties."

    Thus, the view offered in this report, that there had been  a  decrease
    in the number of civilian casualties, was expressed notwithstanding the
    continued use of IEDs and suicide attacks on targets identified  by  Al
    Shabaab. This part of the Danish  2  report  to  which  Dr  Mullen  was
    referred in cross examination continued:

           "According to an international NGO working in  S/C  Somalia  the
           number  of  civilian  casualties  in  Mogadishu  has   decreased
           considerably  compared  to  February  2012  and  today  civilian
           casualties are  at  a  minimum.  In  July  2011  two  thirds  of
           Mogadishu was under al-Shabaab control. Bombardment and shelling
           killed many, but this is no longer taking place. Today you  have
           targeted attacks and sometimes by-passers  get  killed.  It's  a
           question of being at the wrong place at the wrong time."

66. Although Dr Mullen drew  heavily  upon  the  three  Danish  reports  in
    assembling his written evidence, he had not dealt with this. He offered
    no disagreement when invited to comment in oral evidence. Further, when
    referred to a comment by Mr Tony Burns, of SAACID, someone  upon  whose
    appraisal of the current situation in Mogadishu Dr  Mullen  has  placed
    reliance, that:


           "...today there are occasional bombings, assassinations, etc..."


    Dr  Mullen  said  simply  that  he  accepted  Mr  Burns'   professional
    competence.  SAACID  is  an  indigenous  Somali,  not-for-profit,  non-
    religious, non-political, Non-Governmental Organisation  (NGO)  founded
    and directed by Somali women, that focuses  on  practical  measures  to
    enhance the life-options of women, children and the poor.

67. However, at paragraph 61 of his report, Dr Mullen  reproduces  a  chart
    from the same source, ACLED, which depicts violent conflict events  "in
    top 5 most violent regions" one of which regions is Mogadishu.

           [pic]


68. Dr Mullen suggested that "it is reasonable to assume that  the  numbers
    of casualties correlate to the number of events".  That,  though,  does
    not take us very much further  without  information  of  the  scale  of
    casualties and fatalities in fact generated by those events, bearing in
    mind what we have been told about the different nature of  the  attacks
    carried out by Al Shabaab following  withdrawal  from  Mogadishu.  More
    civilians are likely to be caught up in a shelling attack upon an urban
    area such as a busy commercial district than in a suicide  bomb  attack
    on a specific  military  or  government  target.   In  any  comparative
    analysis  carried  out  to  inform  an  assessment  of  risk   due   to
    indiscriminate violence, in addition to the numbers of  attacks  regard
    must be had to the nature of those attacks as well as their capacity to
    inflict "collateral damage". The difficulty encountered  here  is  that
    there is a paucity  of  reliable  data  from  which  to  draw  reliable
    conclusions as to the overall  numbers  of  casualties  and  fatalities
    generated by those violent events in Mogadishu.

69. In this respect, Dr Mullen drew upon a World Heath  Organisation  (WHO)
    report that confirmed that during "the period of 2010-2011"  more  than
    14,700 war-wounded civilians were admitted to three main  hospitals  in
    Mogadishu and during May 2011 alone, which was just before the date  of
    hearing of AMM, more than 3,047 weapons-related injuries were  treated.
    WHO reported also that between 1 January  and  12  February  2012,  647
    casualties from weapons-related injuries were treated in four Mogadishu
    hospitals. The difficulty with this, however, is that, although plainly
    647 is a significantly lower figure  than  either  the  3,047  recorded
    casualties in May 2011 or an  average  figure  of  1,225  that  can  be
    calculated from the overall 2010-2011 figure, it tells us not very much
    about overall  casualty  numbers  because  there  are  more  than  four
    hospitals in Mogadishu and, in any event, these figures relate  to  the
    period before Al Shabaab withdrew from Mogadishu after which the nature
    of their attacks changed.

70. Dealing with the post  withdrawal  change  in  the  nature  of  attacks
    launched by Al  Shabaab,  Dr  Mullen  spoke  in  oral  evidence  of  an
    "international Jihadist trend" emerging, favouring methods of war  seen
    in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Yemen. This  involved  a  seeking  out  of
    strategic targets such as the High Court  and  hotels  expected  to  be
    frequented by military and police personnel and prominent  politicians,
    together with what Dr Mullen described as:

           "... a much more  sinister  form  of  targeting  geared  towards
           peacemakers."


    By way of example he referred in oral evidence to the assassination  of
    the head of an organisation that was carried out at his  home.  He  did
    not identify the organisation but his comment was made in  the  context
    of his evidence of the targeting of "peacemakers".

71. In his written response to questions posed by the respondent, Dr Mullen
    said:


           "The ability of Al Shabaab to kill indiscriminately is linked to
           two tactics  widely  used  in  Mogadishu:  one  is  asymmetrical
           warfare based on IEDs,  mine  deployment  and  assassination  of
           known individuals, such as those associated with the government,
           defection from  Al  Shabaab  ranks,  aid  agency  personnel  and
           journalists. Events have demonstrated that Al  Shabaab  has  the
           capacity   through   asymmetrical   warfare   to   attempt   the
           assassination of low ranking officials up  to  security  chiefs,
           international UN personnel and even the President  himself.  The
           second tactic is the exertion of moral and religious pressure on
           individuals at the level of the mosque and of the  street.  This
           is aptly described at Danish3 p.7."


    In cross examination Dr Mullen accepted that there is in  fact  nothing
    to be found at page 7 of  that  report  concerning  religious  pressure
    being exerted  by  Al  Shabaab.  He  said  that  his  source  for  that
    observation  was  in  fact  interviews  he  had   conducted   with   15
    unidentified informants. What is to be found on page 7 of the Danish  3
    report, though, is this:


           "The international NGO (B), Mogadishu,  stated  that  al-Shabaab
           does not kill civilians indiscriminately.  On  the  other  hand,
           when it is staging large scale  attacks  it  does  not  mind  if
           civilians are killed."

72. Dr Mullen went on to say, in his oral evidence, that:


           "Frequently now we see  lobbing  of  grenades,  for  example  at
           Bakara Market. This is a different type of strategy.  There  are
           so many incidents they are no longer documented."


    Dr Mullen said also that there was  now  no  conventional  fighting  as
    before when civilians were used as human shields but civilians remained
    "fair game". He was referred to page 9 of the Danish 3 report:


           "UNDSS, Mogadishu, explained that there are no recent reports of
           al-Shabaab having  attacked  or  killed  civilians  deliberately
           through armed attacks....
           ...


           Regarding IED attacks UNDSS, Mogadishu,  explained  that  remote
           controlled IED attacks or roadside bombs tend to target  AMISOM,
           SNAF and convoys  and  such  attacks  sometimes  result  in  the
           killing of civilians, i.e. collateral damage."


    and he accepted that to be a correct statement.

73. In this respect we bear in mind that Dr Mullen, in his  oral  evidence,
    made frequent reference to the report of the UN, published  in  January
    2014, "International Protection Considerations with  Regard  to  People
    fleeing Southern and Central Somalia" (hereafter "the 2014 UN  report")
    in which it is said of Mogadishu, nominally under control of government
    forces since August 2011:


           " While the security situation in Mogadishu has  improved  since
           then,  with  a  reduction  of  open  conflict  and  signs  of  a
           resumption of economic activity in the city, Al Shabaab  retains
           the ability to stage lethal attacks even  in  the  most  heavily
           guarded parts of the city, with civilians reportedly bearing the
           brunt of its attacks. The SFG  is  reported  to  be  failing  to
           provide much of its population with  basic  security.  Thus  the
           reality on the ground, as reported by  observers,  remains  that
           civilians are injured and killed every week in targeted  attacks
           by gunmen, or attacks by IEDs and grenades."

Forced recruitment to Al Shabaab.

74. When asked to address this issue in his  written  evidence,  Dr  Mullen
    wrote:

           "As a prelude to this discussion, there is a major  emphasis  on
           whether forced recruitment could have occurred in Mogadishu post
           the  Al  Shabaab  withdrawal  from  the  central  districts   of
           Mogadishu in August 2011..."
           ..
           Given the territorial integration  of  the  districts  into  the
           TFG/AMISOM  jurisdiction,  any  continued  recruitment  into  Al
           Shabaab from the madrasses would have to  be  more  circumspect.
           There is also the vital intelligence function to which  children
           were recruited...
           ... While overt military recruitment may  have  reduced,  it  is
           extremely likely that recruitment into Al Shabaab's intelligence
           wing increased..."

    And later in the same section of his written evidence:

           "I have personally interviewed some 15 young men between the age
           of 16 and 24 over the past 2 years, ten of whom were interviewed
           post August 2011, who all claim to have been  approached  by  Al
           Shabaab in and around Mogadishu and were "invited" to join their
           fighting units... They have recounted that  it  is  generally  a
           process of contacts over many months, with increasing intensity.
           When the approach  is  resisted,  in  most  cases  other  family
           members become  involved  in  the  form  of  threats  or  forced
           marriage of female siblings. Ultimately assassinations of family
           members  is  threatened  and  sometimes  carried   out....   The
           consistency in the various narratives by persons totally unknown
           to each  other  would  suggest  that  the  narrative  of  forced
           recruitment into Al Shabaab is plausible."


75. It might be observed that this approach, if correct,  appears  focussed
    on particular groups: children and young men who are  settled,  in  the
    sense  that  contact  can  be  maintained  over  a  long  period  while
    "grooming" takes place, and who are members  of  families,  members  of
    which can be used as levers in terms of threats of harm to  others.  It
    might be observed also that Dr Mullen himself identifies no evidence of
    successful forced recruitment actually taking  place,  relying  instead
    upon consistency of the accounts  given.  The  evidence  before  us  is
    silent, though, as to whether there is a common or  popular  perception
    about this that informs those accounts.

76. In an appendix to his written report Dr Mullen has more  to  say  about
    this issue, noting that Danish 2 at page 27  states  of  that  document
    that it:

           "...shows mixed evidence. There is a trend  for  Al  Shabaab  to
           forcibly recruit but this  is  now  mainly  in  the  non-central
           districts of Mogadishu, which are more difficult to  infiltrate.
           On the other hand, Al Shabaab can offer financial incentives  to
           young men who are unemployed to encourage  them  to  join  their
           ranks.... The coercive element in these approaches is  obviously
           much less. ... In  outlying  areas  around  Mogadishu,  such  as
           Elasha Biyaha and Afgoye it is probable that forced  recruitment
           continues... The Elman Peace and Human  Rights  Centre  consider
           that  children  in  IDP  camps   and   homeless   children   are
           particularly vulnerable to recruitment."


    While all of  that  is  indeed  contained  within  the  report,  it  is
    interesting to note that Dr Mullen has not  made  any  mention  of  the
    opening paragraphs of the section of the report  from  which  he  draws
    that view:

           "UNDSS stated that there is no way al-Shabaab would be  able  to
           forcibly recruit or mobilize persons in  Mogadishu.  Al  Shabaab
           only recruits in areas in SC Somalia where it is in control.


           Regarding recruitment to  al-Shabaab  in  Mogadishu  Ayaki  Ito,
           UNHCR, stated that he found it hard to believe  that  al-Shabaab
           is able to recruit systematically, and there are no  reports  on
           al-Shabaab undertaking forced recruitment or threatening  people
           to be recruited. Forced recruitment by al-Shabaab  in  Mogadishu
           today does not make economic sense. However, al-Shabaab may  pay
           persons to undertake operations on its behalf."

    And the further one reads into this section  of  the  report  the  more
    difficult it becomes to agree with Dr Mullen's assessment  that  forced
    recruitment is still encountered in Mogadishu. The views  expressed  to
    the contrary seem hard to resist:

           "The local NGO (C) had no reports  of  forced  recruits  to  al-
           Shabaab in the city of Mogadishu..."


           "When asked... an international NGO working in  SC  Somalia  (D)
           stated that it had not heard about this..."


           "The NGO reiterated that it did not believe that  al-Shabaab  is
           able to undertake forced recruitment in Mogadishu..."


           "Saferworld found it unlikely that al-Shabaab undertakes  forced
           recruitment today"


           "Regarding forced recruitment  to  al-Shabaab  in  Mogadishu  an
           international NGO working in S/C Somalia  (C)  stated  that  al-
           Shabaab  does  not  have  the  leverage  to   undertake   forced
           recruitment today... and the NGO was confident  that  al-Shabaab
           is incapable of recruiting in Mogadishu.

    Dr Mullen comments that:

           "An outstandingly  reliable  commentator  on  the  situation  in
           Mogadishu, Tony Burns of SAACID  is  of  the  opinion  that  "Al
           Shabaab may still recruit in Mogadishu... it still has the brand
           and the brand is fear"

    But he does not complete the comment attributed to Tony  Burns,  as  is
    set out in the Danish report:

           "Tony Burns... explained that he and his staff hadn't  heard  of
           forced  recruitment  in  Mogadishu  since   the   2010   Ramadan
           offensive."

Significance of clan membership

77. Perhaps a good indication of the very real change that has taken  place
    in Mogadishu is that some commentators when referring  to  a  "minority
    clan" now base that not on ethnicity but the fact of the clan being  in
    a numerical minority in a particular area,  despite  its  status  as  a
    majority clan on a national basis. It is clear  that  there  have  been
    very significant population movements in Mogadishu in recent years.  In
    his report, Dr Mullen quoted from  a  report  from  the  government  of
    Netherlands in 2012:


           "...  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  also  indications  that
           Mogadishu  is  becoming   a   multi   clan   environment   where
           discrimination against the Reer Hamar in particular has declined
           but not disappeared."


78. We deal below with the evidence of Dr Mullen concerning the  protection
    that can be provided to civilians by police, but at paragraph 20 of his
    report  he  relies  upon  a  statement  made  by  a  leading  Mogadishu
    politician to make the point that clan membership remains important  in
    terms of securing personal safety:


           "The Mayor of Mogadishu  has  underlined  the  vulnerability  of
           citizens in general by stating that "the  only  real  protection
           which people will have at their disposal is their  own  arms  as
           well as clan protection mechanisms."


    However, the source for this quote is the Operational Guidance Note  of
    2012 and this statement was in fact made in March 2010. That  does  not
    mean  necessarily  that  it  is  not  still  accurate  but,  being   an
    observation made about four years ago, this would require reinforcement
    from other sources if it were to be taken as holding good today.


79. Indeed, the indicated relevance of looking to one's clan for support is
    more nuanced in the Danish 3 report. At paragraph 33 of his report,  Dr
    Mullen said:


           "The quoted Danish 3 report emphasises the continuing  need  for
           clan support and sometimes protection in the establishment of  a
           viable livelihood. The 16 districts of Mogadishu are  shaped  by
           their clan configurations and this reflects itself in the choice
           of District Commissioners and their militia support.  This  clan
           dimension runs parallel  to  the  Al  Shabaab  phenomenon  where
           allegiance is to a theocratic hegemony of sharia rather than  to
           a clan. These two concepts coexist side by side as Chapter 2  of
           Danish 3 elaborates."

    But it is informative to draw more extensively upon  that  source  than
    the relatively brief extract reproduced in Dr Mullen's report:


           "Regarding clan protection a UN agency, Nairobi, explained  that
           there is less risk for anyone being attacked  or  violated  only
           because of clan affiliation. It  does  not  matter  whether  you
           belong to a strong  or  a  weak  clan,  or  an  ethnic  minority
           group...... The clan has now become a  social  structure  rather
           than a protective  structure.  This  could  be  due  to  lessons
           learned during the previous clan conflicts and  the  civil  war.
           People are now relating to  government  structures  rather  than
           clans, especially when it comes to business.


           Regarding clan protection an  international  NGO  (A)  explained
           that this is much less of an issue than  it  was  two  to  three
           years ago. Clan protection is no longer important as  there  are
           no clan based militias  in  Mogadishu.  Persons  returning  from
           abroad  are  not  at  particular  risk  because  of  their  clan
           affiliation. When asked if this also include  members  of  small
           minority clans as well as members of ethnic minority groups  the
           international NGO stated that this is the  case.  The  NGO  made
           reference to the Chief of Police in Mogadishu who is a member of
           a Bravanese minority group."

    And a little later in the same section of that report:

           "Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre; Mogadishu, reiterated that
           it is a huge step forward that clan affiliation is no  longer  a
           concern. Even marginalized groups such as the IDPs and  minority
           groups are no longer marginalized, harassed or intimidated  only
           because of their clan affiliations. Thus, the security situation
           for members of small, weak clans and ethnic minority groups  has
           increased considerably during the last year. It is not important
           which clan or group you belong to. Elman Peace and Human  Rights
           Centre emphasized that there are no limitations  in  freedom  of
           movement in Mogadishu. Anyone regardless of clan affiliation  or
           sex is free to move around in Mogadishu  and  no  one  is  being
           harassed  at  checkpoints  only   because   of   sex   or   clan
           affiliation."

    It is not altogether easy to see how  this  section  of  the  Danish  3
    report provides support for Dr Mullen's conclusion that clan support is
    required to establish a livelihood. What this  part  of  the  Danish  3
    report actually says is this:


           "Regarding access  to  livelihood  in  Mogadishu,  UNHCR-Somalia
           explained that the presence of a nuclear family is a requirement
           for livelihood support, as clan will not help with livelihood."

80. The Danish 3 report collects together  similar  views  expressed  by  a
    range of commentators sighted on the current situation in Mogadishu:


           "Regarding  clan  protection  a  representative  of  a  Diaspora
           organization in Mogadishu stated that people no longer  rely  on
           clan protection. Clan  protection  is  no  longer  an  issue  in
           Mogadishu, and if you feel you are exposed  you  will  adapt  by
           'laying low'. If you are laying low  you  are  not  in  need  of
           additional security or protection. This is the strategy of  most
           of the returning Diaspora. One does not rely on  the  police  or
           the SNAF for protection or justice.  The  representative  stated
           that she would not even think of approaching the police  as  the
           police forces are all corrupt.
           ...


           The  representatives  of  an  international  agency,  Mogadishu,
           agreed that the clan is no longer a main issue in Mogadishu. The
           need for clan protection is 'going down' and no one will ask you
           about your clan affiliation any  longer.  The  only  concern  is
           whether you are affiliated with Al-Shabaab or not. On the  other
           hand, whenever a person is planning to settle in Mogadishu he or
           she will most likely consider his or her clan affiliation before
           deciding where to settle down.
           ...


           According to Mohamed Farah Siad, Mogadishu, clan is 'zero' today
           in Mogadishu; clans do not offer any protection as there are  no
           clan militias threatening people. Clanism is only  common  among
           "primitive clans in the bush."


           Mohamed Farah Siad added that clans are only  relevant  when  it
           comes to business, marriage, respect and work, and  stated  that
           "clans should not be involved in politics".

    That view is hard indeed to reconcile with what is said at paragraph 69
    of Dr Mullen's report:

           "As a minority clan member in Mogadishu protection would have to
           be purchased at some  considerable  cost  in  order  to  gain  a
           majority clan patron."

81. The view that clan membership remains important in terms of  access  to
    economic activity is emphasised by Dr Mullen in his own report:


           "A corollary of clan control by the Abgal and Habr  Gedir  (main
           sub-clans of Hawiye) is that they  have  a  shared  interest  in
           maintaining  a  degree  of  peace  as  the  peace  dividend   is
           prosperity and an enabling economic environment. The approach is
           inclusive and  offers  opportunities  to  the  select  few  with
           services to offer or  resources  to  invest,  but  excludes  the
           vulnerable minority clan member or person of modest means.  This
           situation would adversely affect a  low  income  Somali  citizen
           such as a Gadabursi."


    Nor is it altogether easy to understand why the benefits of  the  peace
    dividend should be open  only  to  those  with  services  to  offer  or
    resources to invest, if such a person had  a  clan  or  nuclear  family
    network to fall back on. The "enabling economic  environment"  requires
    not just investors and entrepreneurs but people working at all  levels,
    including as labourers in the widespread reconstruction  projects  that
    Dr Mullen describes.


82. In his oral evidence Dr Mullen accepted that the clan affiliation of  a
    returning member of the Diaspora "does not matter much"  provided  that
    person has access to resources.  He  said  also  that  clan  membership
    informed the type of employment that someone would undertake.  He  gave
    the example that the manufacture of shoes was the exclusive preserve of
    one particular clan and that members of other clans  "would  not  touch
    it", although when asked for evidence of that being the position  today
    he was unable to point to any.

83. Returning to the issue of the emerging importance of the nuclear family
    rather than clan membership alone, in answer to questions posed  by  Mr
    Toal, Dr Mullen agreed that clan support is diminishing, saying:

           "Absolutely.  Sub  sub  clans  are  unable   to   fulfil   their
           obligations and  so  you  have  to  fall  back  on  the  nuclear
           family..... The nuclear family is gaining  prominence  over  the
           clan."

    Although Dr Mullen said at paragraph 78 of his report that  there  were
    other views about the continuing significance of clan membership:

           "However, by contrast, the  key  UN  organisation  working  with
           refugees, UNHCR, maintains that "clan  dynamics  in  combination
           with other factors are an  important  element  when  considering
           risk" (Danish 3 2.1). "Newcomers would certainly attract adverse
           attention; including those originating from Mogadishu  but  have
           left a long time ago.""

    Those brief extracts from the Danish 3 report may be better  understood
    seen in their context:

           "UNHCR-Somalia, Mogadishu, confirmed that someone  in  Mogadishu
           will not be  at  risk  today  solely  because  he/she  is  of  a
           different clan, although clan dynamics in combination with other
           factors  are  an  important  element  when   considering   risk,
           including for the IDP population. It  is  obvious  that  one  is
           safer when he or she is residing in an area dominated by his  or
           her own clan or if one has  good  relations  with  a  dominating
           clan.


           ... Information about a newcomer, particularly, when he/she does
           not belong to the existing clans or  nuclear  families  or  when
           he/she originates from an area formerly or presently  controlled
           by  an  insurgent  group;  would   certainly   attract   adverse
           attention. Even  those  who  originate  from  Mogadishu  may  be
           perceived as newcomers, if they left a long time  ago  and  have
           lost all links with their clan-based community."

84. Dr Mullen makes the point clearly, for example at paragraph 70  of  his
    report where he  considers  how  business  enterprises  operate  across
    different clan areas, that "clanship may be partly replaced by wealth".
    Addressing the position of the appellant MOJ, by whose  representatives
    he was commissioned to prepare his report, he expresses this view:

           "A Gadabursi (the clan of which MOJ is  a  member)  which  is  a
           majority  clan  but  numerically  minor  in   Mogadishu,   would
           therefore require cross-clan alliances and the resources to fund
           them to survive. Therefore, low income  migrants....  or  failed
           asylum seekers... are unlikely to be able to achieve  the  level
           of security acceptable to Arts 2, 3 ECHR  and  Art  15(c).  This
           would imply exposure to violence and conversely the  ability  of
           the state to provide security safeguards to its citizens."


    With respect to Dr Mullen, this in our view is simply  a  non  sequitur
    and an illustration of why broad generalisations are unlikely to  point
    to the true  position  of  an  individual  upon  return.  Further,  and
    importantly, neither Dr Mullen nor either of the other expert witnesses
    referred  to  any  evidence  of  clan-based  persecutory  treatment  in
    Mogadishu in recent times. Not all failed asylum seekers lack resources
    or access to them. Elsewhere in his report he refers to  "relatives  of
    warlords" who have gone to the west. Dr Mullen made clear in  his  oral
    evidence generally, a Somali national who travelled to the west to make
    an asylum claim is very  likely  to  have  had  access  to  significant
    resources:


           "If one calculates the cost of  human  trafficking:  $15,000  to
           $25,000. This has to be raised by family  members.  A  returning
           minority clan member would  be  under  a  social  obligation  to
           reimburse a proportion of the cost of travel to  Europe....  The
           person travelling represents a group of  people  because  it  is
           entirely beyond the capacity of the vast majority of Somalis  to
           travel to Europe."

85. At paragraph 80 of  his  report,  Dr  Mullen  reaches  the  conclusion,
    perhaps reflecting those issues, that:


           "There are enhanced vulnerabilities arising from  ....  minority
           clan profiles (including someone like a Gadabursi who would be a
           de facto minority in a cosmopolitan Mogadishu)  but  this  would
           have to be examined on a case by case basis."


    And at paragraph 91:

           "The major clans do not appear to be  demonstrably  exploitative
           in  relation  to  minority  groups  but  access  to   livelihood
           opportunities  are  blocked  unless   they   (minorities)   have
           resources to invest. The question then  arises  is  whether  the
           characteristics of social exclusion is more operative than  life
           threatening mechanisms in Mogadishu. Social exclusion because of
           cultural  or  economic  reasons  is  not  a   life   threatening
           experience. Therefore there is a need to  have  a  hierarchy  of
           risk within the new dispensation since the election of President
           Mohamud and a degree of substantial normalisation of  conditions
           in Mogadishu..."



Police Protection in Mogadishu

86. The evidence of Dr Mullen concerning the level of  protection  provided
    by the police to citizens of Mogadishu can be summarised quite briefly.
    He explained in his oral evidence that there  are  three  arms  to  the
    security forces: the Somali National Army, the  National  Police  Force
    and the District Police Force. He is clear that it is only the District
    Police Force that is potentially an available instrument of  protection
    but in fact residents of  Mogadishu  cannot  look  to  the  police  for
    protection but must take for themselves whatever steps are necessary to
    secure their own protection. In his written evidence  he  reproduces  a
    comment made by the Mayor of Mogadishu who said:

           "the only real  protection  which  people  will  have  at  their
           disposal  is  their  own  arms  as  well  as   clan   protection
           mechanisms."

    We  set  out  below  our  findings  on  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of
    protection,  which  are  informed  by  the  evidence   generally.   The
    concluding words of this comment by Dr Mullen do not  sit  easily  with
    the other  evidence  before  us  which  is  to  the  effect  that  clan
    membership has become less  significant  in  terms  of  protection,  as
    opposed to social and economic support. The explanation is,  no  doubt,
    that although the  source  for  this  comment  is  given  as  the  2012
    Operational Guidance Note, when that document is itself examined it can
    be seen that the Mayor's comment was in fact made  as  long  ago  as  2
    March 2010.

87. Dr Mullen said that the District police are known to be  clan  centred,
    with the District Police Commissioner and the personnel of the force in
    that area reflecting the clan makeup in  the  district.   He  has  also
    observed, though, in his written evidence, that there  are  indications
    that Mogadishu "is becoming a multi clan environment."

Population Movement within and into / out of Mogadishu

88. It was common ground and agreed between the expert witnesses that there
    is no reliable figure for the present population  of  Mogadishu.  There
    was also a disagreement between those  witnesses  as  to  the  probable
    present population of that city. In oral evidence, Dr Mullen said  that
    the present population of Mogadishu was currently between 2 million and
    2  million  people.  He  described  other  estimates  of  the  present
    population of 3 million as being "wildly  inaccurate".  Addressing  the
    reasons for population movement around Mogadishu, Dr Mullen  said  this
    at paragraph 62 of his report:


           "...  With  increasing  stabilisation,  there  have  been  three
           factors which have acted  as  drivers  to  population  movements
           around Mogadishu: one, post famine returns to agricultural areas
           where agro-pastoralism is practiced, such as the  inter-riverine
           areas of Shabelle and Juba, two, the downsizing  of  the  Afgoye
           corridor encampment due to the withdrawal of Al Shabaab from the
           camp and from the area in general and travel back  to  areas  of
           greater stability in urban and rural  settings  and  three:  the
           expulsion of IDPs from inner city informal sites that are  being
           re-occupied by their original owners and where land values  have
           rocketed."

    Also found in this paragraph of the report is a table setting  out  the
    reduction of movement of population "within Mogadishu" stated as  being
    66,232 in 2011; 28,289 in 2012 and 15,723 in 2013. The total  for  2013
    is in fact for the first 10 months of the year and it is reasonable  to
    calculate a "grossed up" total for the full year of 18,867, that  being
    a reduction in the movement of persons around Mogadishu  of  more  than
    70% when compared to 2011.


89. Dealing next  with  population  movement  out  of  Mogadishu  to  other
    locations, Dr Mullen sets out a table, taken from UNHCR, that discloses
    an equally stark change. In 2011 43,695 people are said  to  have  left
    Mogadishu and in 2013, again grossing up the 10 month figure  to  a  12
    month figure, 6,372.  Put another way there has  been,  since  2011,  a
    reduction of something in the region of 85% in the  numbers  of  people
    leaving Mogadishu. Dr Mullen offers the  view  that  the  reduction  of
    movements within Mogadishu "could be indicative of a greater degree  of
    normalisation  of  residential  patterns  within  the  city"  and   the
    reductions of the numbers leaving the city "could suggest a  degree  of
    preference for Mogadishu  in  the  resident's  own  personal  risk  and
    livelihood assessment in relation to other up-country locations".


IDPs and IDP camps


90. At paragraph 84 of his report, Dr Mullen says of IDPs:


           "... Internally Displaced Persons (or IDPs) who, in the main are
           destitute,  vulnerable  and  clan  vulnerable,  but  are  highly
           sensitive and responsive to stabilisation, decline of  conflict,
           risk reduction because their survival strategy has been strongly
           risk averse. In many respects they are the  weathervane  of  the
           security status of an area..."


    He said that there is ample evidence to demonstrate that life in a  IDP
    camp is extremely difficult and challenging. At  paragraph  75  of  his
    report Dr Mullen said:


           "The issue of the humanitarian dimension of the IDP  problem  is
           highlighted in the Amnesty Report. The situation is quite  dire.
           IDPs have been living in overcrowded and unsafe settlements  and
           remain extremely vulnerable to various  forms  of  human  rights
           abuses, including widespread sexual violence..."


    He sets out  also  an  extract  from  "the  recently  published  Global
    Overview Report on People Displaced by Conflict and Violence (2013)  by
    the much respected IDMC of the Norwegian Refugee Council":


           "Humanitarian law and human rights abuses were committed by  all
           parties. They have reportedly attacked  IDP  camps,  perpetrated
           widespread sexual  and  other  gender-based  violence,  forcibly
           recruited internally displaced children and  fought  each  other
           near  civilian  settlements.  IDP's  health  situation  remained
           critical with most outbreaks of contagious  diseases  coming  in
           areas hosting displaced people. Developments such  as  increased
           security, an improving economy and urban  migration  led  to  an
           increase in forced evictions of IDPs in urban centres across the
           country such as Mogadishu.... A number of  the  most  vulnerable
           victims were unable to seek refuge elsewhere  because  of  their
           limited resources."


91. But care has to be taken with this information about  IDPs.  Dr  Mullen
    says of people categorised as IDPs:


           "They are of two kinds: those  who  have  left  their  homes  in
           Mogadishu for security reasons and have come back  to  re-occupy
           them but retain food entitlements, or others who have  literally
           moved camp from an out of town location to an urban one  (though
           given the current pressure on urban land, these would  be  in  a
           minority)."

    In a written response to a question posed  by  the  respondent  arising
    from his report, Dr Mullen said that he was unable to point to a "legal
    definition" of an IDP but referred to a 1998 UN report  that  used  the
    following "descriptive definition":


           "internally displaced persons (IDPs) are persons  or  groups  of
           persons who have been forced or obliged  to  flee  or  to  leave
           their homes or places of residence in order to avoid the effects
           of  armed  conflict,   situations   of   generalised   violence,
           violations of human rights or natural or  human-made  disasters,
           and who have not crossed  an  internationally  recognised  State
           border."


    Thus, once an individual or a family has left their home to seek safety
    elsewhere, they may well continue to be regarded as  IDPs,  even  after
    they have decided to settle in another district of Mogadishu in  living
    conditions, in a physical sense, equivalent to those they vacated.  The
    2014 UN report has been drawn up  on  the  assumption  that  all  those
    categorised as IDPs are persons "who have not returned to their  places
    of origin" (see page 6 of that report). It emerged  from  the  evidence
    discussed by Dr Mullen that there was no basis upon which a person once
    regarded as an IDP would cease to be considered  such,  even  if  their
    current circumstances were not in themselves  such  as  to  fall  below
    acceptable standards.


92. Put another way, an IDP may be someone living in conditions at or  near
    to destitution, having no access to means of supporting themselves  and
    being vulnerable to a range of actors of persecutory  ill-treatment  or
    possibly someone who presently lives in their own, settled, home and is
    economically  active  (although  retaining  access  to  food   relief),
    retaining that classification simply on  account  of  having  relocated
    from their original home at a previous time in response to  an  adverse
    security situation in their local area that no longer subsists.


93. The question that therefore arises to be addressed  is  whether  it  is
    possible to establish with any degree of accuracy the number of  people
    presently living in Mogadishu as internally displaced persons living in
    conditions that fall below the level  that  it  acceptable.  Dr  Mullen
    draws upon information provided by UNHCR concerning the "Population  of
    IDPs" in Mogadishu as follows:

           April 2012      184,000
           October 2012        184,000
           February 2013   184,000
           September 2013  369,000

    It will be noted that the country guidance of AMM was  published  three
    months  before  April  2012.  Dr  Mullen  recognises  that  this  data,
    suggesting a doubling of the number of IDPs between February  2013  and
    September 2013 is surprising:

           "Such a lack of variation between time periods in  an  emergency
           situation is an unusual phenomenon and generally indicates  that
           there are problems in either collection  or  analysis  of  data.
           This becomes evident in February 2013 when  it  is  acknowledged
           that there are adjustments required and the  figures  should  be
           "triangulated"  or  cross-verified  by  observation.   Then   in
           September 2013, in what  is  assumed  to  be  after  the  cross-
           verification having taken place, revised figures are published."

    Dr Mullen observed that the source of "the excess population" has  been
    the sprawling IDP camp on the Afgoye road known as the Afgoye  corridor
    or "Eelasha Biyaha" where there had been a strong Al Shabaab  presence,
    which in 2008 had housed some 400,000 persons. He went on to say this:

           "The pressure from being associated with Islamists  on  the  one
           hand and the reduced tension in Mogadishu on the other, combined
           to convince many former Eelasha Biyaha residents  to  return  to
           their homes in the city  of  Mogadishu.  The  influx  of  former
           residents back to  Mogadishu  and  the  decline  in  numbers  at
           Eelasha Biyaha is a significant  explanatory  variable  for  the
           increase in IDPs."

    From which it can be seen that a possibly significant number  of  those
    representing the increased number of IDPs living in Mogadishu today are
    in fact people who have returned to  their  former  homes  rather  than
    arriving as strangers to seek out whatever accommodation they can find.
     Dr Mullen continued:

           "The  considerable  movement  of  IDPs  to  Mogadishu   may   be
           indicative of an association  between  relocation  and  improved
           security but it could equally be associated  with  an  increased
           number of family reunions, seeking out employment opportunities,
           evictions or cross border repatriations. It is significant  that
           UNHCR, in its Population Movement Trends for October 2013 at the
           national level, as distinct from Mogadishu, cites the  principal
           reasons for movement as: drought,  lack  of  livelihood,  forced
           return, eviction, cross border return (particularly from  Kenya)
           ahead of insecurity, which comes near the bottom of the list..."

94. There is an additional concern about the indicated level of  IDPs  said
    now to be living in Mogadishu. In cross-examination Dr Mullen  accepted
    that the figure of 369,000 arises from data collected  in  relation  to
    population movements and  not  the  counting  of  heads.  He  was  also
    referred to a document at page 2815 of the  respondent's  bundle,  that
    being produced by  the United Nations Office for  the  Coordination  of
    Humanitarian Affairs ("OCHA") dealing with "nutrition interventions" in
    Mogadishu between April - June 2013 and which asserted that just 30,000
    people were  categorised,  in  this  context,  as  either  "crisis"  or
    "stressed". Dr Mullen said  simply  that  he  did  not  recognise  that
    figure, which we take to be an indication that he did not accept it  as
    accurately representing the true position.


Who are the returnees? Risk faced by returnees


95. Dr Mullen's view of the vulnerability of returnees is plainly  informed
    by economic, as well as social support issues. At paragraph 67  of  his
    report he said:


           "The  ability  to  access  protection  in  Mogadishu  would   be
           contingent on three  significant  resources:  financial  wealth,
           social status and clan protection.... Returning migrant citizens
           without a minimal combination of these attributes  are  unlikely
           to gain access to livelihoods or safety and are likely to end up
           in an IDP camp. The vulnerability is compounded if the  retuning
           citizen is from a minority clan..."


    He continued:


           "This immutable  vulnerability  can  only  be  reversed  through
           access to resources or patronage from a  major  clan  member  or
           group..."


    and at paragraph 68 of his report stated:


           "The very poor and ostracised are, of course, powerless  to  act
           and become passive agents in the threat-violence  continuum  and
           whose risk rating goes off the charts. Only those with a  degree
           of power, either political or economic, can influence and  shape
           decisions  relating  to  their   security   and   reduce   their
           vulnerability.... Prosperous businessmen, with  close  links  to
           the Diaspora, have at their disposal bodyguards and  have  means
           of protection. Meantime, the humanitarian  crisis  has  worsened
           and minority populations have become more vulnerable. Using  any
           classical  risk  index,  there  is  a  pervasive  and   systemic
           environment  of  risk  affecting  the  vulnerable  and  minority
           populations of Mogadishu and this has to be acknowledged in  any
           new CG..."


    Which led him to conclude:


           "Arguably, the destitute minority  populations  because  of  the
           lack of  a  social  network  or  social  capital  or  protective
           mechanisms are at highest risk and as  confirmed  in  the  UNHCR
           report on IDPs, are the least likely to migrate..."


96. There are two groups of people who fall to  be  considered:  those  who
    stayed and  those  who  now  face  a  return,  after  an  absence  from
    Mogadishu, that being either  a  voluntary  return  or  a  forced  one.
    Plainly, those who choose to return are exercising a choice and some of
    those who have chosen to remain, as opposed to  those  who  lacked  the
    means to leave, may also be taken as  having  exercised  a  choice.  At
    paragraph 30 of his report Dr Mullen observed:


           "Forced repatriation of individuals  of  modest  means,  without
           powerful clan support networks would face a situation where,  in
           the words of Tony  Burns  statement  19  August  2013...  "there
           remains an unacceptable risk that returnees  to  Mogadishu  city
           would be at risk  of  direct  and/or  indiscriminate  threat  of
           personal, psychological and economic harm from a broad range  of
           actors and drivers" . This view is shared by the  representative
           of a Diaspora organisation who explained  "that  those  who  are
           returning to Mogadishu... are mostly resourceful people who  see
           opportunities... have  business  to  do  and/or  seek  political
           influence and positions. It  would  be  extremely  difficult  to
           return to Mogadishu if you have no one to rely on when  you  get
           back." Danish 3 7.2 "Diaspora returning from abroad".  The  same
           report at 7.2 also acknowledges that some  people  are  "staying
           despite the difficulties" but there is no  clear  indication  of
           what distinguishes the "stayers" from the "leavers"  apart  from
           suggestions of social class, access  to  resources,  family  and
           clan networking. This signifies  wealth,  clan  connections  and
           power or the sets of factors which, in the case of AMM paragraph
           1 exclude individuals from Art 15(c) consideration."

    It is, though, informative to set out a longer extract from what Danish
    3, published in May  2013,  has  to  say  at  7.2  about  the  Diaspora
    returning from abroad, this being a  source  quoted  by  Dr  Mullen  in
    support of his stated view. It will be  seen  from  this  extract  that
    there is  reference  also  to  "ordinary  people"  returning  from  the
    Diaspora:


           "According to UNHCR-Somalia, Mogadishu,  many  people  from  the
           Diaspora have returned to  Mogadishu,  also,  because  they  see
           business opportunities. In general, there is  no  discrimination
           for the sole reason of belonging to the returning Diaspora.


           Regarding returns from the Diaspora,  an  international  agency,
           Nairobi, explained that ordinary people returning  to  Mogadishu
           and other locations in S/C Somalia are  citing  improvements  in
           the security situation as  some  of  the  reasons  for  returns.
           Others have also been shocked by what they see  when  they  come
           back, especially those who have been abroad for many years.


           An international agency, Nairobi, explained  that  Mogadishu  is
           now a 'buzz', people are going around minding their own business
           and there is an increasing freedom of movement for everyone.


           Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre, Mogadishu,  explained  that
           there is an increasing number of Somalis returning to  Mogadishu
           from abroad as compared to October 2012. However, the  14  April
           [2013] attack may result in a slight decrease for the time being
           as many will give it a  second  thought  before  going  back  to
           Mogadishu.


           A  representative  of  a  Diaspora  organization  in   Mogadishu
           explained that those who are returning to  Mogadishu  and  other
           locations in S/C Somalia are mostly resourceful people  who  see
           opportunities,  have  business  to  do  and/or  seek   political
           influence and positions. It  would  be  extremely  difficult  to
           return to Mogadishu if you have no one to rely on when you  come
           back.


           The representative stated that an increasing number  of  Somalis
           from the Diaspora are returning. Safety and security are  issues
           to consider before you return as  there  are  frictions  between
           those who stayed behind and those who  are  now  returning  from
           their  refuge  abroad.  The  Diaspora  is  being  perceived   as
           competitors as they may take up jobs from the locals  and  their
           increasing presence in Mogadishu has resulted in price increases
           on goods as well as on properties.
           ...


           Concerning the Diaspora people coming back to  Somalia,  Mohamed
           Farah Siad, Mogadishu, said that  they  are  most  welcome  with
           their money and skills. He did not know about a general  tension
           between local people and the ones who  have  returned  from  the
           Diaspora. In his opinion, the ones who have  negative  attitudes
           towards the Diaspora might suffer from an inferiority complex.


           Mohamed Farah Siad added that he has told three of his sons  now
           living in Ohio, USA, to come back to Mogadishu to work with him.
           He expects his sons to be back in Mogadishu in three months...
           ...


           The representative  of  a  Diaspora  organization  in  Mogadishu
           explained that the first  three  months  in  Mogadishu  are  the
           hardest for a returned member of  the  Diaspora.  However,  most
           people from the Diaspora are staying  despite  the  difficulties
           they may face during the first few months. On the other hand,  a
           number of returnees are going back to their  country  of  asylum
           because they could not find a job in Mogadishu. Males as well as
           females are returning to Mogadishu.
           ...
           An international NGO (B), Mogadishu, explained  that  there  are
           many people coming to Mogadishu these  days.  All  flights  from
           Nairobi, Istanbul and the Middle East are fully booked. However,
           the 14 April attack may for a while make people more hesitant to
           return. On the other hand, many people are coming to Somalia  to
           settle.


           An  international  NGO  (C),  Nairobi,  stated  that  the   most
           important developments at the moment are that people are  coming
           back and staying, and making investments. This is very  positive
           and important.


           According to the international NGO (C),  Nairobi,  many  Somalis
           from the Diaspora are these days coming to Mogadishu  to  invest
           and seek opportunities for economic activity. These  people  are
           dependent on a reasonable level  of  security  to  pursue  their
           activities. Al-Shabaab's recent attacks on the Lido Beach and on
           a restaurant where the new westernized middle class of Mogadishu
           gather had the intention to create fear among these  people.  So
           far al-Shabaab  has  not  managed  to  scare  people  away  from
           Mogadishu, but it is crucial that the SNG as soon  as  possible,
           and in a convincing way, can demonstrate  that  it  is  able  to
           prevent terrorist attacks in the city."

97. In his oral evidence Dr Mullen specifically adopted what he had said in
    response to a written question (50) posed by the respondent:


           "The profile of returning Diaspora members includes  the  better
           educated and businessmen seeking out investment opportunities."


    He referred to two sources in this regard.   First,  a  BBC  report  by
    Andrew Harding dated 23 May 2013 from which we reproduce the following:


           "After two decades of anarchy and misery, Mogadishu is  enjoying
           something of a renaissance.  The  spectacular  ruins  are  being
           patched up. Hotels are being built. There are even  streetlights
           in some places. And everywhere you hear accents: Texan, Geordie,
           Minnesotan,  south  London,  Scandinavian.  Somalia's  far-flung
           Diaspora is coming back - in big numbers -  to  visit,  to  help
           out, to make money, and to find out if this renaissance has  any
           chance of lasting. The jury is still out on that one."


    This report includes observations by  residents  of  the  city  to  the
    effect that volatility remains apparent and that "anything  can  happen
    here". There are also examples of returnees from  the  United  Kingdom,
    including a 29 year old who returned a year ago in  order  "to  do  his
    bitto rebuild Mogadishu" of whom Mr Harding wrote:


           "He has been working for  a  charity  that  helps  young  people
           struggling to find jobs. Right now he  is  organising  a  hugely
           popular televised talent competition, Idols - Somali-style."


    Also found in this report is an account of an estate agent  from  Essex
    who has started to clear ground for a new development on a beach to the
    north of Mogadishu, having brought his 13 year old son with him.


98. The second source drawn upon here by Dr Mullen is a  Voice  of  America
    report dated 25 October 2013 suggesting  that  Diaspora  returnees  are
    taking jobs at the expense of locals because they are  better  educated
    and more cosmopolitan.

99. Dr Mullen has pointed also at the importance of remittances from abroad
    for those living in Mogadishu,  quoting  a  report  that  estimated  an
    annual inflow of $1.6 billion. He said in oral  evidence  that  between
    20% and 30% of Somali  families  benefit  from  such  remittances  from
    abroad. However, the main medium by  which  funds  are  sent  to  those
    living in Mogadishu,  the  financial  institution  Dahabshiil,  despite
    adhering to Islamic banking norms, has been declared "an enemy"  by  Al
    Shabaab who carried out a bombing attack on its premises in April 2013.
    Also,  Dr  Mullen  said  that  Barclays  Bank  had  moved  to   suspend
    international  currency  transfers  to  Dahabshiil  because  of   money
    laundering concerns. We cannot see, though, anything  in  the  evidence
    before us to establish that these issues have  caused  any  significant
    disturbance in the rate of such remittals.


100. At paragraph 54 of his report Dr Mullen accepts that:

             "... Individualised returns clearly take place on a  voluntary
             basis and it is evident from the volume of air traffic landing
             in Mogadishu that many expatriates are returning.  These  tend
             to be from the upper income groups but whose  families  remain
             at safe European locations."

    His source, identified in a footnote, for providing  support  for  that
    assertion, is a BBC World Service report said to be "circa  29  October
    2013":

           "There is anecdotal evidence suggesting  that  the  families  of
           virtually all the warlords have gained asylum in Europe and that
           the business class seats on the Turkish  Airlines  flights  from
           Ankara to Mogadishu are generally the first to be sold."

    Indeed,  the  evidence  before  us  indicates  that  all  flights  into
    Mogadishu are heavily booked and it is necessary to book in advance  to
    secure travel on a particular date. Dr Mullen, however, says:


           "... it is my opinion that even given the strong  demand  factor
           for inward and outward  flights  there  is  a  weak  correlation
           between the availability of these flights and security  concerns
           on the ground, as travel on these  flights  already  suggests  a
           behaviour of a high level of risk taking..."


    But this appears to be reasoning of  a  circular  nature:  rather  than
    accepting the possibility that the heavy demand  for  air  travel  into
    Mogadishu indicates that increasing numbers of people consider that  it
    is now safe enough for them to return, Dr Mullen assumes that the  risk
    is undiminished but travellers are now prepared to accept an  increased
    level of risk.  It is not at all clear that such  an  approach  is  the
    correct one.


101. When asked to  address  the  issue  of  risk  on  return,  Dr  Mullen's
    evidence disclosed a number of difficulties. He said at paragraph 56 of
    his report that:


           "...  returnees  are  viewed  as  being  influenced  by  western
           thinking and lifestyle which would be in total contrast  to  the
           Wahabist jihadism pursued by Al Shabaab  and would be likely  to
           elicit punishments in the form of amputations of limbs, torture,
           beatings and even killings, thus clear ECHR infringements."


    But in oral evidence he accepted that there was no evidence, at all, of
    that having actually occurred in Mogadishu in recent years.

102. Similarly, at paragraph 58 of his report Dr Mullen said of MOJ:


           "While a Gadabursi returnee may not stand out like  a  blue-eyed
           white European, as a returnee from the UK, his demeanour, dress,
           possessions would distinguish him from  indigenous  Somalis  who
           have remained behind."


    Indeed, we heard oral evidence from the  other  expert  witnesses  that
    Mogadishu is a conservative society in which traditional dress was  the
    norm such that a returnee would  be  immediately  apparent  because  of
    manner of dress. However,  the  photographs  of  Bakara  Market,  taken
    recently during the visit to Mogadishu by the third expert  witness  to
    give  oral  evidence  before  us,  the  journalist  Miss  Mary  Harper,
    discloses a man wearing what appears to be a Manchester United football
    shirt and another wearing a baseball cap but none of the  male  persons
    pictured in the photographs of this crowded  market  was  wearing  what
    appeared to be traditional dress,  although  all  of  the  women  were.
    Casual trousers and casual shirts appear to be the norm.


103. When asked to identify groups at risk in  Mogadishu  today,  Dr  Mullen
    said that individuals, generally,  were  at  risk  because  Al  Shabaab
    mingle with the  local  population.  Aid  workers,  both  national  and
    international, form a particular risk group. The choice of  residential
    area and proximity to clan members would contribute  to  reducing  risk
    and Dr Mullen accepts, as we have already discussed above,  that  there
    is freedom of movement within Mogadishu. He said, at  paragraph  94  of
    his report, that:


           "... The groups that  would  require  particular  attention  are
           those considered to be "at the bottom  of  the  heap"  and  most
           vulnerable, such as Bantu groups, the Banjuni, the  Midgaan  and
           the other occupational caste clans such as the Eyle, Boon, Tumal
           and the Yibir. Coincidentally, these groups are  all  considered
           to be "Gibil madow" (dark coloured). They are also, in majority,
           vulnerable economically and most likely to be involved in  daily
           labouring activities, often  former  agricultural  workers,  and
           residing  in  IDP  camps.  They  have  no   homeland   or   land
           entitlements apart from by patronage. Extreme poverty  therefore
           emerges as a key feature of continuing Art. 3 eligibility, while
           acknowledging its strong correlation to  minority  clan  status.
           The second major group to be considered for  Art.  3  status  is
           those who have  been  threatened  on  religious  grounds  by  Al
           Shabaab."


104. When asked in oral evidence to identify likely Al Shabaab  targets,  Dr
    Mullen said, notably omitting returnees from the diaspora:


           "Financial  transfers;   internet;   journalists;   peacemakers;
           religious leaders; clan leaders"


    And then added:


           "Generally the targets selected have a  link  to  government  or
           international aid agencies"


    And he observed also that regard should be had to the list of potential
    risk profiles in the 2014 report by UNHCR which, as  can  be  seen,  is
    somewhat more extensive:


           "Potential Risk Profiles:
           1.     Individuals associated with, or (perceived as) supportive
                 of the SFG and the international community,  including  the
                 AMISOM forces;
           2.     Individuals (perceived as)  contravening  Islamic  Sharia
                 and decrees imposed by Al-Shabaab, including converts  from
                 Islam, other "apostates" and moderate Islamic scholars  who
                 have criticized Al-Shabaab extremism;
           3.     Individuals (perceived as) opposing the SFG  and  related
                 interests and individuals (suspected of)  supporting  armed
                 anti-Government groups;
           4.     Individuals in certain professions such  as  journalists,
                 members of the judiciary, humanitarian  workers  and  human
                 rights  activists,  teachers  and  staff   of   educational
                 facilities, business people and other people (perceived  to
                 be) of means;
           5.     Individuals (at risk of being) forcibly recruited;
           6.     Members  of  minority  groups  such  as  members  of  the
                 Christian religious minority and members of minority clans;
           7.     Individuals belonging to a clan engaged in a blood feud;
           8.     Women and girls;
           9.     Children;
           10.    Victims and persons at risk of trafficking;
           11.    Sexual and/or  gender  non-conforming  persons  (lesbian,
                 gay,   bisexual,   transgender   and    intersex    (LGBTI)
                 individuals);
           12.    Persons with a mental disability or suffering from mental
                 illness."


    It is notable that this extensive list  does  not  include  a  specific
    category of diaspora returnees. There is reference  to  those  opposing
    Islamic Sharia and apostates and there is evidence before the  Tribunal
    from some sources that Al Shabaab is likely to regard  those  returning
    from the west as "poisoned" by exposure to an anti Islamic way of  life
    so as to be regarded as spies or apostates. However, if  that  approach
    were thought to be taken towards returnees generally we would expect  a
    more specific reference  to  have  been  made.  For  those  reasons  we
    consider  the  omission  of  such  a  specific  reference  to  diaspora
    returnees to be significant.

105. It can readily be  appreciated  that  it  is  not  altogether  easy  to
    reconcile the UNHCR list of risk categories with some of  the  evidence
    we have set out above. We do not take Dr  Mullen's  reference  to  this
    list as him having adopted it in its entirety. In any event, this  list
    of groups at risk relates to Somalia  as  a  whole  and  not  Mogadishu
    alone. The position outside that city is very different in a number  of
    respects, not least because of the presence and activity of Al  Shabaab
    outside the capital.

Dr Markus Hoehne

106. Dr Hoehne has studied Somali culture, history and politics  since  2001
    and has spent  some  time  in  Somaliland  and  Puntland.  As  well  as
    monitoring news and country reports he maintains contact with a network
    of informants in the region by internet and telephone. In this context,
    the fact that he has never himself visited Mogadishu, does not  in  any
    way disqualify him from offering an expert  opinion  upon  the  current
    situation in that city today.

107. Having described an escalation in operations carried out  in  Mogadishu
    by Al Shabaab during 2013 and the  changing  nature  of  those  attacks
    since withdrawal from a formal  presence  in  the  city,  the  position
    adopted by Dr Hoehne is summarised at paragraph  41-42  of  his  report
    which we reproduce below precisely as it is written. It  will  be  seen
    that this is a less positive assessment than that made  by  Dr  Mullen,
    seeing no justification for a relaxation of the  narrow  categorisation
    of the Tribunal in AMM of those not likely to face risk at a level such
    as to require the protection of Article 15(c):

           41: "This shows, in my view, that the battle against Al  Shabaab
           is far from over and that Mogadishu, but  also  other  parts  of
           south-central Somalia,  is  not  a  safe  place  where  ordinary
           Somalis (locals or those deported there) would be able  to  live
           without a considerable threat to their  physical  integrity  and
           psychological   well-being.   The   positive   news   that   are
           occasionally  transmitted  from  within  Somalia  are  certainly
           correct (although I have the feeling that the  enthusiasm  about
           "Somalia rising" that  was  prevailing  after  the  presidential
           elections in the second half of 2012 has  thinned  out  by  now.
           Things are getting better, but only for some people and in  some
           places. Most people who benefit from the current  situation  are
           (diasporic or local) businessmen and members  of  the  political
           elite who engage in lucrative deals with foreign  companies  and
           foreign governments.


           42 Against this background, it is my view that an Article  15(c)
           risk exists, as described by the tribunal in the case of  AMM  &
           Ors (Somalia) v SSHD [2011] UK UT445 (IAC)  (22  November  2011)
           "as a general matter, in respect of the  majority  of  those  in
           Mogadishu" and those returning from the diaspora without special
           arrangements  and  protection  in  place.  Article   15(c)   is,
           according to Paragraph 328 of the  Tribunal's  decision  in  the
           case of AMM, concerned "with "threat [...] to a civilian's  life
           or person" rather than to specific acts of  violence  [...]  the
           threat is inherent in a general  situation  of  armed  conflict.
           [...] The violence that gives rise to the threat is described as
           "indiscriminate" In my view, this assessment in the case of  AMM
           & Ors is still - or better, again- valid regarding the situation
           in Mogadishu in October 2013."

108. Dr Hoehne's view is that it is only  those  with  access  to  financial
    resources and who can make "special arrangements" for  protection  that
    do not face a  real  risk  of  harm  from  indiscriminate  violence  in
    Mogadishu today. We now examine in detail the route that led Dr  Hoehne
    to those conclusions, which, it will be seen,  are  more  guarded  that
    those reached by Dr Mullen.

109. At paragraph 9 of his report, Dr Hoehne provides a concise overview  of
    the background to the  present  position  relating  to  the  threat  to
    security posed by Al Shabaab:

           "From 2009 to  mid-2011,  Al  Shabaab  had  been  the  de  facto
           government in  most  parts  of  south-central  Somalia.  It  had
           physically controlled vast areas including 90 per  cent  of  the
           capital city, and had delivered services from justice to  health
           care and schooling. Out of a mixture of  fear  and  appreciation
           for keeping law and order, many  ordinary  people  supported  Al
           Shabaab's rule or at  least  tolerated  it.  But  from  mid-2012
           onwards,  a  new  trend  regarding  the  security  situation  in
           southern Somalia including Mogadishu emerged. On the  one  hand,
           Al Shabaab was severely weakened as a military power in Somalia.
           It was evicted from its most important remaining strongholds  in
           Kismayo and Jowhar in December 2012. The security  in  Mogadishu
           was strengthened to some degree and in early 2013,  a  sense  of
           optimism reigned in  the  international  media  and  among  some
           external observers and Somalis that Somalia could rise again  as
           a stable and peaceful entity  --  despite  the  many  challenges
           facing the new administration."

110. A recurring theme in  Dr  Hoehne's  evidence  is  the  significance  of
    changes within Al Shabaab itself. At paragraph 30 of his report:

           "The evidence suggests  that  Al  Shabaab  recently  reorganised
           itself, if anything, as a smaller  movement  under  the  radical
           leadership of Ahmed Abdi Godane, its amir. This, in my view,  is
           an important reason for the stepping up of the  group's  attacks
           in  Mogadishu  and  elsewhere  in  southern  Somalia.  It   also
           resulted, in my view, in the recent  complex  terror  attack  in
           Nairobi, Kenya. Most probably, Al Shabaab will  continue  to  be
           active in Mogadishu... and will be able to  create  considerable
           insecurity in the city and beyond for the  time  being.  It  may
           even "divide labour" and split in an inner - Somali terror  cell
           and a "global  jihad"  branch  that  is  concerned  with  terror
           attacks in the neighbouring countries. "

    Dr Hoehne detects evidence of significant changes in the structure  and
    ideology of Al  Shabaab  since  their  withdrawal  from  Mogadishu.  He
    explained how, since May or June 2013 it  has  purged  from  its  ranks
    those that stood in the way of its version  of  jihad,  including  some
    senior commanders. "Pragmatists" have given way to  "radical  purists".
    Those eliminated from Al Shabaab:


           "were those standing for a less extreme course;  at  least  they
           were not so much in favour of international  or  "global  jihad"
           but were rather concerned about Somali (national) issues."


    Explaining that, having given up  ambitions  of  retaining  territorial
    control within parts of Mogadishu, Al Shabaab needs less  resources  in
    order to operate, Dr Hoehne added:


           "This again frees capacities and resources  to  engage  in  more
           complex  and  vicious  attacks  inside  Somalia   and   in   the
           neighbouring countries..."

111. That analysis is not one that attracts complete consensus between well-
    informed  observers.  Dr  Hoehne  maintained  his  view  despite  being
    referred to the report of the UN monitoring  group  published  in  July
    2013 which expressed the view that:

           "... to interpret divisions within Al Shabaab in binary terms  -
           between nationalists and internationalists - is  misleading  and
           simplistic..."






Escalation in violent attacks by Al Shabaab during 2013

112. In describing the  changing  nature  of  Al  Shabaab's  campaign  after
    having withdrawn from Mogadishu, Dr Hoehne drew upon the report of  the
    joint mission of the African Union and the United Nations conducted  in
    Somalia between August and September 2013:

           "The findings of the joint mission indicate that Al-Shabaab  has
           deliberately shifted tactics since May 2013,  from  conventional
           to asymmetrical  warfare,  in  recovered  areas,  including  the
           Somali capital. They target particularly the  Government,  State
           institutions and the international presence working in  Somalia,
           including the United Nations."

    Once again, the  omission  of  any  reference  to  returnees  from  the
    Diaspora from this list of primary targets is  to  be  noted.  Although
    there had been improvements in  the  security  situation  in  Mogadishu
    following the departure of Al-Shabaab, Dr Hoehne  pointed  to  evidence
    that violent attacks launched by Al  Shabaab  in  2013  had  increased,
    causing casualties. In reaching his conclusions, Dr Hoehne relied  upon
    and referred at some length in his evidence to data produced by the NGO
    Safety Program ("NSP"),  that  data  being  tabulated  in  four  charts
    reproduced at paragraph 18 of his report. He introduces  this  evidence
    by saying:


           "Between November 2011 the time when  the  most  recent  country
           guidance case was  concluded,  and  October  2013  the  security
           situation in  Mogadishu  has  changed  considerably  on  several
           occasions. In fact, as indicated by table 1  below  on  security
           related incidents in Mogadishu January 2012  to  September  2013
           there was a sharp decline in security related incidents  between
           the end of 2012 and early 2013, and an  equally  sharp  rise  of
           such incidents again in the first half of  2013  regarding  most
           forms of security incidents. Only the intensity of armed clashes
           inside Mogadishu between Al Shabaab and  its  enemy  forces  has
           durably declined since  May  2012.  This  demonstrates  that  Al
           Shabaab lost ground in the city since its withdrawal  in  August
           2012... However, the fact that  hand  grenade  attacks,  attacks
           with       improvised        explosive        devices        and
           assassinations/assassination attempts are on the increase  again
           since April or  May  2013  shows  that  Al  Shabaab  retained  a
           clandestine presence in Mogadishu and actually  reorganised  its
           operations in the city."




[pic]




113. A number of observations can be made about this evidence from  NSP.  Dr
    Hoehne accepted, in cross examination, that an increase in incidents is
    not the same thing as an increase in casualties. Looking first  at  the
    graph depicting hand grenade attacks, it will be seen that the data for
    each  month  is  classified  as  either  "Successful  attacks  (inflict
    casualties on target)"  or  "Unsuccessful  attacks  (no  casualties  on
    target)". Since we are concerned to  assess  risks  to  civilians  from
    indiscriminate violence, what is most relevant is the casualty rate and
    not simply the number of attacks  attempted.  Presumably,  unsuccessful
    grenade attacks that cause no casualties, although alarming because  of
    their potential to do so, do not in themselves add to the likelihood of
    a civilian coming to harm as a result of  indiscriminate  violence,  if
    the significant rate of those attacks being unsuccessful continues.

114. Put another way, the correct approach is not that  any  grenade  attack
    might cause casualties so that it is the overall  number  of  attempted
    attacks that is of importance. This is because, as can be seen from the
    chart, in each month the proportion of attacks that  were  unsuccessful
    and caused no casualties is consistently a  substantial  one.  This  is
    significant. It can be seen that in each month of  2013  only  a  small
    proportion of grenade attacks actually caused any casualties at all.  A
    further difficulty is that this evidence makes no attempt  to  estimate
    the numbers of casualties caused by successful grenade  attacks  or  to
    quantify  any  level  of  seriousness  of  injuries,  nor  to  separate
    casualties between injuries and fatalities.

115. We have no evidence to explain why most grenade attacks launched by  Al
    Shabaab are so unsuccessful. We do not know if the low success rate, in
    terms of causing injuries, is because the grenades  themselves  are  of
    low quality so that more often than not they simply do not  explode  or
    whether they do reliably explode but are cast in a way that  when  they
    do no one is close enough to  be  injured  by  the  blast.  It  was  Dr
    Mullen's view that Al Shabaab does not target civilians per se. The aim
    of the  asymmetrical  approach  was  to  demonstrate  that  the  Somali
    security  forces  could  not  guarantee  security  on  the  streets  of
    Mogadishu. We recognise the dangers of speculating in  the  absence  of
    evidence or considered expert opinion and simply record that  it  would
    be surprising if an experienced guerrilla terrorist group  such  as  Al
    Shabaab would have such a low success  rate  if  intent  on  maximising
    civilian casualties from grenade attacks in Mogadishu.

116. The chart depicting IED-related  incidents  plainly  demonstrates  that
    the number of such recorded incidents increased during 2013 as compared
    with 2012. That is perhaps unsurprising in  the  light  of  the  expert
    evidence related to the change in  tactics  involving  a  cessation  of
    "confrontational warfare" following the withdrawal of Al  Shabaab  from
    Mogadishu. But this chart  tells  us  nothing  at  all  about  casualty
    figures. Nor does  it  tell  us  anything  about  how  the  numbers  of
    civilians injured or killed by IEDs in 2013 compared with  the  numbers
    injured or killed during the more conventional  fighting  and  shelling
    that occurred before Al Shabaab was driven from the city.

117. While giving oral evidence, Dr Hoehne was referred to paragraph  15  of
    Danish 3 concerning IED statistics:

           "For many years, data on IEDs has lacked  proper  categorisation
           and a systematic approach to information gathering,  leading  to
           poor quality statistics. Since 2012, IED  data  categorised  and
           processed has improved leading to a higher  number  of  reported
           incidents."

    Dr Hoehne accepted that an improvement in information-gathering had led
    to a higher number of reported incidents, but offered no view as to how
    this should inform a reliable reading of the chart. Since he was  aware
    of the concern  about  the  earlier  figures  and  the  improvement  in
    reporting more recent incidents, it is perhaps surprising that  he  did
    not mention that when introducing the chart in his report,  the  reader
    being invited instead to rely upon it for what it indicated.

118. The third chart, depicting assassination attempts, does not  in  itself
    assist us  very  much  either.  By  their  very  nature,  assassination
    attempts are specifically targeted attacks on individuals who have been
    identified as enemies who should be killed. This is not a  risk  facing
    civilians simply by virtue of being present  in  the  city,  especially
    where the method of assassination deployed is not of a nature to  cause
    significant collateral damage, for example where the  victim  is  shot.
    Given  the  planned  and  targeted  nature  of  such  attempts,  it  is
    unsurprising that the target is killed in nearly all cases. But  it  is
    far from clear what can be drawn from the fact that  something  in  the
    region of 20 targeted individuals were  on  average  assassinated  each
    month in a city the size of Mogadishu during  the  first  9  months  of
    2013, especially because, as we shall see below, there is  evidence  of
    Al Shabaab  operatives  acting  as  "hired  guns"  to  resolve  private
    disputes between individuals.

119. The fourth chart, showing "Armed Clashes -  By  attacker  /  Initiator"
    also offers little to inform our assessment of the risk to civilians.

120. Thus, this data collected and reproduced by NSP and relied upon  by  Dr
    Hoehne is not, in our view, a particularly helpful piece of evidence in
    an assessment to the risk today to civilians in  Mogadishu  from  being
    injured  or  killed  by  indiscriminate  violence.  According  to  this
    evidence, in September 2013 we can see that in a city whose  population
    is 2  million according to Dr Mullen or 1  million  according  to  Dr
    Hoehne, there were 6 grenade  attacks  causing  an  unknown  number  of
    casualties, 10 IED attacks that were not categorised as  "unsuccessful"
    but, again, we know nothing,  from  this  evidence,  of  the  level  or
    severity of injuries or the numbers killed as a result, 15 successfully
    executed assassination attempts and a very few armed clashes in unknown
    locations.

121. Dr Hoehne's evidence is that:

           "Somali news reports from December 2012 and  January  2013  show
           that government and army officials in Mogadishu  were  the  main
           targets of assassinations and bomb attacks and occasional  shoot
           outs. But since around May 2013 many civilians are again falling
           victim to Al Shabaab  attacks.  Particularly  damaging  in  this
           regard were larger scale (suicide)  bombings  that  are  on  the
           increase in Mogadishu over the past months. The details  on  the
           worst incidents are (set out below)."

    Despite the fact that hard evidence  concerning  the  actual  level  of
    civilian casualties is elusive, we do not lose sight of the fact that a
    significant number of civilians are getting caught up  in  the  attacks
    being carried out by Al Shabaab. Drawing on a report by  the  Secretary
    General of the UN dated 31 May 2013, Dr Hoehne noted  that  Al  Shabaab
    continued to launch asymmetrical attacks on soft  targets  that  "often
    resulted in civilian casualties". Targeted killings  and  attacks  were
    routinely reported. IED incidents rose in 2013 in comparison  to  2012.
    He set out a number of examples in his report:

           On 24 January 2013  a  device  hit  a  convoy  carrying  two  UN
           personnel, who were unharmed;


           On 29 January there were suicide bombings  aimed  at  the  prime
           minister in Villa Somalia  and  on  18  March  on  the  head  of
           National Security Intelligence Agency for Benadir, which  killed
           10 people, showing "Al Shabaab's continued intent and capability
           to attack government and soft targets".


           On 14 April more than 30 people died in a complex attack  by  Al
           Shabaab  on  a  regional  court  house.  The  attack,  involving
           multiple gunmen  and  bombs,  "was  the  deadliest  to  date  in
           Mogadishu in 2013". On the same day, a vehicle likely to be that
           of a suicide bomber hit a Turkish aid agency convoy. On 25 April
           a Deputy State Attorney was murdered in Mogadishu.


           On 5 May a suicide vehicle targeting a Qatari delegation  convoy
           killed over 10 people.


           On 19 June 2013 an attack  on  the  United  Nations  Development
           Program compound in Mogadishu by armed men and  suicide  bombers
           killed at least 14 people.


122. Referring back to the NSP charts we have considered  above,  Dr  Hoehne
    said, after a discussion of the above incidents:


           "The intensification of Al Shabaab attacks led to many  civilian
           casualties in Mogadishu in recent months,"

    quoting, in support, the most recent report available at  the  time  by
    the UN Secretary General on the situation in Somalia, dated 3 September
    2013:

           "There was a surge in violent attacks in the capital. In May and
           June, hand grenade attacks in Mogadishu doubled compared to  the
           start of the year. There were three times as  many  bombings  in
           June as in January. Targeted  killings  occurred  almost  daily.
           There were at least four mortar attacks, including  two  against
           Villa Somalia on 20 May and 17 June. On 12 July,  an  improvised
           explosive device attack against an AMISOM convoy on the  airport
           road in Mogadishu resulted in more than 17 civilian  casualties.
           On 27 July, a complex attack by Al-Shabaab  against  a  facility
           adjacent to the Turkish Embassy resulted in  the  death  of  one
           Turkish security officer and one civilian, and injured at  least
           eight others. (emphasis added)."

    It might be noted that this is broadly in  line  with  the  information
    recorded by NSP, discussed  above,  although  no  specific  account  is
    taken, when referring to the  number  of  bombings  being  three  times
    higher in June as compared with January, that most of the hand  grenade
    attacks were unsuccessful and caused no casualties. The same cannot  be
    said, though, of IED attacks, although, as we have seen, the  NSP  data
    does not disclose numbers of casualties.

123. At paragraph 22 of his report, Dr Hoehne sets out an extract from an e-
    mail from a colleague who has been based in Nairobi for the last  three
    years and who has been a regular visitor  to  Mogadishu  since  January
    2013, the emphasis shown in this extract being added by Dr Hoehne:

           "Al  Shabaab  are  staging  increasingly  complex   attacks   in
           Mogadishu involving a combination of  car/truck  bombs,  suicide
           bombers, and gunmen [...] there are no truly secure districts in
           Mogadishu. This is particularly the case now. There are  now  as
           many, if not more, assassinations and  grenade  attacks  in  the
           city as there were when the city was held by Shabaab. All trends
           -- grenades, IEDs, running street battles, assassinations, etc --
            indicate that security is deteriorating. Some thought that this
           is just down to the  "Ramadan  offensive",  but  the  statistics
           suggest that this is an ongoing trend from about March this year
           and that there is no reason to believe it will subside now  that
           Ramadan is over."


124. A further indication of  the  difficulty  of  capturing  reliable  data
    concerning the level of attacks and, the casualties arising from  them,
    is provided by claims made by  Al  Shabaab  about  the  extent  of  its
    operations within Mogadishu. On 4 December 2013 it published a list  of
    18 attacks carried out in the city on 4 September for which it  claimed
    responsibility. Dr Hoehne was invited to comment, in this context, upon
    an observation in  Danish 3 at paragraph 28:


           "In a press communiqu dated 18 April 2013, the so called  Press
           Office  of  Harakat   Al-   Shabaab   Al-   Mujahideen   claimed
           responsibility for  the  killing  of  "127  Somali  intelligence
           agents, officials and spies in Mogadishu" ..."


    This seemed unlikely to be correct because, the report continued:


           "However, the high casualty figure  appears  to  be  propaganda,
           since, according to UN  statistics,  only  22  individuals  were
           assassinated by Al-Shabaab between January and March 2013"

    Asked whether propaganda of this sort is a tactic used by  Al  Shabaab,
    Dr Hoehne readily agreed but pointed out that,  according  to  the  NSP
    chart, rather more than 22 individuals  were  subjected  to  successful
    assassination attempts between January and March 2013.

125. It is clear that the violent attacks launched on  city  targets  by  Al
    Shabaab have continued beyond the period covered by the  NSP  data.  Dr
    Hoehne reproduces in his report a news item from a Somali website:

           11 October 2013 Close to  10  blasts  target  Somali  forces  in
           Mogadishu
           Explosions  have  been  targeted   at   government   forces   in
           Mogadishu's Hamar Jajab, Hamarweyne and Waberi districts.  Other
           explosions occurred in Dabka junction, Taalada Sayidka  at  Maka
           al Mukarama Road, Hamarweyne police station, police  academy.  A
           witness told Shabeelle (the privately owned  website  publishing
           the news report) two hand grenades were hurled at an  army  base
           in Waberi but causalities  remain  unknown.  Another  blast  was
           heard at military  base  at  Maka  al  Mukarama  Road  near  the
           headquarters  of  the  ministry   of   Interior   and   National
           Security..."


    This is a further clear indication of  the  targeting  strategy  of  Al
    Shabaab.  Dr  Hoehne  was  invited  to  comment  upon   the   following
    observations found in Danish 3:

           "The use of IEDs as part of Al Shabaab's tactics aim  at  fixing
           AMISOM forces on all their fronts as they expand  the  area  and
           scope of their military operations. This has both a physical and
           psychological  effect.  Al-Shabaab   attacks   AMISOM   at   its
           vulnerable points while projecting the image that Al Shabaab has
           a more pervasive presence in Somalia than it does"

    His response was:

           "That's an interpretation of what Al Shabaab thinks. I  disagree
           with that presumption."

    We confess to being puzzled by that response. Dr Hoehne did not explain
    (and to be fair he was not pressed on the point) why he felt  that  Al-
    Shabaab would not wish to overstate  its  pervasive  presence.  Indeed,
    that would seem to chime with its ambition to generate a feeling within
    the civilian population that the  security  forces  could  not  deliver
    security and safety to the citizens Mogadishu.


Civilian casualties

126. The difficulty in  identifying  satisfactory  evidence  concerning  the
    true scale of civilian casualties arising from what has  been  referred
    to as "weapons-related injuries" is echoed in the evidence given by  Dr
    Hoehne. In saying that, we accept that he is doing the best he  can  on
    the data that is actually available but, ultimately, it is  clear  that
    there has to be a good degree of estimation undertaken in  arriving  at
    any indication of numbers. At paragraph 31 of his report he said:

           "Scores of civilians have been killed between 2012  and  January
           2013 by gunmen, through indiscriminate use  of  force  by  armed
           groups, or in bomb attacks. The dramatic situation of  civilians
           in Mogadishu has been reported by Midnimo.com, a Somali website,
           which reported on 23 September 2012 that  "Mogadishu's  security
           situation has deteriorated and more than 30 people  were  killed
           in the capital in the last three days only."

    This source of information must be seen for what it is. First  of  all,
    it is common ground and agreed between the witnesses that the  position
    changed significantly after January 2013, and particularly a few months
    later when Al Shabaab completed their withdrawal from Mogadishu so that
    what was happening in Mogadishu during this period is unlikely to be  a
    helpful indicator of the present position.  This much is recognised  at
    paragraph 33 of the report, where Dr Hoehne reproduces an extract  from
    the report of the Independent  Expert  on  the  situation  in  Somalia,
    Shamsul Bari, dated 16 August 2013, noting that then the major  concern
    was civilians getting caught up  in  the  cross  fire,  something  that
    ceased to be a regular risk following the departure of Al Shabaab  from
    the last districts of Mogadishu where it was clinging on to territorial
    control.


127. This part of Dr Hoehne's evidence is relevant for another  reason,  the
    need to be clear about who is a  civilian  for  the  purposes  of  such
    reports or statistics relating to casualties  that  are  available.  In
    cross examination, he accepted that the 30 people  killed  referred  to
    above included military personnel, police and a Member  of  Parliament.
    Given that he reproduced this information immediately under  a  heading
    in his report "Civilian Costs", the need to be vigilant in interpreting
    data about civilian casualties is plain.

128. At paragraphs 33 and 34 of his  report,  which  we  reproduce  in  full
    below, Dr Hoehne sets out a stark view of continuing risk for civilians
    in Mogadishu of becoming  a  casualty  of  the  violence  still  to  be
    encountered in Mogadishu:

           "The Report of the Independent Expert on the situation of  human
           rights in Somalia, Shamsul Bari, dated 16 August 2013, indicated
           the continuing massive human rights problems in much of Somalia.
           In paragraph 40 of his report he stressed that

                 "[...] Before the withdrawal of Al Shabaab  from  Mogadishu
                 in August 2011, the major concern was civilians  caught  in
                 crossfire; the new environment  [in  the  reporting  period
                 until August 2013] has  resulted  in  displacement  due  to
                 military operations, increased incidence of sexual violence
                 against women as well of  sexual  exploitation  and  abuse,
                 conflict   related-detention,   targeted    assassinations,
                 unlawful killings  and  the  use  of  improvised  explosive
                 devices.

           He added in paragraph 42 that "[...] available reports  indicate
           that civilian casualties have continued, resulting  mostly  from
           aerial attacks, as well as naval and ground engagements by  pro-
           Government  forces,   including   international   forces".   The
           independent expert also found in paragraph 44 that  "Al  Shabaab
           increased  the  use   of   victim-activated   (pressure   plate)
           improvised  explosive  devices.  Moreover,   it   continued   to
           perpetrate  suicide  attacks,   beheadings   and   summary   and
           extrajudicial killings [...]."


           In his most recent report on Somalia dated 3 September 2013, the
           UN Secretary General mentioned in paragraph  39  that  "Civilian
           casualties and extrajudicial killings were  frequently  reported
           in conflict  areas,  with  civilians  caught  in  the  crossfire
           between the parties". The head  of  a  Mogadishu-based  research
           institution, whom I asked for his  assessment  of  the  security
           situation in Mogadishu, with particular focus on  the  situation
           of a returnee to a city from abroad (without  privileged  access
           to security,  like  government  officials  or  well  established
           businessmen) wrote me in a mail dated 2 November 2013:


                 [...] I can tell you that  the  notion  that  security  has
                 improved for ordinary Somalis that European  countries  can
                 now deport to Somalia is deeply worrying. Even if they  are
                 Hawiye, the nature of the threats they face  are  not  clan
                 warfare and can't be protected by other clans; people  face
                 serious threats from al-Shabaab. And  individuals  returned
                 from the Diaspora are  particularly  in  jeopardy  as  they
                 become target  both  for  al-Shabaab  and  Somali  security
                 forces who suspect that they might be rejected from  Europe
                 due to their extremist views. In short, this is no  country
                 for returned Diaspora. The threats are grave and the  price
                 people pay could be ultimate. Even if people have  and  can
                 afford bodyguards, like me, my colleagues and I face  great
                 dangers because of the work we are doing.
                 Mail dated 2 November 2013."

129. There are, though, a number of real difficulties with this part  of  Dr
    Hoehne's evidence. First, although the risk to civilians  in  Mogadishu
    of being caught up in cross fire appears to be accepted to be largely a
    concern of the past, the risks that are said  to  have  replaced  that,
    such as aerial attacks, naval bombardments and  ground  engagements  by
    government forces are not issues for those living within Mogadishu even
    if they are real concerns for civilians  living  outside  the  capital.
    Second, the evidence  indicates  that  ongoing  risk  of  extrajudicial
    killings and beheadings by Al  Shabaab  does  not  any  longer  subsist
    within Mogadishu, where there  is  no  attempt  to  retain  territorial
    control and so that must relate to the position outside Mogadishu also.
    Mogadishu is no longer a "conflict area"  where  civilians  risk  being
    caught up in cross fire. Third, this assessment of risk is  by  someone
    working for an organisation of a  type  that  plainly  falls  within  a
    category  viewed  as  a  legitimate  target  by  Al-Shabaab,  as  being
    associated with the international community working within Somalia, and
    so perceived risks to such an organisation are not the  same  as  those
    facing someone properly described as an ordinary civilian.

130. There is a further difficulty with this aspect of Dr Hoehne's  evidence
    of the views being expressed by informed observers. While  he  has  set
    out negative comment drawn from the report of the  Independent  Expert,
    he has left out of account what is said in that report  that  might  be
    thought to be a balancing view, or perhaps even to point the other way.
    In the concluding sections of the report, which might be thought to  be
    of significance because here the author brings together  all  that  has
    been set out and expresses some conclusions on the  material  assembled
    in the report as a whole, we find this:

           "Some reflections on the situation in Somalia
           After more than 20 tortuous years of  armed  hostilities,  which
           still continue in some areas,  Somalia  has  reached  a  turning
           point. While there is still a  long  way  to  go  to  return  to
           normalcy, there are visible signs  of  change  all  around.  The
           palpable improvements in the security situation in Mogadishu and
           in an increasing number of areas in the country is reflected  in
           the return of an impressive number of people from the  diaspora,
           including businessmen lured by the promises that have been made.
           Both international  and  United  Nations  flights  to  and  from
           Mogadishu are full.  Business  activities  and  construction  of
           buildings are on the rise. Though serious concerns remain  about
           the security  situation  as  a  result,  for  example,  of  clan
           infighting in Kismayo and Jubaland, there  are  clear  signs  of
           hope in the air."

    And further, as recommendations being made:

           "For the international community


           Since there is  a  more  committed  and  popular  Government  in
           Mogadishu  now,  it  would  be  prudent  for  the  international
           community to provide it with the support it genuinely  needs  to
           re-establish Somalia as a normal, cohesive and stable State. The
           opportunity to break the back of the insurgents  is  clearly  in
           sight. This can best be achieved  if  popular  backing  for  the
           Government and its efforts  is  enhanced  through,  among  other
           things, specific support to the Government's human  rights  road
           map. States and other donors may wish to select  specific  areas
           likely to be articulated in the road map  for  priority  support
           and implementation. Somalia should not be allowed to  slip  back
           to lawlessness and chaos."

Security / protection needs for returnees

131. At the section of his report commencing  at  paragraph  35,  Dr  Hoehne
    sets out an account of the experiences of a returnee to  Mogadishu,  to
    whom we shall refer as  "Mr  A".  This  is  based  upon  an  hour  long
    interview by telephone. He does so because this is offered as  evidence
    of what will be required of a returnee in order to secure his  personal
    safety, and the fact that Dr  Hoehne  makes  other  references  to  the
    experiences of Mr A elsewhere in his evidence suggests that  he  places
    considerable reliance upon this.

132. Mr A is a Somali citizen who returned to Somalia for a two  month  long
    period between June and July 2013 after an absence of almost 30  years.
    Mr A said:

           "In Mogadishu, you have to have a guard. They consider you as  a
           foreigner [coming from abroad and by clan not belonging  to  the
           local majority group called Hawiye]. The situation is  a  little
           better than three years  ago  [when  Al  Shabaab  was  fully  in
           control]. But still, Al Shabaab is  around.  They  plant  bombs,
           some people get killed. I know myself two Somali women from  the
           diaspora in the UK who visited Mogadishu for summer holidays and
           got killed in bomb blasts."

    In his oral evidence Dr Hoehne said that he had no evidence to  support
    or confirm this account of two unidentified women travelling to Somalia
    from the United Kingdom being killed.

133. Mr A explained that, having been encouraged by some relatives  to  make
    the visit and been  warned  by  others  not  to,  he  pre-arranged  for
    security in advance, speaking of a cost of $US15,000 for "overnight and
    guard" for the two month visit. He said that AMISOM  provides  security
    only  "at the highest level" and that at night militias as well  as  Al
    Shabaab would "operate in town". He said also that "non- Hawiye"  would
    have difficulties in arranging protection.

134. However, more information emerged as Dr Hoehne was pressed for  further
    details from which it is clear that Mr A is not representative of those
    returning to Mogadishu today. The purpose of Mr A's visit was to follow
    up a legal dispute concerning land and property in Afgoye.  During  his
    stay he went frequently to Mogadishu to conduct court proceedings about
    this property dispute. Dr Hoehne said that he assumed that Mr A  was  a
    man of some wealth. It followed that he was  in  dispute  with  someone
    else about land or property of sufficient value to justify the  journey
    to and stay in Somalia to resolve the dispute. In cross examination  Dr
    Hoehne said of the $US15,000 spent on security  and  accommodation  for
    the trip:

           "I do not think everyone would have to pay that. It was  a  land
           dispute."


135. This point is reinforced by what Dr Hoehne wrote  in  response  to  the
    respondent's written questions on his report:

           "... There are reports of Shabaab operatives acting as "guns for
           hire" by individuals bearing a grudge against  people.....  Land
           disputes are also on the rise.... Following the departure of Al-
           Shabaab from the city many of the Sharia court systems  are  not
           operating effectively. So people are taking the law  into  their
           own hands."

136. This evidence does not provide us with much  assistance  in  making  an
    assessment of the security needs  of  an  "unexceptional"  returnee  to
    Mogadishu. Mr A does not make clear the extent to which  he  is  simply
    repeating what he has been told by others and  what,  if  anything,  is
    based upon his own experiences or observations during  this  two  month
    long visit to Somalia.

137. When we refer to an "ordinary civilian" or an "unexceptional  returnee"
    we mean someone not associated with the security forces; any aspect  of
    government or official  administration  or  any  NGO  or  international
    organisation.

138. In fact, Dr Hoehne provided very little  evidence  directly  concerning
    the circumstances facing an "unexceptional" or "ordinary" returnee from
    the diaspora. Yet his assessment of the position of the appellant  MOJ,
    on whose behalf the report was commissioned, is based firmly  upon  the
    circumstances of Mr A, with whom he has very little indeed in common:

           "... it is my opinion that upon return  to  Mogadishu  MOJ,  who
           lacks orientation in Mogadishu due to his absence  from  Somalia
           for over ten years and who belongs to a  clan  (Gadabursi)  that
           has no strong presence in Mogadishu and who personally lacks  an
           active and powerful and rich support network  (as  one  diaspora
           Somali who recently travelled to Mogadishu stated he needed  (Mr
           A) about 15,000  USD  for  2  months  protection....  will  most
           probably be seriously disoriented and vulnerable in the  complex
           environment of  conflict  and  violence  that  in  this  form  -
           involving Al Shabaab attacks - did not exist in the early  2000s
           when he and his family left Somalia. Without  basic  orientation
           and effective protection in Mogadishu, MOJ would be  at  a  very
           high risk of getting caught in cross  fire  or  being  otherwise
           hurt through bomb attacks or explosives along the way."

139. In his oral evidence Dr Hoehne added that what arose was  the  question
    of how someone who had not  lived  in  Somalia  for  nine  years  would
    protect themselves. Such a person, he  said,  would  need  very  strong
    support from relatives or guards or both. This, he said,  "would  cover
    elite diaspora members". An  ordinary  person  without  "financial  and
    personal capacity" would be at high risk of getting caught up with  the
    wrong group of people.

140. What, though, is not altogether easy  to  identify  is  precisely  what
    such a person would need protection against and  how  bodyguards  would
    provide such protection. One can see how Mr A,  seeking  to  dispossess
    another person of land or property, might need guards  to  protect  him
    from an attack intended to see off his legal  challenge.  The  evidence
    does not suggest attacks are specifically targeted at civilians  or  at
    more specific sub-groups  of  civilians  who  have  returned  from  the
    diaspora. A person unfortunate enough to be in the  immediate  vicinity
    of a suicide bomb attack, for example,  would  presumably  be  just  as
    vulnerable whether or not he was  accompanied  by  an  expensive  armed
    guard. What can be drawn from Dr Hoehne's evidence  though  is  that  a
    returnee may well be disadvantaged in  not  being  "street  wise".   He
    might not know when it was best to take an alternative route  or  which
    areas of the city were best to be avoided for the time being.

141. In his written response to questions posed by  the  respondent  arising
    from his report, Dr Hoehne reinforced this point:

           "..  returning  diaspora  tend  to   be   transported   by   the
           organisations they are working for or  with  the  assistance  of
           wealthy relatives. It is commonly  said  that  those  that  have
           remained in the city are able to spot  "returnees"  by  the  way
           they walk or "carry themselves" meaning even women in full burqa
           can often be identified as "outsiders".

142. In his oral evidence Dr  Hoehne  said  that  there  was  "probably"  an
    enhanced risk from Al Shabaab for someone seen as having  arrived  from
    the West. He referred to a warning issued by an Al Shabaab commander on
    29 December  2013  that  they  would  consider  diaspora  returnees  as
    "polluting religion". He said that the view of Al Shabaab was that  "if
    you are not for us you are against us and will be treated as an enemy",
    including those who pollute religion. This is  because  such  returnees
    were suspected of bringing back western views, expressing  support  for
    the government and having "pro-western views", having been  exposed  to
    "an infidel environment".

143. He developed this point further in his oral evidence:

           "You are considered to be westernised. It depends very  much  on
           your  individual  behaviour.  People  who  know  what  has  been
           expected of them on return do  not  run  around  inappropriately
           dressed. It is self-protection.  You  can  do  things  to  avoid
           problems. But, diaspora returnees are identified by the way they
           walk etc. The way they dress. Local people can identify diaspera
           members. Some things are out of your hands. You need to be up to
           date with language.  There  has  been  considerable  dialectical
           change. Somalia and dialects of Somalia.  All  know  a  form  of
           Somali in southern version vocabulary -- too many English words.
           You would not find the right words immediately."

144. This may be thought to be significant and  important  evidence  because
    it represents an acceptance that the level of risk may  be  reduced  by
    appropriate behaviour. "You can do things to avoid  problems".  But  Dr
    Hoehne emphasised that a returnee would be recognisable as such because
    of language, dress and behaviour.

145. On the other hand, Dr  Hoehne  was  referred  to  a  news  report  from
    allafrica.com dated 9 January 2014. This is a lengthy extract which  we
    reproduce in full because it gives  full  details  of  the  Al  Shabaab
    warnings and because it discloses a contrary view expressed by some who
    have chosen to return:
           "Mogadishu - Somalis who have returned to  their  homeland  from
           abroad have shrugged off al-Shabaab's  recent  threats  that  it
           would target them because they "have  been  taught  garbage  and
           sins, and have lost [their] religion  and  are  being  used  [to
           spread evil]."
           Al-Shabaab commander Ali Mohamed Hussein, known  as  Ali  Jesto,
           made the announcement December 29th, saying the returnees  "will
           be killed and fought against in the same manner" that al-Shabaab
           fights against the Somali government.
           "They are working for the infidels, and since they  are  working
           for the infidels, they are the same as  the  infidels  they  are
           working for as far as we are concerned," he said.
           Hussein  also  warned  Somalis  to  stay  away  from  government
           buildings, public venues frequented by government officials, and
           from foreign aid agencies and their workers as they all would be
           targeted in the group's attacks. Days later, al-Shabaab  claimed
           responsibility for a New Year's Day twin bombing at the  Jazeera
           Hotel in Mogadishu that killed at least 10  people  and  injured
           many more.
           Returnees unshaken by al-Shabaab threats:
           Khadija Ali, a 38-year-old mother who returned from  England  in
           2013 to visit her sick mother in Mogadishu, told Sabahi she does
           not think much of the threats, and says  the  terrorism  brought
           about by al-Shabaab cannot chase returnees away.
           "I am advising every diaspora returnee to persevere through  any
           threat that comes from the terrorist groups  so  that  they  are
           defeated," she said. "We should not be  demoralised.  What  they
           want is for us to become demoralised and flee our  country,  and
           we will never accept that."
           "Al-Shabaab will end up fleeing the country  if  we  persevere,"
           Ali said.
           Ahmed Salad Kulmiye, a 60-year-old who returned  to  Somalia  in
           2013  from  England  to  collaborate  with   local   youth-based
           organisations in capacity building projects,  said  al-Shabaab's
           threats against the diaspora will not change their commitment to
           work in their country.
           "They want to isolate the government from the people, but  I  do
           not think that is possible," Kulmiye  said,  commenting  on  the
           warning the militants issued against citizens who seek  services
           at government buildings.
           Kulmiye challenged al-Shabaab's claims  that  returning  Somalis
           are engaging in sinful  acts  and  said  those  statements  were
           excuses for the group to justify their unlawful actions.
           "There are no [night] clubs to dance or do other bad things  [in
           Somalia], and I also have not seen any places to drink alcohol,"
           he said, adding that  Somalis  will  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the
           militants' threats.
           Rowda Abdi, a 55-year-old returnee from England  who  opened  an
           electrical appliances store in Mogadishu's Hamar Weyne district,
           told Sabahi the country's progress should not be hampered by the
           threats from al-Shabaab or the explosions  that  take  place  in
           Mogadishu."
    In response to this, Dr Hoehne said that although  returnees  from  the
    west would raise considerable levels of suspicion, that  did  not  mean
    that all will be treated as enemies of Al  Shabaab.  But  he  qualified
    that response by saying that he  agreed  with  what  was  said  by  the
    Tribunal in AMM to the effect that the only returnees who would not  be
    treated as an enemy are those who sought to join Al Shabaab.


146. Responding to questions from Mr Toal, Dr  Hoehne  was  first  asked  to
    look at a number of pieces of documentary evidence that we must discuss
    briefly in order to put this exchange into its context. First, an  IRIN
    news report from OCHA dated 18 May 2012:

           "SOMALIA: Mogadishu on the up


           MOGADISHU, 18  May  2012  (IRIN)  -  It  is  Friday  morning  in
           Mogadishu and Lido beach presents a scene reminiscent of seaside
           towns around the world. At the top of the beach, women sit  with
           their wares, selling water and ice-lollies from cool-boxes.  The
           middle-beach is dominated by young men  playing  football  using
           driftwood as goalposts. At the water's edge, boys and girls, the
           latter heedless of their long flowing garments, hurl  themselves
           into the waves or bob on the surface like apples.

           "We're on holiday", says Ibrahim, a Londoner in his twenties who
           was born in northern Somalia. Ibrahim is travelling in  a  group
           of 20, all from the UK. "We came here for the beaches", he said.
           On the road behind him, blue  lettering  advertises  the  Indian
           Ocean Star, a new beach-front restaurant and bar.

           Bashir Osman has facilitated journalist visits for years and now
           plans to capitalize on  the  swelling  ranks  of  visitors  like
           Ibrahim  who  are  choosing,  for  both  business  and  personal
           reasons, to come to bullet-ridden Mogadishu. Osman has purchased
           500-metres of beachfront land a  few  kilometres  south  of  the
           international  airport  compound,  where  he  hopes  to  open  a
           restaurant and eventually a hotel. His infectious  fondness  for
           Mogadishu belies a strong philanthropic streak.

           People are returning and reconstruction is under way.  According
           to the UN Refugee  Agency  (UNHCR),  3,800  people  returned  to
           Mogadishu in March alone. From afar the city glints  with  shiny
           new tin roofs dotted among dust-covered ruins and camps. Private
           operators are offering electricity in the old town for  US$30  a
           month. Fishermen are enjoying a healthy  demand  for  shark-fins
           from Dubai and the Middle East, with a shark fetching as much as
           $500. Building materials lie in piles on street  corners,  where
           camel's milk and cappuccino vendors ply their wares.

           International NGO and diplomatic missions are also coming back -
           according to a UN source, Britain  has  already  identified  the
           plot for its permanent diplomatic base on the airport compound -
           and property prices have spiked.  According  to  Osman,  a  100-
           square metre plot near K4 in the city centre sold  recently  for
           $2million.

           "The key is security", said Abdullahi Godah Barre, minister  for
           planning  and   international   cooperation,   of   the   city's
           renovation.  While  African  Union  troops  have  largely  taken
           Mogadishu and continue to push beyond the city limits to  secure
           outlying areas where Al-Shabab operatives remain  obdurately  in
           place, the Somali capital is still  in  counter-terrorism  mode,
           and kidnap and ransom, improvised explosive devices, and suicide
           bombers remain an everyday threat."

    Having set the scene with that somewhat  optimistic  outlook,  Mr  Toal
    drew attention to reports of attacks carried out on facilities  thought
    to be frequented by diaspora returnees. The first  is  a  report  of  a
    suicide bomb attack on a restaurant near Mogadishu's Lido beach  resort
    in February 2013 in which 2 people were killed:
           "Mogadishu - Twin explosions have rocked a restaurant  near  the
           Lido resort  beach  in  Mogadishu,  Friday  killing  two  people
           including the suicide bomber and wounding seven others.
           According to witnesses, the first attack was by a suicide bomber
           wearing a vest packed with explosives that blew  up  inside  the
           restaurant but only killing the perpetrator.
           The second explosion was a car packed full of  explosives  which
           killed one person and wounded seven  others  and  destroyed  the
           perimeter walls.
           Ahmed Hassan, who was at the restaurant, says that the situation
           turned quickly to chaos after huge explosion with smoke and dust
           filling the whole restaurant.
           The attack is the second in the area in less than three weeks.
           The restaurants along the Lido  beach  are  usually  crowded  on
           Muslim  weekends  with  families  enjoying  the  beach,  playing
           football or swimming ."
    Three things might be noted about this report. First, it is an  example
    of a "complex" attack involving a second, follow up, explosion. Second,
    this article does not suggest that this is  a  restaurant  particularly
    frequented by  diaspora  returnees.  Third,  despite  the  considerable
    resources said to be invested in the attack by Al Shabaab and the "huge
    explosion", fortunately the number of fatalities was  limited  to  two,
    one of whom was the original suicide bomber as is  confirmed  by  other
    reports of the incident, with seven wounded.


    Next, Mr Toal drew attention to a report from Aljazeera of a  car  bomb
    attack on another Lido restaurant in February 2013, this  one  targeted
    at a restaurant said to be frequented by "officials", leaving two  dead
    and two injured. In contrast, he then referred  Dr  Hoehne  to  a  very
    positive and optimistic report from The New York Times from April  2012
    headed "A Taste of Hope in Somalia's battered Capital" which  spoke  of
    people travelling to Mogadishu for holidays, the holding of events such
    as a televised talent show called "Somali Idol":


           "But people here are sensing the moment  and  seizing  it.  More
           than 300,000 residents have come back to the city  in  the  last
           six months..... The economic boom, fuelled  by  an  infusion  of
           tens of millions of dollars, much of it  from  Somalis  flocking
           home from overseas, is  spawning  thousands  of  jobs  that  are
           beginning to absorb young militiamen eager to  get  out  of  the
           killing business..."


    The date of that report must be noted and considered in  the  light  of
    the evidence we have set out above. Next, once again  illustrating  the
    other side of the coin, Mr Toal referred to a report of a suicide  bomb
    attack upon the National Theatre of Mogadishu, said to have resulted in
    the  killing  of  ten  people  including  several  officials   of   the
    Transitional Federal Government. It is impossible to ascertain  whether
    the reason for targeting the theatre was  because  it  was  known  that
    officials  of  the  TFG  were  to  be  present  or  whether  that   was
    coincidental. All we know is that that was the  only  category  of  the
    casualties the report chose to identify.

147.  Next,  Mr  Toal  referred  Dr  Hoehne  to  a  report  concerning   the
    establishment in Mogadishu of a  chain  of  restaurants  known  as  the
    Village Restaurants by  a  Somali  citizen  who  returned  in  2008  to
    establish that business. These restaurants have  been  the  subject  of
    bomb attacks as is described by the Voice of America news report  of  3
    November 2012 identified by Mr Toal:

           "Two suicide bombers in Somalia appear to have targeted a second
           restaurant owned by a British-Somali businessman.

           Witnesses say  that  four  people,  including  the  two  alleged
           bombers were killed on Saturday  in  twin  explosions  near  the
           Village Restaurant in Mogadishu. A guard who stopped the bombers
           from entering the building was killed in the attack, along  with
           a civilian.  A total of 10 people were wounded.

           The restaurant is popular with government officials, journalists
           and politicians.

           In September, two  suicide  bombers  attacked  another  co-owned
           Village Restaurant in the capital, killing 15 people.  At  least
           three journalists were among those killed, including the  Somali
           National Television director.

           The African Union peacekeeping force in Somalia (AMISOM) said it
           suspected al-Shabab militants were behind the September attack.

           The al-Qaida-linked group controlled parts of the capital  until
           last year when it was driven out by Somali  and  AMISOM  forces.
           However, the militant group has continued to launch  attacks  in
           the region."

   Once again, it might be noted that this  report  discloses  one  civilian
   fatality  and  that  the  restaurant  is  one  "popular  with  government
   officials, journalists and politicians" each of which groups are seen  by
   Al Shabaab to be a legitimate target.


148. The question posed by Mr Toal  to  Dr  Hoehne  on  the  basis  of  this
    material was "What do those attacks tell us about diaspora  involvement
    in economic development?" to which the response was:

           "Al Shabaab may well get economic returnees who try  to  make  a
           difference. Al Shabaab said they potentially  see  returnees  as
           opponents. All those documents show that Al Shabaab has a  clear
           strategy of targeting  dispora  returnees  who  try  to  make  a
           difference.  These  attacks  all  carry  high  risk  of  killing
           targeted at returnees who  identify  themselves  as  visible  by
           opening restaurants -- encouraging women to swim with men  which
           makes much anger for Al Shabaab."

    It is, however, really quite difficult to see how that  answer  can  be
    drawn from the material addressed. It seems clear  that  the  targeting
    disclosed by the attacks identified is not aimed at diaspora returnees,
    nor those involved in economic regeneration, but (i) civilians engaging
    in activities that might be disapproved of by Al Shabab, such as  mixed
    gender swimming at the beach; and (ii) places frequented by  government
    officials, politicians and journalists. Notably absent from those  news
    reports is any suggestion that diaspora returnees  were,  as  a  group,
    being targeted.

149. It should be recorded, though, that Dr Hoehne has  been  consistent  in
    his view that diaspora returnees are in fact  targeted.  He  reproduces
    written comments from a colleague who has visited Mogadishu, who  said,
    about major changes regarding security for civilians over the  past  12
    months:

           "Popular hang outs for the Somali diaspora are one of  the  main
           targets in Mogadishu at the moment. There have been a number  of
           attacks on restaurants. I was in Mogadishu when the last  attack
           occurred on the Maka Al-Mukarama Hotel.... The Village chain  of
           restaurants have been attacked three times now!"

    However, at page 239 of the "Other background materials" section of the
    appellants' documentary evidence bundle  is  a  report  from  Aljazeera
    about this attack on the Maka Al-Mukarama Hotel which includes this:


           "Al-Shabab claimed responsibility for the blast.


           "The target of the  attack  was  apostate  security  forces  and
           officials. The attack was successful," the group's spokesman for
           military  operations,  Sheikh  Abulaziz  Abu  Muscab,  told   Al
           Jazeera.


           ...


           Al-Shabab have said  that  they  will  keep  up  their  campaign
           against the new government..."


150. In cross examination it was  put  to  Dr  Hoehne  that  the  connection
    between the various attacks is that these  were  places  frequented  by
    Somali officials and government officials, and that they were  targeted
    because of that and not because these were businesses run  by  diaspora
    returnees. He replied, simply, by saying:

           "It's possible."

Risk from Undisciplined soldiers

151. At paragraph 26 of his  report,  Dr  Hoehne  said  that  there  was  an
    additional risk for ordinary civilians from undisciplined soldiers.  In
    support of that he quoted from a news report of looting by soldiers  of
    shops in a district of Mogadishu. The  report  described  how  soldiers
    took cash and emptied the entire contents of eight shops, which had  no
    security guards to protect them. The report said that this was not  the
    first time such had happened, as the same had happened just a few  days
    earlier. Developing the point in a written response to questions raised
    in respect of  his  report,  Dr  Hoehne  wrote  about  a  YouTube  clip
    depicting statements by the head of the Somali military court dated  17
    October 2013:

           "... it features statements by the head of the  Somali  military
           court and the minister of defence  that  clearly  indicate  that
           looting and abuses of civilians by Somali soldiers is a  serious
           problem."

    However, in cross-examination Dr Hoehne accepted that  neither  had  in
    fact used the term "serious problem". Dr Hoehne justified his choice of
    vocabulary on the basis that:

           "They saw the need to set up the court. How I  interpreted  this
           was that there must have been sufficient cases so  they  had  to
           act."


    We do not accept this evidence of Dr Hoehne.  His own interpretation of
    this does not appear, on its face, to be justified.  His  justification
    for his assertion that it was statements by the head of the  court  and
    the minister that clearly indicated  that  there  was  serious  concern
    appears, on the basis of what he  has  said  subsequently,  not  to  be
    correct. He now says that it was the fact of  the  setting  up  of  the
    court  that  indicated  that  there  must  have  been  serious  concern
    entertained about looting by soldiers, rather than any  statement  that
    was made on the You Tube clip referred to. That is  not  what  he  said
    originally.

Significance of Clan Membership

152. Dr Hoehne did not address  in  his  report  the  significance  of  clan
    membership, or indeed, the position of IDPs in Mogadishu today, in  the
    detail into which Dr Mullen descended. That is  not  a  criticism,  but
    said by way of explanation of why there is not a detailed  analysis  of
    that topic at this point of the determination. At paragraph 52  of  his
    report he said:

           "Moreover, clan protection does not function  automatically.  In
           the face of ideological confrontations the "clan front" tends to
           get porous and sometimes crumbles. This means that if confronted
           with Al Shabab, for instance, clan support often does not really
           help or even materialise, since the ideology  of  the  group  in
           many ways opposes clan belonging and  divisions.  It  emphasises
           the unity of all (true) Muslims. Clans support and protection is
           also sometimes dependent on the "value" a clan members  has  for
           the community. If a person is, for instance, very poor,  a  drug
           addict, a notorious criminal or a prostitute, relatives will not
           or only unwillingly offer support and protection."

    That evidence is consistent with the view offered by Dr Mullen  of  the
    declining significance of clan membership in Mogadishu and the analysis
    that clan membership is now  more  relevant  to  the  issue  of  social
    support rather than protection. In his written  response  to  questions
    raised on his report Dr Hoehne added:

           "Clan identity  in  Mogadishu  and  the  surroundings  has  been
           cemented in the past 20 -- 30 years. It is  the  most  important
           social construct in the city and is therefore one  of  the  most
           important factors to consider when arranging security."

    And in his oral evidence Dr Hoehne said:

           There are no "clan militias" as such. When a militia is required
           a person will assemble a  group  drawn  from  his  own  clan  to
           address a particular purpose.

    Thus, when a person looks to his or her clan when security is required,
    that person is more likely to be looking to  relatives,  who  would  of
    course be fellow clan members, rather than to a clan  militia  as  that
    term has previously been understood. Dr Hoehne explained,  in  response
    to an enquiry  as  to  whether  one  would  have  to  pay  for  "family
    protection":


           "It depends upon your profile. You may be able to have just good
           friends or relations to protect you. If you are high profile  or
           involved in a high value legal  case  you  may  want  additional
           security."


    That seems to us to be important evidence and a conclusion  that  flows
    clearly from the evidence we  have  discussed  above.  A  person  whose
    profile is such that he or she may be personally targeted may well need
    visible security to deter such targeted attacks or  to  defend  against
    them. But in respect of a person who is unlikely to attract  personally
    targeted attacks, any risk  arising  from  indiscriminate  violence  is
    unlikely to be reduced or avoided by retaining hired  bodyguards,  save
    perhaps to the extent that such person may be  able  to  provide  local
    knowledge of areas to be avoided. Such  information  and  advice  would
    also be available from family and friends familiar with the area.

153. In his written response  to  questions  arising  from  his  report,  Dr
    Hoehne said:

           "Most clans and  sub-clans  have  their  own  neighbourhoods  in
           Mogadishu. Bigger clans have their own districts  with  District
           Commissioners  representing  that  clan.  Mogadishu  is  heavily
           dominated by the Hawiye clan. Non-Hawiye clans  -  such  as  the
           Gadabursi - will often be  confined  to  smaller  neighbourhoods
           where they can rely on the support of their fellow clansmen."

IDPs and IDP camps

154. Dr Hoehne was asked in oral evidence how many people in  Mogadishu  are
    living in IDP camps. His response was 369,000.

155. Once again, we can detect  in  that  answer  a  propensity  to  present
    information in the least positive manner possible. It seems to be clear
    that 369,000 is the number of people living in Mogadishu whose place of
    residence has changed in response to past concerns  about  security  in
    their home area and  not  the  number  of  people  actually  living  in
    Mogadishu in IDP camps. There is a vitally important distinction to  be
    made in that respect which was identified by  Dr  Hoehne  himself  when
    answering questions from Mr Gill. He said that people who  moved  their
    place of residence within Mogadishu are still regarded as part  of  the
    IDP population, whether or not they need to resort to living in one  of
    the IDP camps. Asked if there might come a time when such people ceased
    to be regarded as IDPs he said:

           "I think they remain IDPs. If they stay for years  and  marry  a
           local girl and sell their other property it is possible, but  my
           thinking is that they are IDPs."

    To confirm that his  answer  had  not  been  misunderstood,  Dr  Hoehne
    confirmed that "a good proportion of IDPs" would have resettled  within
    Mogadishu and an IDP could be someone who had moved from  one  district
    of Mogadishu to another.

Who benefits from the "economic boom" in Mogadishu?

156. As we have mentioned above, although Dr Mullen's evidence was that  the
    population of Mogadishu stood at about  2    million,  Dr  Hoehne  was
    adamant that was an overestimate and that no  more  than  1    million
    people are living in Mogadishu today,  including  IDPs,  the  total  of
    which has been estimated at 369,000.

157. This difference of opinion may be thought significant. That  there  can
    be such a wide difference of opinion about something as fundamental and
    basic as the population of the city is a  powerful  indication  of  the
    fact that well-informed observers who are well qualified to  express  a
    view and who have given  careful  consideration  to  the  question  can
    arrive at conclusions which cannot both be correct. Indeed, both may be
    significantly incorrect. Yet the preferred number is confidently stated
    by both as if it were a fact being asserted. No qualification  is  made
    by either expert witness to the effect that this is a best estimate and
    that there may be a wide margin of error due to the absence of reliable
    data. This has to be  borne  in  mind  when  considering  the  evidence
    generally,  where  witnesses  speak  about  the  number  of   incidents
    involving violence, the numbers of dead and injured that are  generated
    by such attacks and  any  other  assessment  made  in  the  absence  of
    reliable statistical information.

158. With that in mind, we consider next what Dr Hoehne  has  to  say  about
    the "economic boom" or "peace dividend" and who benefits  from  it.  In
    his oral evidence, having been asked who benefits  from  such  economic
    development he said:

           "A tiny proportion. 89% are poor. The remaining 20%  will  be  a
           bit better  than  being  poor.  A  little  better  than  "barely
           surviving". Possibly 1% or 2% of the population benefit from the
           last two years economic development."

    Leaving aside the problematic arithmetic inherent in  that  answer,  it
    can be seen, at least, where the figure of 89% is taken from. Dr Hoehne
    was referred to the Somalia Human Development report for 2012  at  page
    580 of the appellant's bundle from which  he  drew  attention  to  this
    comment:


           "In south central Somalia 89 percent of people are  poor  across
           several dimensions, compared to 75 percent in  Puntland  and  72
           percent in Somaliland."

    But what needs to be added to that comment is the context from which it
    is taken. The sentence that precedes it is as follows:


           "The divide between urban and rural populations is significant -
           61 percent and 94 percent respectively."


    Thus, the figure of 89% does not relate  to  Mogadishu,  but  to  South
    Central Somalia generally, and leaves out of  account  the  urban/rural
    differentiation  emphasised  by  the  author  of   the   report.   This
    illustrates a characteristic that is apparent from Dr Hoehne's evidence
    generally  that   he   consistently   presents   the   least   positive
    interpretation of the source material he draws upon.

159.  Pressed  further  to  explain  who  does  benefit  from  the  economic
    development in Mogadishu, Dr Hoehne said:

           "A very tiny fraction of the elite. The vast majority of  people
           are struggling to survive..."

    We do not accept that to  be  a  correct  view.   The  evidence  is  of
    substantial  inward  investment  in  construction   projects   and   by
    entrepreneurs returning to Mogadishu to invest in business activity. In
    particular we heard much evidence about hotels and  restaurants  and  a
    resurgence of the hospitality industry. It does not, perhaps, need much
    in the way of direct evidence to conclude that jobs such as working  as
    building labourers, waiters or drivers are unlikely to be filled by the
    tiny minority that represents "the elite". Indeed, Dr Hoehne  suggested
    that SSM, on whose behalf he was being asked questions:

            "could probably get a job as a waiter..."

    although he said that there would probably be much competition.


160. Interestingly, Dr Hoehne himself recognised that his  approach  to  the
    evidence may not be the only one properly open. Having  been  asked  in
    oral evidence whether  or  not  there  had  been  "durable  change"  in
    Mogadishu on the basis that the "economic boom" may have  brought  with
    it a degree of durability, he said:

           "I do not think  so.  What  is  a  definition  of  durable?  The
           government was formed in second half of 2012. There  were  large
           financial  pledges   in   2013   and   substantial   development
           construction started in 2012 and early 2013. All this  could  be
           undone within weeks if Al Shabaab mounted -- if they established
           a larger force -- managed to recruit more fighters. If they  get
           more support from Al Qaeda -- more finance."

    He paused, reflected upon what he had said, and added:


           "Maybe that is a speculative answer by me."
Mary Harper

161. Mary Harper is a professional journalist, currently Africa  Editor  for
    the BBC World Service News, who is well-placed to speak  of  conditions
    in Mogadishu today.  She has been a frequent visitor  to  many  African
    countries and has made a  recent  visit  to  Mogadishu.  We  have  some
    photographs taken during her visit which provide a helpful illustration
    to illuminate the broad range of documentary material  we  have  before
    us.

162. As well as drawing  upon  her  own  extensive  personal  experience  of
    reporting of and from Somalia over the last 20 years, her last visit to
    Mogadishu being in August 2013, she  has  spoken  with  Mogadishu-based
    journalists and others who make regular visits to the city as  well  as
    other professionals who have  good  recent  knowledge  of  the  current
    country conditions. The broad range of those with whom she consults  is
    impressive:

           "I speak on an almost daily basis to contacts in  South  Central
           Somalia, including members of central and regional  governments,
           think tanks, non-governmental organisations, the security forces
           and other  armed  groups,  including  the  Islamist  group,  Al-
           Shabaab."

    She has produced three reports, one commissioned on behalf of  each  of
    the appellants. Unsurprisingly, there is a degree of overlap  in  those
    reports which we will not need to revisit.

163. The general conclusion reached by Ms Harper  in  her  written  evidence
    can be identified in the following extract from her report:

           "When the tribunal looked at the situation in Mogadishu for  the
           last Somali Country Guidance Case (November 2011), it found that
           "there remains a  real  risk  of  Article  15(c)  harm  for  the
           majority of those returning to that  city  after  a  significant
           period of time abroad" unless that  person  is  "connected  with
           powerful actors or belonging to a category of  middle  class  or
           professional persons, who can live to a reasonable  standard  in
           circumstances where the Article 15(c) risk, which exists for the
           great majority of the  population,  does  not  apply".  For  the
           reasons outlined in this report, it is  my  opinion  that  there
           continue to be significant risks  for  returnees  who  lack  the
           resources and connections to ensure that they have  an  adequate
           degree of protection."

Al Shabaab - a change of tactics

164. Echoing the evidence reviewed  above,  Ms  Harper  spoke  also  of  the
    significance of the change of tactics adopted  by  Al  Shabaab  in  its
    campaign. In her written evidence she said:

           "By withdrawing from most towns and cities, Al Shabaab no longer
           has to concentrate its resources  on  conventional  battles  and
           holding frontlines. This change of tactics has helped the  group
           cope with the loss of  some  of  its  key  sources  of  revenue,
           especially Mogadishu's Bakara market..."
           ...


           "The security situation in Mogadishu has  changed  significantly
           since Al Shabaab's abrupt withdrawal from  the  city  in  August
           2011. There  are  no  longer  running  battles  involving  heavy
           weaponry between Al Shabaab and  government  troops,  backed  by
           African Union forces and Western security advisors. But the city
           remains dangerous, with regular acts of violence carried out  by
           Al Shabaab, the Somali security services and other armed  groups
           and individuals. Civilians are often caught up in the violence.
           ....


           The  violence  has   become   more   unpredictable   because   a
           conventional war is no longer  being  fought.  Mogadishu  is  no
           longer a city of frontlines; attacks can happen almost  anywhere
           at any time.
           ....


           Al Shabaab has  changed  tactics  in  Mogadishu,  in  some  ways
           reverting to what it does best, which is asymmetrical, insurgent
           style warfare. It carries out  regular  attacks,  using  suicide
           bombers, car bombs, grenades and improvised  explosive  devices.
           The scale, sophistication and regularity of  these  attacks  has
           increased in Mogadishu in 2013.
           ...


           According to the lawyer [...] who works  for  a  Mogadishu-based
           think tank, "there are only a few areas in  Mogadishu  that  are
           considered safe". Much of the rest  of  Mogadishu  isn't  really
           secured - those are the areas that many of us won't or can't  go
           to. Many of these areas are controlled by Al  Shabaab  at  night
           and the  government  forces  can't  really  do  much  about  it.
           Security here is very fragile." (interview 17 November 2013).

Risks for civilians in Mogadishu

165. Ms Harper emphasised that the very nature  of  the  modus  operandi  by
    which Al Shabaab delivered its  violent  attacks  to  targets  selected
    carried with it, inherently, risks for ordinary civilians who  may  not
    themselves be targeted:

           "Civilians often bear the brunt of the violence, as many of  the
           attacks occur in public places, including  restaurants,  hotels,
           roads and roundabouts. Civilian casualties have also  been  high
           in attacks on government and foreign  targets,  or  on  specific
           individuals..."

    Providing a graphic explanation of this so called "asymmetrical"  style
    of warfare, Ms Harper continued, having  recalled  that  previously  Al
    Shabaab would plant roadside bombs  intended  for  vehicles  containing
    government or military personnel:

           "It is now ramming  cars  packed  with  explosives  into  public
           buildings, government offices and the premises of  international
           organisations. Armed men,  often  wearing  suicide  vests,  then
           storm the  buildings,  shooting  and  throwing  grenades  before
           blowing themselves up.  An  example  of  this  type  of  assault
           occurred on 7 September  2013,  when  Al  Shabaab  attacked  The
           Village restaurant in  central  Mogadishu.  First,  a  car  bomb
           exploded outside  the  premises,  then  a  suicide  bomber  blew
           himself up in the crowd of civilians who  had  rushed  to  help.
           About 30 people were killed."

166. The observation that "civilians often bear the  brunt"  of  Al  Shabaab
    violence, asserted as if  it  were  a  fact,   bears  some  examination
    because it is at the very heart of the appeals before us.  That  phrase
    appears to have been taken from the UNHCR 2014 report we first referred
    to above when considering Dr Mullen's evidence. It can be seen from the
    footnote in that report that the source  for  the  phrase  is  a  Human
    Rights Watch document "Memo to the Hague: Somalia is Not Safe" dated 27
    November 2013. That is the stated view of  the  author  of  that  memo,
    Leslie Lefkow. However, what has  not  been  mentioned,  either  by  Ms
    Harper or in the UNHCR report is that  the  view  that  civilians  were
    bearing the brunt of the Al Shabaab attacks in Mogadishu was put by the
    author of this memo to the High Court in the Hague,  supported  by  the
    statistical evidence assembled, but was rejected  by  the  court  which
    went on to uphold the deportation order being challenged. Thus what  is
    now relied upon has failed to survive judicial scrutiny  and  the  data
    itself offered in support is not made available to us,  either  in  the
    memo or the UNHCR report.

167. In her report, Ms Harper lists 15 major Al Shabaab attacks carried  out
    in Mogadishu since August 2011. Of these, 6 were attacks  on  either  a
    hotel, restaurant or theatre, the others  being  "official"  facilities
    including the Turkish embassy, the  presidential  palace  and  military
    compounds. She added that only the  more  spectacular  attacks  receive
    media attention so that "many others" go unreported. She said  that  Al
    Shabaab has a particularly strong presence in outlying districts of the
    city, with its fighters "emerging at night and controlling some of  the
    streets".

168. Ms Harper said that Al Shabaab has  "a  substantial  presence"  in  the
    city's main commercial district, Bakara Market, reporting that:

           "The Mogadishu-based Lawyer [...] said "It is a well known  fact
           that  Bakara  is  controlled  by  Al  Shabaab,  and  that   many
           explosions and killings happen there on a daily basis."

    However, it has to be recognised that such a view does not  sit  easily
    with the evidence given by the other two  witnesses,  neither  of  whom
    spoke of daily killings being perpetrated by Al Shabaab  within  Bakara
    Market. Ms Harper herself moved to qualify the view  expressed  by  the
    lawyer whose assessment she draws upon by saying this:

           "Although Al Shabaab does not control Bakara market in the sense
           of having fighters openly patrolling the area by day, it retains
           a powerful influence there, and in a number of other  districts,
           not only because it continues to  carry  out  acts  of  violence
           there, but because it still to  some  extent  controls  people's
           minds, and therefore the way they behave. However, it  does  not
           control the economy of Bakara market in the same way it did when
           it occupied most of Mogadishu."

    In her oral evidence, Ms Harper added this in response to a question as
    to how people react to Al Shabaab sympathisers:

           "It is difficult to know who is an Al Shabaab sympathiser.  From
           my  own  experience  in  2012  walking  around   Bakara   market
           surrounded by five or six security  guards,  people  showing  me
           around who were very familiar  with  the  area  would  sometimes
           point out people who were Al Shabaab.  I  witnessed  the  police
           roughing up a young boy who was carrying  plastic  bags.  I  was
           angry - why are you beating him? They showed me  in  the  bag  -
           stuff to make an explosive device."

    We make two observations about this evidence. First, it shows that,  at
    least on this occasion while Ms Harper was there  to  witness  it,  the
    police were alert to the need to do what can be  done  to  protect  the
    public from terrorist attacks, even identifying a child as a carrier of
    explosive materials and removing that risk. Second, Ms Harper has  only
    the word of those she was paying to  protect  her  against  Al  Shabaab
    personnel to confirm that such persons were in fact present during  her
    visit to the market. She gives  no  indication  of  what  behaviour  or
    characteristics disclosed the Al  Shabaab  association.  Nor  did  that
    perceived association, if correctly identified by her hired bodyguards,
    translate into any actual risk of harm on that  occasion.  Further,  Ms
    Harper recognises that Al Shabaab no longer controls Bakara market  and
    no longer extracts revenue from it.


Forced recruitment to Al Shabaab


169. In her report Ms Harper said this:

           "Deportees and returnees would also be vulnerable to recruitment
           by Al Shabaab, either  by  force  or  voluntarily.  It  is  very
           difficult to find employment in Mogadishu and elsewhere in South
           Central Somalia, especially for those who are  stigmatised  such
           as people with criminal records deported  from  the  West.  Such
           people might gravitate towards Al Shabaab because it  offers  an
           occupation and a monthly wage."


    On examination, it is difficult to see that what she describes  relates
    to forcible recruitment at all. Ms Harper added:

           "Members of the diaspora have often been used as suicide bombers
           by Al Shabaab, which has established special training camps  for
           this purpose."

    The source offered to support that assertion is Ms  Harper's  own  book
    "Getting Somalia Wrong", published in February 2012, which was not  put
    before us as part of the evidence.  It  is  hard  to  find  within  the
    evidence before us anything to support the view that diaspora returnees
    have "often" been used as suicide bombers, and  harder  still  to  find
    anything to support the  assertion  that  those  carrying  out  suicide
    missions on behalf of Al Shabaab have been forcibly recruited,  against
    their will.

170. In her written evidence Ms Harper referred to  an  interview  with  the
    office cleaner of the Mogadishu office of an organisation  called  Anti
    Tribalism Movement in which he:

           "explained how his brother joined  Al  Shabaab,  how  minorities
           such as the Jareer join Al Shabaab because it  enables  them  to
           seek revenge, how Al Shabaab gets people to join by saying  they
           have relatives in the group ..."

    However, none of those routes  to  membership  of  Al  Shabaab  involve
    forced recruitment. That this informant provided Ms Harper with a  list
    of ways Al Shabaab added to its numbers that  did  not  include  forced
    recruitment tends to suggest that it was not considered,  at  least  by
    this informant relied upon by Ms Harper as articulating a  view  worthy
    of recording in her evidence, to be significant.


171. Further information emerged during  Ms  Harper's  oral  evidence  about
    forced, or at least reluctant, recruitment into Al Shabaab. She said:

           "It depends how you define forced recruitment. Al  Shabaab  does
           not now go into schools and public places and forcibly  recruit.
           But members of the security forces  and  others  have  described
           ways in which Al Shabaab recruits informants or people  who  can
           carry out activities for them  in  Mogadishu.  For  example,  Al
           Shabaab recruits from the security forces. They go to a house or
           the place where they stay and say in front of  their  family  to
           the person: we will not hurt you or your family if  you  provide
           information.  Assistance  through  intimidation.  How  would  Al
           Shabaab do what it does without getting good information?"

    When pressed, she added that this was not in fact restricted to members
    of the security forces as "some other people  in  Mogadishu  are  being
    asked". Asked to explain  further,  she  said  that  "young  men"  were
    approached in a variety of ways:

           "... If a member of a minority clan they are told -  Al  Shabaab
           does not discriminate in terms of clan - everyone  is  equal  in
           the eyes of Allah - so one way to elevate social status or  even
           to get revenge for violence to  the  family  in  the  past  when
           minority clans suffered- was to join Al  Shabaab.  Also,  people
           are offered financial rewards for doing particular things for Al
           Shabaab."

    That does not sound  much  like  forcible  recruitment.  This  evidence
    suggests that security forces are the main target of forced recruitment
    attempts. We do not accept that this evidence provides support for  the
    assertion that returnees  to  Mogadishu  face  a  real  risk  of  being
    subjected to forced recruitment to Al Shabaab.

Clans and Militias

172. In her written evidence Ms Harper said:

           "According to the  Home  Office  Operational  Guidance  Note  of
           September 2013 "There are about 10,000 militiamen  in  Mogadishu
           who are not formally integrated into government  forces".  Armed
           groups and individuals conduct  targeted  and  random  killings,
           robberies and seizures of property."

    This does,  however,  need  to  be  considered  carefully.  We  do  not
    understand Ms Harper's evidence to be that up to 10,000  armed  militia
    are moving around Mogadishu  killing,  robbing  and  seizing  property,
    although it is not hard to accept that some criminal elements do act in
    such a way. She explained in her oral evidence that it was necessary to
    distinguish between bodyguards, who would  also  be  armed,  and  those
    armed individuals who were associated with a militia. But she attempted
    no numerical  division  between  such  categories.  Her  evidence  that
    militias were clan-based groups that could be "activated"  when  needed
    by powerful business figures or politicians does  not  sit  comfortably
    with the evidence of Dr Mullen and Dr  Hoehne  who  spoke  of  militias
    being "assembled" when the need for specific protection arose.


173.  Ms  Harper's  evidence  does  not  persuade  us  that  there  are  any
    significant clan based militias in place in Mogadishu today such as  to
    be drawn upon by clan members seeking protection  or  offensive  action
    against others perceived for one reason or another to  be  enemies.  On
    the other hand, we have no difficulty in accepting that, in the absence
    of an effective police force, there are large  numbers  of  people  who
    have access to arms, and there are employment  opportunities  for  such
    persons acting as  guards  for  both  businesses  such  as  hotels  and
    restaurants as well as from wealthy or business individuals who see the
    need to put in place their own private security arrangements.


174. Ms Harper did, however, recognise that the emphasis upon  the  clan  in
    issues  of  protection  has   significantly   reduced.   The   security
    arrangements of some hotels were publicised on the basis that they were
    drawn up on a mixed clan basis and she confirmed in oral evidence  that
    she simply did not know how many of the 10,000 militia men of which she
    had spoken were "clan based". Significantly, when giving  that  answer,
    she said that in this context "militiamen"  did  include  "bodyguards".
    This, in our judgement, is important. It may be misleading to speak  of
    such groups of armed men as "militiamen" or as  members  of  a  militia
    because their purpose in existing at all is very  different.  This  was
    made clear by Ms Harper, in responding to a question from Mr  Toal  who
    asked to what extent do militias have the role  of  promoting  security
    for a clan:


           "That is not their role. In the current context that is not what
           they do..."

    When pressed for her opinion as to how many of  the  10,000  militiamen
    may be "clan militia" she said:

           "I really do not know who these people would include. Some might
           be Al Shabaab members with access to arms.  Militiamen  includes
           bodyguards."

175. While we accept that Ms Harper's evidence was given in good faith,  she
    doing her best to assist the Tribunal with what could be drawn from her
    knowledge of Mogadishu, we do not feel able to place much reliance upon
    this aspect of her evidence. This is reinforced by what she said, as an
    afterthought, in response to a question about the help a returnee might
    expect to receive from his clan members on return:

           ""None at present. If you arrive in Mogadishu and  do  not  know
           anyone at all, you might start asking for fellow clan members in
           the hope that they might do more for you than  others.  But  you
           could not expect anything from them.


           I stress this is hypothetical."

    Illustrating, again, that Ms Harper was speaking of  what  she  thought
    was likely to happen rather than what she knew to have occurred.

176. In her written evidence Ms Harper had suggested that  there  remains  a
    danger that clan-based violence could  return  to  Mogadishu  but  that
    concern appears to be speculative and not supported by any broad  range
    of views to that effect expressed by  commentators.  She  said  in  the
    "overview" section of her report:

           "Clanism has made a  vigorous  return  and  today  is  the  most
           powerful driver of political calculations and group behaviour".

    But that assertion, unattributed to any contributing expert, has to  be
    regarded as a generous interpretation of the content  that  follows  in
    the sense that it is hard to find either raw data or attributed  expert
    opinion of which that can be said to be an accurate summary.  Correctly
    understood, in our view, this is an indication that clan membership  is
    relevant today in Mogadishu not to issues of protection but  of  social
    support more associated with the concept of an extended family  than  a
    clan as a whole.

177. Given  that  Ms  Harper  is  a  highly  experienced  and  distinguished
    journalist, we do feel  able  to  place  significant  weight  upon  her
    response to a question posed to her  by  the  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in her oral evidence:

           "Is there any  evidence  of  armed  conflict  between  clans  in
           Mogadishu?"

    To which she replied:

           "Not in Mogadishu. You hear exchanges of  gunfire  and  you  are
           told: sub-clan; sub-clan. But documented examples  are  elusive.
           In Mogadishu, apart from incidents that are quite minor, I  have
           not seen evidence of inter-clan violence."

    Further support, incidentally, for this view  of  the  decline  to  the
    point of elimination of inter-clan violence in Mogadishu today is found
    in The Safety and  Security  Baseline  Report  of  2011,  (respondent's
    bundle page 1081):

           "A majority of respondents said that disputes arising from  clan
           based conflicts "never or almost never occur"."

Risks to civilians from ill-disciplined security forces

178. Ms Harper did not deal with this topic in the same  detail  as  did  Dr
    Hoehne, but nor was she asked to. In her written report she did say:

           "The  security  forces  are  frequently   accused   of   abusing
           civilians": (pages 34-38 COIR Aug 2013")

    But it should be noted, which her report did not,  that  the  following
    sentence is found in the same section of that source material:

           "Abuses  by  undisciplined  elements  of  the  Somali   National
           Security Forces against civilians were also reported during  the
           period, although these are said  to  have  decreased  in  recent
           times."

Civilian casualty figures.

179. Ms Harper began her  examination  of  the  evidence  available  to  her
    concerning the levels of civilian casualties  by observing that:

           "...it is impossible to obtain  accurate  casualty  figures  for
           Mogadishu..."

    And, with that  caveat  in  mind,  set  out  the  information  that  is
    available from the World Health Organisation:

           January - December 2010: 5279 casualties  from  weapons  related
           casualties  were  treated  at  the  three  major  hospitals   in
           Mogadishu
           January - December 2011: 9689 casualties  from  weapons  related
           casualties  were  treated  at  the  three  major  hospitals   in
           Mogadishu
           January - December 2012: 6687 casualties  from  weapons  related
           casualties were treated in four hospitals in Mogadishu
           January - October 2013: 3889  casualties  from  weapons  related
           casualties were treated in four hospitals in Mogadishu

    Recognising that the figures for 2013 are incomplete, she said:

           "If extrapolated for the whole year, the  casualty  figures  for
           2013 would be 4667, which is less than  the  previous  year  but
           still high. .... It is important to stress  that  these  figures
           are incomplete and  do  not  give  a  reliable  picture  of  the
           situation in Mogadishu".

    The need for caution in approaching the statistical information that is
    available was reinforced in her oral evidence:

           "We can't know how many people killed or injured are  not  taken
           to hospital - there are few  ambulances;  nature  of  injury-not
           worth it; long queues at hospital; the need to pay. I don't know
           what proportion of those injured in Mogadishu  appear  in  these
           statistics.
           ...


           "All figures coming out of  Somalia  about  people  injured  and
           killed are unreliable and incomplete."

180. What can be made of these figures? They  probably  say  not  very  much
    about overall figures of casualties but do allow an attempt to identify
    trends. It can be seen that even though data is  being  collected  from
    four hospitals in 2013 as opposed to three in 2011, there  has  been  a
    steady reduction on the numbers reported since  2011,  a  reduction  of
    more than a half. The figure calculated by Ms Harper for the whole year
    up  to  December  2013  represents  a  very  small  proportion  of  the
    population of Mogadishu. We heard evidence that there may be  something
    in the region of 12 hospitals in Mogadishu, although not all  have  the
    capacity to treat weapons-related injuries. But, even if  each  one  of
    those hospitals treated such patients at the same rate as the four that
    have provided  data,  that  would  mean  that  well  over  99%  of  the
    population, taking it to be Dr Hoehne's more conservative  estimate  of
    1.5 million, would not  have  indicated  any  need  for  treatment  for
    weapons-related injuries by seeking treatment at any hospital.

IDPs and IDP camps

181. Having made  the  point  that,  even  if  a  person  facing  return  to
    Mogadishu after a period of absence once had property in the  city,  it
    would by now in all likelihood have been seized or occupied by  others,
    Ms Harper concluded that:

           "A person who is returned or deported to Somalia, especially one
           with no known family, would in all likelihood end up  living  in
           one of the 500 camps for the internally displaced in  Mogadishu.
           Some squat in damaged  buildings,  but  this  is  becoming  more
           difficult as the Somali government and others start to  re-claim
           property they see as rightfully theirs. A  person  with  limited
           family without political, social and financial  resources  would
           be in a similar position."

    There is some difficulty with the starting point taken for  this  view.
    It is not difficult to accept that a person would end up in an IDP camp
    only if there was no other alternative. But it is not immediately clear
    why it should be assumed that a person returned or deported to  Somalia
    would necessarily be without resources or access to  them.  After  all,
    the evidence before us indicates  that  the  journey  from  Somalia  to
    Europe, typically, would cost between $15,000 and  $25,000,  which  sum
    the person concerned had been able to raise, or which was raised on his
    behalf. In support, Ms Harper reproduces this extract from a report  by
    Heritage Institute for Public Studies published in November 2013,  this
    report also being authored by the lawyer [whose identity is not  to  be
    disclosed] upon whose work Ms Harper draws repeatedly:

           "Economic  recovery  is  slow  and  barely  reaching  the   most
           vulnerable  communities  in  Somalia.  The  cost  of  living  is
           soaring. Infrastructure is in shambles. Land disputes are common
           and often violent. The Somali government and  private  landlords
           are now forcefully evicting IDPS  in  Mogadishu,  many  of  whom
           recently arrived and have nowhere else to go."

182. In addition, Ms Harper, as a recent visitor to Mogadishu,  has  herself
    seen the scale of the make-shift living  arrangements  to  which  large
    numbers of people have had to resort. Having said that, for the reasons
    given above about the definition of  an  IDP,  we  approach  with  some
    caution her written evidence that more than 360,000 IDPs are living  in
    such IDP camps today, that being the total number of persons  estimated
    to fall within the classification of an IDP. Despite that, there can be
    no doubt that large  numbers  of  people  are  living  in  such  wholly
    unsatisfactory  conditions  today.  In  her  oral  evidence  Ms  Harper
    described what she saw during her most recent visit. Having  spoken  of
    what she referred to as "the rich parts" of  Mogadishu,  where  wealthy
    and powerful people live in compounds  behind  huge  metal  gates  with
    guards who let you in, she described conditions elsewhere in the city:

           "Bulk of the city? Even by the standards of  African  cities  of
           countries affected by conflict,  Mogadishu,  of  cities  I  have
           visited, is on another level.
           ...
            In 2012 what struck me is that  almost  every  patch  of  spare
           ground had "igloos" where displaced people live. Made of sticks,
           cloth,  plastic,  metal.  Not  tents.  Dwellings.  Crammed  into
           patches of spare ground, closely together. Inside there is  just
           sand or cardboard or plastic on the ground.
           ...


           Off the main roads the road disappears into sand and it is  easy
           to get lost and many panic when into a dead end. It's like being
           in a video game about a city devastated by war. Except  for  the
           glamorous parts and Bakara Market that are rebuilt."

    That evidence chimes with other views expressed before us that there is
    a wide disparity of conditions in which people are living in  Mogadishu
    today, although Ms Harper addressed only the two ends of that spectrum:
    those living in conditions of expensive privilege and those at or close
    to levels of destitution. It is plain from the evidence generally  that
    there  are,  unsurprisingly,  levels  of  living   conditions   to   be
    encountered that fall between those two extremes.

183. In cross examination Ms Harper was referred to  a  document  issued  by
    the  British  High  Commission  on  4  February  2014  which  disclosed
    information received that the Saudi Arabian authorities  are  returning
    to Mogadishu Somalis without permission to be present in Saudi  Arabia.
    The total number of removals in January 2014,  using  charter  flights,
    "was over 12,000". A Mogadishu based official  from  the  International
    Organisation for Migration confirmed that figure, adding  that  it  was
    expected that over 30,000 Somalis would be  retuned  in  the  following
    three months.

184. We consider this evidence to be of  significance.   The  IOM  is  well-
    placed to speak authoritatively in confirmation of what actually occurs
    in the context of migration, especially involuntary returns. Given that
    very recent  news  reports  were  produced  during  the  hearing,  some
    relating to events that had occurred in  Mogadishu  only  the  previous
    day, if the influx of 12,000 involuntary  returnees  in  January  alone
    generated experiences of serious  harm  or  persecutory  ill-treatment,
    then it is surprising that no such reports were put forward.

185. Ms Harper said in  her  oral  evidence  that  she  had  spoken  with  a
    Mogadishu-based journalist whose information, taken from a conversation
    with an official at Mogadishu airport, was that the numbers of  persons
    returned from Saudi Arabia in January 2014 was 8,000,  not  12,000.  It
    may be that not much turns upon the difference between  those  figures.
    However, we are inclined to accept the information provided by the IOM,
    who have a professional interest in monitoring and  recording  returns.
    We do not know anything of the remit of the  unidentified  official  to
    whom the journalist spoke.

186. Ms Harper was  asked  if  she  was  aware  of  any  evidence  of  these
    returnees  coming  to  harm.  She  declined  to  answer  that  question
    directly, saying:

           "From information I obtained  from  a  journalist  in  Mogadishu
           those only left Somalia 1-3 years ago and they had  families  in
           Mogadishu and a lot were doing all they could  to  get  back  to
           Saudi."

    This, in our judgement, is a significant answer  that  illuminates  our
    evaluation of Ms Harper's evidence. As she confirmed  in  answer  to  a
    question from the President, the journalist  could  not  possibly  know
    that information to  be  correct  or  reliable.  Yet  it  discloses  an
    assumption about the characteristics of a large group of  people  which
    informs a general conclusion  that  is  most  likely  to  be  factually
    incorrect, even if true in respect  of  part  of  the  group.  This  is
    another example of an assumption  driving  a  conclusion  to  what  was
    thought likely in any event, such as  the  earlier  evidence  that  all
    returnees and deportees would be people with no  access  to  resources.
    That is particularly striking in view of the evidence we  have  of  the
    very significant sums of money sent in the  form  of  remittances  each
    year by members of the diaspora to relatives living in Somalia.

Mogadishu today

187. Although Ms Harper, in common with both Dr Mullen and Dr Hoehne,  spoke
    of the need to assemble personal protection in the form  of  bodyguards
    to reduce risk when moving around the city, there is room  for  another
    view. After all, someone unfortunate enough to be in the vicinity of  a
    suicide bomb attack is unlikely to be assisted as  to  the  outcome  by
    being in the presence of bodyguards, unless that be because  of  advice
    to leave the area swiftly to avoid the risk of  follow-up  attacks.  In
    cross-examination Ms Harper was invited  to  comment  upon  documentary
    evidence that suggested that "ordinary citizens" in fact  are  able  to
    move around the city unaccompanied by guards.

188. Ms Harper was taken first to a news report in the third volume  of  the
    respondent's bundle, the topic being  the  experience  of  an  ordinary
    civilian citizen of Mogadishu travelling  around  the  city  on  public
    transport without being armed or being accompanied  by  any  guard  and
    experiencing no difficulties. The minibus was  packed  with  passengers
    and rival bus operators argued with each other  in  trying  to  attract
    customers. Next she was referred to  the  previous  page  in  the  same
    bundle, that being about a blog created by  a  man  who  was  born  and
    raised in the United Kingdom who had settled in Mogadishu. His blog  is
    designed to assist those "who are heading back or first time to Somalia
    to provide with a head start, an opportunity he never had".  Ms  Harper
    responded:

           "It does not mean they are coming back for  good  -  many  leave
           after one or two years. I do not know  of  any  members  of  the
           diaspora who came back to live in Mogadishu. They may  come  for
           holidays or to have  their  children  circumcised  if  they  are
           girls."

    Once again, we are satisfied that view is based  upon  what  Ms  Harper
    expects to be  the  case  rather  then  any  real  statistically  based
    evidence of what has actually happened.  Another  example  of  this  is
    provided by this extract from paragraph 4.4.2 of  her  report  prepared
    for the appellant SSM:


           "A returnee from Europe or the US  would  be  presumed  to  have
           money or access to money, and so would therefore be at  risk  of
           being robbed, or abducted or subjected to  threats  of  violence
           for the purpose of extortion."

    However, Ms Harper offers  nothing  to  support  that  assertion  which
    appears to be based upon what she thinks is  likely  to  happen  rather
    than being demonstrated to have happened in such a regular way as to be
    a likely experience for this category of persons living in Mogadishu.

189. We do not accept Ms Harper's evidence in this  regard.  Although  there
    certainly have  been  examples  of  buses  or  other  public  transport
    vehicles getting caught up in attacks by  Al  Shabaab  with  consequent
    casualties among passengers who are innocent  civilians,  the  evidence
    does not support the view that public transport is identified generally
    as a target for Al Shabaab, or that there is any real risk of civilians
    coming to harm while using public transport in Mogadishu. Of course,  a
    mini bus operated as a commercial bus service is no  more  immune  from
    being damaged in an explosion than any other vehicle, but we are unable
    to conclude that an enhanced risk of coming to harm while using such  a
    facility is established by the evidence, even though we  were  referred
    to one report of people being shot while travelling on a minibus.

190. Ms Harper herself wrote an article in June  2012  about  "a  young  man
    with good family connections and significant resources who set up a dry
    cleaning business in Mogadishu":
           "Mohamed Mahamoud Sheik decided to start  it  when  he  returned
           home recently to Mogadishu after years abroad.
           He told the BBC the city's security had improved in the last  10
           months, since Islamist militants  were  pushed  out  by  African
           Union and government forces.
           ...
           The Islamist al-Shabab militia, which is fighting the  UN-backed
           interim government, still controls much  of  the  south  of  the
           country, but since it was forced from  Mogadishu,  the  city  is
           coming back to life.
           People are going to the beach, opening restaurants,  hotels  and
           other businesses.
           ...
           "Because the city is more peaceful now, everybody is running  to
           find a place to open a business. Getting a  building  is  really
           hard  in  Mogadishu  these  days  because  there  is   so   much
           competition for space."
           Although  most  al-Shabab  fighters  have  been  driven  out  of
           Mogadishu, the city is by  no  means  safe.  Suicide  and  other
           attacks are common.
           Government officials have provided Mr Sheik with  one  guard  at
           night and two during the day"
    In her evidence Ms Harper urged a restrained assessment of this example
    of a successful return to Mogadishu:
           "Such reports may give the court the impression that  conditions
           are safe for all Somalis to return. I would caution against this
           interpretation since the conditions for these  returnees  and  a
           potential removal or deportee are very different. The  situation
           in Mogadishu... is  by  no  means  safe,  especially  for  those
           without significant resources, both in terms of financial means,
           and in terms of having wealthy and powerful relatives and  other
           contacts."
    Plainly, this enterprising young man must have had access to  resources
    to invest in a start up business. We are, however, told nothing at  all
    about his "wealthy and powerful relatives and other  contacts"  or  how
    they facilitated what may  otherwise  have  been  impossible.  We  were
    referred to nothing to suggest, incidentally, that this person does not
    remain in Mogadishu or that his business does  not  continue  to  trade
    successfully.


191. Considering specifically the position of a returnee to Mogadishu  today
    after a lengthy period of  absence,  Ms  Harper  said  in  her  written
    evidence that while diaspora returnees come back with enough  money  to
    live in safe accommodation and to move around in  a  protected  manner,
    many are on reconnaissance missions to assess the economic and security
    situation. The position would be different for someone  returning  with
    scant financial resources, little or no family support and no means  of
    leaving if he wants to.

           "Upon arrival in Mogadishu ... those removals or deportees  with
           no or limited contacts and meagre financial resources  would  be
           in  an  especially  weak  position.  Such  a  person  would   be
           vulnerable to abuse  or  attack  by  criminals,  clan  militias,
           government troops, African Union soldiers and Al Shabaab."

192. That appears to be an overstatement  of  the  risks  facing  returnees.
    There is little evidence that returnees are  specifically  targeted  by
    criminals, even if inevitably some do become victims of crime; we  have
    heard that there is no longer a concept of clan militias, as opposed to
    ad  hoc  groups  of  people  from  the  same  clan   putting   together
    arrangements for personal security when that is required. There  is  no
    evidence of systematic or routine targeting of returnees by  government
    troops, even if there is some evidence or individual groups of soldiers
    acting in an ill-disciplined way, such as by looting unprotected shops.



193. In her written evidence Ms Harper spoke of the risks  facing  returnees
    on account of having spent time in Europe:

           "Somalis deported from the United Kingdom face possible violence
           from Al Shabaab which considers as a spy anyone returning from a
           Western Country. The group considers returnees from the West  to
           be in a state of apostasy, and therefore subject to  punishment.
           It executes some of those it suspects of spying".

    But, when invited to do so in cross examination, Ms Harper  was  unable
    to identify any returnee who had been subjected to such treatment.  She
    accepted that she did not know of a single case of a diaspora  returnee
    to Mogadishu being targeted by Al Shabaab as a suspected spy.  Further,
    she agreed that Al Shabaab regularly makes claims of responsibility for
    all manner of attacks but  was  unable  to  point  to  any  such  claim
    referring to returnees from the diaspora as being a  target  or  reason
    motivating an attack.

194. This reinforces our view that the evidence simply does not support  the
    asserted risk of a returnee to Mogadishu from the west  being  targeted
    as a spy or apostate.


195. In emphasising the need for family or other support for a  returnee  to
    Mogadishu, Ms Harper looks to  Danish 3  for support:

           "According to the  Norwegian  Landinfo  and  Danish  Immigration
           Service's report of 2013 "It would  be  extremely  difficult  to
           return to Mogadishu if you have no one  to  rely  on  return  to
           Mogadishu if you have no one to rely on when you come back"."


    That, however, does not accurately convey the essence of what is  being
    said in the section of the report from which  those  words  are  taken.
    This was not the view expressed by the authors  of  the  report  but  a
    comment made by "a Diaspora organisation" which, as can  be  seen  from
    the whole extract of this section of the report, is not  in  line  with
    the message being delivered. It is important  to  consider  the  phrase
    lifted by Ms Harper from the report in its proper context:


           "Diaspora returning from abroad


           According to UNHCR-Somalia,  Mogadishu,  many  people  from  the
           diaspora have returned  to  Mogadishu  also,  because  they  see
           business opportunities. In general, there is  no  discrimination
           for the sole reason of belonging to the returning Diaspora.


           Regarding returns from the Diaspora,  an  international  agency,
           Nairobi, explained that ordinary people returning  to  Mogadishu
           and other locations in S/C Somalia are  citing  improvements  in
           the security situation as  some  of  the  reasons  for  returns.
           Others have also been shocked by what they see  when  they  come
           back, especially those who have been abroad for many years.


           An international agency, Nairobi, explained  that  Mogadishu  is
           now a "buzz", people are going around minding their own business
           and there is an increasing freedom of movement for everyone.


           Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre, Mogadishu,  explained  that
           there is an increasing number of Somalis retuning  to  Mogadishu
           from abroad as compared to October 2012. However, the  14  April
           [2013] attack may result in a slight decrease for the time being
           as many will give it a  second  thought  before  going  back  to
           Mogadishu.


           A  representative  of  a  Diaspora  organisation  in   Mogadishu
           explained that those who are returning to  Mogadishu  and  other
           locations in S/C Somalia are mostly resourceful people  who  see
           opportunities,  have  business  to  do  and/or  seek   political
           influence and positions. It  would  be  extremely  difficult  to
           return to Mogadishu if you have no one to rely on when you  come
           back.


           The representative stated that an increasing number  of  Somalis
           are returning. Safety and security are issues to consider before
           you return as there  are  frictions  between  those  who  stayed
           behind and those who are now returning from their refuge abroad.
           The Diaspora is being perceived as competitors as they may  take
           up jobs  from  the  locals  and  their  increasing  presence  in
           Mogadishu has resulted in price increases in goods as well as on
           properties.
           ...
           The representative  of  a  Diaspora  organisation  in  Mogadishu
           explained that the first  three  months  in  Mogadishu  are  the
           hardest for a returned member of  the  Diaspora.  However,  most
           people from the Diaspora are staying  despite  the  difficulties
           they may face during the first few months. On the other hand,  a
           number of returnees are going back to their  country  of  asylum
           because they could not find a job in Mogadishu. Males as well as
           females are returning to Mogadishu."

    It will be noted that the second sentence of  the  final  paragraph  of
    this extract appears to contradict Ms Harper's view that most returnees
    leave after a relatively short period.

196. Similarly, in her oral evidence Ms Harper was asked if she agreed  with
    Dr Hoehne's stated view that people can meet basic needs by operating a
    small business to which she replied:

           "I only saw one person who had set up a  tailoring  business.  I
           did not see other economic activity."

    This helps to illustrate that Ms Harper is limiting her assessment to a
    significant degree to what she has seen herself. It is  also  difficult
    to reconcile that statement with the article she wrote about the  young
    man who started a new dry cleaning business, to which we have  referred
    above. Plainly, the evidence as a  whole  points  at  very  significant
    economic activity in Mogadishu and, even if on one view this is  large-
    scale construction rather than personal enterprise, the former  can  be
    completed only with the assistance of some form of workforce.


197. Ms Harper has provided evidence concerning enhanced risk  arising  from
    being unfamiliar with Mogadishu because of an extended absence:

           "Civilians returning to Mogadishu after a significant period  of
           absence would be at increased risk of serious harm because  they
           would not know how to navigate their way around the city,  which
           has been in a state of conflict for 23  years.  This  is  partly
           because the  conflict  has  dramatically  altered  the  physical
           geography of the city, but also  because  the  nature  of  clan,
           politics and risk has changed, and continues to change, often at
           a  rapid  rate.  An  individual  who  has  been  absent  for   a
           significant period of  time  would  not  be  familiar  with  the
           current workings of clan and politics, and would not know how to
           assess risk. Such a person would also not know how to behave  in
           such a way as to possibly reduce their risk of harm."

    Again, this appears to be based upon the witness's expectation of  what
    she  thinks  will  happen  rather  than  on  evidence  of  examples  of
    manifestation of this perceived  enhanced  risk.  In  any  event,  this
    extract suggests that a person can in fact act in a  way  that  reduces
    exposure to risk. The question, therefore, to be addressed is how  such
    a person should act to reduce exposure to risk. Ms Harper  provides  an
    indication of the answer:

           "A person with no recent experience of Mogadishu  would  not  be
           aware that it is not a good idea to speak about  Al  Shabaab  in
           public, and that it is best to avoid government  buildings,  and
           restaurants, hotels and other places  frequented  by  government
           workers,  security  officials,  members  of  the  diaspora   and
           foreigners. As one former politician and powerful  business  man
           said "I survive in Mogadishu because I don't  go  to  government
           buildings, I don't talk about Al Shabaab and I don't write about
           Al Shabaab." A person who has been away  from  Mogadishu  for  a
           long time would not know that it is considered  unsafe  to  make
           plans in advance to meet someone at a certain time in a  certain
           place ... They would be unaware that  one  should  avoid  moving
           around in a predictable way. There are lots  of  unspoken  rules
           which are only learned from spending time in the city  or  being
           looked after by someone in the know."

    It is not easy to accept that a person who has sought to resist removal
    by asserting that Mogadishu is a dangerous place where he would  be  at
    risk on return  because  of  the  activity  of  Al  Shabaab  would  not
    appreciate it would  be  a  good  idea  to  avoid  speaking  about  the
    organisation openly in public and avoid the places where known  targets
    are likely to frequent and not to let everyone  know  where  they  were
    going to be and when. On the contrary, a  person  who  had  argued  his
    appeal on such a basis would be very much  aware  of  the  up  to  date
    situation concerning such issues. Ms  Harper  was  asked  in  her  oral
    evidence what behaviour should be avoided to avoid risk  of  harm  that
    would not be obvious and said:


           "It would be unwise to speak of AS or the  government.  Best  to
           avoid being close to AMISOM or soldiers as they are at  risk  of
           attack. Avoid being near certain hotels and  restaurants.  Avoid
           giving "attitude" or speaking in a rude way to  soldiers.  If  a
           woman, should dress in a particular way, covered up.  If  a  man
           should not be so casual in dress. Should not listen  to  certain
           types of music. So many subtle forms  of  behaviour  that  could
           invite aggression ..."

    Once again, we find it impossible to accept that a person returning  to
    Mogadishu today after a period of absence would  be  sufficiently  ill-
    informed as to not  instinctively appreciate that these are examples of
    behaviour to be avoided, whether anyone locally "in the know"  informed
    them of that or not.

198. Ms Harper spoke also about the characteristics that would disclose  the
    fact of being a recent returnee:

           "Somalis who have returned from the diaspora tell  me  they  are
           recognised as returnees for many  different  reasons.  They  say
           their dress is different, with men wearing Western-style shirts,
           shoes and trousers instead of the traditional Somali sarong  and
           flip flops...."

    But, as we have already pointed out, this is  impossible  to  reconcile
    with the photographs taken during Ms Harper's recent visit to Mogadishu
    which include a view of a crowded Bakara market in  which  the  general
    style of dress adopted by men is of what might be described as  western
    style clothing. That does not mean, of course, that such a depiction is
    typical of another day at Bakara market, but  in  the  absence  of  any
    reason to suppose otherwise, we are satisfied  that  this  concern  has
    been overstated and is yet another example of  a  witness  speaking  of
    what they believe ought to be the case rather than what it is in fact.

199. Ms Harper is  on  stronger  ground  when  identifying  language  as  an
    indicator of absence from Somalia which would be difficult to hide.  We
    have  no  difficulty  in  accepting  her  evidence  that  Somalis   are
    "particular about how language is spoken" so that differences in accent
    and vocabulary will be immediately apparent in a  conversation  with  a
    returnee who has been away for a significant time. On the  other  hand,
    we have evidence before us that a very broad range of accents is to  be
    encountered in Mogadishu today: see Andrew Harding's report cited by Dr
    Mullen (paragraph 97 above).

200. Dealing next with access to the support of any family who may still  be
    present in Mogadishu, Ms Harper said in oral evidence:

           "If the family unit is there in Mogadishu, if  that  person  was
           involved with criminal activities in  the  UK  they  may  reject
           them. Some families live in igloos or smashed up buildings.  The
           immediate family would I believe receive that person."

   This response appears to be to the effect that a returnee will be able to
   look to family members  for  support  upon  return,  if  they  remain  in
   Mogadishu, but there may be two reasons why that would not represent much
   help. First, if the family had nothing left and lived in an IDP camp they
   would have no material support to offer. Second, there is a risk  that  a
   family who was able to provide support would refuse to do so if aware  of
   past criminal offending by the returning family member.  Ms  Harper  made
   clear that she disagreed with the evidence given  by  Dr  Hoehne  to  the
   effect that an "ordinary" conviction in the  United  Kingdom  would  have
   little or no significance in Somalia, although offences  involving  drugs
   might be different. However, when  invited  to  give  any  example  of  a
   returnee who upon return was shunned by relatives on this account she was
   unable to do so. Therefore, this is yet another  example  of  an  opinion
   being offered that is simply unsupported by any  actual  evidence  of  it
   occurring, being based instead upon what the witness  believes  would  be
   the case.


201. This aspect  of  Ms  Harper's  oral  evidence  did,  however,  identify
    something of  potential  significance.  When  asked  how  relatives  in
    Mogadishu would be aware of convictions acquired in the United Kingdom,
    she   explained   that   Somalis   are   "extraordinary   gossips   and
    communicators" who know each other's business. This of course must mean
    also that if a person in the United Kingdom has relatives remaining  in
    Mogadishu he is likely to be able to communicate  with  them,  even  if
    they have moved within the city to a new area. It is established by the
    evidence before the Tribunal that there is  a  fully  effective  mobile
    phone  network  available  to  residents  of  Mogadishu  and   that   a
    significant number of residents have phones available to  use,  whether
    for individual use or for use by a family.  In  giving  oral  evidence,
    though, MAA said that his family could not afford a mobile phone and he
    did not know whether or not a phone was possessed by his wife's family.



Submissions of the parties

202. The  Tribunal  has  the  benefit  of  extensive  and  detailed  written
    submissions and responses to submissions  from  each  of  the  parties,
    which we now consider in turn. As will have been apparent from what has
    been said above, we had these submissions in mind when  discussing  the
    expert evidence and so these  have  informed  our  assessment  of  that
    evidence. However, it is helpful to  consider  the  submissions  as  an
    independent matter because documentary  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    parties is identified, not all of which has  been  put  to  the  expert
    witnesses for comment. We discuss the submissions in the order in which
    the parties participated in the hearing.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

203.  Mr  Rawat  submits  that  any  examination  of  the  current  security
    situation in Mogadishu must take as its starting point  the  conditions
    in the city as described in AMM and then consider the changes that have
    taken place over time and up to the present. In AMM the tribunal  found
    that there would remain an Article 15(c) risk for most people facing  a
    return to Mogadishu until it could be seen that there had been  durable
    change. That durable change could not be detected at that time because:

        a. The withdrawal of Al Shabaab was recent and there remained  some
           chance of their re-entry into the capital (paragraph 345);
        b. In the event that Al Shabaab did re-enter Mogadishu,  there  was
           the  possibility  that  AMISOM  would  not  adhere  to   a   "no
           retaliation"  policy  but  would  resort  to  shelling  with   a
           consequent risk to civilians (ibid);
        c. It was too early to say to what extent Al Shabaab  would  resort
           to asymmetrical warfare (paragraph 346);
        d. The then humanitarian  situation  in  Mogadishu  compounded  the
           threat from the "significant" levels of  fighting  occurring  in
           some districts of the capital (paragraph 347);
        e. An effect of the humanitarian situation was to increase the risk
           from  other  factors  such   as   IEDs,   criminality   and   in
           discriminatory attacks from Al Shabaab personnel (ibid);
        f. There was a material risk from rogue elements of the TFG, albeit
           it was "far smaller" than the risk from  Al  Shabaab  (paragraph
           349).

204. The respondent's position is that there is now "cogent  and  persuasive
    evidence" that conditions  in  Mogadishu  have  substantially  improved
    since October 2011 when AMM was published. It is submitted that this is
    established by a number of indicators:


        a. Freedom of movement;
        b.  The  available  statistical  evidence  relating   to   civilian
           casualties, showing a significant  decrease  in  weapons-related
           injuries;
        c. The absence of conventional fighting in Mogadishu;
        d. The reduction in general  criminality  or  abuse  by  government
           forces;
        e. The improvement in humanitarian conditions in Mogadishu;
        f. The increase in numbers of people returning  to  Mogadishu  from
           the west or elsewhere in South Central Somalia;
        g. The improvement in conditions in the Afgoye corridor;
        h. The position of IDP's in Mogadishu.


205. Some of those indicators are self-explanatory, given what we have  said
    above about the evidence received, but we need to  say  a  little  more
    about others in order to reflect fairly the nature  of  the  submission
    made.

206. Improved freedom of movement is said to reflect  not  only  a  material
    change in the scale and nature of the  fighting  but  a  perception  of
    improved security. It also facilitates avoidance of areas where risk is
    perceived to be enhanced.

207. There  has  been  no  conventional  fighting  in  Mogadishu  since  the
    withdrawal of Al Shabaab.  Although  Al  Shabaab  continues  to  launch
    attacks in the city, there is said to be no evidence of  concerted  use
    of IEDs against civilians and no targeting of civilians generally.  The
    number of "complex attacks" is said to equate to "about one  every  6-8
    weeks". Those complex attacks  are  directed  at  clearly  identifiable
    "high profile targets".

208.  As  for  the  humanitarian  conditions  in   Mogadishu,   the   famine
    declaration was lifted by the UN in February 2012  and  the  respondent
    points to information recorded on the reliefweb  site  to  support  the
    assertion that "there has been what can only be described as a  massive
    increase in wage rates and relative purchasing power". There  has  been
    an 85% increase in food imports to Mogadishu in the 12 months ending in
    April 2012 and wage rates for "common jobs", such  as  labouring,  have
    improved since 2011.

209. In the respondent's submission, the  evidence  establishes  that  since
    AMM,  "huge  numbers  of  returnees  have  returned  to   Somalia   and
    Mogadishu", that being indicative of a reduction in levels of  violence
    and improved security. Further, the respondent asserts that there is no
    reliable evidence that returnees are being subjected to "mistreatment",
    by either Al Shabaab or by government forces or officials. In addition,
    there has been a highly visible "economic boom" in Mogadishu,  said  to
    be led by the diaspora. The source specifically cited in support  is  a
    report from the  New  York  Times,  published  in  April  2012.  Having
    acknowledged that Mogadishu still has "a long way to  go",  the  report
    continued:

           "But people here are sensing the moment  and  seizing  it.  More
           than 300,000 residents have come back to the city  in  the  past
           six months, local  aid  groups  say,  and  many  are  cheerfully
           carting away chunks of  rubble  and  resurrecting  their  bullet
           riddled homes. The economic boom, fuelled by an infusion of tens
           of millions of dollars, much of it from  Somalis  flocking  from
           overseas, is spawning thousands of jobs that  are  beginning  to
           absorb  young  militiamen  eager  to  get  out  of  the  killing
           business.


           Given Mogadishu's importance to the country, it all adds up to a
           huge  opportunity.  And  though  Somalia   has   self-destructed
           numerous times before, Augustine Mahiga, the head of the  United
           Nations political office for Somalia, along with so many  others
           here insisted that this time really is different. Somalia,  they
           contend, is finally turning around..."

210. In closing submissions, the respondent has raised  concerns  about  the
    evidence offered by  each  of  the  expert  witnesses.  Dr  Mullen  had
    accepted in cross examination that he has on one occasion relied upon a
    source that he should not have regarded to be a reliable one and  on  a
    number of occasions, according to the respondent, his assertions failed
    to stand up to close examination. We have discussed those areas of  his
    evidence above.

211. Dr Hoehne, the respondent submits, displayed a consistent  rigidity  in
    giving evidence in that he declined to depart from any  view  expressed
    in evidence, even when material to which he was referred suggested that
    such view should, at least, be refined. An example was  his  maintained
    insistence that only 1% to  2%  of  the  population  of  Mogadishu  had
    benefited from the "economic boom" seen in  the  city.  The  respondent
    submits that, given the inward investment that has been  received  into
    Mogadishu, said to be tens of millions of dollars, it is impossible  to
    see how the benefits could be restricted to such a tiny  minority.  The
    respondent refers to evidence from  the  Department  for  International
    Development in Somalia report - Autumn  Update  2013  in  which  it  is
    asserted that 56,900 jobs have  been  created  since  May  2011  and  a
    further 45,000 new private sector jobs will be created.

212. Mary Harper accepted that the role of being an expert witness  was  new
    to her and the respondent  raises  the  following  concerns  about  the
    evidence she has provided:


        a. As a journalist, Ms Harper was reluctant to disclose her sources
           so that the reliability of those sources cannot be assessed;
        b. As it was unclear whether her sources were aware of the  use  to
           be made of their information, there was a risk  of  exaggeration
           or fabrication;
        c. Her evidence is said to be overly impressionistic and not  based
           upon objective evidence;
        d. Where it had been possible to identify sources  there  had  been
           error, for example information attributed to Al Shabaab  in  one
           respect was in fact obtained from an office cleaner;
        e. There was an absence of rigour  disclosed  on  occasion  by  her
           evidence, for example in conflating figures relating to injuries
           and fatalities.

213.  The  respondent  submits  that  the  overwhelming  consensus   amongst
    NGOs/INGOs/UN and other bodies is that there  have  been  dramatic  and
    significant  improvements  in  the  security  situation  in   Mogadishu
    following 2011 and the demise of a frontline  in  the  city.  Thus  the
    concern  expressed  by  the  Tribunal  in  AMM  that  the  then  recent
    withdrawal of Al Shabaab "cannot yet be said  to  be  durable"  was  no
    longer justified.

214. The respondent points to a shift in the position of UNHCR  as  a  stark
    illustration of the improvement in security  conditions  in  Mogadishu.
    Having intervened in the AMM appeal, the view of UNHCR  was  then  that
    all civilians were at risk of indiscriminate violence, by  reason  only
    of  their  presence  there.  However,  recent   statements   by   UNHCR
    demonstrate  that  its  view,  based  on  sources  rather  than  direct
    assessment, has changed from one of there being a blanket risk to  "all
    civilians" to the need for a more individualised risk  assessment.  The
    following is the  conclusion  reached  in  a  report  published  on  25
    September 2013 "UNHCR guidance  on  the  application  of  the  internal
    flight or relocation alternative, particularly in respect of Mogadishu,
    Somalia":

           "Conclusion
           27. In light of the overall situation in South  Central  Somalia
           (outside Mogadishu), UNHCR considers that, on the whole, an  IFA
           or IRA would not be relevant or reasonable given, in particular,
           the existence of widespread violence and prevalent human  rights
           violations, the physical risks and legal  or  physical  barriers
           encountered in reaching other areas,  as  well  as  the  serious
           difficulties faced in  accessing  basic  services  and  ensuring
           economic survival in a situation of displacement.


           28. With regard to Mogadishu, the personal circumstances  of  an
           individual need to be carefully  assessed.  UNHCR  considers  an
           IFA/IRA as reasonable only where the individual  can  expect  to
           benefit from meaningful nuclear and/or extended  family  support
           and clan  protection  mechanisms  in  the  area  of  prospective
           relocation. When assessing the reasonableness of an  IFA/IRA  in
           Mogadishu in an individual case, it should be kept in mind  that
           the traditional extended  family  and  community  structures  of
           Somali society no longer constitute as strong a  protection  and
           coping  mechanism  in  Mogadishu  as  they  did  in  the   past.
           Additionally, whether the members of  the  traditional  networks
           are able to genuinely offer support to the applicant in practice
           also needs to be evaluated, especially  given  the  fragile  and
           complex situation in Mogadishu at present.


           29.  For  the  following  categories  of  Somalis,  UNHCR  would
           consider that an IFA/IRA will not be reasonably available in the
           absence of meaningful nuclear and/or extended family support and
           functioning   clan   protection:   unaccompanied   children   or
           adolescents at  risk  of  forced  recruitment  and  other  grave
           violations; young males at risk of being considered  Al  Shabaab
           sympathizers and therefore  facing  harassment  from  government
           security forces; elderly people; people with physical or  mental
           disabilities; single women and female single heads of households
           with no male protection and especially originating from minority
           clans. In any other exceptional cases, in which the  application
           of an IFA/IRA in Mogadishu is considered even in the absence  of
           meaningful family or clan support to the individual, the  person
           would need to  have  access  to  infrastructure  and  livelihood
           opportunities and to other  meaningful  protection  and  support
           mechanisms, taking into account the state institutions'  limited
           ability to provide security and meaningful protection."


215. The respondent places considerable reliance upon this amended  view  of
    UNHCR.

216. In setting out closing submissions, the respondent considers  important
    the Tribunal's assessment of the evidence relating  to  weapons-related
    casualties. The respondent emphasises that a report of the UN Secretary
    General to the Security Council dated 31 May 2013 recorded  a  decrease
    of  33%  (over  the  period  16/01/2013  -  15/05/2013)  in  "civilian"
    casualties treated in referral hospitals  in  Mogadishu  by  comparison
    with the same period in 2012. Although  that  statistic  is  accurately
    reproduced, it does need to be seen in its context and so we  reproduce
    that extract from the report:

           "Civilians  still  bear  the  brunt  of  continued  fighting  in
           Somalia. While the number  of  civilian  casualties  treated  in
           referral hospitals in Mogadishu decreased by 33%, compared  with
           the same  period  in  2012,  as  many  as  1,500  weapon-related
           injuries were treated in those hospitals  during  the  reporting
           period."

    Once again, this illustrates the care with which  statistical  evidence
    must be approached. Over this 5 month  period  there  were  1,500  such
    injuries treated in the hospitals concerned but not all of  those  were
    necessarily civilians. It  is  clear  that  non-civilian  injuries  are
    treated at these hospitals also.

217.  The  respondent  submits  that  even  if  comprehensive  and  reliable
    statistical  evidence  pertaining  to  weapons-related  casualties   is
    absent, the evidence does enable there to be an assessment  of  trends.
    Thus, evidence provided by the ICRC shows a reduction of  "war-wounded"
    treated by hospitals from 84% to 33%. Similarly,  data  collected  from
    four hospitals in  Mogadishu  supported  by  WHO  shows  a  substantial
    reduction in civilian casualties from 9,510 in 2011 to 4,412 in 2013.

218. Further, it is the respondent's position that the evidence simply  does
    not support the view that civilians are  deliberately  targeted  by  Al
    Shabaab:

           "... having regard to the available figures and  the  change  in
           tactics of both sides since AMM (which  crucially  includes  the
           demise of large scale shelling), the SSHD submits that there  is
           no evidence  that  ordinary  civilians  are  being  deliberately
           targeted by suicide attacks. None of  the  three  experts  cited
           documentary evidence to the contrary. For example,  Dr  Mullen's
           examples, given in evidence in chief,  focussed  on  attacks  on
           politicians, police officers, international aid  workers,  etc.,
           i.e. individuals who can legitimately be described as  having  a
           profile higher than that of the ordinary civilian.  Dr  Mullen's
           use of "indiscriminate" must therefore be  put  in  context;  he
           appears to be speaking of directed attacks by AS which, in  some
           cases, resulted in collateral injury to ordinary civilians."

219. The respondent does not accept that any escalation  in  the  number  of
    attacks launched by Al Shabaab in Mogadishu in  2013  equates  with  an
    increased adverse effect upon civilians. While there may have  been  an
    increase in "security incidents" in the city there has also  been  what
    the respondent describes as a significant decrease in grenade attacks.

220. Addressing changes in  the  structure,  approach  and  ideology  of  Al
    Shabaab, the respondent identifies as significant that there has been a
    substantial reduction in the numbers of foreign fighters  available  to
    the group. According to the  UKBA  "Somalia:  Report  of  Fact  Finding
    Mission" of October 2010, in that year the number of  foreign  fighters
    was reported as 2,000 whereas, according to the July 2013  UN  Security
    Council Committee Somalia Monitoring Report, there  are  currently  300
    foreign fighters in the whole of Somalia.

221. In respect of the humanitarian position in  Mogadishu,  the  respondent
    points out that whereas at the time of AMM in August 2011 Mogadishu had
    been declared a famine zone with four million people being  categorised
    as being in "emergency need", no part of Mogadishu is now classified as
    such. Estimates from the Food Security and Nutrition Analysis  Unit  of
    Somalia (FSNAU) for the period April -  June  2013  show  that  of  the
    entire population of Banadir, including Mogadishu, 15,000  people  were
    "in crisis" or "stressed". That is a small part of  the  population  of
    Mogadishu and Banadir, within which the city is situated.

222.  The  respondent  challenges  the  oral  evidence  of  Dr  Hoehne  that
    unemployment levels in Mogadishu stood at 89%. That  figure  was  taken
    from a UNDP report from 2012 but the  focus  of  that  was  upon  youth
    development and makes no reference to unemployment rates  in  Mogadishu
    and Dr Hoehne conceded that he did not know when that survey  had  been
    conducted.

223. According to the respondent, a  striking  feature  of  developments  in
    Mogadishu since AMM is the evidence that "huge numbers" of people  have
    returned  to  Mogadishu,  that  being  said  to  be  indicative  of   a
    considerable reduction  in  levels  of  violence  and  improvements  in
    security. Some local NGO sources have  said  that  there  were  300,000
    returning residents to Mogadishu in the  six  months  between  November
    2011 and April 2012 alone. By August 2012 it had  been  estimated  that
    more than 500,000 people had moved back to the  capital  including  the
    vast majority who had fled since 2007.

224. The respondent refers also to consistently high levels of  air  traffic
    into Mogadishu. A UN News Centre Report  of  January  2013  noted  that
    there were five commercial flights, each carrying over  100  passengers
    from Kenya, arriving at Mogadishu every day.  Danish  3  mentions  that
    flights from Istanbul to Mogadishu are fully booked for three  to  four
    months in advance.

225. Nor does the respondent accept that  those  who  have  been  away  from
    Somalia for a significant period of time would experience difficulty in
    resettling upon return. In support of that submission,  the  respondent
    refers to a number  of  examples  to  be  drawn  from  the  documentary
    evidence before the Tribunal. It is not  necessary  to  identify  those
    individuals to whom, therefore, we refer as follows:

        a. F.O. - returning after 15 years as a taxi driver in England  and
           describing Mogadishu as "a place of leisure" (RB3 page 2881);
        b. F.A. -returning after 13 years in London (ibid);
        c. M.M.S.A. - returning after "many years" abroad  to  open  a  dry
           cleaning business in Mogadishu (RB1 page 261);
        d. A.J.M.- returning after two decades in  the  United  Kingdom  to
           establish a new business, the Village chain  of  restaurants  to
           which reference has already been made (RB1 page 265);
        e. A.A. - A female Somali citizen returning  after  living  in  the
           United States of America for about 5 years to open  a  furniture
           store business in  Mogadishu  which  now  employs  five  people.
           (RB1page 351);
        f. F.A. who lived in Norway for 8  years  before  she  returned  to
           Mogadishu to open an electronics store (ibid);
        g. M.A. who returned to Mogadishu after 10 years  living  in  Kenya
           and opened a beauty parlour where she now provides employment to
           6 women (ibid);
        h. Y.A. who returned to Mogadishu after  living  in  Kenya  for  14
           years to renovate and rent out property (RB1 page 433);
        i. L.M. who, after 25 years living in Canada and the United  States
           of America returned to Mogadishu to re-launch a  hotel  business
           with relatives. He has also opened a coffee bar (RB1 page 467);
        j. H.B. who returned after living for  many  years  in  the  United
           Kingdom, 9 of which she spent working as a taxi driver, and  who
           now, unusually for a Somali woman,  works as  a  bus  driver  in
           Mogadishu (RB3 page 2941);
        k. F.H. who, having left Somalia aged just 2 years old had returned
           in her mid twenties to take up a job as a ministerial  aid  (AB5
           page 1375).

    A few examples such as these is not a real basis  upon  which  to  make
    assertions as to the position for returnees  generally,  especially  as
    the  people  identified   mostly   returned   to   take   up   business
    opportunities. Also, it cannot be assumed that no difficulties had been
    experienced by these  returnees,  as  is  perhaps  illustrated  by  the
    inclusion of the proprietor of the Village Restaurant chain  which,  as
    we have noted, has attracted attacks. The point being made, though,  is
    that this is a selection  of  people  who  were  able  to  return  and,
    apparently  remain  and  re-establish  themselves  after  a  period  of
    absence.

226. The respondent submits that, significantly, there  is  no  evidence  of
    any mistreatment of returnees by either the authorities, including  the
    SNA, or by Al Shabaab in the sense of deliberate targeting. Given  that
    at least 70% of returnees from the diaspora during 2012 were said to be
    from the United States  of  America,  if  such  persons  were  seen  as
    apostates by Al  Shabaab,  or  as  potential  suicide  bombers  by  the
    authorities, one would expect to have seen reports of  that  but  there
    are none.

227. The respondent does not accept that resettlement  is  viable  only  for
    returnees with access to significant financial resources such as may be
    required to open a new business. In  support  of  that  an  example  is
    identified in the account mentioned above of the Somali woman returning
    to Mogadishu to work as a bus  driver  and  to  the  blog  in  which  a
    returnee from the United Kingdom described travelling around  Mogadishu
    on a bus, that being evidence we have discussed above.

228. The respondent further submits that the use of the term  "IDP"  in  the
    Somali context is problematic. This is because  the  term  is  used  to
    cover a wide range of people and circumstances: the  refugee  returnee,
    the IDP returnee, the urban poor, economic  migrants  and  pastoralists
    who moved to urban centres having lost  their  livestock.  And,  as  Dr
    Hoehne confirmed in his oral evidence, a person who had relocated  from
    one district of Mogadishu to  another  and  remained  settled  in  that
    district would still be regarded as an IDP. Thus,  there  may  well  be
    IDPs in Mogadishu who are far wealthier than "settled"  inhabitants  of
    the area.  This  point  was  recognised  in  a  2011  report  from  the
    Observatory of Conflict and Violence Prevention:


           "Hamar Weyne is the old part of town,  but  today  most  of  its
           original fair-skinned inhabitants have left to safer areas,  and
           it is largely inhabited by wealthy IDPs."


229. It is the respondent's position also that the number  of  IDPs  may  be
    overstated. In  support,  reference  is  made  to  comment  by  the  UN
    Monitoring Group in July 2013:


           "Diversion of funds by gatekeepers is endemic. For example,  the
           Monitoring Group has obtained evidence showing the existence  of
           "ghost camps" that are operated by gatekeepers and supported  by
           international assistance. One such camp in the  Karaan  District
           of Mogadishu was supposedly home to 3200 families and  supported
           since 2011 by UN agencies. In April 2012, UN  officials  visited
           the camp and found in addition to  the  gatekeeper  only  a  few
           women present with 20 to 30 shelters occupied by watchmen..."

230. The respondent's analysis of the numerical  data  available  concerning
    IDPs leads to the submission that there has in fact been a  significant
    reduction in the  number  of  IDP  camps  and  those  that  remain  are
    "transcending into fixed settlements".  Thus, the respondent's position
    is that it would be incorrect to assume that all  those  classified  as
    IDPs were vulnerable, poor or even destitute, even though some may be.

231. In that regard, the respondent submits that the historical  context  is
    significant. The "Danish Refugee Council Report on  Profiling  of  IDPs
    Mogadishu" dated 18 May 2007 records that the overwhelming majority  of
    IDPs in Mogadishu (77.5%) had left their home areas as long ago as 1991-
    1992 at the start of the civil war. But only  8%  have  been  displaced
    more than once, suggesting that most IDPs in Mogadishu  might  properly
    now be regarded as long-standing residents.

232. The number of IDPs in Mogadishu is the subject  of  some  disagreement.
    We have seen above, in discussing the oral  evidence,  that  there  has
    been reference to, and broadly acceptance of an estimate of 369,000  by
    the expert witnesses.  The respondent points out that  UNHCR  has  been
    reported as giving a figure of 184,000 and others have offered  figures
    in between those two estimates. Our view of the evidence  available  in
    this regard is that it is insufficiently reliable, whichever source  is
    taken, to provide an accurate figure of persons living in circumstances
    such as to properly characterise them as IDPs. That  is  compounded  by
    the difficulty we  have  discussed  above  concerning  the  problematic
    application of the term IDP to some whose living circumstances disclose
    no indication that they fall  below  what  is  to  be  regarded  as  an
    acceptable level. Having said that, it is clear from the evidence  that
    a significant number of  people  continue  to  live  in  IDP  camps  in
    Mogadishu in wholly inadequate conditions.

233. To  inform  an  assessment  of  conditions  within  an  IDP  camp,  the
    respondent refers to a Fact Sheet produced in September 2013 under  the
    auspices of USAID. This report is based upon  randomly  collected  data
    (every 6th house in an area of the camp selected) as an illustration of
    what was to be expected. Most had been displaced because of a  lack  of
    livelihood options and it is notable that  the  "incidence  of  female-
    headed households" was put at 33%. 20% of those questioned were engaged
    in casual labour, 31% were in  receipt  of  financial  assistance  from
    relatives and 19% reported an  income  from  "selling  property".  Most
    shelters were  buuls,  described  by  Ms  Harper  as  more  substantial
    structures  than  the   considerably   less   satisfactory   tents   or
    transitional shelters in which many in IDP camps have to make do  with.
    75% reported that they did not fear for their  physical  safety  within
    the camps.

234. In contrast to the views expressed by each  of  the  expert  witnesses,
    the respondent, drawing upon the documentary evidence, does not  accept
    that living conditions within Mogadishu's IDP  camps  necessarily  fall
    below acceptable standards. Most of the  camps  have  adequate  hygiene
    levels and water supplies and access to humanitarian aid.  The  general
    improvement in access to food for those living in Mogadishu is  equally
    applicable to those living in the camps. The respondent submits that in
    the light of all the evidence  there  has  been  material  and  durable
    change since 2011 so that returnees to Mogadishu and  those  continuing
    to reside there no longer face the risk of famine or pervasive disease.



235. Further, the evidence indicates  that  there  has  been  a  significant
    reduction in living costs as well as improved employment  opportunities
    since May 2011. By any view this must open opportunities for people who
    would otherwise be left with no alternative but to live  in  inadequate
    conditions  within  an  IDP  camp  to  seek  to  improve  their  living
    circumstances. According to the Report of the Secretary General of  the
    UN Security Council dated 3 September 2013, the "poverty line"  is  put
    at $2 per day. An ORB/BBC survey in November 2010 had recorded that 84%
    of respondents had a household income of about $50.  The  FSNAU  report
    referred to above noted that over the period July 2011  to  April  2012
    there had been a steady increase in wages for casual labour as well  as
    a reduction in the number of "ordinary residents" who relied upon it as
    an income source.

236. The respondent maintains that the evidence  indicates  that  some  will
    resort to "petty trading" as a means of providing income. Those  living
    in IDP camps are not disqualified  on  that  account  from  seeking  to
    establish a livelihood in this way. In AMM the  Tribunal  recorded  the
    view of Tony Burns that someone with money and short-term support could
    have a viable means of survival,  although  he  cautioned  about  other
    risks associated with visible possession of financial resources at that
    time. Returnees with some experience of work while away from Somalia or
    some other skill  or  qualification  acquired  would  be  in  a  better
    position that many Somali IDPs  in  seeking  employment  opportunities.
    Unlike those who have remained  in  Somalia,  few  of  whom  will  have
    received any form of secondary education, those who have spent time  in
    the west may, by comparison have benefited from education  such  as  to
    enhance their employment prospects upon return.

237. The respondent submits that  the  "economic  boom"  that  has  come  to
    Mogadishu is of particular relevance. The  "huge"  influx  of  diaspora
    people has prevented a re-emergence of the old "warlord" phenomenon and
    Mogadishu has become a tourist destination, the  evidence  speaking  of
    the creation and  opening  of  small  businesses  such  as  nightclubs,
    arcades, cafs and the installation of solar-powered street lighting. A
    notable return of women to Mogadishu in the last 2 years is  said  also
    to be indicative of real improvements in security and access to a means
    of livelihood.

238. Although it is the respondent's  position  that  a  returnee  from  the
    United Kingdom may be better-placed to establish a  livelihood  than  a
    long-term resident, reliance is placed also upon  the  significance  of
    remittances. The United Kingdom is described  as  one  of  the  highest
    receivers of Somali nationals, a  total  being  estimated  in  2010  of
    110,326 individuals ("Keeping  the  Lifeline  Open  -  remittances  and
    markets in Somalia "(Oxfam), 2013 (RB1694). Drawn from the same  source
    is an estimate that more than 16 million was sent  in  2009  from  the
    United Kingdom by way of remittances to Somalia.

239. Finally, in terms of general  submissions,  the  respondent  points  to
    financial support provided to returnees by the Home Office in terms  of
    reintegration support. Voluntary returnees can benefit from  a  package
    of a grant of up to 1,500  which  might  be  used  to  start  a  small
    business as well  as  support  from  local  caseworkers.  Although  the
    Tribunal in AMM were  not  persuaded  that  would  make  a  significant
    difference, that was because of the conditions as they were then  found
    to be. Now  that  the  complete  withdrawal  of  Al  Shabaab  has  been
    maintained and there  is  no  longer  any  conventional  fighting,  the
    position is, the respondent submits, very different.

Submissions on behalf of MOJ

240. In addition to his oral submissions, Mr Gill  has  submitted  composite
    written submissions, a substantial document that includes  the  initial
    skeleton argument, a summary of propositions and  detailed  submissions
    upon the various issues that arise in these appeals.  In  addition,  he
    has submitted a written response to  the  closing  written  submissions
    made by the respondent. As these written submissions extend  to  nearly
    200 pages, we do not attempt to summarise here all that is advanced but
    seek to do justice to Mr Gill's submissions in setting out the  summary
    that follows.

241. Mr Gill submits that the present country situation in Somalia  is  such
    that some groups of Somali citizens will still be able to  establish  a
    claim to be recognised as refugees, or to be entitled to the protection
    of Article 3  of  the  ECHR  or  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive. MOJ, he submits, is entitled to refugee  status  because  he
    would be targeted by Al Shabaab  for  two  reasons  recognised  by  the
    Convention, those being an imputed political  opinion  and  an  imputed
    religious belief. Alternatively, there  would  be  an  infringement  of
    Article 3 of the ECHR because of a risk that he would be  subjected  to
    inhuman and degrading treatment as a member of the "marginalised  urban
    poor or IDP population in Mogadishu".

242. Mr Gill further submits that  MOJ  is  eligible  for  protection  under
    Article 15(c) because of the sliding  scale  approach  adopted  by  the
    Court of Appeal in QD (Iraq) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  620  as  well  as
    protection against ill-treatment such as to infringe Article 3 in  that
    context and protection under Article 8 of the ECHR in  the  sense  that
    his return to Mogadishu would infringe his right  to  respect  for  his
    physical and moral integrity.

243. We will summarise first his submissions relating  to  the  evidence  we
    have before us and in respect of the general country situation and then
    consider the specific issues affecting MOJ as an individual appellant.

244. Mr Gill takes as a starting-point the categories of  those  thought  to
    be at risk as are identified in the 2014 UNHCR report that we have made
    reference to already. He emphasises that this list  is  non-exhaustive.
    Rather than setting out the re-articulation of that list found  in  his
    written submissions, we reproduce the list as it appears in the report:

           "Potential Risk Profiles:


           1. Individuals associated with, or (perceived as) supportive  of
              the SFG and the international community, including the AMISOM
              forces;


           2. Individuals (perceived as) contravening  Islamic  Sharia  and
              decrees imposed by Al-Shabaab, including converts from Islam,
              other "apostates" and  moderate  Islamic  scholars  who  have
              criticized Al-Shabaab extremism;


           3. Individuals (perceived  as)  opposing  the  SFG  and  related
              interests and individuals  (suspected  of)  supporting  armed
              anti-Government groups;


           4. Individuals  in  certain  professions  such  as  journalists,
              members of the  judiciary,  humanitarian  workers  and  human
              rights  activists,  teachers   and   staff   of   educational
              facilities, business people and other  people  (perceived  to
              be) of means;


           5. Individuals (at risk of being) forcibly recruited;


           6. Members of minority groups such as members of  the  Christian
              religious minority and members of minority clans;


           7. Individuals belonging to a clan engaged in a blood feud;


           8. Women and girls;


           9. Children;


           10. Victims and persons at risk of trafficking;


           11. Sexual and/or gender non-conforming persons  (lesbian,  gay,
              bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) individuals);


           12.    Persons with a mental disability or suffering from mental
              illness."


    It has to be recognised, though, that the evidence  before  us  plainly
    indicates that there is no clan-based persecution in Mogadishu today at
    a level to engage issues of international  protection.  Notably  absent
    from that list is any reference to returnees from the West. However, Mr
    Gill invites the Tribunal to add such a category of persons at risk  in
    Mogadishu, on the basis that Al Shabaab has made threats:


           "[they] have been taught garbage and sins, and have lost [their]
           religion and are being used to [spread evil];


    and because Commander Hussein of Al Shabaab is reported  to  have  said
    that returnees "will be killed and fought against in  the  same  manner
    that Al Shabaab fights against the Somali Government."

245. We are unable to accept  that  submission.  In  our  judgement,  it  is
    simply inconceivable that UNHCR would have omitted returnees  from  the
    West from this recently assembled list of categories of persons who may
    be at risk today in Mogadishu if there had been any reason  to  include
    such a group.

246. Mr Gill refers in his  submissions  to  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    describing periodic round-ups in Mogadishu by the police, searching for
    Al Shabaab supporters, in support of an assertion that this  represents
    an obstacle to safe return. Although the vast majority are released the
    same day, Mr Gill points to reports of youngsters  being  detained  for
    weeks or even months. However, when the source for this information  (a
    news report of 22 January 2013 from Sabah Washington DC)  is  examined,
    the picture that emerges is of the police acting in what  would  appear
    to be an entirely appropriate way. Having reported  that  3,259  people
    had  been  arrested  during  an  operation  the  report  contained  the
    following:

           "[The Benadir National Security  Agency  Commander]  said  3,000
           people were released after police investigations determined they
           were innocent. "We will continue with the investigations we  are
           conducting in the city until we secure the city" he said."
           ...
           "The operations also led to the confiscation of landmines, bombs
           and ammunition for heavy weapons such  as  bazookas,  AK47s  and
           other automatic machineguns..."


    One person caught up in this operation was quoted as saying:


           "We were about 20 people and they took us to the headquarters of
           the Criminal Investigation Department  (CID)....  They  did  not
           harm us. They asked us questions like where we  lived  and  what
           our occupations were. We were detained for about five  hours  in
           the CID jail, and finally they released 16 of us."


           "Benadir Deputy Governor for security Affairs...  said  security
           forces have made a concerted effort to protect  Mogadishu.  "The
           city of Mogadishu is the heart of the  country.  If  it  becomes
           peaceful, all the regions of the  country  will  be  peaceful...
           Security in Mogadishu has been improving day by  day  since  Al-
           Shabaab was expelled from the  city  in  August  2011.  Security
           forces are ready to eliminate the remnants."

247. Mr Gill submits that freedom of movement within Mogadishu  is  hampered
    by the fact that there are unauthorized checkpoints run  by  police  or
    associated militia or  set  up  by  Al  Shabaab  members  disguised  as
    soldiers. But, this must be seen in the  context  of  the  source  from
    which this information is drawn, the Danish 2  report,  which  includes
    this:


           "Freedom of movement  in  Mogadishu  has  improved  considerably
           since February 2012  according  to  Kilian  Kleinschmidt,  OCHA.
           There are no longer visible checkpoints in the  city  centre  of
           Mogadishu. However, there are a lot  of  invisible  checkpoints,
           but even these do not affect the  freedom  of  movement  for  UN
           agencies. Today there are only checkpoints in the outlying areas
           of Mogadishu...
           ...


           Ayaki Ito, UNHCR, confirms that the  number  of  checkpoints  in
           Mogadishu has been reduced considerably [since  February  2012].
           However, it is common to see a person from the local militia  at
           important street corners for him to check if someone unknown  is
           passing by. These are the so-called invisible check checkpoints.


           A representative of an international organisation explains  that
           there are checkpoints in Mogadishu and one  cannot  exclude  the
           possibility that al-Shabaab disguised as  soldiers  are  manning
           them...


           An international NGO working in S/C Somalia (B)  explained  that
           there are still checkpoints in Mogadishu, but these  are  mainly
           in place to tax the trucks going into the city...
           ...


           An international NGO working in  S/C  Somalia  (D)  stated  that
           today people are moving more freely around Mogadishu than during
           the previous five to six years. People  are  now  going  to  the
           Bakara market...
           ...


           There are far less checkpoints in  Mogadishu  than  in  February
           2012, and the existing ones tend to  be  government  checkpoints
           according to Tony Burns. SAACID-Australia...


           People are moving freely around in  Mogadishu  today,  and  they
           feel safer today than for the past twenty years according to  an
           international NGO working in S/C Somalia (A)."


    In the light of this material we reject Mr Gill's  submission  in  that
    regard.

248. Attention is drawn to a report by the UN Human Settlements  Program  in
    December  2013  that   describes   Mogadishu   as   "the   capital   of
    displacement". Mr Gill is correct to say  that  report  speaks  of  the
    majority of Mogadishu's population consisting  of  displaced,  homeless
    and urban poor people. This, however, must be seen in  the  context  of
    the evidence before the Tribunal concerning the problematic  definition
    of IDPs  in  the  Somali  context,  this  report  apparently  including
    reference to 400,000 people who left Mogadishu years ago but  who  have
    since returned. Although the now familiar figure of 369,000 IDPs is re-
    stated, this report in fact suggests a different figure:


           "...The UNHCR estimates that 184,400 IDPs are in settlements  in
           Mogadishu as of July 2012. The majority  of  the  IDPs  surveyed
           (55%) arrived in the city between 6 and 12 months prior  to  the
           April survey, which coincides with the peak of the famine crisis
           that hit southern Somalia between June and October 2011.
           ...


           ...the large majority of IDPs originating from the nearby famine
           stricken regions. However, the proportion  of  people  displaced
           inside the city seems to have decreased (20% to 12%), which  can
           be attributed to the improved security situation in Mogadishu."


249. The fact remains, though, that  this  report  speaks  of  90%  of  IDPs
    living  in  makeshift   accommodation   in   "specifically   designated
    settlements" although the  description  of  the  methodology  does  not
    indicate the ways in which IDPs  were  identified  or  whether  it  was
    precisely because such persons were to be located in those settlements.



250. Significantly, those who are described as IDPs are said to  be  exposed
    to a wide  range  of  human  rights  violations.  In  support  of  that
    submission, Mr Gill refers to a HRW report of March 2013 ("Hostages  of
    the Gatekeepers") which focuses in the following extract not on IDPs as
    such but upon IDPs who are living in one of Mogadishu's  IDP  camps  or
    settlements:

           "This report is based on more than a year's research,  including
           70 interviews with newly arrived persons  displaced  from  South
           Central Somalia by the 2011 2012 famine and fighting in some  of
           the main IDP camps and settlements in Mogadishu. It examines the
           situation of displaced people in Mogadishu from  the  height  of
           the famine in July 2011 through November 2012 and  it  describes
           the abuses faced by these people who are often silenced by those
           bent on exploiting their vulnerability.


           Throughout this  period  members  of  displaced  communities  in
           Mogadishu faced serious  human  rights  abuses  including  rape,
           beatings, ethnic discrimination, restricted access to  food  and
           shelter, restrictions on movement, and reprisals when they dared
           to protest their mistreatment.  The  most  serious  abuses  were
           committed by the various militias  and  security  forces,  often
           affiliated with the government, operating within or  near  camps
           and settlements for the  displaced.  Frequently  these  militias
           were linked or controlled by managers, or "gatekeepers" as  they
           are known, of the IDP camp."

251. Mr Gill submits that the Danish 2 report points out that clan  dynamics
    in combination  with  other  factors  are  an  important  element  when
    considering risk for the IDP population but, again, it is necessary  to
    put that into its context. In that report it is noted that:

           "UNHCR-Somalia, Mogadishu, confirmed that someone  in  Mogadishu
           will not be  at  risk  today  solely  because  he/she  is  of  a
           different clan, although clan dynamics in combination with other
           factors  are  an  important  element  when   considering   risk,
           including for the IDP population. It  is  obvious  that  one  is
           safer when he or she is residing in an area dominated by his  or
           her own clan or if one has  good  relations  with  a  dominating
           clan."

252. Addressing access to a livelihood, Mr  Gill  refers  to  the  Danish  3
    report:

           "Regarding access  to  livelihood  in  Mogadishu,  UNHCR-Somalia
           explained that the presence of nuclear family is  a  requirement
           for  livelihood  support,  as  the  clan  will  not  help   with
           livelihood."


    Mr Gill draws a sharp distinction between two types of  returnees;  the
    business  people  and   investors   seeking   economic   and   business
    opportunities  and  those  returnees  with  neither  family   or   clan
    connections nor access to economic  resources.  The  latter  group,  he
    submits are at risk of:


        a. being marginalised  and  forced  into  joining  gangs,  becoming
           alcohol  and  drug-dependent,  unemployment,  hopelessness   and
           facing social stigma
        b. being targeted because of their clothes,  their  foreign  manner
           and their apparent affluence
        c. being suspected of returning in order to join Al Shabaab
        d. being compelled to join Al Shabaab, clan-based  militia  or  the
           national forces
        e. ending up in an IDP camp


253. Addressing next  facilities  for  treating  those  with  mental  health
    difficulties, Mr Gill points out that although  it  has  been  reported
    that as many as one in three Somalis  are  affected  by  some  form  of
    mental illness, largely due  to  prolonged  exposure  to  conflict  and
    instability, there are only five health centres  in  the  country  that
    provide mental health care services and  there  are  real  difficulties
    with the availability of  medication  for  psychiatric  disorders  (COI
    Report August 2013). However, the extract  reproduced  in  his  written
    submissions omits the second half of the paragraph, taken from the  WHO
    report quoted in the COI:


           "To address this issue, WHO-Somalia in  collaboration  with  the
           local health authorities provided  medicines  to  mental  health
           care services and expanded  the  charge  free  initiative.  This
           initiative that addresses the rights  of  the  mentally  ill  by
           advocating for charge  free  hospitals,  chain  free  homes  and
           charge free environment is  well-established  in  Mogadishu  and
           Hargeisa and will start in Bossaso in 2011."


254.  On the basis of this evidence, Mr Gill submits that  a  returnee  with
    mental heath problems would not be able to access appropriate treatment
    and as there have been examples of such persons  being  chained  up  or
    imprisoned instead of treated appropriately  by  health  professionals,
    there is a real risk of infringement of rights protected by  Article  3
    or 8 of the ECHR.

255. The next topic addressed  in  Mr  Gill's  written  submissions  is  the
    question of the impact upon the Article 15(c) risk, found to be present
    for most residents  of  Mogadishu  by  the  Tribunal  in  AMM,  of  the
    withdrawal from Mogadishu of Al Shabaab. In submitting that such a risk
    from indiscriminate violence remains a significant one,  he  identifies
    the following factors:

        a. Grenade attacks being  carried  out  on  a  nightly  basis  with
           youngsters being paid to throw hand grenades;
        b. Targeted assassinations being carried out by Al Shabaab;
        c. Increased use by Al Shabaab of victim-activated  pressure  plate
           IEDs, with  the  number  of  civilian  casualties  from  suicide
           attacks rising sharply;
        d. An increase in the number of UIED attacks, compared  with  2012,
           creating a risk of "collateral damage" for civilians;
        e. Increasingly complex asymmetrical attacks being carried  out  by
           Al Shabaab, designed to cause the maximum number  of  casualties
           and general disorder;
        f. Continued presence of Al Shabaab in the Bakara market area;
        g. Al Shabaab infiltration of  police,  intelligence  and  military
           forces;
        h. Ability of Al Shabaab to move around Mogadishu, anonymously;
        i. Al Shabaab's warning to civilians to stay away  from  government
           buildings, public venues frequented by government officials  and
           foreign aid agencies and their workers, as  they  would  all  be
           targeted in attacks;
        j. The latent ability of Al  Shabaab  to  carry  out  well-equipped
           multi-fronted   offensives   against   the    government    once
           international forces withdraw;
        k. Recommencement  of  nightly  mortar  attacks  on  Mogadishu  and
           engagement by Al  Shabaab  with  the  Somali  National  Army  in
           daylight gunfire exchanges with the SNA ;
        l. An increased targeting of civilians by Al Shabaab, according  to
           ACLED.

256. Most of these issues have already been discussed, in our assessment  of
    the expert evidence carried out above. However, in sum, the  conclusion
    Mr Gill invites the Tribunal to  draw  is  one  that  he  expresses  as
    follows:


           "The position is, therefore, that  whilst  AS  has  shifted  its
           tactics away from conventional warfare, its use  of  symmetrical
           warfare has evolved and become more sophisticated over time. The
           consequence of this has been  an  increase  in  the  number  and
           complexity of asymmetrical attacks with a corresponding increase
           in the number  of  civilian  casualties  in  proportion  to  the
           overall number of casualties..."


    That assessment is said to be supported by the statistics  provided  by
    ACLED which we have considered above. The assertion that an increase in
    the number of attacks following withdrawal of Al Shabaab from Mogadishu
    corresponds directly with an increase in  civilian  casualties  is,  of
    course, at the very heart of the dispute between the  parties  that  it
    falls to us to resolve.

257. Mr Gill argues that this evidence supports  the  assertion  that  there
    has been an increase in the targeting of civilians and an  increase  in
    the number of fatalities attributed to Al Shabaab The source quoted the
    ACLED report dated January 2014.  This  report  is  not  limited  to  a
    consideration of the situation in Mogadishu. Whilst the report does say
    that "the proportion of Al Shabaab  activity  that  has  targeted  non-
    combatants populations has increased steadily since 2011..." it can  be
    seen from the paragraph that follows that this is  not  specifically  a
    reference to what is happening in Mogadishu:

           "...In areas which were soon-to-be  seized  from  the  group  by
           Federal Government  forces,  attacks  on  civilians  accused  of
           spying appear to have increased....  Similarly,  in  many  areas
           which were recently seized from the group remained vulnerable to
           indiscriminate attacks on civilian populations such as  bombings
           in marketplaces"

    Further, this is to be read in the context of what was said earlier  in
    the same report, prefacing what was to follow:

           "... the intensity of conflict appears to have reduced somewhat,
           with reported fatalities dropping slightly over  the  course  of
           the year. While event levels reached a historic  peak  in  2013,
           reported fatalities have remained relatively low and stable over
           the course of the year..."

258. Very recently, there have been reports of Al  Shabaab  having  launched
    attacks on Mogadishu which Mr Gill submits should be categorised  as  a
    recommencement of this form of attack. It is plain from  those  reports
    that the target of the attacks are the presidential palace,  an  AMISOM
    base and government buildings although some civilian homes are said  to
    have been struck. Casualty levels have not been confirmed.

259. With regard  to  the  approach  of  the  Tribunal  to  the  statistical
    information available concerning casualty figures  generally,  Mr  Gill
    urges caution on the basis that figures  are  not  reliable  and  UNHCR
    warns against using such information to discern trends. He points  also
    to the disparity that can be detected between  statistical  information
    from different sources. He submits that although there  may  well  have
    been "some limited improvement" in  the  socio-political  and  economic
    sphere after the Al Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu in  August  2011,
    the question is whether  the  improvements  have  been  sufficient.  He
    submits that given the shortcomings in the data or statistical evidence
    and the recent news of renewed  conventional  warfare  by  Al  Shabaab,
    there remains a general and non-specific Article 15(c) risk of harm for
    all civilians, including returnees to Mogadishu.

260. Recognising that the large numbers of  people  choosing  to  return  to
    Mogadishu invites a conclusion that this is illustrative of an  overall
    perception of safety, Mr Gill submits there are difficulties with  that
    view. This is because a  number  or  reports  have  referred  to  these
    returnees as being "the elite", persons with access  to  resources  and
    having clear economic or political ambitions.  They  may  be  going  to
    Mogadishu on a temporary basis, retaining the option  of  returning  to
    western or middle eastern countries where they retain citizenship. This
    category of persons is not representative as other returnees may not be
    able to pay for secure accommodation and protection such as the $15,000
    paid in the example given by Dr Mullen. We do not need to  repeat  what
    we say above about that.

261. Mr Gill summarises in his written submissions the oral expert  evidence
    concerning the inability of the security forces to  provide  protection
    to individual citizens and the absence of protection available  from  a
    returnee's own clan.

262. An interesting issue that arose during the oral  evidence  was  whether
    and if so to what extent a returnee should be expected to take steps to
    minimise the risk that may be encountered from Al Shabaab in  Mogadishu
    today. In his closing  submissions  Mr  Gill  says  that  applying  the
    principles of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, "ordinary citizens" should  not
    be required to change the way they are inclined to act for fear of  the
    clandestine Al Shabaab presence. For example, a citizen should  not  be
    expected to avoid Bakara market  simply  because  there  is  a  greater
    chance of getting caught up in a grenade attack there than elsewhere in
    Mogadishu. Nor should  an  "ordinary  citizen"  be  expected  to  avoid
    government buildings or other locations known to be  identified  by  Al
    Shabaab as legitimate  targets.  His  submission  is  that  this  would
    constitute such a disruption to daily life to amount to an infringement
    of rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR.

Submissions on behalf of MAA

263. Ms Panagiotopoulou takes as her starting point  the  concern  expressed
    by the Tribunal in AMM that the improvements detected  in  the  country
    situation may not have been shown to be  durable,  and  reinforces  the
    importance of that concern by drawing upon what  was  said  in  EM  and
    others (returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UTUT 98 (IAC):

           "where a previous assessment has resulted in a  conclusion  that
           the population generally or certain sections of  it  may  be  at
           risk,  any  assessment  that  the  material  circumstances  have
           changed would need to demonstrate that such  changes  are  well-
           established evidentially and durable."


264. Developing that point, reference is  made  to  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information report, covering the security situation  between  2012  and
    up to June 2013, mention of which is said to be "conspicuously  absent"
    from the respondent's written arguments:

           "Somalia's  long-running  armed  conflict  continues  to   leave
           civilians  dead,  wounded,  and  displaced  in  large   numbers.
           Although the Islamist armed  group  al-Shabaab  lost  ground  in
           2012, abandoning  control  of  key  towns  such  as  Beletweyne,
           Baidoa, and the strategic port city of Kismayo, it continues  to
           carry out  attacks  and  targeted  killings,  including  in  the
           capital,  Mogadishu....Civilians  continue  to  be  killed   and
           wounded by crossfire, particularly during infighting between TFG
           forces over control of roadblocks, and by  improvised  explosive
           devices and grenade attacks primarily by al-Shabaab fighters. Al-
           Shabaab carried out  several  high-profile  suicide  attacks  in
           Mogadishu including one on September 20 that killed at least  18
           people, including three journalists.'


           The UN Security  Council's  Report  of  the  Secretary  General,
           published on 31 May 2013 and covering events of 16 January  2013
           to 15 May 2013, (UNSC Report May 2013) stated that the  security
           situation remained fragile during the reporting period.  Despite
           some improvements in Mogadishu, Al-Shabaab continued  to  launch
           asymmetrical attacks on soft  targets  using  terrorist  tactics
           that often resulted in civilian  casualties.  Targeted  killings
           and attacks were routinely reported.  The  number  of  incidents
           involving  improvised  explosive  devices  rose   in   2013   in
           comparison with 2012."

    In fact, in the interests of accuracy, it should be noted that this  is
    an extract from a HRW report published on  31  January  2013,  and  the
    report is not dealing only with the situation in Mogadishu, although of
    course reference is made to the city.


265. Reliance is placed also upon an extract from advice  published  by  the
    Foreign and Commonwealth Office, advising against all travel to Somalia
    and urging any British nationals present to  leave.  However,  this  is
    primarily intended to reflect the position of British citizens and  not
    Somali nationals whose position in their own country of nationality  is
    inherently different than that of a foreigner present in the country.

266. Ms Panagiotopoulou points to consistent reports  by  the  UN  Secretary
    General speaking of the  fragility  and  unpredictable  nature  of  the
    security situation in Somalia. She reproduces a short extract from  the
    report of 1 May 2012:

           "Al Shabaab terrorists attacks remained constant"

    but should have completed the sentence to  put  it  into  its  intended
    context:

           "In the Mogadishu area, Al-Shabaab  terrorist  attacks  remained
           constant, though many  were  prevented  or  failed  as  pressure
           mounted from reinforced Government and AMISOM forces."

    Similarly, she reproduces part of another extract:

           "While Somali forces and AMISOM  continue  to  make  territorial
           gains, asymmetrical insurgent attacks pose a substantial  threat
           ....I  remain  deeply  concerned  about  grave   violations   of
           international humanitarian and human rights law."

    But that sentence, which relates not just to Mogadishu but  to  Somalia
    generally, should be read to its conclusion to understand its focus:

           "I  remain  deeply   concerned   about   grave   violations   of
           international humanitarian  and  human  rights  law,  especially
           against women and children. I urge all parties  to  ensure  that
           the protection of civilians  is  integrated  into  all  military
           operations.

           ... I am encouraged by  the  Transitional  Federal  Government's
           continued commitment to  prevent  the  recruitment  and  use  of
           children by its armed forces..."

267. Other extracts from the Secretary General's reports  include  reference
    to arbitrary arrests and detentions remaining a major concern. But this
    is a reference to the "sweep" operations,  carried  out  by  police  in
    Mogadishu, designed to identify Al  Shabaab  supporters  and  those  in
    possession of explosive material, which for most  people,  as  we  have
    seen, involved being detained only a few hours while questioning  takes
    place and no ill-treatment is experienced. Given the objectives of that
    operation and the benefit to the civilian population where it succeeds,
    that does appear to be a proportionate disruption of personal freedom.

268. Ms Panagiotopoulou quotes from a report dated 31 May 2013 in which  the
    Secretary  General  noted  that  the  number  of  incidents   involving
    improvised explosive devices rose in 2013 in comparison with  2012  but
    omitted from her extract the single example  that  was  given  in  this
    regard, in the words that followed on from the extract quoted:

           "... On 24 January, for example, a device hit a convoy  carrying
           two United Nations personnel, who were unharmed."

    It seems curious that the author of this report should select a  single
    example of such an attack in which no one was  injured  if,  typically,
    such  attacks  generally  claimed  victims  in  terms  of  injuries  or
    fatalities. It might be  observed  also  that  this  was  apparently  a
    targeted attack against non-civilians.

269.  Continuing  her  analysis  of  the  Secretary  General's  reports,  Ms
    Panagiotopoulou emphasises the view that had  been  expressed  that  in
    view of the increased number of security incidents, compared with 2012:

           "The political, security and development gains made  so  far  in
           Somalia are still reversible..."

    and:


           "The mission concluded that the political progress made over the
           past year and the military gains against Al  Shabaab  that  have
           been achieved in recent years  are  at  serious  risk  of  being
           reversed. The findings of the joint mission indicate that AS has
           deliberately shifted tactics since May 2013 from  convention  to
           asymmetrical warfare, in recovered areas, including  the  Somali
           capital.  They  target  particularly   the   Government,   State
           institutions and the international presence working in  Somalia,
           including the UN.... In addition to causing the  death  of  many
           innocent  civilians,   including   women   and   children,   the
           deterioration in the security situation threatens  to  undermine
           the fragile Somali political  process..."


270. Reference is made next to the most recent  report  from  the  Secretary
    General on 2 December 2012:

           "The  security  situation  in  Mogadishu   remained   relatively
           unstable during the reporting period..."

    But, again, we feel it is necessary to complete the citation  in  order
    to convey the meaning apparently intended by the author of the  report.
    He continued, in the next sentence:

           "The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)  and  the  Somali
           national security forces continued to thwart Al-Shabaab  attacks
           almost daily in and around Mogadishu."

271. Finally, in this regard, Ms Panagiotopoulou reproduced  this  from  the
    same and most recent report:

           "An increase in criminal  activities  was  observed  during  the
           reporting period, including the establishment of  illegal  check
           points, robberies and extortion of drivers and owners of  public
           transportation vehicles. In addition, abuses  against  civilians
           by undisciplined elements of the Somali national security forces
           were  reported,  mainly  on  the  outskirts  of  Mogadishu   and
           Kismayo."

    It  might  be  observed,  though,  that  the  evidence  indicates  that
    checkpoints are not a continuing phenomena  generally  now  encountered
    within Mogadishu and this is not  a  comment  limited  to  difficulties
    within the capital city.


272. Next, Ms Panagiotopoulou addressed in her written  submissions  UNHCR's
    January 2014 report, which has been considered in detail in the context
    of our discussion of the evidence. The point being made is  that  there
    is said to be no apparent improvement in the security situation in 2014
    and security incidents continue to be reported.

273. According to the  Danish  2  report,  Ms  Panagiotopoulou  submits,  Al
    Shabaab remains in  control  of  some  parts  of  Mogadishu  at  night.
    However, in our view this is not a conclusion of the  Danish  2  report
    but a recitation of the view expressed by others:

           "According to an international NGO working in  S/C  Somalia  (D)
           there are areas of Mogadishu which are more or  less  controlled
           by al-Shabaab, but only during  night-time.  Al-Shabaab  is  not
           visible at daytime.. This is  especially  the  case  in  Deynile
           district..."

    And to put that into its proper context, we need to add the  concluding
    sentence of that  paragraph,  which  seems  to  us  to  be  a  powerful
    indicator of the general position  as  the  writer  of  the  report  is
    attempting to describe it:

           "However, people in general find that other areas  of  Mogadishu
           are safer than ever since the civil war began in 1991."

274. Ms Panagiotopoulou takes from the third and  final  Danish  report  the
    following assertions: armed attacks by Al  Shabaab  have  continued  in
    Mogadishu, notwithstanding their withdrawal from  the  city,  and  they
    have infiltrated the police, the intelligence and the military; targets
    tended to be SNAF, police and government institutions, but such attacks
    can sometimes result in the killing of civilians; although  Al  Shabaab
    does not want to send a message that it deliberately  kills  civilians,
    indiscriminate use of weapons did cause civilian casualties.

275. Further, she submits there has been an increase in the use of pressure-
    plate IEDs and civilian casualties from suicide attacks  rose  sharply.
    However, we do observe that there may be a contextual  difficulty  with
    the source of this information, which suggests that the focus is not on
    Mogadishu itself:

           "Al-Shabaab continues to cause  significant  harm  to  civilians
           through  its  indiscriminate  use  of  weapons.   According   to
           available data for 2012, Al-Shabaab increased the use of victim-
           activated pressure-plate improvised explosive devices, while the
           reported number of civilian casualties  resulting  from  suicide
           attacks in Somalia also rose sharply.  In  addition,  Al-Shabaab
           persistently  practices  targeted  assassinations  of  civilians
           accused  of  spying  or  as  a  punishment  for  their  apparent
           allegiances, and systematic intimidation  of  local  communities
           through restrictions on movement,  imposition  of  taxation  and
           strict application of sharia law."

    Since this is a  reference  to  attacks  in  Somalia,  rather  than  in
    Mogadishu, and since the evidence discussed above does not suggest that
    there are public executions for spying or punishments  carried  out  in
    Mogadishu by Al-Shabaab or the imposition of  taxation  or  control  of
    communities in Mogadishu by  the  application  of  sharia  law  by  Al-
    Shabaab, it seems likely that this is not intended to be a  commentary,
    specifically, of the situation within Mogadishu.

276. On the other hand, Ms Panagiotopoulou does  reproduce  in  her  written
    submissions some  material  dealing  specifically  with  events  within
    Mogadishu. The Monitoring Group report of 2012, at page 376 :

           "... According to UN Mine Action Service (UNMAS) data,  28  IEDs
           detonated in Mogadishu during the course of 2011,  resulting  in
           116 deaths out of 378  casualties.  Between  1  January  and  24
           September  2012  the  number  of  IEDs  detonated  in  Mogadishu
           increased to 32, resulting in 62 deaths out of 235 casualties."


277. Ms  Panagiotopoulou  advances  submissions  in  respect  of  the  ACLED
    evidence that echoes the points we have  already  discussed.  She  adds
    that regard should be had to the observation in  the  Danish  2  report
    that "anyone who works actively for  normalisation  of  livelihoods  in
    Mogadishu could be at risk  of  being  threatened  or  killed  by  AS".
    However we observe that the use of the word "could" indicates a  degree
    of speculation rather than evidence-based  observation,  especially  as
    that comment, taken from the Danish report is followed soon after  with
    a list of categories of people who are considered to be at risk.

278.  Rogue  elements  of  the  TFG  operating  in  Mogadishu  also,  in  Ms
    Panagiotopoulou's submission, represent a risk to civilians, especially
    in terms of robbery. In support, she cites the same  extract  from  the
    Secretary General's  report,  discussed  above,  that  appeared  to  be
    concerned  with  areas  "mainly  on  the  outskirts  of  Mogadishu  and
    Kismayo". Ms Panagiotopoulou submits that it is clear from the evidence
    that very little, if any, protection is available to civilians from the
    police in Mogadishu.

279. Ms Panagiotopoulou deals briefly with the issue of the significance  of
    clans in Mogadishu today, limiting her written submissions to note that
    UNHCR said in 2014:

           "The traditional extended family  and  community  structures  of
           Somali society no longer constitute as strong a  protection  and
           coping  mechanisms  they  did  in  the  past,  particularly   in
           locations such as Mogadishu... In Mogadishu  in  particular  the
           nuclear  family  has  reportedly  become  the  main   protection
           mechanism."


280. As for the statistical evidence available, in common with  counsel  for
    the other parties in this appeal, Ms Panagiotopoulou recognises in  her
    submissions that the data available is imperfect and  incomplete  in  a
    number of respects, but points out that the UNHCR January  2014  report
    suggested that the level of fatalities  for  civilians  and  combatants
    combined were higher in 2012 and early 2013 than they had been in  2011
    but, we observe, the significant information, which is the division  of
    those figures between civilians and combatants, is elusive.

281.  Addressing  next  the  humanitarian   situation   in   Mogadishu,   Ms
    Panagiotopoulou asserts that "acute malnutrition" remains with  870,000
    people being "food insecure" and a further  2.3  million  people  being
    classified as "stressed". There are an estimated 369,000 people in  IDP
    settlements as at September 2013. IDPs and "poor people" do  not  enjoy
    the same levels of security as others do and IDPs often have to pay for
    their security and face problems from  the  "gatekeepers"  of  the  IDP
    camps.

282. Ms Panagiotopoulou further submits that an Article 15(c) risk  persists
    in Mogadishu "for the general population of Mogadishu", such  that  the
    conclusions of the Tribunal in AMM should not  be  departed  from.  She
    argues that the position is unaffected by the view expressed in  KAB  v
    Sweden because that case was concerned  with  Article  3  of  the  ECHR
    rather than Article 15(c).

283. MAA's profile, it is said, would be that of someone returning from  the
    West after 2 years away from Somalia and so, according to the  evidence
    of Dr Hoehne, would be at risk because "as a  general  matter  diaspora
    returnees are being suspected of being in the anti AS camp."  He  would
    be seen as someone "who had been taught garbage and sin"  and  who  has
    lost his religion. He is at risk of being perceived as someone who  was
    "used to spread evil". As the expert witness Mary Harper  had  said  in
    the written report commissioned on behalf of  MOJ,   drawing  upon  the
    determination of the Tribunal in AMM:

           "Al-Shabaab believes returnees from the West to be in a state of
           apostasy, and therefore subject to punishment,"

284. Indeed,  this  particular  risk  was  recognised,  Ms  Panagiotopoulou,
    points out, by the Tribunal in giving  the  last  country  guidance  at
    paragraph 464:

           "the fact of having come  from  the  United  Kingdom  is,  as  a
           general matter, likely to elevate the risk to a person of  being
           branded a spy, which carries the very real risk of serious  ill-
           treatment or death.  The only exception we would make  is  where
           the returnee is seeking out Al-Shabab in order to join its ranks
           as a fighter for international jihad..."

    In this respect  also,  reliance  is  placed  also  upon  the  evidence
    provided by Mary Harper who, at paragraph 4.5 of her report  reproduced
    a comment by the Al Shabaab commander Ali Mohamed Hussein who  said  of
    diaspora returnees:

           ... They are working for the infidels and since they are working
           for the infidels, they are the same as  the  infidels  they  are
           working for as far as we are concerned.. They will be killed and
           fought against in the same manner."

285. Ms Panagiotopoulou submits, again based upon  reference  to  Danish  2,
    that MAA would be at risk also  from  violent  and  armed  elements  in
    Mogadishu who would perceive him to be  wealthy  and  so  would  demand
    money from him. However, that section of the report, not set out in the
    written submissions, needs to be read  in  context  and  no  reason  is
    offered why it is that MAA would be perceived as wealthy:

           "When asked if there are reports of returnees from abroad  being
           harassed or kidnapped for ransom on arrival in Mogadishu a local
           NGO(C) in Mogadishu  stated  that  people  see  those  returning
           [from] abroad as a peace sign and no one abducts them,
           ...
           An international NGO (B) stated that in general terms  there  is
           no  negative  attitude   towards   returnees   in   Mogadishu...
           Kidnappings used to happen in  the  past  but  these  days  it's
           threats in order to get money. These threats would not  be  made
           in areas controlled by the TFG but local militias  might  demand
           so called protection money from a returnee. Especially returning
           persons perceived to be wealthy would be at  risk  of  receiving
           threats and they would often need to buy protection  from  armed
           groups."


286. Ms Panagiotopoulou submits that MAA no longer has family links to  "his
    home area" and he has not spoken to his wife or parents  since  leaving
    Somalia 2 years ago. He is unaware of their whereabouts  and  it  is  a
    real possibility that they may have moved.

287. Dealing with MMA's personal characteristics, it is  submitted  that  he
    does  not  fall  within  one  of  the  AMM  categories  excluded   from
    protection. He is uneducated and has never worked. The only  source  of
    income in Somalia was that provided by his mother selling sweets.  Even
    if the Tribunal were to find as a fact that he still has family  living
    in Mogadishu, he is at real risk of attracting adverse  attention  from
    Al-Shabaab "as  being  perceived  as  a  spy  coming  from  the  West".
    Unemployment rates in Somalia are estimated at 54% and  67%  for  those
    between 14-29 years. Therefore, it  is  unlikely  that  he  would  find
    employment on return. He faces a real possibility of having to live  in
    an IDP camp where he would be exposed to conditions that would infringe
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

288. Thus, Ms Panagiotopoulou urges the Tribunal to  find  that  MMA  has  a
    well-founded fear of persecution for a reason recognised  by  the  1951
    Convention, that being his perceived political opinion  as  a  returnee
    from the West; a real risk of being forced  to  live  in  circumstances
    that cross the threshold tolerated by Article 3 of the ECHR and that he
    faces a real risk of harm due to indiscriminate  violence  such  as  to
    bring about an infringements of Article 15(c).

Submissions on behalf of SSM

289. Mr Toal's written closing  submissions  commence  with  an  observation
    that the Tribunal should be cautious not to be misled by positive  news
    reports that, in the light of  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  should  be
    dismissed as "misleading hyperbole". Thus an observation  in  a  report
    about Somali citizens returning home to "accelerate progress" that "the
    sound of bullets that was once so  common  in  the  Somali  capital  of
    Mogadishu has been replaced by the sound  of  construction"  should  be
    seen, in the words of  Mary  Harper,  as  merely  "symptomatic  of  the
    international media giving undue  prominence  to  stories  of  diaspora
    returnees who are thriving in Mogadishu, simply  because  they  like  a
    good story and provide a new angle to a country usually associated with
    war..."

290. Mr Toal submits the evidence indicates that  returnees  are  themselves
    often targets for violence, as is evidenced by a bombing  attack  on  a
    theatre being carried out the day after singers gave a  concert  there,
    the first for two decades. Similarly, despite reports of development at
    the Lido beach presenting "a scene reminiscent of seaside towns  around
    the world", a beachfront restaurant was the target of a bombing attack.
    One chain of restaurants opened by a  diaspora  returnee,  the  Village
    Restaurants, has attracted three bombing attacks, leaving many dead and
    injured. The methodology that has become established  of  detonating  a
    second explosion after the initial one  was,  he  says,  calculated  to
    cause casualties among rescuers and spectators.

291. In Mr Toal's submission, despite the "reported accomplishments" of  the
    international community and diaspora  returnees,  there  has  not  been
    durable change for the better such as to satisfy the test identified by
    the Tribunal in AMM.

292. Further, Mr Toal submits that the  respondent  has  misunderstood  what
    the Tribunal were saying in AMM about the need for durable  change.  He
    says that the requirement for durability related  to  the  fact  of  Al
    Shabaab's withdrawal and not to the level of risk then found to  exist.
    He submits that the finding as to a general Article 15(c) risk did  not
    depend upon that want of durability. It was based  upon  what  Mr  Toal
    describes as  "its  assessment  of  the  qualitative  and  quantitative
    features of risk arising from the situation that existed at the time of
    the Tribunal's determination of the appeal". Put  another  way,  if  we
    understand the argument correctly, the Tribunal did not find  that  the
    circumstances generally as they were then found to  be,  if  maintained
    for a period sufficient as to constitute a durable maintenance  of  the
    status quo, would mean that there was no Article 15(c) risk.  What  was
    required was a further reduction in the level of risk.

293. That this is the correct  interpretation,  according  to  Mr  Toal,  is
    reinforced by the fact that although the preponderance of conventional,
    confrontational, fighting was in one area of the city,  Bakara  Market,
    and much of the city was not in a main conflict zone, residents in  all
    areas of the city were considered to be at an Article 15(c) risk.

294. Thus, after the withdrawal  of  Al  Shabaab,  all  residents  faced  an
    Article 15(c) risk for the following reasons:

        a. some conventional fighting may have continued;
        b. the continued use of asymmetrical fighting methods;
        c. the humanitarian crisis that might have forced returnees to live
           in areas where conventional fighting continued;
        d. because of the humanitarian crises there was enhanced risk  from
           IEDs, opportunist criminals and Al Shabaab elements;
        e. a risk from rogue elements of the TFG.


    Therefore Mr Toal argues that  it  would  not  be  sufficient  for  the
    respondent to demonstrate that nothing has changed since  AMM.  Indeed,
    the Tribunal reached the conclusions that it did  notwithstanding  that
    it had in mind then the following matters:


        a. an improving economy with more commercial activity;
        b. the ability of humanitarian organisations to operate;
        c. a busy airport,  with  1,000  people  arriving  each  month  for
           various purposes including work and holidays;
        d. widespread reconstruction projects;
        e. evidence of voluntary returns from the diaspora.

295. Mr Toal argues that the improvements in conditions required to  justify
    a departure from the present country guidance cannot be  found  in  the
    end of conventional fighting  alone  as  that  had  been  substantially
    reduced by the time of AMM and was "increasingly  confined  to  certain
    areas". Despite that, the 15(c) risk was found to exist in all areas.

296. Although accepting that  Al  Shabaab  has  been  weakened  by  loss  of
    territory,  loss  of  revenue  and  internal   divisions   within   its
    leadership, Mr Toal argues  that  the  organisation  remains  a  potent
    threat for a number of reasons, which can be summarised as follows.

297. Mr Toal submits that Al Shabaab still controls  most  of  southern  and
    central Somalia, having a core military force of about 5,000, with  its
    operational readiness and chain of command intact. It has  arms  caches
    hidden all over central  Somalia  and  continues  to  have  substantial
    support from some major clans. Despite a diminution in its revenue,  Al
    Shabaab still receives funding from  abroad  and  "taxation"  from  the
    charcoal trade, though to a lesser extent than before.  Although  there
    has been internal conflict within the leadership of the group this  has
    not affected the "broad sense of unity" or its  ability  to  engage  in
    asymmetrical warfare.

298. In Mr Toal's submission, the  evidence  demonstrates  a  sustained  and
    increasing engagement by Al Shabaab in asymmetrical warfare as well  as
    an incapacity of the government and  AMISOM  forces  to  eliminate  the
    threat posed to civilians by Al Shabaab. In support of  that  assertion
    he points to a number of issues.

299. First, the number of grenade attacks rose  during  2012,  numbering  50
    per week. The  source  for  that  information  is  given  as  Danish  1
    although we note that the section he refers to begins by saying:

           "Regarding  the   security   situation   on   Mogadishu   Kilian
           Kleinschmidt,  OCHA,   Mogadishu,   stated   that   a   dramatic
           improvement has taken place since February 2012. Today there are
           less gunfire and no artillery. These are simple indicators which
           demonstrate a process from war  to  tremendous  improvements  in
           security. However, there are still many security  challenges  as
           there are incidents, including grenade attacks every night..."

    It will be observed from this that Kilian Kleinschmidt's assessment  of
    a dramatic improvement in the security situation was expressed  in  the
    context of there being that number  of  grenade  attacks.  It  will  be
    recalled also that there is evidence before the Tribunal that there was
    a relatively high rate of grenade attacks being ineffective.

300. Next, Mr Toal refers to the 2012 report  of  the  Monitoring  Group  on
    Somalia to demonstrate  that  civilian  casualties  caused  by  suicide
    bombings increased during 2012. That is correct. The actual information
    found there is that there were four such attacks  in  2011  causing  11
    casualties but in 2012, although the number of  such  attacks  was  the
    same - four - they were more successfully carried  out  so  that  there
    were 125 casualties, 34 being fatal.

301. Mr Toal refers next to evidence from  the  same  source  that  targeted
    assassinations of civilians continued to  form  part  of  Al  Shabaab's
    modus  operandi,  the  group  executing  civilians  perceived   to   be
    supportive of the Somali government or AMISOM, often  on  suspicion  of
    spying. However, when one looks at the source evidence, there are  some
    difficulties with the conclusion one is invited to draw. First, it  may
    well be that this is discussing to some extent  what  occurred  outside
    Mogadishu. It is said that such killings are sometimes in the  form  of
    public executions,  including  beheadings,  since  one  of  the  expert
    witnesses confirmed that  such  public  executions  and  beheadings  of
    suspected spies were not carried out by Al Shabaab in  Mogadishu  after
    the group had withdrawn from the city. It should  be  noted  also  that
    this section of the report makes clear that it is politicians or  local
    public figures supportive of the Somali government  that  are  targeted
    for assassination by Al Shabaab so that the  reference  to  "civilians"
    being targeted might be misunderstood. It would not  appear  that  such
    persons were  being  identified  for  assassination  because  they  are
    civilians, or because Al Shabaab wishes to  kill  civilians.  They  are
    being targeted because of their  profile,  or  behaviour  or  perceived
    behaviour.

302. Addressing the regular reports made by the  UN  Secretary  General,  Mr
    Toal places reliance upon a number  of  statements  in  those  reports.
    First, that dated 1 May 2012:

           "terrorist attacks remained constant ... asymmetrical  insurgent
           attacks pose a substantial threat".


    Although, to understand what the author sought to communicate, we  feel
    it is necessary to set out the whole of the first sentence  from  which
    the phrase is taken:


           "In the Mogadishu area, Al-Shabaab  terrorist  attacks  remained
           constant, though many  were  prevented  or  failed  as  pressure
           mounted from reinforced Government and AMISOM forces."

303. The Secretary General has referred to attacks by Al Shabaab  as  having
    "occurred frequently", those attacks being of  an  asymmetrical  nature
    and being launched against "soft targets" in a way that often  resulted
    in civilian casualties. Targeted killings and  attacks  were  routinely
    reported and the number  of  incidents  involving  IEDs  rose  in  2013
    compared with 2012.

304. It is notable that this reproduces faithfully the  words  used  by  the
    Secretary General in this paragraph  of  his  report  in  which  he  is
    speaking of the security situation of south central Somalia  generally,
    save that the phrase:

            "Despite some improvements in Mogadishu..."

    has been omitted by Mr  Toal.  That  might  be  thought  a  significant
    omission because those words were  plainly  inserted  to  qualify  that
    which followed.

305. On the other hand, as Mr Toal points out,  the  Secretary  General  has
    written in his report of 3 September 2013 of a surge of violent attacks
    in the capital, warning that Al Shabaab "remains  capable  of  carrying
    out intensified attacks against civilians and international  partners".
    That expression of concern follows on from a paragraph  particularising
    attacks against journalists, human  rights  abuses  against  women  and
    children, sexual  violence,  and  "innocent  civilians  caught  in  the
    crossfire between parties and is considering the position  both  within
    and outside the capital (Al-Shabaab  continues  to  undermine  security
    throughout the country, including in Mogadishu").

306. Finally, the Secretary General expressed concern in  a  letter  written
    in October 2013 that military gains  against  Al  Shabaab  achieved  in
    recent years are at serious risk of being reversed.

307. It is Mr Toal's submission that  the  risk  to  civilians  from  "rogue
    elements" of the TFG identified by the Tribunal  in  AMM  is  one  that
    still persists. This is because the security  forces  are  composed  of
    loosely assembled units and militias with no coherent command structure
    which are sometimes available for "side employment". A proliferation of
    armed guards working in the private sector  may  provide  security  for
    their employers but cause civilian deaths when  they  shoot  to  defend
    themselves and their employers. The evidence for that asserted risk  is
    a comment by an unidentified former editor  of  a  Somali  news  agency
    whose view was recorded in the October 2012 Danish report.

308. Mr Toal submits that the risk  from  rogue  elements  of  the  security
    forces is reinforced by the fact that as they are paid  irregularly  or
    not at all, they resort to extortion at check  points  and  robbery  of
    civilians.  Although  the  evidence  indicated  that  the   number   of
    checkpoints to be encountered in Mogadishu had reduced,  he  says  that
    more recent evidence suggests that they have now returned.

309. There are two sources for  that  assertion.  First,  a  brief  RefWorld
    report of  14  June  2013  records  that  there  had  been  60  illegal
    roadblocks in Mogadishu the previous year that had been  dismantled  of
    which "some" were back in  place.  Second,  the  UN  Secretary  General
    referred to this, in the context of an increase in criminal activity in
    the reporting period of 16 August to 15 November 2013 and the extortion
    of drivers and owners of public transportation vehicles.

310. Mr Toal next sets out in his written  submissions  a  lengthy  list  of
    incidents involving civilian casualties being caused by "rogue elements
    within government forces". When the sources from which these are  taken
    are examined, little information other than the asserted fact  of  that
    can be found. To  a  large  extent  the  victims  are  not  identified,
    although that is not reason to doubt that the incident occurred.

311. Addressing next the  statistical  evidence  concerning  weapons-related
    injuries, Mr Toal submits that the only potentially reliable source  of
    such statistics are the numbers said to be treated for such injuries at
    the Mogadishu hospitals. In 2012 the number treated  at  WHO  supported
    hospitals in Mogadishu was 6,687 and in 2013  it  was  4,412.  Mr  Toal
    includes an annex to his submissions that is an attempt  to  compile  a
    comprehensive list of all deaths and injuries that occurred as a result
    of the violent incidents  in  Mogadishu  in  2012  and  2013  that  are
    reported in the documentary material submitted by all parties  to  this
    appeal. The result is that 144 people are said to have been killed  and
    197 injured in such incidents in 2012 and 183 injured  and  234  killed
    during 2013. He points out that  this  represents  only  a  very  small
    proportion of that total  number  of  people  treated,  from  which  he
    invites the conclusion that most such incidents go unreported,  as  was
    the evidence of Mary Harper, in particular.

312. The difficulty with that reasoning is that the evidence of the  numbers
    treated for weapons-related injuries is in itself a form of  reporting.
    Mr Toal submits that those figures are also plainly unreliable  in  the
    sense that there is no systematic or established process  of  recording
    the information. The only real information available is from  the  WHO-
    supported hospitals in Mogadishu, but  there  are  other  hospitals  in
    respect of which no information at all is available about  the  numbers
    of people treated or the classification of the  treatment.  Apart  from
    those problems, it must be recognised that  some  with  weapons-related
    injuries would not seek medical treatment from any hospital.

313. In his written submissions Mr Toal carries out a detailed  analysis  of
    the data available in respect  of  the  numbers  treated  for  weapons-
    related injuries in hospitals in Mogadishu and  concludes  that  it  is
    simply not possible to establish from that evidence the total number of
    people treated in any given year. We agree.

314. However, we find it much harder to accept Mr Toal's assertion  that  it
    follows that the Tribunal will have very real difficulty in making  its
    assessment of whether  the  "real  risk"  threshold  is  satisfied.  He
    submits that in the absence of reliable casualty figures  the  Tribunal
    cannot embark upon the type of analysis conducted in  AK  (Afghanistan)
    arriving at a tolerably accurate figure for casualty  levels.  But  the
    risk assessment is to be made in the light of the evidence as  a  whole
    and not simply as a function of arithmetical calculation.

315. Although it is the respondent's  case  that  the  end  of  conventional
    fighting in Mogadishu is something that lessens the Article 15(c)  risk
    for civilians, Mr Toal submits that the asymmetrical warfare  that  has
    replaced it also causes significant civilian casualties. Also, although
    recognising that it is the respondent's case that Al Shabaab  does  not
    deliberately target civilians, Mr Toal submits that in launching large-
    scale attacks on locations frequented by  civilians  it  is  inevitable
    that there will be civilian casualties.

316. In support of that argument, Mr Toal points to attacks at  the  Jazeera
    Palace Hotel on  1  January  2014,  the  attack  on  Hotel  Makkah  Al-
    Mukararmah on 8 November 2013, the attack on the Village restaurant  on
    7 September 2013 and the attack on the Benadir High Court  building  on
    14 April 2013.

317. The inference to be drawn from these  submissions  is  that  these  are
    examples of attacks upon "civilian targets". However, when the evidence
    is examined more closely, a different picture is seen to emerge.

318. The Jazeera Palace Hotel is described as a hotel that is "popular  with
    government officials and foreigners" (AB4 page 63). It  has  previously
    been targeted for a bomb attack  as  a  place  where  politicians  met.
    Another report quoted an Al Shabaab source as saying that  its  bombers
    had targeted intelligence officers who were meeting at the hotel at the
    time. The second bomb was  said  to  have  been  exploded  not  in  the
    immediate aftermath of the first bomb but after  "emergency  personnel"
    arrived  at  the  scene.  Thus,  those  targeted  were  not   "ordinary
    civilians"  but  those  falling  within  classes  of  persons   plainly
    discernible as legitimate targets by Al Shabaab.

319. Four of the six people killed in the bomb attack on  the  Hotel  Makkah
    Al-Mukaramah were policemen and  a  senior  Somali  diplomat  was  also
    included in the 6 fatalities. Al Shabaab are reported to have said:

           "the target of the  attack  was  apostate  security  forces  and
           officials"

    From which it appears that the venue was chosen on the basis of who was
    likely to be encountered, at this hotel which, as was the case with the
    Jazeera Hotel, is described  in  the  news  reports  as  being  one  of
    Mogadishu's most expensive hotels. A BBC News report dated  8  November
    2013 confirms that the hotel "is popular with members of parliament and
    other officials".

320.  The attack on the Village restaurant, which is located  not  far  from
    Somalia's Parliament, was, like the Jazeera Hotel, the second  occasion
    it had been targeted. According to a news report from  Aljazeera  dated
    11 September 2013, Al Shabaab said after the attack:

           "We attacked this particular place because  it  is  a  base  for
           government"

    Although that was denied by the owner who  sought  only  to  operate  a
    restaurant business,  a BBC News report dated 7 September 2013 said:

           "The group said it had attacked the Village  restaurant  because
           it is frequented by Somali MPs."

    and that:

           "The Village, about 1 km  from  the  Presidential  Palace...  is
           popular with journalists and those in political circles."

    this being confirmed by another BBC News report, also dated 7 September
    2013:

           "the  restaurant  was  popular  with  government   workers   and
           journalists and has been targeted before."


    A news report also dated 7 September 2013 from Reuters, added  that  in
    admitting responsibility Al Shabaab had said:

           "We are behind  today's  blasts",  al  Shabaab's  spokesman  for
           military operations, Sheikh Abdiasis Abu  Musab,  told  Reuters.
           "Government  officials,  military  forces,  workers  and   their
           security always meet there. We had targeted it even before today
           and we shall continue targeting it."

321. The Benadir High Court is, of course, a  government  building  but  one
    which civilians may occasionally have need to visit.

322. In his written submissions, Mr Toal recognises that:

           "It is true also that Al Shabaab and  other  agents  of  serious
           harm target high profile individuals and they target venues that
           are not usually frequented by civilians..."

    But he argues that the evidence does  demonstrate  that  a  significant
    number of civilian casualties result from such attacks. Thus, an attack
    on a UN compound in June 2013 resulted in 22 deaths,  of  whom  4  were
    foreign security workers, 4 were local guards and 7 were militants. The
    inference invited is that the remaining  7  must  have  been  "ordinary
    civilians" However, the BBC news report of this incident  records  that
    Al Shabab claimed to have killed "16 UN workers" which, if that were in
    fact true, would together with the number of attackers  killed  account
    for the whole total of fatalities. In any event, there is  a  disparity
    in the numbers of casualties reported. A Telegraph report said that "at
    least 15" people were killed of whom not 7 but 9 were attackers. It  is
    clear, however, from  the  documentary  evidence  about  this  incident
    considered as a whole that there were civilian casualties.


323. Certainly,  civilians  were  killed  or  injured  in  these  9  attacks
    identified by Mr Toal, even though each of them appears to have  had  a
    non-civilian target as well as 8 more he categorises as  attacks  aimed
    at government forces.

324. Mr Toal submits that it is not realistically possible  for  a  civilian
    to reduce his or her exposure to risk by avoiding places or areas  that
    can readily be seen to be more likely than  others  to  attract  an  Al
    Shabaab attack. This is  because  the  attacks  take  place  throughout
    Mogadishu and are not restricted to only certain  areas.  Further,  the
    locations of attacks includes venues such as a  football  stadium,  aid
    distribution centres, IDP settlements and so on.

325. In his written submissions Mr Toal  refers  to  the  "very  significant
    statistics" produced by Saferworld in its August 2012 report "Mogadishu
    Rising?" which includes the  results  of  a  survey  of  800  Mogadishu
    households that  disclosed  that  in  the  previous  90  days  126  had
    experienced violence. He invites from this the conclusion  that  it  is
    evidence of an extremely high  risk  of  violence.  Those  figures  are
    recorded in the report but in assessing how reliable they  are,  regard
    must be had to what is said at the beginning  of  the  chapter  of  the
    report containing the table disclosing the results of that survey:

         "Though violence remains a daily reality,  Saferworld's  Mogadishu-
         wide survey in July 2012 found that an overwhelming 93 per cent  of
         respondents reported an improvement in the  security  situation  in
         the past 12 months, with 4.5 per cent saying it  had  remained  the
         same and only one per cent reporting a deterioration.  Fifteen  per
         cent said that security had improved in the past three  months,  33
         per cent noted improvement in the last six months and 22  per  cent
         said the last nine months were improved."

    The same report recorded also, at chapter 4, that:

         "An increase in African Union Mission  in  Somalia  (AMISOM)  troop
         levels to more than 17,000 as  of  July  2012,  along  with  better
         coordination between AMISOM and TGF officials, has  contributed  to
         the decline of the  militant  movement  al-Shabaab  in  the  Somali
         capital."

    And that, in response to criticism by the Council of Islamic  Scholars,
    who branded Al Shabaab "the enemy of the Somali people":

         "Al Shabaab responded by moving much of its manpower and  equipment
         to Puntland in north-east Somalia..."

    a development that had been noted by the  United  Nations  Somalia  and
    Eritrea Monitoring Group also.

326. Mr Toal recognises the conclusion of the ECtHR in KAB v  Sweden  is  of
    significance:

           "The Court is aware that the human rights and security situation
           in  Mogadishu  is  serious  and  fragile  and   in   many   ways
           unpredictable. However, in the light of the above, in particular
           the fact that al-Shabaab is no longer  in  power  in  the  city,
           there is no front line fighting or shelling any longer  and  the
           number of civilian casualties has gone down, it finds  that  the
           available  country  information  does  not  indicate  that   the
           situation is, at present, of such a nature as to place  everyone
           who is present in the city at a real risk of treatment  contrary
           to Article 3 of the Convention."


    but says that he agrees with the view of the minority in KAB  v  Sweden
    and urges the Tribunal to find that "the population of Mogadishu" faces
    not just an Article 15(c) risk but also a risk of treatment that  would
    be contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.


327. In Mr Toal's submission, the two main qualitative  distinctions  to  be
    detected between the circumstances at the time of the AMM determination
    and the present are the cessation of conventional warfare in  Mogadishu
    and an improvement in the humanitarian situation such that there is  no
    longer said to be famine. However, he submits that, on the basis of the
    evidence now  before  the  Tribunal,  it  is  impossible  to  say  that
    circumstances have changed to the extent that there is no longer a risk
    of serious harm.

328. If the Tribunal does not accept that submission, and finds  that  there
    is no Article 15(c) risk for the population of Mogadishu generally,  Mr
    Toal argues that SSM should succeed on  the  basis  of  his  individual
    characteristics. This is because he would  be  returning  to  Mogadishu
    after a very long absence as a  person  with  no  adult  experience  of
    living in that city and will be someone easily recognisable  as  having
    come from a Western country. He has a profile of someone being deported
    for having committed a criminal offence and  will  have  no  access  to
    resources on return. As a result, according to Mr Toal, he will  become
    an IDP facing all of the difficulties that have been disclosed  by  the
    evidence.

329. Those difficulties, faced by IDPs in Mogadishu,  are  said  to  include
    inadequate access to food and water, disease due to  insanitary  living
    conditions and inadequate housing. Mr Toal asserts that 90% of IDPs  in
    Mogadishu live in makeshift shelters, that being taken  from  the  Food
    Security and Nutrition Situation Trends report covering the period July
    2011-April 2012.  Additional  problems  will  include  exploitation  by
    "gatekeepers" and vulnerability to forced eviction from settlements.

330. As a returnee, Mr Toal submits, SSM would be vulnerable because he  may
    be suspected of an intention to join Al Shabaab; he may be perceived to
    be wealthy, on the basis of having come from  Europe,  and  so  attract
    demand for money or threats from militias, he will find it difficult to
    find employment and will face risk from Al Shabaab for no reason  other
    than being a returnee from the West. Finally, with no recent  knowledge
    of living in Mogadishu, he will be unable to anticipate and so minimise
    or avoid risk.

331. Mr Toal accepts that the evidence does not indicate a  risk  of  forced
    recruitment to Al Shabaab but in the face of an inability to  access  a
    livelihood, SSM may feel driven to work for the group as the  only  way
    to access money as well as to enable him to demonstrate he is not a spy
    or  an  apostate.  This  would  amount  to  Al  Shabaab   abusing   his
    vulnerability so as to  amount  to  trafficking  such  as  to  infringe
    Article 4 of the Convention against Trafficking.

332. Therefore, it is Mr Toal's submission that SSM:

        a. has a well founded fear  of  persecution  by  Al  Shabaab  as  a
           returnee from the West, that being a reason  recognised  by  the
           Convention so as to require  that  he  be  recognised  to  be  a
           refugee;
        b. there is an established  Article  15(c)  risk  of  serious  harm
           generally  and,  because  of   his   particular   vulnerability,
           specifically in his case;
        c. is likely to suffer inhuman and degrading treatment in having to
           live in circumstances analogous to an IDP such  as  to  infringe
           Article 3 of the ECHR;
        d. faces a real risk that he would be "trafficked"  by  Al  Shabaab
           within the meaning of the Convention.

Conclusions:

333. It should be recognised that the country guidance issues  addressed  in
    this determination are not identical  to  those  engaged  with  by  the
    Tribunal in AMM. Therefore, where country guidance has  been  given  by
    the Tribunal in  AMM  in  respect  of  issues  not  addressed  in  this
    determination then the guidance provided by AMM shall continue to  have
    effect.

334. Before setting out our conclusions we make these  observations.  First,
    we have, where appropriate and convenient, explained what we have  made
    of the evidence  when  discussing  it  above.  We  emphasise,  for  the
    avoidance of any possible doubt, that although some discussion  of  the
    evidence  has  been  set  out  before  our  summary  of   the   closing
    submissions, those arguments were very much in mind when  carrying  out
    our assessment.  In explaining why we  reach  the  conclusions  we  do,
    there may be some duplication of what we have said already  but,  given
    the nature of our task that is unavoidable.

335. The second observation concerns the country reports  that  the  parties
    have put before us, which are itemised in the appendix. We do not  need
    to set out our own, separate and freestanding summary of these reports.
    That is because each of the expert witnesses, whose  evidence  we  have
    discussed at length, have drawn heavily upon those reports  where  they
    are relevant to the issues with which we are concerned, and the parties
    have identified those parts relied upon in their  lengthy  submissions,
    which, again, we have considered  in  detail.  We  are  satisfied  that
    everything contained within those reports that the parties consider  to
    be of importance has already been extracted and discussed and so  taken
    into account by the Tribunal, whether or not we refer  specifically  to
    it in this determination,  which  is  long  enough  already  without  a
    repetition of those matters in a separate synopsis.

336. Finally, we observe that, although we have had regard to all  that  the
    parties have advanced before us, we do not seek to deal with  each  and
    every strand of argument that has been advanced before us and  nor  can
    we analyse each piece of evidence to which we have  been  referred.  We
    do, though, aim to make clear why we have  reached  the  conclusion  we
    have.   Drawing  upon  the  observations  we  have  already  made  when
    analysing the expert evidence, we now summarise our conclusions on  the
    main issues as follows.

Significance of clan membership in Mogadishu today

337. The evidence establishes clearly that, in Mogadishu, there is no inter-
    clan violence taking place and no real risk of  serious  discriminatory
    treatment being experienced on the basis of clan. We have set out above
    the broad range of evidence to this  effect,  including  comments  from
    NGOs and others well placed to comment on the  situation  in  Mogadishu
    today, including these, that were set out in  Dr  Mullen's  report  and
    discussed above at paragraphs 79:

           "...It does not matter whether you belong to a strong or a  weak
           clan, or an ethnic minority group... The clan has now  become  a
           social structure rather than a protective structure."

           "Clan protection is no longer important as  there  are  no  clan
           based militias in Mogadishu. Persons returning from  abroad  are
           not at particular risk because of their clan affiliation";

           "...it is a huge step forward that clan affiliation is no longer
           a concern.  Even  marginalized  groups  such  as  the  IDPs  and
           minority  groups  are  no  longer  marginalized,   harassed   or
           intimidated only because of their clan affiliations.  Thus,  the
           security situation for members of small, weak clans  and  ethnic
           minority groups has increased considerably during the last year.
           It is not important which clan or group you belong to.";

           "The representatives  of  an  international  agency,  Mogadishu,
           agreed that the clan is no longer a main issue  in  Mogadishu...
           According to Mohamed Farah Siad, Mogadishu, clan is 'zero' today
           in Mogadishu; clans do not offer any protection as there are  no
           clan militias threatening people. Clanism is only  common  among
           "primitive clans in the bush."

338. This was reinforced by the expert evidence, Ms Harper  confirming  that
    she had not seen any evidence of  inter-clan  violence  and  Dr  Hoehne
    saying that there are no clan militias as such.  If  and  when  a  need
    arises, a person will assemble a group  drawn  from  his  own  clan  to
    address a particular purpose. Ms Harper's evidence that  militias  were
    still to be regarded as clan-based groups that could be activated  when
    needed by  powerful  business  figures  or  politicians  does  not  sit
    comfortably with the evidence of Dr Mullen and Dr Hoehne who  spoke  of
    militias being "assembled" when needed, rather than remaining intact to
    be "activated", or with the documentary evidence generally. Thus, we do
    not accept that in Mogadishu today there exist clan based  militias  in
    the sense  of  formal  armed  groups  assembled  to  provide  on  going
    protection to clan members in  a  given  area  and  exerting  de  facto
    control over the lives of local inhabitants.

339. That is not to say that clan membership has no  significance  to  those
    living in Mogadishu. It was observed in the Danish 3 report that:

           "On the other hand, whenever a person is planning to  settle  in
           Mogadishu he or she will most likely consider his  or  her  clan
           affiliation before deciding where to settle down."

     And one local commentator has observed that:

           "...  clans  are  only  relevant  when  it  comes  to  business,
           marriage, respect and work, and stated that "clans should not be
           involved in politics".


    Which chimes with what is said in the Danish 3 report:

             "The clan has now become a  social  structure  rather  than  a
             protective structure. This could be  due  to  lessons  learned
             during the previous clan conflicts and the civil  war.  People
             are now relating to government structures rather  than  clans,
             especially when it comes to business."


    And a little later in the same report:

             "Regarding access to livelihood  in  Mogadishu,  UNHCR-Somalia
             explained  that  the  presence  of  a  nuclear  family  is   a
             requirement for livelihood support, as clan will not help with
             livelihood."

340. We find that the evidence relating to Mogadishu does  indeed  establish
    a change in the significance of clan from being a protective  mechanism
    to one of social and economic support. That does  not  mean  that  clan
    membership has no relevance to protection issues at  all.  Support  for
    that view is found, again in the Danish 3 report:

           "UNHCR-Somalia, Mogadishu, confirmed that someone  in  Mogadishu
           will not be  at  risk  today  solely  because  he/she  is  of  a
           different clan, although clan dynamics in combination with other
           factors  are  an  important  element  when   considering   risk,
           including for the IDP population. It  is  obvious  that  one  is
           safer when he or she is residing in an area dominated by his  or
           her own clan or if one has  good  relations  with  a  dominating
           clan."

    Where a person sees a need to make arrangements for  personal  security
    for a particular purpose he will probably look to his own clan first of
    all, those being persons from whom he might anticipate assistance being
    available more readily, especially if  he  does  not  have  significant
    financial resources with which to pay for "commercial" security.  Also,
    some trades are dominated by one particular clan so that access may  be
    made easier with clan sponsorship but there  is  no  evidence  that  an
    individual would be barred because of an absence of it.

341. There is evidence also from a number of sources that the importance  of
    what has been termed "the nuclear family" has become  more  significant
    than membership of a clan. This was recognised by UNHCR in  the  report
    dated 25 September 2013 which is mentioned above and to which  we  will
    return below. It is plain that the significance of clan membership  has
    changed and, increasingly, residents of Mogadishu look to their nuclear
    family for support, protection and access  to  a  livelihood.  But,  of
    course, the close relatives involved would invariably also  be  members
    of the same clan but it is the family relationship,  rather  than  clan
    membership,  that  is  of  significance.  It  is,   perhaps,   entirely
    unsurprising that people choose to live in areas  where  relatives  are
    established or that district police forces, being drawn from  the  area
    in which they operate, reflect the  numerical  dominance  of  the  clan
    predominately present:

           "UNHCR-Somalia, Mogadishu, confirmed that someone  in  Mogadishu
           will not be  at  risk  today  solely  because  he/she  is  of  a
           different clan, although clan dynamics in combination with other
           factors  are  an  important  element  when   considering   risk,
           including for the IDP population. It  is  obvious  that  one  is
           safer when he or she is residing in an area dominated by his  or
           her own clan or if one has  good  relations  with  a  dominating
           clan."

342. It follows from this that for  a  returnee  to  Mogadishu  today,  clan
    membership is not a  potential  risk  factor  but  something  which  is
    relevant to the extent to which he will be able to  receive  assistance
    in re-establishing himself on return, especially if  he  has  no  close
    relatives  to  turn  to  upon  arrival.  There  remains  an  aspect  of
    protection to be derived from clan membership, which we discuss in more
    detail below when considering issues of sufficiency of protection.  But
    this is more to do with having access to a  support  network  providing
    the opportunity to put in hand security  measures  when  needed  rather
    than a situation of being able to look to an existing clan  militia  to
    provide  protection.  But  this  source  of  assistance  must  not   be
    overstated. As explained  by  Ms  Harper,  in  her  oral  evidence,  in
    response to a question concerning what help  a  returnee  might  expect
    from his clan:

           "None at present. If you arrive in Mogadishu  and  do  not  know
           anyone at all, you might start asking for fellow clan members in
           the hope that they might do more for you than  others.  But  you
           could not expect anything from them.

343. We understand that to mean that while there was no guarantee that  help
    would be available from clan members outside the close  family  network
    of a returnee, at least there is more  likelihood  of  such  a  request
    being accommodated than if made to those unconnected  by  the  bond  of
    clan membership. That is, perhaps, wholly  unsurprising.   However,  it
    should be noted that in the UNHCR January  2014  report  the  view  was
    expressed that a returnee might be rather more confident  of  receiving
    help from his clan, if not a minority clan member:

             "Persons belonging to minority clans... remain  at  particular
             disadvantage in Mogadishu... There  remains  a  low  sense  of
             Somali social and ethical  obligation  to  assist  individuals
             from weak lineages and social groups.  This  stands  in  stark
             contrast to the powerful and non-negotiable obligation Somalis
             have to assist members of their own lineage."

The "Economic Boom"

344. The economic revival of Mogadishu can be described only as  remarkable,
    considering what is known about conditions in the city since the  civil
    war began in 1991. Each of the expert witnesses has addressed  this  in
    their evidence that we  have  considered  above.  It  is  perhaps  well
    described by a report of the New York Times of April 2012:

           "But people here are sensing the moment  and  seizing  it.  More
           than 300,000 residents have come back to the city  in  the  last
           six months..... The economic boom, fuelled  by  an  infusion  of
           tens of millions of dollars, much of it  from  Somalis  flocking
           home from overseas, is  spawning  thousands  of  jobs  that  are
           beginning to absorb young militiamen eager to  get  out  of  the
           killing business..."

    An international agency referred to in Dr Mullen's report  is  recorded
    as saying:

           "Mogadishu is now a 'buzz',  people  are  going  around  minding
           their own  business  and  there  is  an  increasing  freedom  of
           movement for everyone."

345. It is beyond doubt that there has been huge inward  investment,  large-
    scale construction projects and vibrant business activity. Land  values
    are said to be "rocketing" and entrepreneurial members of the  diaspora
    with access to funding are returning  in  significant  numbers  in  the
    confident expectation of launching successful  business  projects.  The
    question to be addressed is what, if any, benefit does this deliver for
    so  called  "ordinary  returnees"  who  are  not   themselves   wealthy
    businessmen or highly skilled professionals employed by such people.

346. According to the respondent, a  striking  feature  of  developments  in
    Mogadishu since AMM is the evidence that "huge numbers" of people  have
    returned to Mogadishu, that is said to be indicative of a  considerable
    reduction in levels of violence  and  improvements  in  security.  Some
    local NGO sources have said that there were 300,000 returning residents
    to Mogadishu in the six months between November  2011  and  April  2012
    alone. By August 2012 it had been  estimated  that  more  than  500,000
    people had moved back to the capital including the  vast  majority  who
    had fled since 2007.

347. Dr Hoehne's view was that very few people indeed benefit from this.  He
    said when asked who benefited:


           "A tiny proportion. 89% are poor. The remaining 20%  will  be  a
           bit better  than  being  poor.  A  little  better  than  "barely
           surviving". Possibly 1% or 2% of the population benefit from the
           last two years economic development."

    As we have  observed,  the  arithmetic  disclosed  by  that  answer  is
    problematic but we have more difficulty with the view expressed.

348.  Pressed  further  to  explain  who  does  benefit  from  the  economic
    development in Mogadishu, Dr Hoehne said:

           "A very tiny fraction of the elite. The vast majority of  people
           are struggling to survive..."


349. This is a view that is not altogether easy to  understand  and  we  are
    unable to  agree  with  it.  The  evidence  is  of  substantial  inward
    investment in construction projects and of entrepreneurs  returning  to
    Mogadishu to invest  in  business  activity.  In  particular  we  heard
    evidence  about  hotels  and  restaurants  and  a  resurgence  of   the
    hospitality  industry  as  well  as  taxi  businesses,  bus   services,
    drycleaners, electronics stores and  so  on.  The  evidence  speaks  of
    construction projects and improvements  in  the  city's  infrastructure
    such as the installation of some solar powered street lighting. It does
    not, perhaps, need much in the way of direct evidence to conclude  that
    jobs such as working as  building  labourers,  waiters  or  drivers  or
    assistants in retail outlets are unlikely to  be  filled  by  the  tiny
    minority that represents "the elite". Indeed, Dr Hoehne suggested  that
    SSM, on whose behalf he was being asked questions:

            "could probably get a job as a waiter..."

    although he said that there would probably be much competition.

350. The respondent submits that, given the inward investment that has  been
    received into Mogadishu, said to be tens of millions of dollars, it  is
    impossible to see how the benefits could be restricted to such  a  tiny
    minority. The respondent refers to evidence  from  the  Department  for
    International Development in Somalia report -  Autumn  Update  2013  in
    which it is asserted that 56,900 jobs have been created since May  2011
    and a further 45,000 new private sector jobs will be created.

351. Further, there is  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  identified  by  Dr
    Mullen, to the  effect  that  returnees  from  the  West  may  have  an
    advantage in seeking employment in Mogadishu  over  citizens  who  have
    remained in the city throughout.  This  is  said  to  be  because  such
    returnees  are  likely  to  be  better  educated  and  considered  more
    resourceful and  therefore  more  attractive  as  potential  employees,
    especially where the employer himself or herself has returned from  the
    diaspora to invest in a new business.

352. For those reasons we do not accept Dr  Hoehne's  evidence  that  it  is
    only a tiny elite that derives any benefit from  the  "economic  boom".
    Inevitably, jobs have been created and the evidence discloses no reason
    why a returnee would face discriminatory  obstacles  to  competing  for
    such employment. It may be that, like other residents of Mogadishu,  he
    would be more likely to succeed in  accessing  a  livelihood  with  the
    support of a clan or nuclear family.

Population movements

353. It is clear from  the  evidence  that  there  has  been  a  significant
    reduction in  population  movements  both  within  Mogadishu  and  from
    Mogadishu  to  other  locations.  As  we  have  seen,  the  statistical
    information available demonstrates a significant reduction of  movement
    within Mogadishu. In 2011 66,232, in 2012 28,289 and  in  2013  15,723.
    The total given for 2013 is in fact for the first 10 months of the year
    and it is reasonable to calculate a "grossed up"  total  for  the  full
    year of 18,867, that being a  reduction  in  the  movement  of  persons
    within Mogadishu of more than 70% when compared to 2011.

354. In respect of population movement out of Mogadishu to other  locations,
    Dr Mullen sets out a table, taken from UNHCR, that discloses an equally
    stark change. In 2011 43,695 people are said to have left Mogadishu and
    in 2013, again grossing up the 10 month figure to a  12  month  figure,
    6,372.  Put another way there has been,  since  2011,  a  reduction  of
    something in the region  of  85%  in  the  numbers  of  people  leaving
    Mogadishu.

Sufficiency of protection

355. It is established by the evidence, and  indeed  common  ground  between
    the  expert  witnesses,  that  the  "ordinary"  civilian  resident   of
    Mogadishu does not have the  benefit  of  an  efficient  and  effective
    police force to look to in respect of protection needs. But that is not
    a complete answer to the question of whether, in terms of a  claim  for
    international protection, there is available in Mogadishu a sufficiency
    of protection. In the  Somali  context,  as  is  the  case  often,  the
    position is complex.

356. The Danish 3 report records an observation by UNHCR-Somalia that:

         "...it will not be any time soon that one will see  a  functioning,
         fair and efficient justice system in Mogadishu..."

    and noted that the Benadir Court as well as the Benadir  Supreme  Court
    are functioning but marred by corruption. It is also expensive to  take
    cases to court. Therefore citizens  are  likely  to  seek  "traditional
    remedies" to resolve disputes, which can be  referred  to  clan  elders
    representing the parties who will  negotiate  a  resolution,  but  this
    appears  to  relate  to  civil  disputes  rather  than  complaints   of
    criminality.

357. When addressing the question of sufficiency of protection the  response
    that appears superficially to be  appropriate  is  "protection  against
    what?" As we have explained, civilians in general are not targeted,  as
    a group, by any actor of ill-treatment.  The risk faced is being in the
    wrong place at the wrong time but, as we have explained, that risk  can
    be significantly reduced, but not eliminated,  by  avoiding  high  risk
    areas.

358. Having said that, careful analysis of the true position  does  disclose
    an apparatus of protection being available for the benefit of civilians
    even if not in an orthodox way. AMISOM exists not to provide protection
    to individual citizens but to engage with the Al Shabaab threat and  to
    do what can be done to neutralise it. Much the same can be said for the
    Somali National Army. Although the continuing attacks  carried  out  in
    Mogadishu  demonstrate  that  there  is  some  way  to  go,  there  are
    indications of the security forces being  successful  in  limiting  the
    reach of Al Shabaab into Mogadishu and so into the  lives  of  ordinary
    civilians.

359. For example, we have noted  above  the  observation  of  the  Secretary
    General of the UN that:

           "The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)  and  the  Somali
           national security forces continued to thwart Al-Shabaab  attacks
           almost daily in and around Mogadishu."

    And that the police are doing what they can to  remove  the  Al  Shabab
    threat from the streets of Mogadishu is illustrated by the  account  of
    Ms Harper's visit to Bakara Market  when  a  child  was  discovered  by
    police to be in possession of explosives and by the  evidence  referred
    to by each of the expert  witnesses  of  police  roundups  designed  to
    identify Al Shabaab sympathisers and those in possession of  explosives
    on  the  streets  of  Mogadishu.  Those   are   both   legitimate   and
    proportionate responses to such a threat, most of those detained in the
    roundups being released within a few hours, having experienced no  ill-
    treatment while detained and questioned.

360. Although we have found that  clan  membership  has  become  more  of  a
    social support than a protection mechanism, the clan issue  does  still
    have a role to play in this regard. The evidence is that  the  District
    Police reflect the clan profile of the district in which  it  operates.
    It is entirely unsurprising that the local  or  district  police  force
    should  be  drawn  from  those  living  locally  and  so  reflect   the
    predominant clan in the area. Even accepting that the  District  police
    are inefficient and poorly trained and unable to deliver the protection
    to the community generally to be expected of a local  police  force,  a
    member of the dominant clan will expect to derive a greater  degree  of
    protection from the fact of the demographics of the police than someone
    who is not of that clan. That will manifest itself in many ways but not
    least in that, as the nuclear family becomes increasingly important  in
    terms of protection and re-establishment on return, an ability to  look
    to relatives who may well include members of the local police force  is
    likely  to  enhance  protection  levels,  if  only   because   of   the
    availability of an armed relative with some  training  in  police  work
    and, obviously, with a close association to the police force itself.

361. Access to protection for a citizen of Mogadishu is a  composite  issue.
    There is now a functioning central government in Mogadishu, even if its
    authority outside the capital  is  more  limited.  At  one  level,  all
    citizens benefit from steps taken by the  national  security  services,
    supported by AMISOM, to deal with the threat posed by Al Shabaab. We do
    not suggest that  such  services  have  always  performed  their  roles
    adequately or properly, but their role and presence have clearly had  a
    deterrent effect on  Al  Shabab  activity.  Local  or  District  Police
    service may be deficient but make some contribution by way of a visible
    presence. Those who do have specific personal protection needs, such as
    wealthy businessmen, politicians and those involved  in  litigation  or
    land disputes can and do assemble private bodyguards. Such arrangements
    are not simply tolerated by the authorities but implicitly  encouraged.
    That can be  seen  from  the  fact  that  the  government  is  actively
    encouraging  commercial  and  business  development  and   hotels   and
    restaurants  openly  advertise  the  security  arrangements  they  have
    assembled to protect patrons, on occasion making  clear  that  security
    teams  are  drawn  from  a  variety  of   clans   rather   than   being
    representative of just one.

362. As was made clear by the Court of Appeal in R  (Bagdanavicius)  v  SSHD
    [2003] EWCA Civ 1605, sufficiency of protection is not a  guarantee  of
    protection  from  Article  3  ill-treatment.   At   paragraph   55   of
    Bagdanavicius Auld LJ observed:

         "Where the risk falls to be judged  by  the  sufficiency  of  state
         protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according to whether it
         would eradicate the real risk of the relevant harm,  but  according
         to whether it is  a  reasonable  provision  in  the  circumstances;
         Osman"


363. Thus the protection afforded is to be considered in  the  circumstances
    pertaining in Mogadishu. Those include the general access  to  firearms
    and the assembling of private security  arrangements  where  those  are
    thought necessary, all without demur by the state. Put another way, the
    arrangements made available by the state for citizens to have access to
    protection include the freedom to  assemble  private,  armed,  security
    personnel if thought necessary. As we have explained, such arrangements
    will not be required by an "ordinary citizen" who would in  most  cases
    be unable to afford to pay for those arrangements in any event.  It  is
    important to  note  that  there  is  no  clear  evidence  of  "ordinary
    citizens" being at risk at the hands of private security men  assembled
    to protect whoever is paying them. That is not to  exclude  members  of
    any particular class of  citizens  from  having  access  to  protection
    mechanisms because, as we have said, an  "ordinary  citizen"  will  not
    need to be accompanied by an armed guard in order to secure his  safety
    in moving around or living in the city.

364. Having said that, it may well be that protection mechanisms fall  short
    for those living in IDP camps at or close  to  levels  of  destitution,
    given the evidence we have discussed above of the level  of  abuses  to
    which some camp inhabitants have been exposed.

365. However, where the issue arising is limited to the  risk  posed  by  Al
    Shabaab, in the context of the circumstances pertaining  in  Mogadishu,
    the response of the state does,  in  our  judgement,  deliver  what  is
    required in terms of a sufficiency of protection.  Where,  however,  an
    individual has a  basis  for  anticipating  being  a  victim  of  other
    criminality, which is not something experienced generally in  Mogadishu
    today, it may not be difficult  to  establish  that  a  sufficiency  of
    protection from the state security services is unavailable.

Al Shabaab

366. That is the backdrop against which we consider the level of risk  posed
    by Al Shabab for civilians in Mogadishu today. Significant  numbers  of
    people have chosen to return to Mogadishu and fewer people are choosing
    to leave. The question we address next is the level of risk  they  have
    apparently been willing to confront by doing so.

367. As we have observed, an analysis  of  the  reach  of  Al  Shabaab  into
    Mogadishu for the purpose of carrying out its violent attacks and their
    selection of targets is at the very heart of  any  assessment  of  risk
    facing those living in the city today and those facing the prospect  of
    returning there after a period of absence.

368. It is established by  the  evidence  that  the  approach  taken  by  Al
    Shabaab following withdrawal from Mogadishu has changed. There has been
    a cessation of confrontational warfare and with it, generally,  an  end
    to the use of artillery which, when used in an urban area, was  certain
    to cause very significant levels of civilian  casualties.  Instead,  Al
    Shabaab  has  adopted  what  has  been  termed  asymmetrical   warfare,
    sometimes launching what  are  referred  to  as  complex  attacks,  for
    example with a suicide bomb  attack  being  followed  up  by  a  second
    explosion.

369. It is plain from the evidence that when planning attacks in  Mogadishu,
    Al Shabaab selects its targets  carefully.  Dr  Mullen  spoke  in  oral
    evidence of an "international Jihadist  trend"  emerging,  involving  a
    seeking out of strategic targets such as  the  High  Court  and  hotels
    expected  to  be  frequented  by  military  and  police  personnel  and
    prominent politicians. Dr Mullen described this as:

           "... a much more  sinister  form  of  targeting  geared  towards
           peacemakers..."

370. Dr Hoehne agreed. He detects evidence of  significant  changes  in  the
    structure and ideology  of  Al  Shabaab  since  their  withdrawal  from
    Mogadishu. He explained how, since May or June 2013 it has purged  from
    its ranks those that  stood  in  the  way  of  its  version  of  jihad,
    including some senior  commanders.  "Pragmatists"  have  given  way  to
    "radical purists". Those eliminated from Al Shabaab:


           "were those standing for a less extreme course;  at  least  they
           were not so much in favour of international  or  "global  jihad"
           but were rather concerned about Somali (national) issues."

371. There is ample evidence  to  establish  precisely  what  the  targeting
    strategy of Al Shabaab is and in our judgement  neither  civilians  nor
    returnees are specifically targeted. For example:

           "The international NGO (B), Mogadishu,  stated  that  al-Shabaab
           does not kill civilians indiscriminately.  On  the  other  hand,
           when it is staging large scale  attacks  it  does  not  mind  if
           civilians are killed."


           "UNDSS, Mogadishu, explained that there are no recent reports of
           al-Shabaab having  attacked  or  killed  civilians  deliberately
           through armed attacks....
           ...


           Regarding IED attacks UNDSS, Mogadishu,  explained  that  remote
           controlled IED attacks or roadside bombs tend to target  AMISOM,
           SNAF and convoys  and  such  attacks  sometimes  result  in  the
           killing of civilians, i.e. collateral damage."

    And in an Aljazeera news report dated 11 September 2013 a spokesman for
    Al Shabaab, speaking after an attack  on  the  Parliament  building  in
    Mogadishu, is reported as saying that their attacks in Mogadishu:

           "... have nothing to do with... stopping Somalis coming back  to
           their country."

372. Dr Mullen said in oral evidence that, generally, the  targets  selected
    have a link  to  government  or  international  aid  agencies.  In  his
    evidence, Dr Hoehne drew upon the report of the joint  mission  of  the
    African Union and the United Nations conduced in Somalia between August
    and September 2013:


           They target particularly the Government, State institutions  and
           the international presence working  in  Somalia,  including  the
           United Nations."


    The omission of any reference to ordinary civilians or  returnees  from
    the diaspora from  this  list  of  primary  targets  is  to  be  noted.
    Similarly, we consider significant that neither civilians nor  diaspora
    returnees are included in the list of those at risk set out in the 2014
    UNHCR report which we discussed when summarising  submissions  advanced
    by Mr Gill. There is reference to those  opposing  Islamic  Sharia  and
    "apostates" and there is evidence before the Tribunal from some sources
    that Al Shabaab is likely to regard those returning from  the  west  as
    "poisoned" by exposure to an anti Islamic way  of  life  so  as  to  be
    regarded as spies or apostates. However, if that approach were  thought
    to be taken towards returnees generally we would expect a more specific
    reference to have been made. For those reasons we consider the omission
    of such a specific reference to diaspora returnees to  be  significant.
    Further, as the evidence simply does not establish  that  returnees  to
    Mogadishu experience such targeted difficulties  at  the  hands  of  Al
    Shabaab, we are satisfied that there is no real risk  arising  on  that
    account.


373. It has been submitted on behalf of the appellants that the  bombing  of
    hotels and restaurants does demonstrate that  civilians  and  returnees
    from the diaspora in particular, are targeted by Al  Shabaab.  In  oral
    evidence Dr Mullen spoke of civilians being regarded by Al  Shabaab  as
    being "fair game". But as our analysis of the  attacks  highlighted  in
    those submissions illustrates, invariably the  establishment  has  been
    said  to  have  been  selected  because  it  is   a   venue   used   by
    government/official or NGO associated personnel. There is no reason  to
    suppose that would not be known by others who choose to patronise those
    establishments. Indeed, there are a number of examples of such  venues,
    which include the more expensive hotels and restaurants, being targeted
    more than once, frequently followed by publicly reported pronouncements
    from Al Shabaab explaining why that target had been attacked.

374. We are satisfied that the evidence does not  establish  that  "ordinary
    civilians"  including  diaspora  returnees  are  targeted  by   anyone.
    Specifically, we are satisfied that the  evidence  does  not  establish
    that "ordinary civilians"  including  returnees,  are  targeted  by  Al
    Shabaab or the authorities or criminal elements. We are satisfied  that
    it  matters  not  that  a  returnee  who  has  been  absent  for   some
    considerable time would be recognisable as such by his dress, behaviour
    or language. That perhaps explains the news report  from  May  2013  we
    discussed above:

           "After two decades of anarchy and misery, Mogadishu is  enjoying
           something of a renaissance.  The  spectacular  ruins  are  being
           patched up. Hotels are being built. There are even  streetlights
           in some places. And everywhere you hear accents: Texan, Geordie,
           Minnesotan,  south  London,  Scandinavian.  Somalia's  far-flung
           Diaspora is coming back - in big numbers -  to  visit,  to  help
           out, to make money, and to find out if this renaissance has  any
           chance of lasting. The jury is still out on that one."

375.  Having  said  that,  we  accept  that  whenever  an  attack  involving
    explosives or gunfire is carried out within an urban  city  area  there
    will be a risk of civilian "collateral damage" and  it  is  clear  that
    civilians are killed and injured in the attacks  that  continue  to  be
    perpetrated in Mogadishu. We accept also that some  attacks  have  been
    carried out at venues such as a football stadium  and  a  retail  shop,
    which  appears  to  at  least  indicate  some  level  of  targeting  of
    civilians.  However, there are other  reasons  motivating  violence  in
    Mogadishu, the evidence suggesting that even  Al  Shabaab  members  are
    sometimes available as "guns for hire" to those with the resources  and
    motivation to hire them to settle personal disputes. In any event, such
    attacks are the exception, not the norm.

The level of weapons-related civilian casualties.

376. Therefore, it is necessary to carry out an assessment of the  scale  of
    the violent attacks and the extent of  civilian  casualties  caused  in
    order to make a judgment as to whether they are at a level such  as  to
    give rise to risk for civilians present in Mogadishu. It is clear  that
    Al Shabaab launches regular attacks in Mogadishu, including by  suicide
    bombers, car bombs, grenades, targeted killings  and  IEDs.  Dr  Mullen
    points to a UN Security body report:

           "There are on average several  targeted  killings  per  week  in
           Mogadishu, four to five weekly hand grenade attacks in Mogadishu
           and usually more."

    In the Danish 2 report, despite noting that:

           "... there is a decrease in the number of civilian casualties in
           Mogadishu, relative to the last few years. This decrease is  due
           to front-line fighting having moved out of Mogadishu. There  are
           now fewer mass-casualty attacks and killings, in particular  due
           to the cessation of shelling in Mogadishu..."


    the report continued:

           "Still  civilian   casualties   remain   a   daily   occurrence,
           principally due to assassinations, improvised explosive  devices
           (IEDs) and suicide attacks, and reactions to  these  attacks  by
           the armed forces. Recent grenade and  suicide  bomb  attacks  on
           theatres and cafes, such as the August 2012 attack on the Jezira
           Hotel, cause numerous civilian casualties."

    Despite that acknowledgement, the report went on to say this:

           "According to an international NGO working in  S/C  Somalia  the
           number  of  civilian  casualties  in  Mogadishu  has   decreased
           considerably  compared  to  February  2012  and  today  civilian
           casualties are  at  a  minimum.  In  July  2011  two  thirds  of
           Mogadishu was under al-Shabaab control. Bombardment and shelling
           killed many, but this is no longer taking place. Today you  have
           targeted attacks and sometimes by-passers  get  killed.  It's  a
           question of being at the wrong place at the wrong time."

377. Thus, it is established that there are daily attacks being carried  out
    in Mogadishu, and that there are civilian casualties  caused  by  those
    attacks. But the simple fact of that predictable frequency  is  not  an
    answer in itself to the questions being addressed in these appeals.  It
    will be recalled that in KAB v Sweden, which of course was not directly
    concerned with whether or not there was  an  Article  15(c)  risk,  the
    ECtHR accepted that civilian casualties remained a daily occurrence yet
    still concluded that there was no general Article 3 risk.

378. Much time and effort has been invested by each of the parties to  these
    appeals in making  what  they  could  of  the  statistical  information
    available about the  numbers  of  people  treated  for  weapons-related
    injuries in Mogadishu. Each has concluded that the  data  available  is
    incomplete and insufficiently consistent in respect of its collation so
    as to make it impossible to arrive at any reliable  total  figures.  We
    agree. Information is available from only  some  of  the  hospitals  in
    Mogadishu; there is no reliable distinction between civilian  and  non-
    civilian casualties and, in any event, it must be recognised  that  not
    all  casualties  will  have  presented  themselves  at  any  of   those
    hospitals.  It  is  also  problematic  that  the  term  "civilians"  is
    sometimes used to include anyone who is not part of the military,  such
    as politicians,  NGO  personnel  and  others  falling  squarely  within
    categories identified by Al Shabaab as legitimate targets.

379. That does not mean the information is of no use at all, but  we  accept
    that caution must be exercised in making use of it.

380. Ms Harper collated the information available  from  the  WHO  supported
    hospitals:

           January - December 2010: 5279 casualties  from  weapons  related
           casualties  were  treated  at  the  three  major  hospitals   in
           Mogadishu
           January - December 2011: 9689 casualties  from  weapons  related
           casualties  were  treated  at  the  three  major  hospitals   in
           Mogadishu
           January - December 2012: 6687 casualties  from  weapons  related
           casualties were treated in four hospitals in Mogadishu
           January - October 2013: 3889  casualties  from  weapons  related
           casualties were treated in four hospitals in Mogadishu

    Recognising that the figures for 2013 are incomplete, she said:

           "If extrapolated for the whole year, the  casualty  figures  for
           2013 would be 4667, which is less than  the  previous  year  but
           still high. .... It is important to stress  that  these  figures
           are incomplete and  do  not  give  a  reliable  picture  of  the
           situation in Mogadishu".

381. What can be made of these figures? Our conclusions in this  regard  are
    as stated above  and  it  is  convenient  to  repeat  those  here.  The
    statistical information available probably says  not  very  much  about
    overall figures of casualties but does allow  an  attempt  to  identify
    trends. We note that caution has been urged in  placing  reliance  upon
    "trends" but we see no reason not to have regard to that as part of the
    totality of the evidence before us.


382. It can be seen that even though  data  is  being  collected  from  four
    hospitals in 2013 as opposed to three in 2011, there has been a  steady
    reduction on the numbers reported since 2011, a reduction of more  than
    a half. The figure calculated by Ms Harper for the  whole  year  up  to
    December 2013 represents a very small proportion of the  population  of
    Mogadishu. We heard evidence that there may be something in the  region
    of 12 hospitals in Mogadishu, although not all  have  the  capacity  to
    treat  weapons-related  injuries.  But,  even  if  each  one  of  those
    hospitals treated such patients at the same rate as the four that  have
    provided data, that would mean that well over 99%  of  the  population,
    taking it to be Dr Hoehne's more conservative estimate of 1.5  million,
    would not have indicated any need  for  treatment  for  weapons-related
    injuries by seeking treatment at any hospital. If Dr Mullen is correct,
    and the population stands at  2.5  million,  then  the  figure  seeking
    hospital treatment is less than 0.2%.

383. However, as we have  said,  that  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  reliable
    calculation, for all of the reasons we have given.

384. What is significant is that, although  some  Al  Shabaab  attacks  have
    caused large-scale casualties, generally, the shift to targeted attacks
    on carefully  selected  targets  has  the  propensity  to  cause  fewer
    "collateral" casualties than the shelling exchanges seen  during  times
    of confrontational warfare. Therefore, a comparative  analysis  of  the
    number of attacks being carried out today with the  number  of  attacks
    carried out at a time when the  front  line  was  within  the  city  is
    unlikely to be helpful. We have seen also that a significant number  of
    grenade attacks have been unsuccessful.

385. Thus, what we are left with is this. Al Shabaab continues to carry  out
    attacks in Mogadishu on a  daily  basis.  These  are  not  targeted  at
    "ordinary civilians" or diaspora returnees, but they carry with them  a
    probability of some collateral damage to civilians who find  themselves
    in the vicinity at the time of the attack, especially  in  the  complex
    attack where a second explosion follows the first.  Having  said  that,
    there is some evidence that the follow  up  explosion  is  intended  to
    target not civilians gathering in the aftermath of the  first  exposion
    but the emergency services who respond to assist  the  victims  of  the
    blast. If correct, that would chime also with the  clearly  articulated
    intention to target those associated with the government.  We  do  not,
    though, lose sight of the  fact  that  civilian  casualties  frequently
    result from the attacks that continue to be carried out in Mogadishu.


386. As we have seen, large numbers of  people  have  chosen  to  return  to
    Mogadishu, notwithstanding those daily attacks. That may be thought  to
    be a cogent indication of perception of actual risk by  those  actually
    present. It is, in our judgement, little short of fanciful  to  suggest
    that for the large numbers of people who have chosen to  return,  their
    decision to do so  has  not  been  informed  by  evidence  of  improved
    conditions for civilians in Mogadishu, reinforced by  their  experience
    of the city after arrival.

Avoiding or reducing risk

387. It is clear also that it is open to  residents  of  Mogadishu  to  take
    steps to minimise their exposure to the risk of getting caught up in an
    Al Shabaab attack. For most people there will be no need to patronise a
    hotel or restaurant known to be  frequented  by  the  security  forces,
    government officials or international aid or NGO workers. Similarly, if
    it is thought that the risk of being involved in a  grenade  attack  is
    higher in the specific areas where the security forces or international
    organisations are based or in Bakara market than elsewhere, we  do  not
    accept that it is unreasonable to expect someone to avoid that area. We
    recognise that each of the appellants argue vigorously to the contrary,
    particularly in respect of Bakara Market. This is the  main  commercial
    district but there are a number of other markets in  Mogadishu.  We  do
    not accept that the need to visit  Bakara  Market,  or  to  dine  at  a
    restaurant known to be frequented  by  politicians  or  journalists  or
    government officials is a matter of such core importance to  engage  an
    argument under the principles of HJ (Iran).

388. Support for that conclusion may be found in the decision of  the  Grand
    Chamber of the Court of Justice of the European Union in Case (C-71/11)
    Federal Republic of Germany v Y Case (C-71/11) & Z (Case  99/11).  That
    decision was concerned with the question of whether it  was  not  every
    interference with protected religious  freedoms  but  only  those  that
    constituted a severe violation such as to adversely  affect  the  "core
    area of that religious freedom". That infringed Article 9 of the  ECHR.
    Although noting that religious freedom is a basic human right it  could
    not be said that any interference with that right would  amount  to  an
    act of persecution. There needed to be:

         "...  a  "severe"  violation"  of  religious   freedom   having   a
         significant effect on the person concerned for it  to  be  possible
         for the acts in question to be regarded as acts of persecution."

    By analogy, it  cannot  be  said  that  the  need  to  take  reasonable
    precautions  to  avoid  areas  of  Mogadishu  thought  to  represent  a
    particularly high risk of getting caught up in an Al Shabaab attack not
    specifically targeted at civilians is something  that  would  affect  a
    core area of private life being enjoyed in Mogadishu because  it  would
    be hard to show that would involve a person not  doing  something  that
    was of particular importance to him in order to preserve his  enjoyment
    of it.

389. The expert evidence supports the view that it is, in fact,  open  to  a
    resident of Mogadishu to take steps to reduce his personal exposure  to
    risk. Ms Harper expressed concern  that  an  individual  who  had  been
    absent from Mogadishu for a significant time:

           "... would not know how to behave in such a way as  to  possibly
           reduce their risk of harm."

    Implicit in this statement is an acceptance that it would be open to an
    individual who was aware of how best to behave to reduce  his  exposure
    to risk. However, when pressed to explain what sort of  conduct  should
    be avoided, Ms Harper listed types of behaviour which, it seems to  us,
    plain common sense would demand:

           "... it is not a good idea to speak about Al Shabaab in  public,
           and it is best to avoid government buildings,  and  restaurants,
           hotels  and  other  places  frequented  by  government  workers,
           security officials, members of the diaspora and foreigners..."

    It  was  Ms  Harper's  evidence  that  members  of  the  diaspora   are
    specifically targeted by Al Shabaab, although we have found as  a  fact
    that is not the case.

390. We accept that however diligent a civilian in Mogadishu  is  in  acting
    sensibly to  minimise  his  exposure  to  risk,  that  risk  cannot  be
    eliminated entirely, but that, of course,  is  not  a  requirement  for
    lawfully enforcing a return to that city. As Dr Mullen said:


         "No life solution in Mogadishu is without some degree of risk"

391. We should make  clear  also  that  we  do  not  accept  that,  for  the
    "ordinary civilian" living in Mogadishu today, personal safety  can  be
    assured only by  employing  personal  armed  bodyguards,  as  has  been
    suggested. Thus we reject, in particular, Dr Heohne's evidence that  an
    inability to fund expensive personal security arrangements  would  give
    rise to an unacceptable exposure to risk for all and any  returnees  to
    Mogadishu.


392.  We have found that civilians, including returnees from  the  diaspora,
    are not specifically targeted by either Al Shabaab, the authorities  or
    by  anyone  else.  It  has  been  suggested  that  returnees  might  be
    considered wealthy and so are likely to become victims  of  robbery  or
    extortion. But that we find speculative,  there  being  an  absence  of
    evidence to support such a concern.  We have no difficulty in accepting
    that persons such as Mr A, identified  in  Dr  Hoehne's  evidence,  who
    returned to conduct litigation and resolve a  land  dispute,  may  well
    feel the need to hire expensive armed guards  to  ensure  his  personal
    safety. But  as  we  have  found  that  ordinary  civilians,  including
    diaspora returnees, are not specifically targeted by anyone,  the  risk
    face by such individuals is that of "being in the wrong  place  at  the
    wrong time". Being accompanied by a bodyguard provides no assistance to
    an individual unfortunate enough to find himself in close proximity  to
    the venue of an Al Shabaab bomb attack.

393. An "ordinary civilian" unaccompanied by bodyguards, is likely  to  make
    his way around  Mogadishu  using  public  transport.  There  have  been
    examples of buses or other public transport vehicles getting caught  up
    in attacks by Al Shabaab with consequent  casualties  among  passengers
    who are innocent civilians. We have been referred to  news  reports  of
    passengers being shot on such buses in what may or may  not  have  been
    simple criminality. However, the evidence does  not  support  the  view
    that public transport is  identified  generally  as  a  target  for  Al
    Shabaab, or that there is generally any real risk  of  coming  to  harm
    while using public transport  in  Mogadishu.  Of  course,  a  mini  bus
    operated as a commercial bus service  is  no  more  immune  from  being
    damaged in an explosion than any other vehicle, but we  are  unable  to
    conclude that an enhanced risk of coming to harm  while  using  such  a
    facility is established by the evidence.

394. Similarly, although we heard evidence concerning  round-ups  by  police
    in Mogadishu, for the reasons we have already given, we  are  satisfied
    that is a proportionate response by police to the threat posed  to  the
    community by the presence in Mogadishu  of  Al  Shabaab  supporters  or
    those in possession of explosives.

Forced recruitment to Al Shabaab

395. It is entirely clear from the evidence that there is no  real  risk  of
    forced recruitment to Al Shabaab, despite the opinion to  the  contrary
    expressed by the expert witnesses. We have set out  above  a  range  of
    well-informed views, given by respected observers present on the ground
    in Mogadishu, that contradicts that opinion, including  the  following,
    taken from the Danish 2 report:

           "The local NGO (C) had no reports  of  forced  recruits  to  al-
           Shabaab in the city of Mogadishu..."


           "When asked... an international NGO working in  SC  Somalia  (D)
           stated that it had not heard about this..."


           "The NGO reiterated that it did not believe that  al-Shabaab  is
           able to undertake forced recruitment in Mogadishu..."


           "Saferworld found it unlikely that al-Shabaab undertakes  forced
           recruitment today"


           "Regarding forced recruitment  to  al-Shabaab  in  Mogadishu  an
           international NGO working in S/C Somalia  (C)  stated  that  al-
           Shabaab  does  not  have  the  leverage  to   undertake   forced
           recruitment today... and the NGO was confident  that  al-Shabaab
           is incapable of recruiting in Mogadishu.

396. Mr Toal advances an ingenious argument the thrust  of  which  is  that,
    even if there is no risk of forced recruitment,  if  a  person  has  no
    resources, no access to a livelihood and is facing destitution, he  may
    be driven to accept money from Al Shabaab to carry out tasks  for  them
    but, in recruiting him on this basis, Al Shabaab would be  abusing  his
    vulnerability such that it would amount  to  trafficking,  such  as  to
    infringe Article 4 of the Convention against  Trafficking.  We  do  not
    exclude that  argument  as  being  sustainable  in  certain  individual
    circumstances, but it is certainly not made out in relation to civilian
    returnees in general and whether it is applicable in the  case  of  SSM
    will depend upon an assessment of  his  circumstances  and  whether  he
    established that level of vulnerability. In  any  event,  where  it  is
    established that a returnee  would  in  fact  find  himself  living  in
    conditions of destitution, he would look to the protection of Article 3
    of the ECHR.

Assessment of current level of risk

397. Therefore, the key question to be  addressed  is  whether  the  violent
    attacks that continue to be carried out  by  Al  Shabaab  in  Mogadishu
    against carefully selected targets are at a level that means that there
    is for persons facing return  to  Mogadishu  a  risk  of  ill-treatment
    contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR or a serious and individual threat to
    a civilian's life or person by reason of the indiscriminate  nature  of
    those attacks carried out by Al Shabaab as they continue  to  prosecute
    their campaign against carefully selected targets in the  city.  As  we
    have explained, the statistical information concerning casualty  levels
    arising from those attacks  is  deficient  and  unreliable.  Thus,  our
    assessment must be made upon the evidence as a whole.


398. Gone are the indiscriminate bombardments and military offences  causing
    an unacceptable number of civilian casualties spoken of by the ECtHR in
    Sufi and Elmi. This has contributed  to  the  reduction  in  population
    movement in and from Mogadishu that we accept is now being  seen,  with
    "huge" numbers of people returning to the city. Nor can it be said that
    the  nature  of  the  conflict  is  unpredictable.  Given  the  careful
    selection of  targets  by  Al  Shabaab,  their  frequent  announcements
    reported in the media explaining why those targets have  been  selected
    it  is  entirely  predictable  which  areas  of  the  city,  and  which
    establishments or compounds within them, represent a greater  risk  for
    citizens moving about the city. We do not  suggest,  though,  that  the
    location of all such attacks can be anticipated and so avoided,  simply
    that certain obvious  areas  and  establishments  representing  clearly
    enhanced risk of an Al Shabaab attack can be generally avoided.

399. Drawing  all  of  this  together,  and  taking  together  all  we  have
    discussed, including:


        a. the scale of returns to Mogadishu  indicating  that  people  who
           know the city well are "voting with their feet";
        b.  the  scale  of  inward  investment  and  the  "economic   boom"
           indicating   that   individual   entrepreneurs,   as   well   as
           international agencies, consider investments to be  appropriate;


        c. the reduction in civilian casualties indicated by the  imperfect
           statistical information;
        d. the durability of the withdrawal  from  formal  presence  of  Al
           Shabaab from the city;
        e. the continued absence, generally, of the  use  of  artillery  or
           shelling within the city;
        f. the transparently clear targeting strategy of  Al  Shabaab  that
           does not include civilians, specifically, or diaspora returnees;
        g. the opportunity to take some reasonable steps to reduce exposure
           to risk;
        h. the absence of any risk of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab;


    and notwithstanding our acceptance of the continued  level  of  violent
    attacks that are being carried out  in  Mogadishu  by  Al  Shabaab,  we
    conclude that, absent some aspect of a person's profile making  him  of
    particular adverse interest to Al Shabaab or to the  authorities  as  a
    possible supporter of Al Shabaab, there is not a  general  risk  for  a
    civilian, simply by being present in the city, of  serious  harm  as  a
    result of indiscriminate violence. Nor is it established that there are
    substantial grounds for believing that a person returning to  Mogadishu
    would face a real risk of being  subjected  to  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

400. We are reinforced in this conclusion by the evidence concerning  recent
    large-scale returns of Somali citizens  irregularly  present  in  Saudi
    Arabia.

401. In cross-examination Ms Harper was referred to  a  document  issued  by
    the  British  High  Commission  on  4  February  2014  which  disclosed
    information received that the Saudi Arabian authorities  are  returning
    to Mogadishu Somalis without permission to be present in Saudi  Arabia.
    The total number of removals in January 2014,  using  charter  flights,
    "was over 12,000". A Mogadishu-based official  from  the  International
    Organisation for Migration confirmed that figure, adding  that  it  was
    expected that over 30,000 Somalis would be  retuned  in  the  following
    three months.

402. Very little is known about these individuals, other than  the  fact  of
    their return. Assuming that information to be correct, and we  have  no
    reason to suppose it is not, given that very recent news  reports  were
    produced during the hearing, some relating to events that had  occurred
    in Mogadishu only the previous day, if the influx of 12,000 involuntary
    returnees in January alone generated experiences  of  serious  harm  or
    persecutory ill-treatment, then it is surprising that no  such  reports
    were put forward.

403. That being the case, having rejected the view that  Mogadishu  poses  a
    "general risk" under Article 15(c) we still need  to  consider  whether
    some individuals  living  in  Mogadishu  can  nevertheless  succeed  to
    establish a specific Article  15(c)  risk  under  the  "sliding  scale"
    criterion identified by the CJEU in Elgafaji and Diakite.

404. Our conclusion that there is an absence of an  Article  15(c)  risk  is
    based upon a person who is an "ordinary civilian". A person who  works,
    for example, as a police officer, a  government  official,  or  in  any
    capacity for the  security  forces  or  the  government  administrative
    machine will not be an "ordinary citizen"  and  he  will  experience  a
    higher level of  risk,  even  if  not  individually  targeted  on  that
    account, because his daily life will bring him to the very areas of the
    city that are subject to an enhanced likelihood of being selected as  a
    target for an Al Shabaab attack. But given what we have said about  the
    opportunities to access other means of securing a livelihood, a  person
    who works in a capacity of the type described, which brings with it  an
    enhanced level of risk, will have done so as a matter of  choice.  That
    choice will have been informed by his overall circumstances,  including
    his personal security arrangements that may  relate  to  the  means  of
    travelling around the city and to his place of residence and the  level
    of security in which he is able to live.

405. It follows from this that there will need to be  a  careful  assessment
    of a person's overall circumstances.

406. We consider, it the  light  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  that  the
    position as set out by UNHCR in its report published  on  25  September
    2013 continues to reflect an appropriate  starting  point  today,  upon
    which to build in the light of our review of the up to date evidence:


         "With  regard  to  Mogadishu,  the  personal  circumstances  of  an
         individual need  to  be  carefully  assessed.  UNHCR  considers  an
         IFA/IRA as reasonable only  where  the  individual  can  expect  to
         benefit from meaningful nuclear and/or extended family support  and
         clan protection mechanisms in the area of  prospective  relocation.
         When assessing the reasonableness of an IFA/IRA in Mogadishu in  an
         individual case, it should be kept in  mind  that  the  traditional
         extended family and  community  structures  of  Somali  society  no
         longer constitute as strong a protection and  coping  mechanism  in
         Mogadishu as they  did  in  the  past.  Additionally,  whether  the
         members of the traditional networks are  able  to  genuinely  offer
         support to the applicant in practice also needs  to  be  evaluated,
         especially given the fragile and complex situation in Mogadishu  at
         present.


         For the following categories of Somalis, UNHCR would consider  that
         an IFA/IRA will not be  reasonably  available  in  the  absence  of
         meaningful nuclear and/or extended family support  and  functioning
         clan protection: unaccompanied children or adolescents at  risk  of
         forced recruitment and other grave violations; young males at  risk
         of being considered Al Shabaab sympathizers  and  therefore  facing
         harassment from government security forces; elderly people;  people
         with physical or  mental  disabilities;  single  women  and  female
         single heads of households with no male protection  and  especially
         originating from minority clans. In any other exceptional cases, in
         which the application of an IFA/IRA in Mogadishu is considered even
         in the  absence  of  meaningful  family  or  clan  support  to  the
         individual, the person would need to have access to  infrastructure
         and livelihood opportunities and to other meaningful protection and
         support mechanisms, taking into  account  the  state  institutions'
         limited ability to provide security and meaningful protection."

407. Distilled  to its essence, and on the basis of all the evidence  before
    us, we give the following country guidance:


          a. Generally, a person who is "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
             associated with the security forces; any aspect  of  government
             or  official  administration  or  any  NGO   or   international
             organisation) on returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
             absence will face no real risk of persecution or risk  of  harm
             such as to  require  protection  under  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification  Directive  or  Article  3  of   the   ECHR.   In
             particular, he will not be at real risk simply  on  account  of
             having lived in a European location for a  period  of  time  of
             being viewed with suspicion either  by  the  authorities  as  a
             possible supporter of  Al  Shabaab  or  by  Al  Shabaab  as  an
             apostate  or  someone  whose   Islamic   integrity   has   been
             compromised by living in a Western country;


          b. There has been durable change in the sense that the Al  Shabaab
             withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete  and  there  is  no  real
             prospect of a re-established presence within the city. That was
             not the case at the time of the country guidance given  by  the
             Tribunal in AMM,


          c.  The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding  non-military
             casualties that clearly fall within Al  Shabaab  target  groups
             such as politicians, police officers, government officials  and
             those associated with  NGOs  and  international  organisations,
             cannot be precisely established  by  the  statistical  evidence
             which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it is  established
             by the evidence considered as a whole that  there  has  been  a
             reduction in the  level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
             largely due to the cessation of confrontational warfare  within
             the city and Al Shabaab's resort  to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
             carefully selected targets. The  present  level  of  casualties
             does not amount to a sufficient risk to ordinary civilians such
             as to represent an Article 15(c) risk.


          d. It is open to an "ordinary  citizen"  of  Mogadishu  to  reduce
             further still his personal exposure to the risk of  "collateral
             damage" in being caught up in an Al Shabaab attack that was not
             targeted at him by avoiding areas and establishments  that  are
             clearly identifiable as likely Al Shabaab targets,  and  it  is
             not unreasonable for him to be expected to do so.


          e. There is no real risk of forced recruitment to Al  Shabaab  for
             civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including recent returnees from
             the West.


          f. A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence  will
             look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in  the  city,
             for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing  a
             livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek  assistance  from
             his clan members who are not close relatives, such help is only
             likely to be forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority
             clans may have little to offer.


          g. The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu  has  changed.
             Clans now provide, potentially, social support  mechanisms  and
             assistance with access to livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
             protection function than previously. There are no clan militias
             in  Mogadishu,  no   clan   violence,   and   no   clan   based
             discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.


          h. If it is accepted that a person facing a  return  to  Mogadishu
             after a period of  absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing  himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment of all of
             the circumstances. These considerations will include,  but  are
             not limited to:

                 i) circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
                ii) length of absence from Mogadishu;
               iii) family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
                iv) access to financial resources;
                 v) prospects of securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                    employment or self employment;
                vi) availability of remittances from abroad;
               vii) means of support during the time  spent  in  the  United
                    Kingdom;
              viii) why his ability to fund  the  journey  to  the  West  no
                    longer enables an appellant to secure financial  support
                    on return.


             Put another way, it will be for the  person  facing  return  to
             Mogadishu to explain why he would not be  able  to  access  the
             economic opportunities that have been produced by the "economic
             boom", especially as there  is  evidence  to  the  effect  that
             returnees are taking jobs at the  expense  of  those  who  have
             never been away.

408. It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or  family  support  who
    will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who have no  real
    prospect of securing access to a livelihood on return who will face the
    prospect of  living  in  circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is
    acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

IDPs

409. One category of resident of Mogadishu whose circumstances  do  seem  to
    be strikingly different are those living in IDP camps.

410. Before addressing that category of persons,  we  should  say  something
    about IDPs generally. As we have explained, and as has been  recognised
    by the expert evidence of both Dr Mullen and Dr Hoehne, in  the  Somali
    context that label is  problematic.  A  person  may  be  settled  in  a
    reasonable standard of accommodation with access to food aid, resources
    provided by others such as remittances from abroad or a  livelihood  to
    provide for himself, yet retain the categorisation of an  IDP  because,
    at some point in the past, possibly many years ago, he left his home to
    move somewhere else. Such a person will not, in our judgment, face  any
    enhanced level of risk as compared with any other settled  citizen  who
    is not classed as an IDP.

411. However, a person who has no option but to live in one  of  Mogadishu's
    IDP camps in a tent or makeshift  shelter  is  in  a  wholly  different
    position. Despite the positive assessment adopted by the respondent  of
    living conditions in some IDP  camps,  there  is  ample  evidence  that
    conditions in many IDP camps are appalling, as is illustrated  by  this
    extract from the 2013 report of the  Internal  Displacement  Monitoring
    Centre of the Norwegian Refugee Council:


           "Humanitarian law and human rights abuses were committed by  all
           parties. They have reportedly attacked  IDP  camps.  Perpetrated
           widespread sexual  and  other  gender-based  violence,  forcibly
           recruited internally displaced children and  fought  each  other
           near  civilian  settlements.  IDP's  health  situation  remained
           critical with most outbreaks of contagious  diseases  coming  in
           areas hosting displaced people. Developments such  as  increased
           security, an improving economy and urban  migration  led  to  an
           increase in forced evictions of IDPs in urban centres across the
           country such as Mogadishu.... A number of  the  most  vulnerable
           victims were unable to seek refuge elsewhere  because  of  their
           limited resources."


    And reinforced by Dr Mullen who said:

           "The issue of the humanitarian dimension of the IDP  problem  is
           highlighted in the Amnesty Report. The situation is quite  dire.
           IDPs have been living in overcrowded and unsafe settlements  and
           remain extremely vulnerable to various  forms  of  human  rights
           abuses, including widespread sexual violence..."

412. Given what we have seen,  and  described  above,  about  the  extremely
    harsh living conditions, and the risk of being subjected to a range  of
    human rights abuses, such a person is likely to be found to  be  living
    at a level that falls below acceptable humanitarian standards.

413.  It  is  necessary  to  say  something  about  the  numerical  data  or
    statistical evidence relating to the numbers of people  living  in  IDP
    camps in Mogadishu. In our judgement it is not possible to identify any
    accurate figure in that regard. As we have observed,  Dr  Mullen  draws
    upon information provided by UNHCR concerning the "Population of  IDPs"
    in Mogadishu as follows:

           April 2012      184,000
           October 2012        184,000
           February 2013   184,000
           September 2013  369,000

    In doing so, he recognised that this data, indicating a doubling of the
    number of IDPs between February 2013 and April 2013 is  surprising  and
    suggested that it was probably due to "problems in either collection or
    analysis of data". He explained also that "adjustments" had  been  made
    to the figures in September 2013 after the  figures  had  been  "cross-
    verified by observation". In  other  words  the  September  figure  was
    adjusted sharply upwards because visual verification checks  considered
    that the earlier figures were understated.

414.  There  are  further  difficulties  with  this  estimate  of  IDPs   in
    Mogadishu. The figures relate to population movement  and  not  to  the
    counting of heads. Also, the assertion that those living in  IDP  camps
    are living at levels of destitution must somehow be reconciled with the
    evidence concerning  "nutrition  interventions"  from  OCHA,  discussed
    above, that between April-June 2013 just 30,000 people were assessed as
    being either in "crisis" or "stressed".

415. Thus although each of the expert witnesses  have  accepted  that  there
    are 369,000 people living in Mogadishu's IDP camps,  we  are  satisfied
    that this is simply not correct and is a significant  overstatement  of
    the true figure. That figure includes those whose  place  of  residence
    has changed in response to earlier concerns  over  security  but  whose
    present living arrangements are below a level that is considered to  be
    acceptable. Indeed, despite maintaining  that  the  higher  figure  was
    correct, Dr Hoehne accepted in oral  evidence  that  people  who  moved
    their place of residence within Mogadishu are still regarded as part of
    the IDP population, whether or not they needed to resort to  living  in
    an IDP camp. He said:

         "I think they remain IDPs. If they stay for years and marry a local
         girl and sell their other property it is possible, but my  thinking
         is that they are IDPs."

    He added that "a good proportion of IDPs"  could  be  someone  who  had
    moved  from  one  district  of  Mogadishu  to  another."   In   closing
    submissions, the respondent  points  to  an  observation  in  a  report
    published  in  2011  by  the  Observatory  of  Conflict  and   Violence
    Prevention:


           "Hamar Weyne is the old part of town,  but  today  most  of  its
           original fair-skinned inhabitants have left to safer areas,  and
           it is largely inhabited by wealthy IDPs."


416. The respondent points also to evidence found in the form of the  report
    of the UN Monitoring Group published in  July  2013  concerning  "ghost
    camps" operated by "gatekeepers" who are in  receipt  of  funding  from
    international organisations but whose camps did not contain the numbers
    of IDPs claimed. In one case a camp in receipt of funding  for  housing
    3,200 families was found to contain only a few women and 20-30 shelters
    containing "watchmen". The respondent has produced an estimate of  IDPs
    provided by UNHCR of 184,000.

417. On the other hand, unlike the other witnesses, Ms  Harper  has  visited
    the city recently and has seen for herself the scale and extent of  the
    IDP camps and the large numbers of people living in temporary shelters.
    We accept that evidence and that many thousands of people  are  reduced
    to living in circumstances of destitution.

418. As we have recorded above, we  conclude  that  no  reliable  figure  is
    available of the numbers of people living in conditions of  destitution
    in IDP camps in Mogadishu today.  We  do,  however,  accept  that  that
    figure will be at least that identified in the lower figure offered  by
    UHNCR. The question to be addressed, though, is whether returnees  such
    as the appellants in this appeal, are likely to  find  on  return  that
    they have no alternative but to live in such inadequate conditions.  To
    some extent we have consider this above in the preceding section of the
    determination, but there are some further points to be made.

419. Ms Harper's evidence is that a person returning to  Mogadishu  after  a
    period of absence would probably find that their home would  have  been
    seized and occupied by someone else and  so  would  end  up  themselves
    having to live in an IDP camp. But that does not follow at all  because
    there is no reason to assume that any returnee  who  was  not  able  to
    repossess his own property would have no access to support or resources
    in order to establish themselves somewhere else, no  doubt  while  they
    take steps to recover their own property. After all, we heard  evidence
    that the cost of the journey that brings a Somali citizen, irregularly,
    to Europe would  be  between  $15,000  and  $25,000  which  the  person
    concerned had been able to raise before departure or which  was  raised
    on his behalf.

420. While it is  likely  that  those  who  do  find  themselves  living  in
    inadequate makeshift accommodation in an IDP camp will be  experiencing
    adverse living conditions such as to engage the protection of Article 3
    of the ECHR, we do not see that it gives rise to  an  enhanced  Article
    15(c) risk since there is an insufficient nexus with the indiscriminate
    violence which, in any event, we have found to be not at  such  a  high
    level that all civilians face a real risk of  suffering  serious  harm.
    Nor does the evidence support the claim that there is an enhanced  risk
    of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab for those in the IDP camps or  that
    such a person is more likely to be caught up in an Al Shabaab attack of
    which he or she was not the intended target.

421. Other than for  those  with  no  alternative  to  living  in  makeshift
    accommodation in an IDP camp, the humanitarian  position  in  Mogadishu
    has continued  to  improve  since  the  country  guidance  of  AMM  was
    published. The famine is confined to  history,  although  food  aid  is
    still required and  is  still  available  to  many  who  need  it.  The
    "economic boom" has generated more opportunity for employment  and,  as
    always, self-employment in  the  form  of  small-scale  trading  is  an
    established  Somali  route  to  a  livelihood.  For   many   returnees,
    remittances will be important. The evidence before the Tribunal is that
    more than 16 million was sent in 2009 from the United Kingdom alone by
    way of remittances to Somalia. There is no reason to suppose that there
    has been any diminution on  that  level  of  support  being  sent  from
    abroad.

422. The fact that we have rejected the view that there is a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm or ill treatment to civilians or  returnees
    in Mogadishu does not mean that no Somali national  can  succeed  in  a
    refugee or humanitarian protection or Article 3 claim. Each  case  will
    fall to be decided on its own facts. As we have  observed,  there  will
    need to be a careful assessment  of  all  of  the  circumstances  of  a
    particular individual.

423.  Two  observations  might  be  made  about  financial   considerations.
    Financial assistance from the Home Office may be available to voluntary
    returnees, in the form  of  a  grant  of  up  to  1,500,  and  may  of
    significant assistance to a returnee. Second, if an individual was able
    to raise the level of funds necessary to pay for a  journey  to  Europe
    arranged by an agent, it may be difficult for him to assert that he now
    has no access to financial resources unless he is able to explain  what
    has changed and why, especially if he has been found not to be credible
    in the factual account he advanced in his appeal hearing.

Mogadishu as a destination for internal relocation.

424. The evidence  indicates  clearly  that  it  is  not  simply  those  who
    originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to live  in  the
    city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or facing a  real
    risk of destitution. Large numbers of Somali  citizens  have  moved  to
    Mogadishu where, as we have seen there is now freedom of  movement  and
    no clan based discrimination.  Such  a  person  seeking  to  settle  in
    Mogadishu but who has not previously lived there would be able to do so
    provided he had either some form of social support network, which might
    be in the form of membership of a majority  clan  or  having  relatives
    living in the city, or having access to funds such as would be required
    to establish accommodation and a means of on-going support. That  might
    be in terms of continuing remittances or securing a  livelihood,  based
    on employment or self employment.

425. On the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu for a person of  a  minority
    clan  with no former links to the city, no access to funds and no other
    form of clan, family or social support is unlikely to be realistic  as,
    in the absence of means to establish a home and some  form  of  ongoing
    financial support there will be a real risk of  having  no  alternative
    but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp  where  there
    is a real possibility of having to live in conditions  that  will  fall
    below acceptable humanitarian standards.

Determination of the individual appeals

MOJ

426. The facts in relation to MOJ as  agreed  between  the  parties  are  as
    follows:

            . The Appellant is a Somali national, born on  10  October  1989
              (now aged 24 years).


            . The Appellant is from Mogadishu, Somalia, and is a  member  of
              the Gadarbursi clan.


            . On 22 April 2004, the Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
              having been granted entry clearance on 8 April 2004,  together
              with his younger brother and the then  fiance  of  his  older
              brother. He was granted indefinite leave to remain.


            . Between 9 September 2009 and 18 November 2010,  the  Appellant
              was convicted of various offences, which resulted either in  a
              non-custodial penalty or short periods of imprisonment.


            . On 14 January 2011, the Appellant was convicted of robbery and
              sentenced to 2 years imprisonment.


            . On 2  March  2011,  the  Respondent  wrote  to  the  Appellant
              informing him of his liability to  deportation  under  the  UK
              Borders Act 2007.


            .  On  13  February  2012  the   Appellant   submitted   further
              representations.


            .  On  26  February  2012,  the  Appellant  was  served  with  a
              deportation order signed on 21 of February 2012.


            . On 10 May 2012, the  deportation  decision  was  withdrawn  in
              order for the Appellant's asylum claim (made on 3 April  2012)
              to be considered.


            . On 26 June 2012, the Appellant was interviewed in relation  to
              his asylum claim.


            . On 26 July 2012 the Appellant was served with a  notice  under
              section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
              refusing his claim for asylum.


            . On 23 January 2013, the Appellant was served with  the  notice
              of the Respondent's decision that section 32  (5)  of  the  UK
              Borders Act 2007 applied to him.


            . In a determination promulgated on 23 April  2013,  the  First-
              tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  dismissed  the
              Appellants appeal against that decision.


            . In a determination promulgated on 22 July 2013, Upper Tribunal
              Judge Storey decided that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
              law. The learned judge stated  that  the  adverse  credibility
              findings made by the First-tier Tribunal stood, and  that  the
              characteristics which apply to the Appellant for  the  purpose
              of any other hearing is that he is a native  of  Somalia  from
              Mogadishu and is a member of a majority clan (the Gadarbursi).

427. The following directions were sent to the parties:

       1. The Tribunal has made  its  findings  of  fact  and  reached  its
          conclusions upon  country  guidance  and,  as  confirmed  at  the
          conclusion of the oral hearing of these appeals, will  not  admit
          further evidence or submissions, written  or  oral,  relating  to
          those matters.


       2.  There  is  though  one  matter  concerning  which  the  Tribunal
          considers it necessary and appropriate  to  provide  the  parties
          with an opportunity of addressing,  either  in  oral  or  written
          submissions.  Section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014  inserts  a
          new section 117 into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
          2002. That provision is now in force and is  applicable  to  this
          appeal. Where the Upper Tribunal remakes a decision relating to a
          claim that a decision under the Immigration Acts breaches  rights
          protected by Article 8 of the ECHR or would give rise to a result
          that is unlawful under s6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  the
          Tribunal must have regard to the factors set out in s117.


       3. Therefore, the hearing will be reconvened on 9 September 2014 for
          the purpose of receiving any submissions in that regard that  the
          parties may wish to advance.


       4. The parties are advised that:


                  a.  If  preferred,  the  Tribunal  will  receive  written
                     submissions concerning the  matters  described  above,
                     provided those have been served upon each of the other
                     parties; and
                  b. As there are agreed facts relating to  the  individual
                     appellants, the submissions raise issues of  law  only
                     and  that  should  be  reflected  in  any  submissions
                     advanced.
                  c. Oral submission, if advanced, must not exceed 30 mins.

    At the hearing on 9 September 2014 the Tribunal received submissions on
    behalf of MOJ, the only appellant to advance a claim under Article 8 of
    the ECHR, and on behalf of the respondent as to the correct approach to
    the new legal framework. Although articulated in  different  terms,  we
    did not detect much difference between the positions  of  the  parties.
    And so do not need to set out those submissions in detail. Section  117
    provides as follows, so far as is relevant for present purposes:


         PART 5A ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS


         117A Application of this Part

         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
          (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private  and  family
          life under Article 8, and
          (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human
          Rights Act 1998.


         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
          (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in  section  117B,
          and
          (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,  to
          the considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).



         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.


         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
          (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
          (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-
          (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
          (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-
          (a) a private life, or
          (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.


         (6) ...



         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.


         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.


         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.


         (4) Exception 1 applies where-
          (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for  most
          of C's life,
          (b) C  is  socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
          Kingdom, and
          (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's  integration
          into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


         (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.


         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are  to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.





         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1) In this Part-
          "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
          Rights;
          ...
         (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
          (a) who is not a British citizen,
          (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of  an  offence,
          and
          (c) who-
            (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least
            12 months,
          ...

428. The relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules, again so far  as  are
    relevant, are as follows:

         A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under
         Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014  are  met,
         regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served. (09.07.2012 HC 194)
         ...


         A398. These rules apply where:
              a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that  his
                 deportation would be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
                 obligations  under  Article  8   of   the   Human   Rights
                 Convention;


              b) a foreign criminal applies for a  deportation  order  made
                 against him to be revoked.


         Deportation and Article 8 (HC 760 13.12.2012)


         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and


              (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
              the public good and in the public interest because they  have
              been convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
              sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


              (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
              the public good and in the public interest because they  have
              been convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
              sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than  4  years
              but at least 12 months; or


              (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
              the public good  and in the public interest because,  in  the
              view of the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused
              serious harm or they are a persistent offender  who  shows  a
              particular disregard for the law,  the Secretary of State  in
              assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph  399  or
              399A applies and, if it does  not,  the  public  interest  in
              deportation will only be outweighed by  other  factors  where
              there are very compelling circumstances over and above  those
              described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.




         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -


                    (a) the person has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who
                    is in the UK, and
                          (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                          (ii) the child has lived in  the  UK  continuously
                          for at least the 7 years immediately preceding the
                          date of the immigration decision;  and  in  either
                          case
                          (a)it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live
                          in the country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                          deported
                          (b) it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  child  to
                          remain in the UK without the person who is  to  be
                          deported  or


                    (b)  the  person   has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                    relationship with a partner who is in the UK and  is  a
                    British Citizen or settled in the UK and


                             (i) the relationship was formed at a time  when
                             the  person  (deportee)      was  in   the   UK
                             lawfully and their immigration status  was  not
                             precarious; and


                         ii) it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be    deported,    because    of     compelling
                             circumstances over and above those described in
                             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


                        iii) it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported.


              399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
              applies if -


                          a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK
                             for most of his life; and


                          b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the
                             UK; and


                          c) there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
                             his integration into the country to which it is
                             proposed he is deported.

429. Mr Gill submitted  that  neither  section  117  of  the  2002  Act  nor
    paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules purport to set  out  a
    comprehensively complete framework of circumstances in which a  foreign
    criminal can demonstrate that the public interest does not  demand  his
    deportation. Therefore, having followed a structured approach guided by
    those provisions the Tribunal should look at all that is relied upon in
    support of the Article 8 claim. Mr Rawat submitted  that  where  it  is
    plain that those matters have already been considered and found not  to
    outweigh the public interest it  will  be  sufficient  to  say  so  and
    nothing more is required. Otherwise, Mr  Gill  urged  the  Tribunal  to
    accept that a complete proportionality  assessment  will  be  required,
    which generally is best carried out by addressing the 5 questions posed
    by Lord Bingham in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27,  although  as  has
    always been the case, depending upon the circumstances  some  of  those
    can be answered in very brief terms:
             (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
             authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect
             for his private or (as the case may be) family life?
             (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
             (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
             (4)  If so, is such interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security, public safety or
             the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
             (5)  If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?
430. This  appeal  is  not  the  appropriate  vehicle  for  a  detailed  and
    authoritative analysis of this new framework and we do not  purport  to
    offer guidance in that regard. For  the  purpose  of  determining  this
    appeal we are content to proceed on the basis summarised above. In that
    context, we accept Mr Gill's submission that  there  is  no  particular
    threshold to be met or hurdle  to  overcome  before  a  proportionality
    assessment is to be carried out. We accept also Mr  Rawat's  submission
    that if there is, in reality, nothing of consequence or of a compelling
    nature speaking in favour of the appellant that has  not  already  been
    considered, very little will need to be said to recognise that.

431. Mr Gill advances MOJ's human rights claim in the following way. As  MOJ
    says he will be without support, financial or social,  upon  return  to
    Mogadishu he will fall into poverty and have no alternative but to join
    the ranks of the city's  IDPs  and  therefore  be  forced  to  live  in
    conditions such as to infringe Article 3 of the ECHR.

432. Mr Gill submits that returning MOJ to  Mogadishu  would  also  infringe
    rights protected by Article 3 of the ECHR. As a member of the Gadabursi
    clan, the clan base of which is in Somaliland, there would be  no  clan
    support available to him so that he would become part of the  poor  IDP
    population of the city, resulting in  him  living  in  conditions  that
    would infringe Article 3 of the ECHR on the basis of destitution. There
    is no evidence that he has access to economic resources  and  there  is
    little prospect of him securing even low-skilled work in Mogadishu.  In
    the United Kingdom he has been  unemployed  since  2008.  Although  his
    father was found by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  have  been  a
    wealthy businessman prior to 1991, there is no evidence that the family
    has retained that wealth. The fact that MOJ may have contacts or family
    in Somaliland is of no assistance to him on return to Mogadishu today.

433. In his written submissions Mr Gill said:

         "Aligned to this risk of Article 3 ECHR breach  would  also  be  an
         Article 8 ECHR breach in  relation  to  MOJ's  physical  and  moral
         integrity. In addition, the  fear  and  stress  which  the  general
         situation in Mogadishu is likely to cause would be at such a  level
         as to impact on the physical and moral integrity  in  contravention
         of Article 8 ECHR."

    Thus, the Article 8 claim is mainly predicated  not  upon  interference
    with any family or private life in the  United  Kingdom  but  upon  the
    conditions in which MOJ would find himself upon return to Mogadishu. In
    that respect MOJ will need to show that he faces a risk of  a  flagrant
    violation of rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR in the receiving
    state, a challenge that Lord Bingham in EM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2008] UKHL
    64 described as "a very exacting one". Lord Bingham went on to  approve
    and adopt the words of Lord Steyn in R (Ullah)  v  Special  Adjudicator
    [2004] 2 AC 368  that it was necessary to establish  at  least  a  real
    risk of a flagrant violation of the very essence of the right.


434. Mr Gill adds, though, that MOJ has been in the United Kingdom since  he
    was 14 years old (not 13 as earlier  suggested)  and  although  he  has
    committed a serious offence, that occurred when he was a  young  adult.
    Mr Gill submits that MOJ has spent his formative years  in  the  United
    Kingdom and, in view of the "extreme situation to  which  he  would  be
    forcibly returned" his  removal  would  not  be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim being pursued by the respondent  in  seeking  to  deport
    him.

435. Developing those submissions, Mr Gill said that MOJ left  Somalia  when
    only 10 or 11 years old and has been away from the country for about 13
    years so that he has no knowledge of or ties to  Mogadishu.  Therefore,
    on return he faces a real risk of persecution  on  account  of  imputed
    political opinion and imputed religious belief.  That  is  because,  as
    someone returning from the West he would be regarded by Al Shabaab as a
    spy and as someone with pro-government,  pro-western  views,  and  with
    liberal attitudes and political visions. Also, he would be viewed as an
    infidel and as such at risk of coming  to  harm  at  the  hands  of  Al
    Shabaab.

436. The First-tier Tribunal found that MOJ had left  Somalia  when  he  was
    just 12 years old and had spent time in Ethiopia before arriving in the
    United Kingdom with a brother in April 2004.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds finding that even if there had been
    no certificate under section 72  of  the  Nationally,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, the effect of which was that MOJ's appeal fell  to  be
    dismissed on asylum grounds, his asylum claim would not be  established
    because, as he asserted only a generalised and non-specific fear of  Al
    Shabaab, that was not a reason recognised by the  1951  Convention  and
    the Tribunal rejected his evidence generally about his circumstances as
    they would be on his return to Somalia.

437. The Tribunal did not find MOJ to be a credible witness.  They  rejected
    his claim to have no family remaining in Somalia. They  referred  to  a
    pre-sentence report prepared in 2011, saying:

         "Amongst other things the report refers to  the  appellant  stating
         that he originated from Somalia and where most of his family  still
         lives."


    That information plainly was provided by MOJ himself and is  impossible
    to reconcile with his account of having no family remaining in  Somalia
    and of having  no  contact  with  them.  Further,  the  Tribunal  heard
    evidence from MOJ's brother who, although  supporting  MOJ's  claim  to
    have no family members remaining in Somalia, was reminded  that  at  an
    earlier hearing in  2004  he  had  given  evidence  of  having  made  a
    telephone call to Somalia. This led the Tribunal to conclude that:


         "We do not accept [MOJ's] evidence that there are  no  contacts  or
         family left in Somalia. His first language is  Somali  as  such  we
         consider he would be able to return there without any risk  to  his
         life, safety or welfare."

438. The finding in respect of safety on return is not of  course  preserved
    but is one to be made afresh by the Upper Tribunal in the light of  all
    that we have considered above. Before leaving the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal we take from it  first  the  following  observation
    made in the pre-sentence report:


         "My own clinical judgment  and  my  comprehension  of  the  offence
         analysis leads me to conclude that there is a  pattern  of  violent
         offending  and  that  his  index  offence  is  an   escalation   in
         seriousness as he has now resorted to using  physical  violence.  I
         therefore assess that he poses a high risk of serious harm  to  the
         public and that he meets the dangerousness criteria..."


    and the findings that MOJ has not had employment in the United  Kingdom
    since 2008 but he has obtained qualifications in adult  literacy,  life
    skills and adult numeracy. In addition he undertook some courses  while
    serving his sentence. The Tribunal noted, in particular, that  MOJ  had
    learned how to cut hair "and became a regular hairdresser in prison".

439. We do not accept any  of  Mr  Gill's  submissions  in  respect  of  the
    protection claim. For the reasons we have given above there is no  real
    risk that on return MOJ will be assumed by Al Shabaab to be  a  spy  or
    apostate or an infidel on account of having spent  a  number  of  years
    living in the United Kingdom. He will not  be  imputed  to  posses  any
    religious  belief  that  he  does  not  possess.  We  accept  that  the
    Gadabursi, although a majority  clan  nationally,  is  in  a  numerical
    minority in Mogadishu and so will be unlikely to be able to provide the
    level of support that MOJ might expect to obtain had he been  a  member
    of a clan with a predominant presence. However, on the findings of fact
    preserved, he does have family contacts "in Somalia" and even if  those
    relatives are not in Mogadishu, as he is in contact with them there  is
    no reason at all to suppose that they will not be able to  provide  him
    with some financial support if he needs it.

440. In any event, we do not accept that  MOJ  would  be  unable  to  secure
    employment on return to Mogadishu, either, for example, as a waiter  or
    at a similar level in one of the large number of  new  businesses  that
    have been established in recent years in Mogadishu or as a hairdresser,
    either as an employee or on his own account. That is, plainly, a  skill
    that is transferable to  another  country.  Mr  Gill  points  out  that
    hairdressing is "traditionally a job for the Bantu" so that if he  took
    up such an occupation "he would be openly conducting business in a  way
    which  is  entirely  foreign  to  Somali  culture".  But,  as  we  have
    explained, that  represents  no  disqualification  from  doing  so  and
    Mogadishu today is a very different city than  it  was  in  times  when
    issues of clan were of much more significance. There is insufficient to
    indicate that MOJ could not work in such a capacity  and  every  reason
    for him to do so in order to provide for himself.

441. Thus we are unable to accept Mr Gill's  submission  that  MOJ  "has  no
    prospects" of obtaining suitable employment on return. Nor, as will  be
    clear from our general conclusions, do we accept that MOJ would  be  in
    any way handicapped by  being  unable  to  finance  expensive  personal
    security arrangements. He would not be driven to live in poverty in  an
    IDP camp. He can call  upon  relatives  in  Somalia,  even  if  not  in
    Mogadishu, as well as relatives who remain in the  United  Kingdom,  to
    provide  support  while  he  arranges  for  employment   and   suitable
    accommodation.

442. For these reasons we are satisfied that  MOJ  faces  no  real  risk  on
    return of being subjected to ill-treatment such as to  infringe  rights
    protected by Article  3  of  the  ECHR  and  he  will  not  face  risks
    proscribed  by  Article  15(c)  as  an  ordinary  civilian  present  in
    Mogadishu, there being no characteristic either to facilitate  a  lower
    requirement of risk level on the basis of the Elgafagi sliding scale.

443. We address next MOJ's claim under Article 8 of the ECHR.  Although,  as
    we have observed, the claim is  founded  upon  his  circumstances  upon
    removal to Mogadishu rather than any  impermissible  interference  with
    rights protected by Article 8 relating  to  his  circumstances  in  the
    United Kingdom, for the sake of completeness we record that he  has  no
    family life in the United Kingdom and  there  is  no  evidence  of  any
    particular  aspect  of  private  life   that   would   render   removal
    disproportionate.

444. MOJ, having been convicted of an offence of robbery for  which  he  was
    sentenced to two years imprisonment, is a foreign criminal  as  defined
    by section 32 of the UK Borders  Act  2007.  Therefore,  by  virtue  of
    section 32(4) his deportation is conducive to the public good.  Section
    32(5) requires that the SSHD must make a deportation order  unless  one
    of the exceptions set out in section  33  apply.  MOJ  claims  that  an
    exception would apply for reasons raised in his asylum and human rights
    claim. As part of that  human  rights  claim  is  founded  upon  rights
    protected by Article 8 of  the  ECHR  would  be  infringed,  the  Upper
    Tribunal is now required to have regard to the considerations listed in
    section 117B and 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, inserted by section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014  with  effect
    from 28 July 2014.

445. Thus, engaging with the claim as advanced on his behalf by Mr Gill,  we
    consider first the considerations we are required to have regard to  by
    virtue of section 117. In the absence of direct evidence on the  point,
    there is no reason to take issue with Mr Gill's submission that MOJ can
    speak English and has not been a burden on the taxpayer. Those  factors
    can be regarded as speaking in his favour. Turning to section 117C,  Mr
    Gill submits that MOJ falls within Exception 1 and so on  that  account
    alone it should be accepted that the public interest does  not  require
    his deportation.

446. We do not accept that  submission.  MOJ  was  born  in  Somalia  on  10
    October 1989 and arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 April 2004 aged 14
    years and 6 months. As at the date of the final day of the  hearing  of
    this appeal, 9 September 2014, he had  been  lawfully  present  in  the
    United Kingdom for 10 years and 4 months and so had not  been  lawfully
    resident here for most of his life.

447. Mr Gill  complains  that  there  had  been  an  unacceptable  delay  in
    processing his application for entry clearance.  Had  that  been  dealt
    with within a reasonable time MOJ would have arrived sooner and  so  he
    should be treated as if he had  been  lawfully  present  since  January
    2002. That is because he made his application for entry clearance on 10
    October 2001 and the delay was unacceptable such  that  the  respondent
    should now not be allowed to benefit from it in  any  way.  We  do  not
    agree. The statutory provision is clear and the appellant fails to meet
    it. Even if, which we do not accept, the date proposed by  Mr  Gill  is
    accepted, MOJ would have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  aged  13  or
    possible 12 years old and he has been resident here for 10 years, which
    cannot be said is for most of his life.  There  is  no  scope  for  the
    application of a "near miss" principle.

448. In any event, on  our  findings  generally,  applied  to  the  specific
    circumstances of MOJ, for all of the reasons we have given,  it  cannot
    be  said  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Somalia.

449. It is not suggested that Exception 2 applies and so the  next  step  is
    to consider whether MOJ derives any benefit from paragraph 398  of  the
    Immigration Rules, on  the  basis  that  the  public  interest  in  his
    deportation is outweighed by the other factors he points  to  amounting
    to very compelling circumstances over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 or 399A, neither of with take MOJ any further.

450. In that regard, Mr Gill relies upon the physical  and  moral  integrity
    submissions summarised above and, possibly, the unlawfulness  disclosed
    by  the  respondent's  delay  in  dealing  with  the  entry   clearance
    application, if we decline to accept his invitation  to  treat  MOJ  as
    having arrived earlier than he did for the purposes of section 117.

451. In our judgement there is no merit in those submissions. Any  delay  in
    dealing with the entry clearance application is indicative, at most, of
    maladministration rather than unlawfulness.  The  proposed  deportation
    will not have the effect of interfering with the exercise of any  right
    to respect for private and family life in  Somalia,  and  there  is  no
    suggestion of an impermissible  interference  with  such  rights  being
    exercised in the United Kingdom.  In  that  sense,  Article  8  is  not
    engaged. If it is  engaged  on  the  basis  asserted,  based  upon  the
    challenges facing  MOJ  on  arrival  in  Mogadishu,  that  will  be  in
    accordance  with  the  law,  given  our  general  findings  above,  and
    necessary for the public  interest  reasons  we  have  discussed.  That
    leaves the question of proportionality. It is sufficient  to  say  that
    all that is asserted on MOJ's behalf is not such  as  to  outweigh  the
    pressing public interest  in  the  deportation  of  a  violent  foreign
    criminal, the index offence being one of  robbery.  That  offence,  for
    which on 14 January 2011 he was sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment, was
    not his first offence. He  had  accumulated  convictions  for  racially
    aggravated threatening words or behaviour, theft, and criminal damage.

452. Therefore, in respect of MOJ we substitute a fresh decision  dismissing
    his appeal on all grounds.

MAA

453. The facts in relation to MAA as  agreed  between  the  parties  are  as
    follows:


    . The appellant is a Somali National, born on 13 November 1986 (now aged
      27 years).


    . The Appellant was born in Mogadishu. Prior to leaving Somalia he lived
      in the Hodan district of Mogadishu with his parents  and  sister.  The
      Appellant claims to have married on 12 November 2011.


    . The Appellant left Mogadishu some two and  a  half  weeks  before  his
      arrival in the United Kingdom. The last contact he had with his family
      was a week before he left Somalia.


    . He entered the United Kingdom on 7 April 2012 and  claimed  asylum  on
      arrival.


    . A screening interview was conducted on 7 April 2012.


    . A full asylum interview was conducted on 26 April 2012.


    .  On  1  May  2012  the  Appellant's   representatives   made   further
      representations   on   his   behalf.   The   Appellant's   claim    to
      asylum/Humanitarian Protection was based on his claimed membership  of
      a minority clan (Benadiri/Reer Hamar) as well as the lack of  security
      prevailing in Mogadishu.


    . On 2 May 2012, the Respondent  refused  the  application  for  asylum,
      decided the appellant did not qualify for Humanitarian Protection  and
      that he did not qualify for a grant of  limited  leave  to  enter  the
      United Kingdom.


    . The Appellant's appeal against the decision not to grant him leave  to
      enter came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) on 29 June 2012. It was dismissed in a determination dated 23
      July 2012.


    . On 15  November  2012,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  granted  the
      Appellant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  on  the  basis
      that "the application does raise a properly arguable issue  which  may
      identify an error of law, namely the alleged failure by the First-tier
      Tribunal Judge to deal adequately with the issue of Article  15c  risk
      on return."


    . On 9 May 2013, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lewis held that  the  First
      Tier Tribunal had made an error  of  law.  The  judge  set  aside  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal and directed that "The decision in
      the appeal in respect of Humanitarian Protection is to  be  remade  by
      the Upper Tribunal."


    . Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lewis further said,  "I  do  not  consider
      that there is any basis for revisiting the first tier  tribunal  judge
      is  credibility  findings  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  historic
      account." Those findings were:


   a. The Appellant was not a member of a minority clan as he had claimed;
   b. The Appellant's claim to have been abducted by Al Shabaab was a recent
      invention to bolster an otherwise weak claim;
   c. The appellant had not been targeted by Al Shabaab.


    . Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lewis also found that  "  the  [First-tier
      Tribunal] Judge does not identify a cogent basis for  concluding  that
      the Appellant falls within a  class  of  person  who  can  live  to  a
      reasonable standard." On  5  June  2013,  the  Respondent  withdrew  a
      concession made at the error of law hearing that the Appellant "was an
      ordinary person with no especially influential connections." In  light
      of such withdrawal, Deputy Upper Tribunal Lewis further directed on  5
      June 2013 that oral evidence would be  heard  from  the  Appellant  in
      respect of his circumstances/connections in Mogadishu.

454. Thus MAA is someone who left Mogadishu in 2012, leaving behind a  wife,
    his parents and his sister. There is no reason to suppose they  do  not
    remain there. MAA gave an account of adverse experiences in  Mogadishu,
    based  upon  claimed  membership  of  a   minority   clan,   that   was
    comprehensively rejected as untrue  by  the  judge  who  dismissed  his
    appeal.

455. MAA gave oral evidence before this Tribunal. He described  how  he  had
    arranged to leave Mogadishu and travel to the United  Kingdom.  He  was
    living in Mogadishu with his parents and sister.  His  father  did  not
    work, because of health problems, but his mother raised  an  income  by
    selling sweets in the market. Six years before his departure,  MAA  had
    sent a letter to an uncle in Saudi Arabia  asking  for  help  to  leave
    Mogadishu. There was no further contact between them but,  unexpectedly
    in 2012, the uncle sent a man to MAA's house so that he could make  the
    arrangements for the journey  to  the  United  Kingdom.  He  could  not
    explain why, if Mogadishu was then  so  dangerous  as  to  require  his
    departure, the resources made available by the  uncle  could  not  have
    been used instead to finance the departure of the  whole  family  to  a
    less remote destination, such as Kenya.

456. MAA said that he had no contact with  his  family  or  his  wife  since
    leaving Mogadishu. He had  asked  "religious  leaders"  in  the  United
    Kingdom, for example at mosques, for help but they had been  unable  to
    help. He had not been able to call upon  his  uncle  in  Saudi  Arabia,
    which might have been an obvious thing to do bearing in mind  that  the
    uncle was able to find him in Mogadishu six years after  the  appellant
    had sent a letter. That was because MAA did not know  where  his  uncle
    lived. He explained that he had given his  letter  to  a  man  who  was
    travelling to Saudi Arabia in the hope that he would be able to pass it
    on and, fortunately, that had been achieved. Although the man  sent  by
    the uncle six years later brought with him a  letter  from  the  uncle,
    that did not provide MAA with the address of his benefactor.

457. MAA's evidence disclosed  little  about  his  living  circumstances  in
    Mogadishu. He persisted in his claim to  be  a  minority  clan  member,
    although the finding of fact made to the contrary has  been  preserved.
    He said that the family did not pay rent for their house, the inference
    being that it was owned by them.

458.  Ms  Panagiotopoulou's  submissions  relating   to   MAA's   individual
    circumstance may be summarised as follows. MAA's profile is of  someone
    retuning to Mogadishu after living for 2  years  in  Europe.  For  that
    reason he would be at risk from Al Shabaab because he would be seen  as
    someone who had lost their religion and had come to spread  evil.  That
    amounts to risk of persecutory  ill-treatment  on  account  of  imputed
    political and religious opinion and so a reason recognised by the  1951
    Convention.

459. It will be clear from our conclusion set out above that none  of  those
    submissions are arguable and we reject each of them.

460. Next, Ms Panagiotopoulou submits  that  MAA would, on return  from  the
    West, be perceived to be wealthy and so would be at risk from  criminal
    elements also. We have already explained  why  that  submission  cannot
    succeed. There is no evidential basis to establish that to  be  a  real
    risk for those returning to Mogadishu having lived in what are  thought
    to be more wealthy countries.

461. It is submitted on MAA's behalf that  he  has  lost  contact  with  his
    family. They may have moved. He himself has never worked and in view of
    the high unemployment rate in Mogadishu he is likely to end  up  living
    destitute in an IDP camp in conditions below the Article 3 threshold.

462. The difficulty with that submission, and the reason why we  reject  it,
    is that MAA has been found not to be a witness of truth  and  his  bare
    assertion that he has had no contact with the family  he  left  behind,
    including the wife to whom he had only recently been married, does  not
    carry very much weight. He has managed in the past to establish contact
    with a relative in Saudi Arabia  who  was  able  to  provide  what  the
    evidence suggests must have been a significant level  of  resources  to
    fund his journey to the United Kingdom. If that  relative  was  willing
    and able to provide that  level  of  support  to  MAA  to  improve  his
    experience of life then it would nothing short of extraordinary if this
    benefactor  left  the  rest  of  the  family  in  Mogadishu  destitute,
    especially as, being MAA's uncle, he must have enjoyed a  closer  blood
    relationship with one of his parents.

463.  In  any  event,  as  we  have  heard  from  Ms  Harper,  Somalis   are
    "extraordinary communicators" who know the business of  relatives  even
    while they are in this country, such  is  the  level  of  communication
    maintained with the diaspora. There is nothing to  suggest  that  MAA's
    relatives do not remain in Mogadishu and, as his claim to be the member
    of a minority clan has been rejected as untrue, that means that he will
    be able to call upon the support network of  a  majority  clan  in  re-
    establishing contact with the relatives with whom he was living  before
    his departure and who supported him before he left. Presumably, though,
    his search will begin at the family home  where,  absent  a  reason  to
    believe otherwise,  he  would  expect  to  find  his  family  still  in
    residence.

464. That means that there is nothing in MAA's personal  circumstances  that
    puts him at any  enhanced  risk  on  return  that  any  other  ordinary
    civilian in Mogadishu. On that basis, for the reasons  we  have  given,
    his claim under Article 15(c) cannot succeed and, as there is no reason
    to suppose that he will be driven to live in an  IDP  camp,  his  claim
    under Article 3 of the ECHR fails also.

465. MAA does not advance a claim before us under Article 8 of the ECHR.

466. For these reasons we substitute  a  fresh  decision  to  dismiss  MAA's
    appeal on all grounds advanced.

SSM

467. The facts in relation to SMM as  agreed  between  the  parties  are  as
    follows:

            . There is no challenge to that part of the factual  matrix  on
              which the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTJ  Brennells  and  Mr  GF
              Sandall) based its decision, described in paragraph 15 of its
              determination as follows:


              "As the Appellant is now only  pursuing  his  Article  3  and
              Humanitarian Protection claims we have only to  consider  the
              situation now prevailing  in  Mogadishu.  The  only  personal
              facts which we have taken into account in so  doing  is  that
              the Appellant is not a minority clan member and that he  does
              not have any significant resources which would assist him  in
              re-establishing himself in Mogadishu."


            . The following additional facts are agreed:


              a. the  appellant  is  a  Somali  national  who  was  born  on
                 2.12.1985 in Mogadishu;
              b. the appellant arrived in UK with his mother and siblings on
                 16.7.1997 and has remained in the  UK  since  then  and  to
                 date;
              c. he was refused asylum in the UK on 1.8.2001 but was granted
                 exceptional leave to remain until 31.8.2004;
              d. he applied for indefinite leave to remain on 16.8.2004  and
                 was subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain;
              e. on 14.2.2005 he was convicted at Snaresbrook Crown Court of
                 robbery  and  was  sentenced  on  4.4.2005  to  18   months
                 detention in a young offenders' institution;
              f.  on  6.6.2008,  he  was  convicted   at   Highbury   Corner
                 Magistrates Court and sentenced to  8  weeks'  imprisonment
                 for using threatening words and/or behaviour with intent to
                 cause fear or provocation of violence;
              g. on 28.11.2008 the appellant was  convicted  at  Wood  Green
                 Crown Court of violent disorder  and  was  sentenced  to  3
                 years and 4 months imprisonment.


            . The foregoing facts are agreed  by  the  solicitors  for  the
              appellant and the respondent.

468. Thus, SSM is also a foreign criminal in respect of whom the  SSHD  must
    make a deportation order unless an exception identified in  section  33
    of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  applies.  Mr  Toal  submits  that   is
    established. That deportation order has been made and  the  immigration
    decision under challenge by SSM in the proceedings is  the  refusal  of
    the  respondent  to  revoke  the  deportation  order  in  response   to
    submissions advanced on SSM's behalf, founded principally  on  evidence
    supplied by Dr Hoehne, that  on  return  to  Mogadishu  he  would  face
    treatment that would be contrary to both Article  3  of  the  ECHR  and
    Article 15(c) of the Directive.

469. We have set out  and  consider  above  Mr  Toal's  submissions  on  the
    position of civilians in Mogadishu generally and we have explained  why
    we are unable to accept those arguments. In  his  submissions  Mr  Toal
    says that if the Tribunal does not accept his arguments on the  general
    position, and finds that  there  is  no  Article  15(c)  risk  for  the
    population of Mogadishu generally, SSM should succeed on the  basis  of
    his individual characteristics. This is because he would  be  returning
    to Mogadishu after a very long  absence  as  a  person  with  no  adult
    experience  of  living  in  that  city  and  will  be  someone   easily
    recognisable as having come from a Western country. He has a profile of
    someone being deported for having committed a criminal offence and will
    have no access to resources on return. As a  result,  according  to  Mr
    Toal, he will become an IDP facing all of the  difficulties  that  have
    been disclosed by the evidence.

470. Those difficulties, faced by IDPs in Mogadishu,  are  said  to  include
    inadequate access to food and water, disease due to  insanitary  living
    conditions and inadequate housing. Mr Toal asserts that 90% of IDPs  in
    Mogadishu live in makeshift shelters, that being taken  from  the  Food
    Security and Nutrition Situation Trends report covering the period July
    2011-April 2012.  Additional  problems  will  include  exploitation  by
    "gatekeepers" and vulnerability to forced eviction from settlements.

471. As a returnee, Mr Toal submits, SSM would be vulnerable because he  may
    be suspected of an intention to join Al Shabaab; he may be perceived to
    be wealthy, on the basis of having come from  Europe,  and  so  attract
    demands for money or threats from militias, he will find  it  difficult
    to find employment and will face risk from Al  Shabaab  for  no  reason
    other than being a returnee from the  West.  Finally,  with  no  recent
    knowledge of living in Mogadishu, he will be unable to  anticipate  and
    so minimise or avoid risk.

472. Mr Toal accepts that the evidence does not indicate a  risk  of  forced
    recruitment to Al Shabaab, but in the face of an inability to access  a
    livelihood, SSM may feel driven to work for the group as the  only  way
    to access money as well as to enable him to demonstrate he is not a spy
    or  an  apostate.  This  would  amount  to  Al  Shabaab   abusing   his
    vulnerability so as to  amount  to  trafficking  such  as  to  infringe
    Article 4 of the Convention against Trafficking.

473. Therefore, it is Mr Toal's submission that SSM:

        a. has a well founded fear  of  persecution  by  Al  Shabaab  as  a
           returnee from the West, that being a reason  recognised  by  the
           Convention so as to require  that  he  be  recognised  to  be  a
           refugee;
        b. there is an established  Article  15(c)  risk  of  serious  harm
           generally  and,  because  of   his   particular   vulnerability,
           specifically in his case;
        c. is likely to suffer inhuman and degrading treatment in having to
           live in circumstances analogous to an IDP such  as  to  infringe
           Article 3 of the ECHR;
        d. faces a real risk that he would be "trafficked"  by  Al  Shabaab
           within the meaning of the Convention.

474. Those submissions go beyond what had been agreed between  the  parties,
    which was that SSM was pursuing only his claim under Article 3  of  the
    ECHR and a claim for Humanitarian Protection. However, we can deal with
    most of the issues raised by Mr Toal quite briefly. For the reasons  we
    have already given, SSM will not  face  any  real  risk  on  return  on
    account of having spent time living in the United Kingdom,  whether  at
    the hands of Al Shabaab on the basis that he had  been  compromised  in
    ideological or religious terms by his time in the West nor on the basis
    of attracting adverse attention from criminal elements  on  account  of
    being perceived to be a wealthy returnee. Nor is there any risk of  him
    being suspected by the authorities of being an  Al  Shabaab  supporter,
    simply because he is returning to Mogadishu  after  having  spent  time
    living in the United Kingdom.

475. The argument, that as someone with no adult  experience  of  living  in
    Mogadishu SSM will be unable to anticipate and so avoid  risk,  is  one
    that we have considered above but rejected. SSM has  acquired  criminal
    convictions for public order offences and  a  robbery.  He  has  served
    custodial sentences. He will  have  learnt  how  to  be  aware  of  his
    surroundings when on the street and  there  is  no  reason  at  all  to
    consider him to be nave. Much of the behaviour to be  avoided  on  the
    streets of Mogadishu identified by the expert witnesses when addressing
    what can be done to avoid risk in Mogadishu  is  no  more  than  common
    sense and we are satisfied that SSM would appreciate that.

476. What remains is this. We accept that SSM would be unfamiliar  with  the
    detailed geography of modern Mogadishu. He would be  returning  without
    the family members whom he accompanied to the United Kingdom  in  1997.
    We have no difficulty in accepting  that  it  would  be  a  challenging
    experience for any person to establish himself in any city  with  which
    he has no recent experience, even if the  city  did  not  generate  the
    additional difficulties that citizens of Mogadishu have to  cope  with.
    Therefore, we do not underestimate the difficulties that would face SSM
    on his arrival in Mogadishu after an absence of 17 years,  having  left
    when just 12 years old.

477. Having said that, a long period of absence from the city and  the  fact
    of having had no adult experience of living within it cannot be factors
    sufficient in themselves be to make the prospect of return unreasonable
    or unacceptable because we have found that it may represent a  suitable
    destination for relocation for Somali citizens who have had no previous
    connection with the city at all.

478. SSM's claim to be a member of a minority clan has been rejected and  so
    we must assess his position on return on the basis that he is a  member
    of a majority clan and so would be able to look  to  clan  members  for
    assistance in re-establishing himself in what would  be  an  unfamiliar
    city. As we have seen, the nature of the response to be  expected  from
    clan members may not be the same  as  it  once  was  but  the  evidence
    plainly  discloses  this  as  a  relevant  and  significant  avenue  of
    exploration for someone in SSM's position. Also, many  Somali  citizens
    survive with the assistance  of  remittances  from  abroad.  SSM  would
    remain in contact with relatives in  the  United  Kingdom  who,  it  is
    reasonable to assume, would do what they  could  to  provide  continued
    financial support from here, as do many thousands of others.  Thus,  Mr
    Toal's submission that SSM would not have access to any  resources  has
    to be seen in that context.

479. Mr Toal submitted that SSM would face  further  difficulties  precisely
    because he is being deported on account of  having  committed  criminal
    offences in this country. There was not a clear consensus in the expert
    evidence about this matter but  we  are  satisfied  that,  absent  some
    aspect of the offending disclosing characteristics such  as  to  offend
    core Somalis mores (which is not the case here), simple criminality  on
    a returnee's part, even if it somehow came to be known about, would not
    cause anyone to act any differently towards him.

480. That leaves two matters. It is said that SSM would  find  it  difficult
    to find employment, but that is simply asserted as an unexplained fact.
    As a man approaching 30 years of age who is apparently in  good  health
    and who has spent  time  living  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  is  not
    immediately obvious what would disqualify him from seeking a low  level
    job in one  of  the  many  new  enterprises  spawned  by  the  economic
    explosion of entrepreneurship that Mogadishu has seen.  There  is  some
    evidence  that  suggests  that,  especially  for  businessmen  who  are
    themselves diaspora returnees, those returning from abroad may be  seen
    as more attractive prospects for employment than those who  have  never
    left. As a member of a majority clan SSM could seek sponsorship as such
    if he wished to, and that may make the process easier, but the evidence
    does not establish that access to employment would  be  barred  without
    it. We do not accept, therefore, that SSM would be driven to  work  for
    Al Shabaab, with all the attendant risk to his life that  follows  from
    such an association. There is no risk of forcible  recruitment,  as  we
    have explained, and we do not accept that the  route  to  a  livelihood
    would be barred such as to leave him  with  no  option  but  to  accept
    payment from Al Shabaab for carrying out tasks for them.

481. Drawing all this together, while we have no doubt that  SSM  will  find
    the process difficult, unsettling and challenging,  we  are  unable  to
    accept that  SSM  would  find  himself  destitute  on  the  streets  of
    Mogadishu, left with no option but to live in an IDP camp in conditions
    that would reduce him to living below a level tolerated by Article 3 of
    the ECHR. In sum, the only aspects of SSM's circumstances that might be
    thought to identify anything different  from  those  facing  any  other
    citizen returning to Mogadishu is that he has  been  away  for  a  long
    period and so would be unfamiliar with the  city  and  has  no  nuclear
    family to look to for assistance as  he  establishes  himself.  In  our
    judgement, for a member of a majority clan who remains in contact  with
    relatives in the diaspora, those are not  difficulties  that  can  give
    rise to a finding of a need for international protection such  as  will
    displace the public interest in deporting a violent foreign criminal.

482. For these reasons we substitute a decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
    all grounds.




    Signed:


    Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
    Dated: 10 September 2014


                                 APPENDIX A

           Schedule of Expert and Background Evidence (Appellants)

|Item  |Document                      |Source            |Date            |
|Appellant: MOJ                                                          |
|1     |Responses to further questions|Hoehne, Dr Markus |23 January 2014 |
|2     |Responses to further questions|Harper, Miss Mary |21 January 2014 |
|3     |Responses to further questions|Mullen, Dr Joseph |19 January 2014 |
|4     |Further questions from        |Respondent        |13 January 2014 |
|      |Respondent to Experts         |                  |                |
|5     |Responses to Questions        |Harper, Miss Mary |6 January 2014  |
|6     |Responses to Questions        |Hoehne, Dr Markus |23 December 2013|
|7     |Responses to Questions        |Mullen, Dr Joseph |20 December 2013|
|8     |Questions to Ms Harper        |Respondent        |20 December 2013|
|9     |Questions to Dr Mullen        |Respondent        |9 December 2013 |
|10    |Questions to Dr Hoehne        |Respondent        |9 December 2013 |
|11    |Expert Report for             |Harper, Miss Mary |3 December 2013 |
|12    |Expert Report                 |Mullen, Dr Joseph |18 November 2013|
|13    |Expert Report                 |Hoehne, Dr Markus |18 November 2013|
|Appellant: MAA                                                          |
|14    |Responses to Questions        |Mullen, Dr Joseph |26 January 2014 |
|15    |Expert Report                 |Harper, Miss Mary |23 January 2014 |
|Appellant: SSM                                                          |
|16    |Responses to Questions        |Harper, Miss Mary |29 January 2014 |
|17    |Questions to Ms Harper        |Respondent        |28 January 2014 |
|18    |Expert Report                 |Harper, Miss Mary |18 January 2014 |
|19    |Updated Expert Report         |Hoehne, Dr Markus |11 October 2013 |
|20    |Expert Report                 |Hoehne, Dr Markus |11 August 2013  |
|Background Evidence                                                     |
|      |Total IDPs by Region          |UNHCR             |Various         |
|      |Human Rights and Democracy    |Foreign and       |Various         |
|      |2012: Somalia                 |Commonwealth      |                |
|      |                              |Office            |                |
|      |WHO Somalia Biennial Report   |WHO               |Undated         |
|      |2010-2011                     |                  |                |
|      |Chronology of recent events   |Harper, Mary      |Undated         |
|      |Photographs                   |Harper, Mary      |Undated         |
|      |Map of Mogadishu              |                  |Undated         |
|      |Map of Internal Displacement  |Internal          |Undated         |
|      |                              |Displacement      |                |
|      |                              |Monitoring Centre |                |
|      |                              |(iDMC)            |                |
|      |Mortar fire rains down on     |CNN               |Undated         |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu under constant      |Harar 24 News     |12 February 2014|
|      |attack, while senior          |                  |                |
|      |intelligence officers blame   |                  |                |
|      |residents for the violence    |                  |                |
|      |Hormuud halts its mobile      |Al Shahid Network |6 February 2014 |
|      |internet services all Somali  |                  |                |
|      |territory                     |                  |                |
|      |New barrages of mortar fire   |Associated Press, |5 February 2014 |
|      |rattle Mogadishu              |reported at       |                |
|      |                              |Kentucky.com      |                |
|      |Somalia: Population Movement  |UNHCR             |1 February 2014 |
|      |Trends                        |                  |                |
|      |Benadir Regional              |                  |29 January 2014 |
|      |Administration, Statistics    |                  |                |
|      |52 Journalists Killed in      |Committee to      |27 January 2014 |
|      |Somalia since 1992/Motive     |Protect           |                |
|      |Confirmed                     |Journalists       |                |
|      |Al-Shabab carries out daring  |Harar 24 News     |26 January 2014 |
|      |daylight attack today in      |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu's Huriwaa District  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Big Promises, Scant  |Human Rights Watch|21 January 2014 |
|      |Change                        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia travel advice         |Foreign and       |21 January 2014 |
|      |                              |Commonwealth      |                |
|      |                              |Office            |                |
|      |UNSOM Mandate                 |United Nations    |20 January 2014 |
|      |                              |Assistance Mission|                |
|      |                              |in Somalia        |                |
|      |Relatives and families bemoan |Shabelle Media    |20 January 2014 |
|      |after Gunmen  in Gov't troops |Network           |                |
|      |dresses sprayed bullets on a  |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |public Vehicle                |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Federal Govt confirms|Garowe Online     |15 January 2014 |
|      |presence of US military       |                  |                |
|      |advisers in Mogadishu         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia government, citizens  |Sabahi Online     |15 January 2014 |
|      |condemn al-Shabaab's attempt  |                  |                |
|      |to ban internet access        |                  |                |
|      |Humanitarian Snapshot -       |UNOCHA            |14 January 2014 |
|      |December 2013                 |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabaab warns     |Garowe Online     |13 January 2014 |
|      |Mogadishu residents 'not to   |                  |                |
|      |work for int'l agencies'      |                  |                |
|      |Political infighting threatens|Integrated        |13 January 2014 |
|      |Somalia's government          |Regional          |                |
|      |                              |Information       |                |
|      |                              |Networks News     |                |
|      |Somalia: Two civilians gunned |Garowe Online     |12 January 2014 |
|      |down in Mogadishu             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Federal Govt urges   |Garowe Online     |11 January 2014 |
|      |telecom companies not to abide|                  |                |
|      |by Al Shabaab internet ban    |                  |                |
|      |US military advisers deployed |Reuters           |10 January 2014 |
|      |to Somalia to help African    |                  |                |
|      |forces                        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: 7 Federal Govt       |Garowe Online     |10 January 2014 |
|      |soldiers killed in ambush near|                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu by Al Shabaab       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Gunmen kill woman who|Garowe Online     |9 January 2014  |
|      |worked for Turkish agency in  |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalis from disapora denounce|Sabahi Online     |9 January 2014  |
|      |al-Shabaab threats            |                  |                |
|      |World Report 2014 - Somalia   |Human Rights Watch|3 January 2014  |
|      |Foreign travel advice: Somalia|Foreign and       |2 January 2014  |
|      |                              |Commonwealth      |                |
|      |                              |Office            |                |
|      |Al Shabaab New Year's Day     |Sabahi Online     |2 January 2014  |
|      |attack rattles Somalia's      |                  |                |
|      |security faade               |                  |                |
|      |Toll now 11 dead, 40 wounded  |UPI               |2 January 2014  |
|      |in bomb attacks on Somali     |                  |                |
|      |hotel                         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabaab Claims    |VOA News          |2 January 2014  |
|      |Responsibility for Deadly     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Bombings              |                  |                |
|      |Death Toll at 20 From         |VOA News          |2 January 2014  |
|      |al-Shabab Bombings            |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabaab claims             |The Guardian      |2 January 2014  |
|      |responsibility for Mogadishu  |                  |                |
|      |hotel bombings                |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabaab claims             |UPI               |2 January 2014  |
|      |responsibility for deadly     |                  |                |
|      |hotel bombing                 |                  |                |
|      |Security Council, Ban deplore |UN News Service   |2 January 2014  |
|      |Mogadishu bombings, reaffirm  |                  |                |
|      |resolve to help end Al Shabaab|                  |                |
|      |threat                        |                  |                |
|      |International Protection      |UNHCR             |1 January 2014  |
|      |Considerations with Regard to |                  |                |
|      |people fleeing Southern and   |                  |                |
|      |Central Somalia               |                  |                |
|      |Hotel in Somali capital       |BBC News          |1 January 2014  |
|      |Mogadishu hit by car bombs    |                  |                |
|      |Real-time analysis of African |ACLED             |1 January 2014  |
|      |political violence, January   |                  |                |
|      |2014                          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu hotel      |Garowe Online     |1 January 2014  |
|      |rocked by deadly car bomb     |                  |                |
|      |attacks                       |                  |                |
|      |Six killed by car bombs in    |Garowe Online     |1 January 2014  |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Whose Country Is It, |Harper, Mary      |Winter 2013     |
|      |Anyway?                       |                  |                |
|      |Somali soldiers killed in     |BBC News          |27 December 2013|
|      |Mogadishu blast               |                  |                |
|      |Bomb blast at restaurant kills|Garowe Online     |27 December 2013|
|      |11 in Mogadishu               |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: UN expert urges      |UN News Service   |26 December 2013|
|      |government to finalise human  |                  |                |
|      |rights roadmap                |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabaab is danger |Garowe Online     |24 December 2013|
|      |to the public-President Hassan|                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Federal Govt troops  |Garowe Online     |22 December 2013|
|      |clash at checkpoint           |                  |                |
|      |Syrian and Somali doctors'    |BBC News          |18 December 2013|
|      |shot dead near Mogadishu      |                  |                |
|      |Gunmen Kill 6 outside Somali  |VOA News          |18 December 2013|
|      |Capital                       |                  |                |
|      |Four doctors, two bodyguards  |UPI               |18 December 2013|
|      |killed in Somalia attack      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: UN envoy condemns    |UN N0             |18 December 2013|
|      |deadly attack on medical      |                  |                |
|      |convoy near Mogadishu         |                  |                |
|      |Food Security and Nutrition:  |FSNAU             |17 December 2013|
|      |Quarterly Brief               |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Federal Govt forces  |Garowe Online     |15 December 2013|
|      |and Al Shabaab clash in       |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Fierce Battle Erupts |Shabelle Media    |9 December 2013 |
|      |in Baladweyne                 |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Bomb blast kills     |Garowe Online     |6 December 2013 |
|      |Federal MP in Mogadishu       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Fighting Causes|Shabelle Media    |4 December 2013 |
|      |Casualties in Beledweyne      |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Report of the                 |United Nations    |2 December 2013 |
|      |Secretary-General on Somalia  |Security Council  |                |
|      |Somalia PM Abdi Farah Shirdon |BBC News          |1 December 2013 |
|      |loses confidence vote         |                  |                |
|      |The consequences of political |HIPS              |1 December 2013 |
|      |infighting                    |                  |                |
|      |Nutrition Update, October -   |FSNAU             |1 December 2013 |
|      |December 2013                 |                  |                |
|      |Harassment of Radio Shabelle  |Reporters without |30 November 2013|
|      |journalists continues         |Borders           |                |
|      |Delivered by the Netherlands  |Amnesty           |29 November 2013|
|      |into the clutches of a suicide|International     |                |
|      |bomber in Somalia             |                  |                |
|      |Delayed planting and floods   |FEWSNET           |27 November 2013|
|      |threaten Deyr crops           |                  |                |
|      |Memo to the Hague: Somalia is |Human Rights Watch|27 November 2013|
|      |not safe                      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Well known           |Dalsan Radio      |26 November 2013|
|      |Businessman and Woman killed  |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |in Kismayo                    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Civilians Complain   |Dalsan Radio      |25 November 2013|
|      |Over Government Forces Loot   |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |and Torture                   |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Court judge gunned   |Garowe Online     |23 November 2013|
|      |down in Mogadishu             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Dispute among Govt   |Garowe Online     |22 November 2013|
|      |troops turn deadly            |                  |                |
|      |Somalia arrests woman over    |Garowe Online     |21 November 2013|
|      |rape allegations              |                  |                |
|      |Under fire on a dangerous     |BBC News          |20 November 2013|
|      |Somali road                   |                  |                |
|      |Despite Setbacks, al-Shabab   |VOA News          |19 November 2013|
|      |Still a Potent Threat         |                  |                |
|      |Somali African Union          |BBC News          |19 November 2013|
|      |Beledweyen base hit by bomb   |                  |                |
|      |attack                        |                  |                |
|      |Do Somalis in Dadaab refugee  |BBC News          |19 November 2013|
|      |camp want to go home?         |                  |                |
|      |Islamists raid Somali police  |Reuters           |19 November 2013|
|      |station, at least 28 dead:    |                  |                |
|      |witnesses                     |                  |                |
|      |Dispatches: Deported to Danger|Human Rights Watch|19 November 2013|
|      |in Somalia                    |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabaab attacks Somali     |UPI               |19 November 2013|
|      |police station                |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabaab attack on Somali   |CNN               |19 November 2013|
|      |police station kills at least |                  |                |
|      |12                            |                  |                |
|      |Al Shabaab claims attack on   |Reuters           |19 November 2013|
|      |police station in central     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Alshabab Burn Down   |Dalsan Radio      |18 November 2013|
|      |Vehicles Transporting Liquor  |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Politics not Refugees at heart|Rawlence, Ben     |12 November 2013|
|      |of Repatriation to Somalia    |                  |                |
|      |Deadly explosion rocks        |Aljazeera         |11 November 2013|
|      |Mogadishu hotel               |                  |                |
|      |Security Council 'outraged' by|United Nations    |10 November 2013|
|      |deadly bomb attack in Somali  |News Centre       |                |
|      |capital                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Somali Military      |Dalsan Radio      |10 November 2013|
|      |Soldier Kills Shoeshine Young |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Boy in Mogadishu              |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: People Living        |Dalsan Radio      |10 November 2013|
|      |Alshabab Controlled Areas Fear|(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Using Smartphone After More   |                  |                |
|      |Questions                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Deeply flawed rape   |Human Rights Watch|10 November 2013|
|      |inquiry                       |                  |                |
|      |Lobby blast may have preceded |UPI               |9 November 2013 |
|      |hotel bombing in which 11     |                  |                |
|      |reported dead                 |                  |                |
|      |5 killed in bombing outside   |CNN               |9 November 2013 |
|      |Mogadishu hotel, Somali       |                  |                |
|      |official says                 |                  |                |
|      |Suspected Car Bomb Kills 6 in |VOA News          |8 November 2013 |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: 18 Die in Heavy Clan |Sabahi Online     |8 November 2013 |
|      |Fighting Near Jowhar          |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu blast: 'Suicide     |BBC News          |8 November 2013 |
|      |attack' in Somali capital     |                  |                |
|      |Car bomb outside Somalia hotel|UPI               |8 November 2013 |
|      |kills at least 4, injures 5   |                  |                |
|      |6 killed at Mogadishu hotel   |Garowe Online     |8 November 2013 |
|      |bombing                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia's Shabaab 'still far  |Al Shahid Network |7 November 2013 |
|      |from defeat'                  |                  |                |
|      |When Push Comes to Shove:     |Refugees          |7 November 2013 |
|      |Displaced Somalis under Threat|International     |                |
|      |Somalia: Somali Poor          |Shabelle Media    |7 November 2013 |
|      |Leadership Crisis             |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia's future relies on an |Garowe Online     |4 November 2013 |
|      |army that does not yet exist  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Amid internal        |Garowe Online     |3 November 2013 |
|      |divisions, Al Shabaab pledges |                  |                |
|      |more attacks                  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: How Mogadishu        |Dalsan Radio      |2 November 2013 |
|      |Soldiers Harass Civilians     |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Federal Register, Vol 78, No  |US Department of  |1 November 2013 |
|      |212, November 2013, 65692     |Homeland Security |                |
|      |Key actors mapping: Somalia   |Browne and Fisher |1 November 2013 |
|      |Repatriation Pact:            |The Heritage      |1 November 2013 |
|      |Insufficient Progress         |Institute         |                |
|      |Somalia: Humanitarian         |UNOCHA            |30 October 2013 |
|      |Dashboard (as of 30 October   |                  |                |
|      |2013)                         |                  |                |
|      |US 'drone strike' kills senior|Aljazeera         |29 October 2013 |
|      |Shabab members                |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Roadside Bomb Hits On|Shabelle Media    |29 October 2013 |
|      |Gov't Soldiers in Mogadishu   |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabaab Ambushes  |Shabelle Media    |29 October 2013 |
|      |On AMISON Vehicle in Dhoobley |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Al Shabaab rebuilds forces in |The Guardian      |28 October 2013 |
|      |Somalia as African Union      |                  |                |
|      |campaign stalls               |                  |                |
|      |Drone strike kills at least   |Reuters           |28 October 2013 |
|      |two in Somalia - residents    |                  |                |
|      |Kenya calls for Somalis to    |Shabelle Media    |26 October 2013 |
|      |leave world's largest refugee |Network           |                |
|      |camp                          |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Explosion Rocks|Shabelle Media    |24 October 2013 |
|      |Janale Town                   |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Fighting       |Shabelle Media    |23 October 2013 |
|      |Between Government Troops and |Network           |                |
|      |Alshabab in Bakol Region      |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Grenade Bombs Thrown |Shabelle Media    |20 October 2013 |
|      |to a House Belonging to the   |Network           |                |
|      |Mayor of Marka                |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Al-Shabab Claims the |Dalsan Radio      |20 October 2013 |
|      |Responsibility for the        |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Baladweyn Suicide             |                  |                |
|      |Suicide bomber kills 16 in    |Reuters           |19 October 2013 |
|      |Somali caf attack aimed at   |                  |                |
|      |foreign troops                |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Suicide Bomber Kills |Shabelle Media    |19 October 2013 |
|      |Dozens in Beledweyne Town     |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Suicide Bomber Kills |Dalsan Radio      |19 October 2013 |
|      |13 At Restaurant in Central   |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Over Dozen Die In    |Garowe Online     |19 October 2013 |
|      |Beledweyne Suicide Bombing    |                  |                |
|      |Somali suicide bombing kills  |BBC News          |19 October 2013 |
|      |AU soldiers in Beledweyne     |                  |                |
|      |Al Shabab bombing in Somalia  |UPI               |19 October 2013 |
|      |kills 16                      |                  |                |
|      |Suicide bomber kills at least |Radio Free Europe |19 October 2013 |
|      |12 at restaurant in Somalia   |                  |                |
|      |At Least 15 Killed in Somalia |VOA News          |18 October 2013 |
|      |Attack                        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Explosions     |Shabelle Media    |17 October 2013 |
|      |Occur in Lower Shabelle Region|Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Al Shahid Network 'Thousands  |Al Shahid Network |16 October 2013 |
|      |of additional troops urged for|                  |                |
|      |force in Somalia'             |                  |                |
|      |Alshabab called Westgate      |Al Shahid Network |16 October 2013 |
|      |attack as massage to Kenya, no|                  |                |
|      |war                           |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Government Soldiers  |Shabelle Media    |16 October 2013 |
|      |Spray Bullets to Poor         |Network           |                |
|      |Civilians At an Aid           |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Distribution Camp in Mogadishu|                  |                |
|      |Letter dated 14 October 2013  |United Nations    |14 October 2013 |
|      |from the Secretary-General    |Secretary-General |                |
|      |addressed to the President of |                  |                |
|      |the Security Council          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Ten killed in        |Garowe Online     |14 October 2013 |
|      |fighting near Mogadishu       |                  |                |
|      |Letter dated 14 October 2013  |United Nations    |14 October 2013 |
|      |from the Secretary General    |Security Council  |                |
|      |addressed to the President of |                  |                |
|      |the Security Council          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: PM vows to eliminate |Garowe Online     |13 October 2013 |
|      |terror attacks, 3 killed in   |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |African Union calls for more  |Reuters           |12 October 2013 |
|      |African troops in Somalia     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Gun Fire Kills       |Dalsan Radio      |12 October 2013 |
|      |Civilian in Mogadishu         |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Freedom of the Press 2013     |Freedom House     |10 October 2013 |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabaab remains   |Garowe Online     |10 October 2013 |
|      |dangerous presence says       |                  |                |
|      |Ambassador Linda-Thomas       |                  |                |
|      |Greenfield                    |                  |                |
|      |How the US raid on al-Shabaab |The Guardian      |9 October 2013  |
|      |in Somalia went wrong         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al-Shabab Arrests a  |Shabelle Media    |9 October 2013  |
|      |Business Man in Connection to |Network           |                |
|      |Barawe's Attack in Lower      |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Shabelle Region               |                  |                |
|      |Al-shabab abducts welfare     |Al Shahid         |8 October 2013  |
|      |worker in middle Juba region  |                  |                |
|      |US raid on Somalia: Al-Shabab |BBC News          |7 October 2013  |
|      |bolsters presence in Barawe   |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Federal Govt seeks   |Garowe Online     |6 October 2013  |
|      |confidence from public amid   |                  |                |
|      |reports of torture by soldiers|                  |                |
|      |Somalia's Al-Shabab said still|Mareeg.com        |5 October 2013  |
|      |benefit from Charcoal trade   |                  |                |
|      |through 'connections'         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabaab militants |Garowe Online     |5 October 2013  |
|      |repel raid by unidentified    |                  |                |
|      |foreign troops                |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Blasts Occur in|Shabelle Media    |3 October 2013  |
|      |Jowhar Town                   |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Battle Between |Shabelle Media    |3 October 2013  |
|      |Allied Troops and Alshabab    |Network           |                |
|      |Occur in the Lower Juba Region|(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |of Somalia                    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Scores of Dead Bodies|Dalsan Radio      |2 October 2013  |
|      |Found in Kismayo              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Alshabab Attacks     |Shabelle Media    |2 October 2013  |
|      |Newly Liberated District in   |Network           |                |
|      |the Lower Shabelle Region     |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: 10 killed in Mahaday |Garowe Online     |2 October 2013  |
|      |clashes, Police officer gunned|                  |                |
|      |down in Mogadishu             |                  |                |
|      |Solutions for IDPs revealed as|Internal          |1 October 2013  |
|      |key for future peace and      |Displacement      |                |
|      |stability in Somalia          |Monitoring Centre |                |
|      |Somalia: AMISON Base in       |Shabelle Media    |30 September    |
|      |Beledweyne Attacked by Unknown|Network           |2013            |
|      |Gunmen                        |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: President Hassan     |Garowe Online     |29 September    |
|      |expresses concern over Al     |                  |2013            |
|      |Shabaab attacks               |                  |                |
|      |On the shifting frontlines of |The Observer      |28 September    |
|      |the fight against Al Shabaab  |                  |2013            |
|      |Africa's Terrorist Threat     |The Times         |26 September    |
|      |                              |                  |2013            |
|      |Mogadishu cannot qualify as an|Amnesty           |26 September    |
|      |Internal Flight Alternative   |International     |2013            |
|      |Crossing the Al Shabaab       |BBC News          |25 September    |
|      |frontline in Somalia          |                  |2013            |
|      |UNHCR guidance on the         |UNHCR             |25 September    |
|      |application of the internal   |                  |2013            |
|      |flight or relocation          |                  |                |
|      |alternative, particular in    |                  |                |
|      |respect of Mogadishu, Somalia |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Confrontations |Shabelle Media    |25 September    |
|      |in the Lower Juba and Shabelle|Network           |2013            |
|      |Regions                       |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Crossing the al-Shabab        |BBC News          |25 September    |
|      |frontline in Somalia          |                  |2013            |
|      |Regional intelligence chief   |Dhacdo.com website|23 September    |
|      |killed in southern Somali port|                  |2013            |
|      |city                          |                  |                |
|      |Blast hits government troops  |Somali Memo       |23 September    |
|      |in southern Somalia           |website           |2013            |
|      |Somalia: Land Mine Explosion  |Shabelle Media    |23 September    |
|      |Targets Government Troops in  |Network           |2013            |
|      |Afgoye Town Lower Shabelle    |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Region                        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia MP is killed in       |Radio Dalsan      |22 September    |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |2013            |
|      |Somalia: Al-Shabab remains a  |BBC News          |22 September    |
|      |potent threat                 |                  |2013            |
|      |Three killed in Somali capital|Raxanreeb website |21 September    |
|      |blast                         |                  |2013            |
|      |Somalia: Two Killed in        |Garowe Online     |21 September    |
|      |Mogadishu Grenade Explosion   |                  |2013            |
|      |Somalia: Grenade Attack in    |Shabelle Media    |21 September    |
|      |Mogadishu's Bakara Market     |Network           |2013            |
|      |Leaves Dozens Including a     |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Foreigner Injured             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Bomb Blast Kills Two |Dalsan Radio      |21 September    |
|      |Businessmen in Somalia        |(Mogadishu)       |2013            |
|      |Capital, Mogadishu            |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Confrontations |Shabelle Media    |20 September    |
|      |Between Alshabab and Allied   |Network           |2013            |
|      |Forces in the Lower Juba      |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Region of Somalia             |                  |                |
|      |Briefing: Are remittances to  |Integrated        |19 September    |
|      |Somalia doomed?               |Regional          |2013            |
|      |                              |Information       |                |
|      |                              |Networks          |                |
|      |Somalia: Men Wearing          |Shabelle Media    |19 September    |
|      |Government Military Dresses   |Network           |2013            |
|      |Rob Passengers                |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Fighting Between     |Shabelle Media    |18 September    |
|      |Government Forces and Alshabab|Network           |2013            |
|      |in the Lower Shabelle Region  |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Grenade Attacks      |Shabelle Media    |17 September    |
|      |Thrown At a Gov't Military    |Network           |2013            |
|      |Base in Jowhar                |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Uganda suspends officers sent |BBC News          |16 September    |
|      |to Somalia on AU mission      |                  |2013            |
|      |Uganda suspends officers sent |BBC News          |16 September    |
|      |to Somalia on AU mission      |                  |2013            |
|      |Somalia: Fierce Confrontations|Shabelle Media    |15 September    |
|      |and Explosions Rock Marka Town|Network           |2013            |
|      |in Overnight Attacks          |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Gunmen kill prominent         |Radio Gaalkacyo   |14 September    |
|      |traditional elder in southern |                  |2013            |
|      |Somali port city              |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Forced evictions in  |Amnesty           |13 September    |
|      |Mogadishu put thousands of    |International     |2013            |
|      |displaced at even greater risk|                  |                |
|      |U.N. official condemns attack |UPI               |13 September    |
|      |on Jubba administration leader|                  |2013            |
|      |Somalia: Somali President     |Dalsan Radio      |13 September    |
|      |Hassan Sheikh Condemns the    |(Mogadishu)       |2013            |
|      |Attack Against Sheikh Ahmad   |                  |                |
|      |Madobe in Kismayu             |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu's clean-up puts     |Amnesty           |13 September    |
|      |thousands of displaced at risk|International     |2013            |
|      |Southern Somalia              |Shabeelle Media   |12 September    |
|      |administration leader injured |Network website   |2013            |
|      |in blast                      |                  |                |
|      |12 September 2013 Ten killed, |Midnimo.com       |12 September    |
|      |Somali militia leader injured |website           |2013            |
|      |in explosion in port city     |                  |                |
|      |Al-Amriki and al-Britani:     |BBC News          |12 September    |
|      |Militants 'killed' in Somalia |                  |2013            |
|      |Mogadishu's stability under   |Aljazeera         |11 September    |
|      |the gun again                 |                  |2013            |
|      |Somali government deplores    |RBC Radio         |11 September    |
|      |attack on Ahmed Madobe        |                  |2013            |
|      |Somalia: Explosions and       |Shabelle Media    |11 September    |
|      |Confrontations Occur in Marka |Network           |2013            |
|      |and Kismayu Respectively      |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabaab militants |Garowe Online     |10 September    |
|      |target Federal Govt positions |                  |2013            |
|      |with mortar shells            |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Fighting Between     |Shabelle Media    |9 September 2013|
|      |Government Forces and Alshabab|Network           |                |
|      |in Baay and Lower Juba Regions|(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |of Somalia                    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al-Shabaab Claims    |Sahahi Online     |8 September 2013|
|      |Responsibility for Mogadishu  |                  |                |
|      |Restaurant Attack That Kills  |                  |                |
|      |30                            |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Land Mine Explosion  |Shabelle Media    |8 September 2013|
|      |Targets Amisom Troops in      |Network           |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: At Least One Person  |Shabelle Media    |8 September 2013|
|      |Confirmed Dead In Beledweyne  |Network           |                |
|      |Grenade Attacks               |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabab Claims     |Dalsan Radio      |8 September 2013|
|      |Responsibility of Attacks     |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Against Civilians in Mogadishu|                  |                |
|      |Restaurant                    |                  |                |
|      |Bomb attacks at Somali        |UPI               |8 September 2013|
|      |restaurant kill 15            |                  |                |
|      |Eleven killed in Somali       |Shabeelle Media   |7 September 2013|
|      |capital bomb blasts           |Network website   |                |
|      |Somalia's Al-Shabab says it   |BBC News          |7 September 2013|
|      |bombed Mogadishu eatery       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Two Suicide Bomb     |Dalsan Radio      |7 September 2013|
|      |Explosions Kill At Least 25 in|(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Suicide Explosions   |Dalsan Radio      |7 September 2013|
|      |Kills Civilians in Somalia    |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Capital                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Car Bomb Explosion   |Shabelle Media    |7 September 2013|
|      |Rocks Mogadishu               |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia blasts hit Mogadishu's|BBC News          |7 September 2013|
|      |village restaurant            |                  |                |
|      |Al Shabaab bombers strike     |Reuters           |7 September 2013|
|      |Mogadishu restaurant, 15 dead |                  |                |
|      |Somalia blasts hits           |Garowe Online     |7 September 2013|
|      |Mogadishu's Village restaurant|                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Over dozen killed in |Garowe Online     |7 September 2013|
|      |coordinated terror attacks in |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |UN envoy strongly condemns    |UN News Service   |7 September 2013|
|      |terrorist attack in Somali    |                  |                |
|      |capital                       |                  |                |
|      |Food security gains in Somalia|Integrated        |6 September 2013|
|      |'fragile'                     |Regional          |                |
|      |                              |Information       |                |
|      |                              |Networks News     |                |
|      |Somalia: Explosions Heard in  |Dalsan Radio      |5 September 2013|
|      |Mogadishu During Night Time   |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Govt troops go on    |Garowe Online     |5 September 2013|
|      |strike over support services  |                  |                |
|      |Powerful blasts rock Somali   |Somali Memo       |4 September 2013|
|      |capital                       |website           |                |
|      |UN chief warns Somalia could  |Hiiraan Online    |4 September 2013|
|      |slide back into failed state  |                  |                |
|      |status                        |                  |                |
|      |Somali president unhurt in    |VOA News          |3 September 2013|
|      |bomb attack                   |                  |                |
|      |Report of the                 |United Nations    |3 September 2013|
|      |Secretary-General on Somalia  |Security Council  |                |
|      |Somalia: President Hassan     |Garowe Online     |3 September 2013|
|      |reaches Marka as Al Shabaab   |                  |                |
|      |claims to have attacked his   |                  |                |
|      |convoy                        |                  |                |
|      |Somali President Unhurt in    |VOA News          |3 September 2013|
|      |Bomb  Attack                  |                  |                |
|      |Acute malnutrition persists in|FSNAU             |3 September 2013|
|      |Somalia while 870,000 people  |                  |                |
|      |remain food insecure          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: UN expert hails human|UN News Service   |3 September 2013|
|      |rights effort but urges       |                  |                |
|      |broader consultation process  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Operational Guidance |Home Office UK    |1 September 2013|
|      |Note                          |Border Agency     |                |
|      |Somalia: No Place for the     |Amnesty           |1 September 2013|
|      |Displaced                     |International     |                |
|      |Somalia: Civilian Killed After|Dalsan Radio      |1 September 2013|
|      |Gun Fire in Central Region    |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Landmine Explosion   |Shabelle Media    |31 August 2013  |
|      |Targets Government Officials  |Network           |                |
|      |of Lower Shabelle Region      |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Rape and sexual      |Amnesty           |30 August 2013  |
|      |violence a constant threat for|International     |                |
|      |displaced women               |                  |                |
|      |Humanitarian Dashboard July   |UNOCHA            |30 August 2013  |
|      |2013                          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Intelligence official|Garowe Online     |29 August 2013  |
|      |killed in ambush in Mogadishu |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: 'Illegal Roadblocks  |Garowe Online     |28 August 2013  |
|      |Are On Increase' in Lower     |                  |                |
|      |Shabelle Region               |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Security operations  |Garowe Online     |28 August 2013  |
|      |continue in Mogadishu as      |                  |                |
|      |insecurity looms              |                  |                |
|      |Somalia's Al-Shabaab: Down But|Homeland Security |27 August 2013  |
|      |Not Out                       |Policy Institute  |                |
|      |Somalia: Alshabab Accused of  |Shabelle Media    |27 August 2013  |
|      |Killing Civilians in Mustahil,|Network           |                |
|      |Hiran Region                  |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu explosions |Garowe Online     |27 August 2013  |
|      |target Federal Govt soldiers  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Fighting in    |Shabelle Media    |26 August 2013  |
|      |Kismayu,Lower Juba Region     |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Somali Olympic       |Garowe Online     |24 August 2013  |
|      |official gunned down in       |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Raskamboni Militia   |Shabelle Media    |23 August 2013  |
|      |Evicting Civilians From Their |Network           |                |
|      |Residencies                   |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Confrontations |Shabelle Media    |23 August 2013  |
|      |Between Alshabab and          |Network           |                |
|      |Government Soldiers in Lower  |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Shabelle Region               |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: The Administration of|Shabelle Media    |22 August 2013  |
|      |Afgoye Town Complain About    |Network           |                |
|      |Escalating Insecurity         |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Swedish politician attacked in|BBC News          |21 August 2013  |
|      |Somalia's Mogadishu           |                  |                |
|      |Why Doctors Without Borders   |International     |20 August 2013  |
|      |Left Somalia: Interview with  |Peace Institute   |                |
|      |Sophie Delaunay               |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Redux? Assessing the  |Bryden, Matt      |19 August 2013  |
|      |New Somali Federal Government |                  |                |
|      |Why MSF decided to leave      |Medecins Sans     |19 August 2013  |
|      |Somalia                       |Frontiers         |                |
|      |Somalia: Land Mine Explosions |Shabelle Media    |19 August 2013  |
|      |Target Amisom Troops in       |Network           |                |
|      |Kismayu,Lower Juba Region     |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Explosion in kismayo kills    |Dalsan Radio      |16 August 2013  |
|      |pro-Jubbaland clan elder      |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |UN humanitarian wing warns of |UN News Service   |16 August 2013  |
|      |pervasive sexual violence in  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Polio in Somalia: UN warns of |BBC News          |16 August 2013  |
|      |'explosive' outbreak          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: A Well-Known Business|Shabelle Media    |15 August 2013  |
|      |Man Injured in Mogadishu Blast|Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Car bomb explosion   |Garowe Online     |15 August 2013  |
|      |kills one at Mogadishu's      |                  |                |
|      |Bakara market                 |                  |                |
|      |UPDATE 1 - Deadly attacks     |Reuters           |14 August 2013  |
|      |force Doctors Without Borders |                  |                |
|      |to quit Somalia               |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu residents  |Garowe Online     |14 August 2013  |
|      |complain about violent        |                  |                |
|      |activities by Federal Govt    |                  |                |
|      |Soldiers                      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Grenade Attacks      |Shabelle Media    |14 August 2013  |
|      |Targets Government Troops in  |Network           |                |
|      |the Middle Shabelle Region    |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |MSF closes operations in      |BBC News          |14 August 2013  |
|      |Somalia over 'extreme attacks'|                  |                |
|      |Doctors Without Borders pulls |Reuters           |14 August 2013  |
|      |out of Somalia due to attacks |                  |                |
|      |Civilians killed after        |Dalsan Radio      |14 August 2013  |
|      |violence erupted in Mogadishu |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |MSF forced to close all       |Garowe Online     |14 August 2013  |
|      |medical programmes in Somalia |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabab militants  |Garowe Online     |14 August 2013  |
|      |loot MSF offices in Bay region|                  |                |
|      |MSF decision to leave Somalia |Garowe Online     |14 August 2013  |
|      |'impacts health sector in     |                  |                |
|      |Puntland': Minister           |                  |                |
|      |MSF forced to close all       |Medecins Sans     |14 August 2013  |
|      |medical programmes in Somalia |Frontiers         |                |
|      |Justine Greening under fire   |The Guardian      |12 August 2013  |
|      |over theft of British aid     |                  |                |
|      |supplies to Somalia           |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: In Somalia, UNDP     |UNDP              |12 August 2013  |
|      |provides vital job-skills     |                  |                |
|      |training for youth            |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Country of Origin    |Home Office UK    |5 August 2013   |
|      |Information  Report           |Border Agency     |                |
|      |UNICEF steps up efforts to    |UN News Service   |5 August 2013   |
|      |stop polio outbreak in Somalia|                  |                |
|      |Extremist Violence Returns to |Inter Press       |3 August 2013   |
|      |Hit Mogadishu                 |Service News      |                |
|      |                              |Agency            |                |
|      |Somali militants attack AU    |Radio Al-Furqaan  |2 August 2013   |
|      |peacekeepers in southern      |website           |                |
|      |region                        |                  |                |
|      |Major roads in Mogadishu      |Shabeelle Media   |1 August 2013   |
|      |closed as explosions rock     |Network website   |                |
|      |Somali capital                |                  |                |
|      |Humanitarian Dashboard June   |UNOCHA            |31 July 2013    |
|      |2013                          |                  |                |
|      |Information on available state|Refugee           |30 July 2013    |
|      |protection in Somalia         |Documentation     |                |
|      |                              |Centre (Ireland)  |                |
|      |Somalia and Amisom Forces     |Garowe Online     |29 July 2013    |
|      |Conduct Joint Security        |                  |                |
|      |Operation in Jowhar           |                  |                |
|      |UN chief, Security Council    |UN News Service   |29 July 2013    |
|      |strongly condemn attack on    |                  |                |
|      |Turkish building in Somalia   |                  |                |
|      |Six killed in southwestern    |Garoweonline.com  |27 July 2013    |
|      |Somalia as government troops  |website           |                |
|      |battle militants              |                  |                |
|      |Blast hits Turkish staff      |Somali Memo       |27 July 2013    |
|      |building in Somali capital,   |website           |                |
|      |casualties reported           |                  |                |
|      |Al Shabaab claim attack on    |Reuters           |27 July 2013    |
|      |Turkish mission in Somalia,   |                  |                |
|      |three dead                    |                  |                |
|      |Five civilians wounded in     |Raxanreeb website |26 July 2013    |
|      |Mogadishu grenade attack      |                  |                |
|      |Kenya: Court Quashes Plan to  |Human Rights Watch|26 July 2013    |
|      |Force Refugees Into Camps     |                  |                |
|      |Deadly Suicide Bombing Strikes|VOA News          |26 July 2013    |
|      |Turkish Mission in Somalia    |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabab boasts about Ramadan|Sabahi Online     |26 July 2013    |
|      |rampage                       |                  |                |
|      |Somali security forces, AU    |Dhacdo.com website|25 July 2013    |
|      |troops' bases attacked in     |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia's Islamists strike AU |Dhacdo.com website|22 July 2013    |
|      |bases in southern districts   |                  |                |
|      |Four killed in Somali port as |Shabeelle Media   |20 July 2013    |
|      |explosion targets Sierra      |Network website   |                |
|      |Leonean troops                |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Land Mine Targets    |Shabelle Media    |20 July 2013    |
|      |Sierra Leon [sic] Troops      |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia's Al-Shabab attack    |Shabeelle Media   |18 July 2013    |
|      |southwestern army bases       |Network website   |                |
|      |Insecurity said on the rise in|Shabeelle Media   |16 July 2013    |
|      |Somalia's capital             |Network website   |                |
|      |Somalia: Kismayu Residents    |Shabelle Media    |16 July 2013    |
|      |Face Daily Abuses From the    |Network           |                |
|      |Indiscipline Raskamboni       |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Militia and Corrupt Kenyan    |                  |                |
|      |Peacekeepers                  |                  |                |
|      |Death toll in Somali capital  |Shabeelle Media   |13 July 2013    |
|      |12 July attack rises to 11    |Network website   |                |
|      |Grenade attack in Somali      |Dhacdo.com website|13 July 2013    |
|      |capital kills three           |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: At least 5 killed as |Hiiraan Online    |12 July 2013    |
|      |troops clash with militants   |                  |                |
|      |Somali capital Mogadishu hit  |BBC News          |12 July 2013    |
|      |by 'suicide attack'           |                  |                |
|      |Two killed in Somali capital  |Agence            |12 July 2013    |
|      |grenade attack                |France-Presse     |                |
|      |Bomber hits peacekeepers in   |Reuters           |12 July 2013    |
|      |Somalia, 8 civilians dead     |                  |                |
|      |Report of the Monitoring Group|United Nations    |12 July 2013    |
|      |on Somalia and Eritrea        |Security Council  |                |
|      |pursuant to Security Council  |                  |                |
|      |resolution 2060 (2012):       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Government forces, Al-Shabab  |Shabeelle Media   |11 July 2013    |
|      |militants clash in            |Network website   |                |
|      |southwestern Somalia          |                  |                |
|      |Suicide Bomber Kills 3 in     |VOA News          |11 July 2013    |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Somali car explodes in        |BBC News          |9 July 2013     |
|      |Mogadishu's Bakara market     |                  |                |
|      |Police officers wounded in    |UPI               |9 July 2013     |
|      |attack in Somali market       |                  |                |
|      |Five police wounded in Somali |Reuters           |9 July 2013     |
|      |bombing by Islamists          |                  |                |
|      |Ten killed as Somali forces,  |Shabeelle Media   |3 July 2013     |
|      |Al-Shabab militants clash     |Network website   |                |
|      |Al Shabaab extremists kill two|France 24         |30 June 2013    |
|      |of their chiefs               |                  |                |
|      |Al Shabaab Commanders Killed  |Sky News          |30 June 2013    |
|      |By Own Group                  |                  |                |
|      |Seven said injured in southern|Radio Risala      |29 June 2013    |
|      |Somalia explosion targeting AU|                  |                |
|      |troops                        |                  |                |
|      |Operations on Mogadishu-      |Goobjoob.com      |27 June 2013    |
|      |Jowhar highway                |                  |                |
|      |Clannish Clashes Erupt in     |Shabelle Media    |26 June 2013    |
|      |Kismayu Again                 |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |At least three dead in Somali |Reuters           |26 June 2013    |
|      |port clash: witnesses         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Civilians Killed in  |Human Rights Watch|25 June 2013    |
|      |Kismayo Clashes               |                  |                |
|      |Civilians killed in landmine  |Shabeelle Media   |24 June 2013    |
|      |explosion in Somali capital   |Network website   |                |
|      |UN condemns 'despicable'      |BBC News          |20 June 2013    |
|      |al-Shabab attack in Somalia   |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Madina Hospital in   |Shabelle Media    |20 June 2013    |
|      |Mogadishu Says It Received 18 |Network           |                |
|      |Patients After Yesterday's    |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Attacks                       |                  |                |
|      |Somali Islamists threaten more|Reuters           |20 June 2013    |
|      |carnage after attack on U.N.  |                  |                |
|      |base                          |                  |                |
|      |Gunmen target UN compound in  |Shabeelle Media   |19 June 2013    |
|      |Somali capital                |Network website   |                |
|      |Kooxo hubeysan oo Weerarro    |Hiiraan Online    |19 June 2013    |
|      |isugu jira Ismiidaamin iyo    |                  |                |
|      |kuwa toos ah ku qaaday UNDP ee|                  |                |
|      |Magaalada Muqdisho            |                  |                |
|      |Somali Islamist rebels attack |Reuters           |19 June 2013    |
|      |U.N. base, 22 dead            |                  |                |
|      |Somalia UN office attack by   |BBC News          |19 June 2013    |
|      |al-Shabab 'kills 15'          |                  |                |
|      |Four foreign security staff   |Reuters           |19 June 2013    |
|      |among 15 dead in Somalia U.N. |                  |                |
|      |attack                        |                  |                |
|      |Somali Islamist rebels attack |Reuters           |19 June 2013    |
|      |U.N. base, 22 dead            |                  |                |
|      |Al-Qaeda bombs UN compound in |Telegraph         |19 June 2013    |
|      |Somalia, killing 15           |                  |                |
|      |14 dead, 15 hurt in attack on |UPI               |19 June 2013    |
|      |U.N. compound in Somalia      |                  |                |
|      |UN officials voice outrage at |UN News Service   |19 June 2013    |
|      |deadly attack on world body's |                  |                |
|      |compound in Somali capital    |                  |                |
|      |Fifteen reported dead in      |Radio Free Europe |19 June 2013    |
|      |attack on UN compound in      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Explosion Targeting  |Shabelle Media    |18 June 2013    |
|      |Kenyan Troops in Kismayu As   |Network           |                |
|      |Madobe's Deputy Is Seriously  |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Injured                       |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabab Gunmen Attack UN    |VOA News          |18 June 2013    |
|      |Compound in Mogadishu         |                  |                |
|      |Land mine blast kills at least|Radio Simba       |15 June 2013    |
|      |10 in southern Somalia        |                  |                |
|      |Tea shop bomb in Somali town  |Reuters           |15 June 2013    |
|      |kills at least seven          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia at risk of unraveling,|UPI               |14 June 2013    |
|      |U.N. says                     |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu's Dilemma: Who's in |Roble, Muhyadin   |14 June 2013    |
|      |Control?                      |Ahmed of the      |                |
|      |                              |Jamestown         |                |
|      |                              |Foundation        |                |
|      |Somali forces, Al-Shabab clash|Shabeelle Media   |13 June 2013    |
|      |in south western locality     |Network website   |                |
|      |Somali forces, Al-Shabab clash|Shabeelle Media   |12 June 2013    |
|      |in south western town         |Network website   |                |
|      |At least 18 dead in battle    |Reuters           |8 June 2013     |
|      |over disputed Somali port city|                  |                |
|      |Statement by President of the |United Nations    |6 June 2013     |
|      |Security Council              |Security Council  |                |
|      |Al-Shabab militants kill five |Shabeelle Media   |5 June 2013     |
|      |civilians in southern Somalia |Network website   |                |
|      |Somalia: Several People Killed|Shabelle Media    |5 June 2013     |
|      |By Alshabab At the Outskirts  |Network           |                |
|      |of Jawhar Town                |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Alshabab Displays    |Shabelle Media    |3 June 2013     |
|      |Kenyan Soldiers Held Hostage  |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |AU troops targeted with twin  |Radio Risala      |2 June 2013     |
|      |explosion attacks in Somali   |                  |                |
|      |capital                       |                  |                |
|      |"Heavy battles" reported      |Shabeelle Media   |1 June 2013     |
|      |between AU troops, Al-Shabab  |Network website   |                |
|      |in central Somalia            |                  |                |
|      |Report of the                 |United Nations    |31 May 2013     |
|      |Secretary-General on Somalia  |Security Council  |                |
|      |Somalia: Heavy Bombardments   |Shabelle Media    |28 May 2013     |
|      |Rock the Kismayu Airport      |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Firefight rocks airport in    |UPI               |28 May 2013     |
|      |Kismayu, Somalia              |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Explosions Target    |Shabelle Media    |25 May 2013     |
|      |Ethiopian Troops in Baidoa    |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Ten dead in Somalia after     |UPI               |23 May 2013     |
|      |al-Shabaab clash with         |                  |                |
|      |Ethiopian troops              |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu culture shock for   |BBC News          |23 May 2013     |
|      |diaspora Somalis              |                  |                |
|      |Amnesty International Annual  |Amnesty           |23 May 2013     |
|      |Report: Somalia 2013          |International     |                |
|      |Somalia: Military Commander - |Shabelle Media    |21 May 2013     |
|      |There Are No Govt Troops Based|Network           |                |
|      |in Kismayu                    |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Alshabab Launches    |Shabelle Media    |17 May 2013     |
|      |Attacks in Bai and Bakol      |Network           |                |
|      |Regions                       |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Denmark: No forced returns to |Amnesty           |15 May 2013     |
|      |'volatile' situation in       |International     |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Returns to South and Central  |Amnesty           |15 May 2013     |
|      |Somalia: A Violation of       |International     |                |
|      |International Law             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Explosion in         |Shabelle Media    |15 May 2013     |
|      |Mogadishu                     |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Public Statement: Returns to  |Amnesty           |15 May 2013     |
|      |South and Central Somalia: A  |International     |                |
|      |violation of International Law|                  |                |
|      |Analysis: Somali security     |Integrated        |13 May 2013     |
|      |sector reform                 |Regional          |                |
|      |                              |Information       |                |
|      |                              |Networks          |                |
|      |Asylum system not fit for     |The Guardian      |11 May 2013     |
|      |purpose                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Fighting in Gedo and |Shabelle Media    |8 May 2013      |
|      |Lower Juba Region             |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somali conflict: Mohamud and  |BBC News          |7 May 2013      |
|      |Cameron hail 'new era'        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Some Roads in        |Shabelle Media    |7 May 2013      |
|      |Mogadishu Closed for Security |Network           |                |
|      |Reasons                       |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Deadly bombings hit drive to  |UPI               |7 May 2013      |
|      |save Somalia                  |                  |                |
|      |Suicide bomber targets Qatari |CNN               |6 May 2013      |
|      |delegation in Somalia, 8 dead |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: London Meeting Should|Human Rights Watch|6 May 2013      |
|      |Emphasize Rights              |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu car bomb targets    |The Telegraph     |5 May 2013      |
|      |Qatari officials              |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu Hit By     |Shabelle Media    |5 May 2013      |
|      |Deadly Explosion              |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Car bomb in Mogadishu kills at|UPI               |5 May 2013      |
|      |least 7, injures 10           |                  |                |
|      |Bomb hits convoy carrying     |Reuters           |5 May 2013      |
|      |Qataris in Somalia, eight dead|                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Residents of Kismayu |Shabelle Media    |4 May 2013      |
|      |Cry Over Insecurity           |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Car Bomb Attack Hits Somali   |VOA News          |4 May 2013      |
|      |Capital                       |                  |                |
|      |United Nations Security       |United Nations    |2 May 2013      |
|      |Council Resolution 2102 (2013)|Security Council  |                |
|      |Security and protection in    |Danish Immigration|1 May 2013      |
|      |Mogadishu and South-Central   |Service and       |                |
|      |Somalia                       |LANDINFO          |                |
|      |USCIRF Annual Report 2013 -   |US Commission on  |30 April 2013   |
|      |Thematic Issues: Severe       |International     |                |
|      |religious freedom violations  |Religious Freedom |                |
|      |by non-state actors           |                  |                |
|      |When it comes to Somalia's    |The Guardian      |29 April 2013   |
|      |displaced, don't mistake      |                  |                |
|      |ambition for achievement      |                  |                |
|      |Global overview 2012: People  |Norwegian Refugee |29 April 2013   |
|      |internally displaced by       |Council/Internal  |                |
|      |conflict and violence -       |Displacement      |                |
|      |Somalia                       |Monitoring Centre |                |
|      |Authorities must investigate  |Committee to      |22 April 2013   |
|      |murder of Somali journalist   |Protect           |                |
|      |                              |Journalists       |                |
|      |Country Reports on Human      |United States     |19 April 2013   |
|      |Rights Practices for 2012     |Department of     |                |
|      |                              |State             |                |
|      |Suspected militant kills      |Reuters           |18 April 2013   |
|      |himself in Mogadishu blast:   |                  |                |
|      |police                        |                  |                |
|      |UN expert urges Somalia to    |UN News Service   |17 April 2013   |
|      |strengthen justice system     |                  |                |
|      |following attacks             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: UN Condemns Deadly   |Shabelle Media    |16 April 2013   |
|      |Attacks in Mogadishu          |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Explosion At Beled   |Shabelle Media    |16 April 2013   |
|      |Weyn                          |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: urgent investigation |Article 19        |16 April 2013   |
|      |needed into suicide court     |                  |                |
|      |attack                        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: New Al-Shabaab       |Human Rights Watch|16 April 2013   |
|      |attacks are war crimes        |                  |                |
|      |Death toll rises to 35 in     |Associated Press  |15 April 2013   |
|      |Somalia court attack          |                  |                |
|      |Somali militants threaten more|Reuters           |15 April 2013   |
|      |attacks after killing 30      |                  |                |
|      |At least 30 killed in Somali  |Reuters           |15 April 2013   |
|      |bombings: medical source      |                  |                |
|      |Human Rights and Democracy:   |UK FCO            |15 April 2013   |
|      |The 2012 Foreign and          |                  |                |
|      |Commonwealth Office Report -  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: militants' attacks in|UN News Service   |15 April 2013   |
|      |capital will not derail       |                  |                |
|      |determination to achieve peace|                  |                |
|      |says UN                       |                  |                |
|      |Violence returns to Somalia as|Euronews          |14 April 2013   |
|      |19 are killed in Mogadishu    |                  |                |
|      |Islamist Militant Assault     |VOA News          |14 April 2013   |
|      |Kills 22 in Somali Capital    |                  |                |
|      |Gunmen launch deadly attack on|BBC News          |14 April 2013   |
|      |Somalia courthouse            |                  |                |
|      |Bombs and gun battles kill at |Reuters           |14 April 2013   |
|      |least 19 in Somali capital    |                  |                |
|      |Big blast heard amid gunfire  |Reuters           |14 April 2013   |
|      |at Somalia's Mogadishu courts |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: senior UN official   |UN News Service   |14 April 2013   |
|      |'shocked and outraged' by     |                  |                |
|      |today's deadly attacks        |                  |                |
|      |Interview: OCHA Mogadishu Head|UNOCHA            |11 April 2013   |
|      |of Office                     |                  |                |
|      |UNHCR Somalia Operational     |UNHCR             |7 April 2013    |
|      |Highlights 1st - 7th April    |                  |                |
|      |2013                          |                  |                |
|      |Blast rocks Dahabshiil bank   |Press TV          |2 April 2013    |
|      |headquarters in Mogadishu     |                  |                |
|      |UPDATE 2 - Bomb hits Somalia's|Reuters           |2 April 2013    |
|      |biggest bank after militant   |                  |                |
|      |threat                        |                  |                |
|      |The Armed Conflict and Event  |ACLED             |1 April 2013    |
|      |Location Dataset, Somalia,    |                  |                |
|      |April 2013                    |                  |                |
|      |Country Report: Somalia       |ACLED             |1 April 2013    |
|      |Disquiet about death penalty  |Reporters without |29 March 2013   |
|      |for man convicted of          |Borders           |                |
|      |journalist's murder           |                  |                |
|      |Protect Displaced People at   |Human Rights Watch|27 March 2013   |
|      |Risk                          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: urgent investigation |Article 19        |27 March 2013   |
|      |needed after fatal shooting of|                  |                |
|      |journalist                    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Protect Displaced    |Human Rights Watch|26 March 2013   |
|      |People at Risk                |                  |                |
|      |Briefing: In Somalia, relative|Integrated        |26 March 2013   |
|      |peace belies rocky road ahead |Regional          |                |
|      |                              |Information       |                |
|      |                              |Networks News     |                |
|      |Somalis flee Hudur after Al   |Sabahi Online     |22 March 2013   |
|      |Shabaab takeover              |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al-Shabaab Retakes   |Sabahi Online     |18 March 2013   |
|      |Hudur                         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia's capital Mogadishu   |BBC News          |18 March 2013   |
|      |hit by deadly car bomb        |                  |                |
|      |Car bomb kills at least 10 in |Reuters           |18 March 2013   |
|      |Somali capital                |                  |                |
|      |Car bomb kills 8 in Mogadishu |UPI               |18 March 2013   |
|      |Car Bomb Kills 10 in Somali   |VOA News          |18 March 2013   |
|      |Capital                       |                  |                |
|      |Weapons stolen from           |UPI               |17 March 2013   |
|      |presidential palace           |                  |                |
|      |Resolution 2093 (2013)        |United Nations    |6 March 2013    |
|      |                              |Security Council  |                |
|      |Press releases: Somalia: UN   |Amnesty           |4 March 2013    |
|      |arms embargo must stay in     |International     |                |
|      |place                         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Blasts Kill Two At   |allafrica.com     |1 March 2013    |
|      |Mogadishu Beach               |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu beachfront hit by   |Telegraph         |1 March 2013    |
|      |twin attacks                  |                  |                |
|      |Hostages Of The Gatekeepers:  |Human Rights Watch|1 March 2013    |
|      |Abuses against Internally     |                  |                |
|      |Displaced in Mogadishu,       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Blasts Rock Mogadishu         |VOA News          |1 March 2013    |
|      |Restaurant                    |                  |                |
|      |AMISOM Condemns Repeated      |AMISOM            |1 March 2013    |
|      |Attacks on Somali Civilians in|                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |The Netherlands: Halt plan to |Human Rights Watch|21 February 2013|
|      |deport Somalis                |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: UN Political Office  |UN News Service   |19 February 2013|
|      |condemns recent wave of terror|                  |                |
|      |attacks                       |                  |                |
|      |Briefing notes                |Information Centre|18 February 2013|
|      |                              |on Asylum and     |                |
|      |                              |Migration         |                |
|      |Deadly blast hits Mogadishu   |Aljazeera         |17 February 2013|
|      |Eatery                        |                  |                |
|      |Landmine danger persists in   |Integrated        |1 February 2013 |
|      |Somalia                       |Regional          |                |
|      |                              |Information       |                |
|      |                              |Networks News     |                |
|      |World Report 2013 - Somalia   |Human Rights Watch|31 January 2013 |
|      |Report of the                 |United Nations    |31 January 2013 |
|      |Secretary-General on Somalia  |Security Council  |                |
|      |Somalia beginning 'profound   |UN News Centre    |30 January 2013 |
|      |transformation,' UN official  |                  |                |
|      |says during visit             |                  |                |
|      |Suicide bomber kills two near |Reuters           |29 January 2013 |
|      |Somali presidential palace    |                  |                |
|      |Suicide blast by offices of   |BBC News          |29 January 2013 |
|      |Somalia president and PM      |                  |                |
|      |Somalian PM's office bombed   |UPI               |29 January 2013 |
|      |Bomb detonates near office of |CNN               |29 January 2013 |
|      |Somali prime minister         |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabab Claims              |VOA News          |29 January 2013 |
|      |Responsibility for Mogadishu  |                  |                |
|      |Bombing                       |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabab fighters "attack"   |Somali Memo       |20 January 2013 |
|      |government, Amisom in Somali  |website           |                |
|      |capital.                      |                  |                |
|      |Militants attack army base in |Jowhar website    |19 January 2013 |
|      |southern Somalia              |                  |                |
|      |Journalist gunned down in     |Reporters without |18 January 2013 |
|      |Mogadishu, 2013's first       |Borders           |                |
|      |fatality                      |                  |                |
|      |Latest murder of Somali       |UN News Service   |18 January 2013 |
|      |journalist sparks condemnation|                  |                |
|      |from UN                       |                  |                |
|      |Kenyan forces, Al-Shabab      |Shabeelle Media   |17 January 2013 |
|      |militants clash in southern   |Network website   |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia's Al-Shabab launches  |Dhacdo.com website|17 January 2013 |
|      |overnight attack on Burundian |                  |                |
|      |troops                        |                  |                |
|      |Five police officers killed in|Radio Daljir      |15 January 2013 |
|      |southern Somalia grenade      |                  |                |
|      |attack                        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabab Execute Two|Shabelle Media    |12 January 2013 |
|      |Civilians in Jilib            |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Mogadishu is like Manhattan': |The Guardian      |11 January 2013 |
|      |Somalis return home to        |                  |                |
|      |accelerate progress           |                  |                |
|      |Land mine explosion kills two |Shabeelle Media   |11 January 2013 |
|      |Kenyan soldiers in southern   |Network website   |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Pro-Somali government militia,|Shabeelle Media   |9 January 2013  |
|      |Islamists clash in southern   |Network website   |                |
|      |port city                     |                  |                |
|      |Landmine blast in southern    |Shabeelle Media   |8 January 2013  |
|      |Somalia kills one soldier;    |Network website,  |                |
|      |Fierce fighting erupts in     |Shabeelle Media   |6 January 2013  |
|      |southwestern Somalia          |Network website   |                |
|      |Al-Shabab militants ambush    |Somali Memo       |5 January 2013  |
|      |Ethiopian convey carrying     |website           |                |
|      |Somali soldiers               |                  |                |
|      |Somalia's A-Shabab detains 100|Radio Bar-Kulan   |4 January 2013  |
|      |clerics for failing to recruit|website           |                |
|      |fighters for group            |                  |                |
|      |Islamists return to           |Dhacdo.com website|3 January 2013  |
|      |southwestern Somali town,     |                  |                |
|      |seize 13 clan elders          |                  |                |
|      |Assailants hurl hand grenade  |Shabeelle Media   |2 January 2013  |
|      |at police post in central     |Network website,  |                |
|      |Somali town                   |                  |                |
|      |Blast in southern Somalia     |Jowhar website    |2 January 2013  |
|      |injures three civilians       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Roadside Bomb Hits   |Shabelle Media    |2 January 2013  |
|      |Amisom Patrol in Merka Town   |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Update on security and human  |Danish Immigration|1 January 2013  |
|      |rights issues in South-Central|Service and       |                |
|      |Somalia, including in         |LANDINFO          |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Three injured in Somali New   |Radio Gaalkacyo   |1 January 2013  |
|      |Year's blast                  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Bomb attack targets  |Radio Al-Furqaan  |29 December 2012|
|      |government troops in Baydhabo |website           |                |
|      |Three soldiers said killed in |Somali Memo       |26 December 2012|
|      |Mogadishu bomb attack         |website           |                |
|      |Somalia's Al-Shabab recapture |Radio Gaalkacyo   |25 December 2012|
|      |southern town from allied     |                  |                |
|      |troops                        |                  |                |
|      |Grenade attack kills two in   |Radio Gaalkacyo   |24 December 2012|
|      |Somali capital, Mogadishu     |                  |                |
|      |Mortars hit outside Somali    |Jowhar website,   |22 December 2012|
|      |presidential palace;          |                  |                |
|      |Islamist fighters pull out of |Radio Bar-Kulan   |21 December 2012|
|      |central Somali town, villages |website           |                |
|      |Somalia: Eight Killed in a    |Shabelle Media    |21 December 2012|
|      |Fight in Kismayo              |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Grenade attack kills one,     |Radio Gaalkacyo   |19 December 2012|
|      |injures three in southern     |                  |                |
|      |Somali town                   |                  |                |
|      |Somali, AU troops said seize  |Radio Gaalkacyo   |18 December 2012|
|      |more localities in south      |                  |                |
|      |Teeven: the security situation|Government of the |17 December 2012|
|      |in Mogadishu has improved     |Netherlands       |                |
|      |Somali gunmen shoot dead      |Dhacdo.com        |17 December 2012|
|      |commandant in Mogadishu       |website,          |                |
|      |Somalia: Al-Shabab fighters   |Somali Memo       |16 December 2012|
|      |clash with government, AU     |website           |                |
|      |troops                        |                  |                |
|      |Explosives-laden vehicle goes |Jowhar website    |14 December 2012|
|      |off in Somali capital, kills  |                  |                |
|      |one                           |                  |                |
|      |Fighting between Somali       |Radio Gaalkacyo   |13 December 2012|
|      |Islamists, Ethiopian troops   |                  |                |
|      |leaves 10 dead                |                  |                |
|      |Somalia's Al-Shabab pulls out |Radio Bar-Kulan   |11 December 2012|
|      |of yet another southern town  |website           |                |
|      |Somali Islamists attack AU    |Dhacdo.com website|9 December 2012 |
|      |troops in southern region     |                  |                |
|      |Twin land mine blasts rock    |Radio Gaalkacyo   |9 December 2012 |
|      |seized southern Somali town;  |                  |                |
|      |Powerful explosion reported at|Dhacdo.com        |8 December 2012 |
|      |military base in Somali       |                  |                |
|      |capital                       |                  |                |
|      |Grenade attack at cinema in   |Dhacdo.com website|8 December 2012 |
|      |Somalia capital causes        |                  |                |
|      |casualties                    |                  |                |
|      |Twenty Somali women traders   |Jowhar website    |6 December 2012 |
|      |said injured in Mogadishu     |                  |                |
|      |market blast                  |                  |                |
|      |Some 11 Somali regional troops|Radio Gaalkacyo   |5 December 2012 |
|      |killed in Islamist landmine   |                  |                |
|      |attack                        |                  |                |
|      |Family of five injured in     |Radio Gaalkacyo   |5 December 2012 |
|      |Somali Islamists' mortar      |                  |                |
|      |attack in capital             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia's Al-Shabab said      |Somali Memo       |4 December 2012 |
|      |attack Ethiopian convoy in    |website           |                |
|      |south-central region          |                  |                |
|      |Government forces capture     |Radio Gaalkacyo   |3 December 2012 |
|      |southwestern Somali town      |                  |                |
|      |Somali government ministers   |Dhacdo.com website|3 December 2012 |
|      |"survive" another Al-Shabab   |                  |                |
|      |attack;                       |                  |                |
|      |Blasts target government      |Midnimo.com       |3 December 2012 |
|      |officials' home in central    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia;                      |                  |                |
|      |AU convoy said hit by landmine|Radio Mustaqbal,  |2 December 2012 |
|      |attack in southern Somalia    |Mogadishu         |                |
|      |town                          |                  |                |
|      |Militants create buffer zone  |Somali Memo       |2 December 2012 |
|      |between warring sub-clans in  |website           |                |
|      |central Somalia region        |                  |                |
|      |38 dead in Somali clan        |UPI               |2 December 2012 |
|      |violence                      |                  |                |
|      |Meeting the mayor of          |BBC News          |15 November 2012|
|      |Mogadishu: Somalia's Tarzan   |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu hospitals push on   |Sabahi            |9 November 2012 |
|      |despite shortages, obstacles  |                  |                |
|      |Dahabshiil CEO and Dr Laura   |PR Newswire       |7 November 2012 |
|      |Hammond Discuss Preliminary   |                  |                |
|      |Findings of Remittance        |                  |                |
|      |Research                      |                  |                |
|      |Somalis welcome formation of  |Hiiraan Online    |7 November 2012 |
|      |new cabinet                   |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Car Bomb Kills a     |Shabelle Media    |7 November 2012 |
|      |Soldier, Injures Three in     |Network           |                |
|      |Somali Capital                |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Car Bomb Outside Federal      |Garowe Online     |7 November 2012 |
|      |Somali Parliament Kills 1     |                  |                |
|      |Police Officer                |                  |                |
|      |Bomb attack in Mogadishu      |Foreign and       |7 November 2012 |
|      |                              |Commonwealth      |                |
|      |                              |Office            |                |
|      |Blasts Rock Somali Parliament |VOA News          |7 November 2012 |
|      |Somalia: Roadside Blast Kills |Shabelle Media    |5 November 2012 |
|      |Four Soldiers in Somalia's    |Network           |                |
|      |Port City of Kismayo          |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Two Suicide          |Shabelle Media    |3 November 2012 |
|      |Explosions Kill Four in       |Network           |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |British-Somali Businessman's  |VOA News          |3 November 2012 |
|      |2nd Restaurant Targeted       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu IDPs suffer|Integrated        |1 November 2012 |
|      |extortion, eviction           |Regional          |                |
|      |                              |Information       |                |
|      |                              |Networks News     |                |
|      |Somalia Fact Sheet            |UNHCR             |1 November 2012 |
|      |Many Somalis Still See        |VOA News          |22 October 2012 |
|      |al-Shabab as Threat           |                  |                |
|      |Two killed in Mogadishu       |Jowhar website    |20 October 2012 |
|      |restaurant grenade attack     |                  |                |
|      |Somali government official    |Shabeelle Media   |18 October 2012 |
|      |killed in capital             |Network website   |                |
|      |Gunmen kill prominent elder in|Jowhar website    |18 October 2012 |
|      |southern Somali port city     |                  |                |
|      |Gunmen kill 1, hurt 5 on      |UPI               |15 October 2012 |
|      |Somali bus                    |                  |                |
|      |Somali government forces open |Midnimo.com       |11 October 2012 |
|      |fire, kill three in Mogadishu |website           |                |
|      |Somali commentator says Kenyan|Mareeg website    |11 October 2012 |
|      |troops being used to pursue   |                  |                |
|      |clan interests                |                  |                |
|      |Islamist militants ban Muslim |Reuters           |8 October 2012  |
|      |agency's aid to 1.3 million   |                  |                |
|      |Somalis                       |                  |                |
|      |The strategic port city of    |Foreign Policy    |3 October 2012  |
|      |Kismayo has now been wrested  |                  |                |
|      |from al-Shabab. But it's still|                  |                |
|      |a long way from safe.         |                  |                |
|      |Somali militants hit Kismayu  |Reuters           |2 October 2012  |
|      |as African troops move in     |                  |                |
|      |Operation Guidance Note:      |UK Border Agency  |1 October 2012  |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Update on security and human  |Danish Immigration|1 October 2012  |
|      |rights issues in South-Central|Service and       |                |
|      |Somalia, including in         |LANDINFO          |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Islamists abandon     |BBC News          |29 September    |
|      |Kismayo amid AU attack        |                  |2012            |
|      |Somalia Human Development     |United Nations    |28 September    |
|      |Report 2012: Empowering youth |Development       |2012            |
|      |for peace and development     |Programme         |                |
|      |Somalia, allies batter al     |Reuters           |28 September    |
|      |Shabaab, but gains may be     |                  |2012            |
|      |fragile                       |                  |                |
|      |KDF soldier arrested for      |The Standard      |25 September    |
|      |killing Somali civilians      |website           |2012            |
|      |Kenyan troops blamed in 7     |UPI               |24 September    |
|      |Somalia deaths                |                  |2012            |
|      |Somali government says it has |Midnimo.com       |23 September    |
|      |new plans for Mogadishu       |website           |2012            |
|      |security                      |                  |                |
|      |Somali MP assassinated outside|UPI               |23 September    |
|      |home                          |                  |2012            |
|      |Gunmen kill Somali lawmaker in|Radio Bar-Kulan   |22 September    |
|      |Mogadishu                     |website           |2012            |
|      |Al Shabaab withdraws and      |RBC Radio         |22 September    |
|      |abandons Jawhar town          |                  |2012            |
|      |Somali journalist shoot dead  |Shabeelle Media   |21 September    |
|      |in Mogadishu                  |Network website   |2012            |
|      |Suicide bombers kill 15 in    |Reuters           |21 September    |
|      |Somali capital                |                  |2012            |
|      |Somali suicide bombing kills  |UPI               |21 September    |
|      |at least 10                   |                  |2012            |
|      |Journalists, civilians killed |Jowhar website    |20 September    |
|      |in twin blasts in Somali      |                  |2012            |
|      |capital                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu Restaurant |Shabelle Media    |20 September    |
|      |Bombings Kill 10, Including 3 |Network           |2012            |
|      |Journalists                   |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia suicide bombing hits  |BBC News          |20 September    |
|      |Mogadishu - 14 Killed         |                  |2012            |
|      |14 killed in Mogadishu suicide|Telegraph         |20 September    |
|      |attack                        |                  |2012            |
|      |Suicide Bomber Kill at Least  |VOA News          |20 September    |
|      |15 at Mogadishu Restaurant    |                  |2012            |
|      |The Angel of Mogadishu who    |                  |14 September    |
|      |raised a hospital from the    |                  |2012            |
|      |ruins of war                  |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabab claims attack on new|Aljazeera         |13 September    |
|      |Somalia leader                |                  |2012            |
|      |Attack on Somali president    |Reuters           |13 September    |
|      |exposes fragile "new era"     |                  |2012            |
|      |Two days into job, Somali     |Reuters           |12 September    |
|      |president survives attacks    |                  |2012            |
|      |Somalia: Roadside Blast Kills |Shabelle Media    |12 September    |
|      |Four, Wounds 10 in Mogadishu  |Network           |2012            |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Two killed in grenade attack  |Midnimo.com       |6 September 2012|
|      |in Somali capital             |website           |                |
|      |Ten die in central Somalia    |Jowhar website    |6 September 2012|
|      |clan fighting                 |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Grenade Attack Kills |Shabelle Media    |5 September 2012|
|      |Two in Mogadishu              |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Two killed, three injured in  |Radio Bar-Kulan   |4 September 2012|
|      |southern Somalia as gunmen    |website           |                |
|      |open fire on lorry            |                  |                |
|      |Gunmen kill two in Somali     |Midnimo.com       |3 September 2012|
|      |capital                       |website           |                |
|      |Five killed in Somali capital |Radio Bar-Kulan   |2 September 2012|
|      |grenade attack                |website           |                |
|      |Grenade attack "kills" three, |Radio Gaalkacyo   |30 August 2012  |
|      |injuries four in Somali       |                  |                |
|      |capital                       |                  |                |
|      |Rape and sexual violence in   |Amnesty           |30 August 2012  |
|      |Somalia - an ongoing epidemic |International     |                |
|      |Somalia's Al Shabaab loses    |BBC News          |27 August 2012  |
|      |control of Merca port to army |                  |                |
|      |Report of the                 |United Nations    |22 August 2012  |
|      |Secretary-General on Somalia  |Security Council  |                |
|      |Somalia COI Bulletin          |UK Border Agency  |17 August 2012  |
|      |Somalia Bulletin: Security    |Home Office UK    |17 August 2012  |
|      |Situation in Southern and     |Border Agency     |                |
|      |Central Somalia               |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Roadside Bomb Kills  |Shabelle Media    |6 August 2012   |
|      |Two in Somali Capital,        |Network           |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: August|SomaliaReport     |1 August 2012   |
|      |2012                          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Blast Kills Two, Hurt|Shabelle Media    |29 July 2012    |
|      |Seven in Somali Capital       |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Somalia: Blast Hits a Caf in |Shabelle Media    |15 July 2012    |
|      |Somalia's Baido Town          |Network           |                |
|      |                              |(Mogadishu)       |                |
|      |Letter dated 11 July 2012 from|United Nations    |13 July 2012    |
|      |the Chair of the Security     |Security Council  |                |
|      |Council Committee pursuant to |                  |                |
|      |resolutions 751 (1992) and    |                  |                |
|      |1907 (2009) concerning Somalia|                  |                |
|      |and Eritrea addressed to the  |                  |                |
|      |President of the Security     |                  |                |
|      |Council                       |                  |                |
|      |Hammers Replace Bullets as    |VOA News          |6 July 2012     |
|      |Mogadishu Rebuilds            |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Fighting displaces   |Integrated        |5 July 2012     |
|      |thousands in Middle Shabelle  |Regional          |                |
|      |                              |Information       |                |
|      |                              |Networks News     |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: July  |SomaliaReport     |1 July 2012     |
|      |2012                          |                  |                |
|      |IRIN: Concern over planned    |Refugees          |28 June 2012    |
|      |relocation of refugees from   |International     |                |
|      |Kenya to Somalia              |                  |                |
|      |From King's Cross to          |Hiiraan Online    |17 June 2012    |
|      |Mogadishu: how one man is     |                  |                |
|      |leading the changing face of  |                  |                |
|      |our beloved capital city      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Car Bomb in Busy     |Garowe Online     |17 June 2012    |
|      |Market, Injures Three         |                  |                |
|      |Somali opens Mogadishu's first|BBC News          |8 June 2012     |
|      |dry cleaners in decades       |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: June  |SomaliaReport     |1 June 2012     |
|      |2012                          |                  |                |
|      |Somalis flee as Al Shabaab    |Aljazeera         |26 May 2012     |
|      |stronghold falls              |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Crisis far from over |Medecins Sans     |24 May 2012     |
|      |                              |Frontiers         |                |
|      |Country Reports on Human      |United States     |24 May 2012     |
|      |Rights Practices for 2011     |Department of     |                |
|      |                              |State             |                |
|      |Amnesty International Annual  |Amnesty           |24 May 2012     |
|      |Report: Somalia 2012          |International     |                |
|      |Mortar Attack Kills 7 in      |VOA News          |7 May 2012      |
|      |Somali Capital                |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: May   |SomaliaReport     |1 May 2012      |
|      |2012                          |                  |                |
|      |Report of the                 |United Nations    |1 May 2012      |
|      |Secretary-General on Somalia  |Security Council  |                |
|      |Blast Kills At Least 10 in    |VOA News          |8 April 2012    |
|      |Somali Town                   |                  |                |
|      |Somalia theatre bombing kills |BBC News          |4 April 2012    |
|      |top sports officials          |                  |                |
|      |Suicide Bomber Kills 8 in     |VOA News          |3 April 2012    |
|      |Somali Capital                |                  |                |
|      |Security and human rights     |Danish Immigration|1 April 2012    |
|      |issues in South-Central       |Service           |                |
|      |Somalia including Mogadishu   |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: April |SomaliaReport     |1 April 2012    |
|      |2012                          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Pro-Government       |Human Rights Watch|28 March 2012   |
|      |Militias Executing Civilians  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Thousands displaced  |Integrated        |15 March 2012   |
|      |by fighting in Gedo           |Regional          |                |
|      |                              |Information       |                |
|      |                              |Networks News     |                |
|      |Al-Shabab Says It Carried Out |VOA News          |13 March 2012   |
|      |Mogadishu Attack, 3 Dead      |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: March |SomaliaReport     |1 March 2012    |
|      |2012                          |                  |                |
|      |Civilian Accused of Shabaab   |SomaliaReport     |28 February 2012|
|      |Ties Shot in Baidoa           |                  |                |
|      |Press releases: Protection of |Amnesty           |23 February 2012|
|      |civilians and human rights are|International     |                |
|      |critical for stable future    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Al Shabaab militant   |BBC News          |22 February 2012|
|      |base of Baidoa captured       |                  |                |
|      |Militants and civilians killed|Bureau of         |22 February 2012|
|      |in multiple US Somalia strikes|Investigative     |                |
|      |                              |Journalism (UK)   |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict:       |SomaliaReport     |1 February 2012 |
|      |February 2012                 |                  |                |
|      |Public Statement: African     |Amnesty           |25 January 2012 |
|      |Union: Put protection of      |International     |                |
|      |Civilians at the Forefront of |                  |                |
|      |Efforts to Address Peace and  |                  |                |
|      |Security in Somalia           |                  |                |
|      |Somalia's Al Shabaab attack   |BBC News          |24 January 2012 |
|      |Ethiopian base in Beledweyne  |                  |                |
|      |Suicide Bomber Strikes in     |VOA News          |23 January 2012 |
|      |Central Somalia               |                  |                |
|      |World Report 2012 - Somalia   |Human Rights Watch|22 January 2012 |
|      |MSF closes largest medical    |Reuters           |19 January 2012 |
|      |centres in Somali capital     |                  |                |
|      |MSF closes its largest medical|Medecins Sans     |19 January 2012 |
|      |centres in Mogadishu after    |Frontiers         |                |
|      |killings                      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Country of Origin    |Home Office UK    |17 January 2012 |
|      |Information (COI) Report      |Border Agency     |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict:       |SomaliaReport     |1 January 2012  |
|      |January 2012                  |                  |                |
|      |Two aid workers killed in     |CNN               |30 December 2011|
|      |Somalia capital               |                  |                |
|      |Somali staff member kills 2   |Reuters           |29 December 2011|
|      |MSF aid workers in Mogadishu  |                  |                |
|      |Report of the Security-General|United Nations    |9 December 2011 |
|      |on Somalia                    |Security Council  |                |
|      |Fighting breaks out in parts  |UPI               |8 December 2011 |
|      |of Mogadishu                  |                  |                |
|      |At least 19 dead in Somali    |UPI               |8 December 2011 |
|      |fighting                      |                  |                |
|      |Violence in Somali Capital    |VOA News          |7 December 2011 |
|      |Escalates                     |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict:       |SomaliaReport     |1 December 2011 |
|      |December 2011                 |                  |                |
|      |5 Dead in Suicide Bombing in  |VOA News          |29 November 2011|
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somali Militants Ban 16 Aid   |VOA News          |28 November 2011|
|      |Agencies                      |                  |                |
|      |Violence in Southern Somalia  |VOA News          |21 November 2011|
|      |Kills 11                      |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict:       |SomaliaReport     |1 November 2011 |
|      |November 2011                 |                  |                |
|      |Report: Airstrike kills 5 at  |UPI               |31 October 2011 |
|      |refugee camp in Somalia       |                  |                |
|      |Suicide car bomb kills 3 in   |Reuters           |18 October 2011 |
|      |Somali capital                |                  |                |
|      |Somali rebels fortify         |Reuters           |18 October 2011 |
|      |defenses, blast kills six in  |                  |                |
|      |capital                       |                  |                |
|      |Statement by Amnesty          |Amnesty           |11 October 2011 |
|      |International: Item 6: Human  |International     |                |
|      |Rights Situation in Africa    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Civilians pay the    |Amnesty           |5 October 2011  |
|      |price of bomb attack in       |International     |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somali's al Shabaab kills 70  |Reuters           |4 October 2011  |
|      |in Mogadishu bomb             |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu blast kills dozens  |UPI               |4 October 2011  |
|      |Massive al-Shabaab suicide    |Telegraph         |4 October 2011  |
|      |bomb kills over 80 in Somali  |                  |                |
|      |capital Mogadishu             |                  |                |
|      |Car bomb kills 65 in Mogadishu|Telegraph         |4 October 2011  |
|      |UN deplores deadly bombing in |United Nations    |4 October 2011  |
|      |Somali capital                |News Centre       |                |
|      |Insurgents Kill 60 in Somali  |VOA News          |3 October 2011  |
|      |Capital Blast                 |                  |                |
|      |Deadly Bombing in Mogadishu   |VOA News          |3 October 2011  |
|      |Marks Return of Al-Shabab     |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict:       |SomaliaReport     |1 October 2011  |
|      |October 2011                  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia's al Shabaab launches |Reuters           |30 September    |
|      |offensive in south            |                  |2011            |
|      |Somalia: Protection and       |Landinfo          |30 September    |
|      |Conflict Resolution Mechanisms|                  |2011            |
|      |UN Human Rights Council       |Amnesty           |28 September    |
|      |Eighteenth Session: Item 10   |International     |2011            |
|      |Technical assistance and      |                  |                |
|      |capacity-building             |                  |                |
|      |Briefing: Somalia: A          |Amnesty           |26 September    |
|      |humanitarian and human rights |International     |2011            |
|      |catastrophe                   |                  |                |
|      |UN declares sixth famine zone |The Guardian      |5 September 2011|
|      |in Somalia                    |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict:       |SomaliaReport     |1 September 2011|
|      |September 2011                |                  |                |
|      |Report of the independent     |United Nations    |29 August 2011  |
|      |expert on the situation of    |General Assembly  |                |
|      |human rights in Somalia,      |                  |                |
|      |Shamsul Bari                  |                  |                |
|      |Somali militants behead boys  |Reuters           |26 August 2011  |
|      |in Mogadishu attacks          |                  |                |
|      |Al Shabaab rebels withdraw    |The Telegraph     |6 August 2011   |
|      |from Somali capital           |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: August|SomaliaReport     |1 August 2011   |
|      |2011                          |                  |                |
|      |"You Don't Know Who to Blame":|Human Rights Watch|1 August 2011   |
|      |War Crimes in Somalia         |                  |                |
|      |10 Killed in Battle to Keep   |VOA News          |27 July 2011    |
|      |Somali Aid Flowing            |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabaab arrests 30 women   |UPI               |26 July 2011    |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: July  |SomaliaReport     |1 July 2011     |
|      |2011                          |                  |                |
|      |Public Statement: African     |Amnesty           |23 June 2011    |
|      |Union must prioritize the     |International     |                |
|      |protection of civilians in    |                  |                |
|      |conflict situations           |                  |                |
|      |Al Shabaab rebels claim       |Reuters           |11 June 2011    |
|      |killing of Somalia minister   |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: June  |SomaliaReport     |1 June 2011     |
|      |2011                          |                  |                |
|      |Fighting in Somali Capital    |VOA News          |1 June 2011     |
|      |Kills 17                      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Country of Origin    |Home Office UK    |27 May 2011     |
|      |Information (COI) Report      |Border Agency     |                |
|      |Amnesty International Annual  |Amnesty           |13 May 2011     |
|      |Report: Somalia 2011          |International     |                |
|      |Militants, government clash in|UPI               |12 May 2011     |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |26 Killed in Fighting Between |VOA News          |2 May 2011      |
|      |Somali Forces, Militants      |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: May   |SomaliaReport     |1 May 2011      |
|      |2011                          |                  |                |
|      |Country Reports on Human      |United States     |8 April 2011    |
|      |Rights Practices for 2010     |Department of     |                |
|      |                              |State             |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: April |SomaliaReport     |1 April 2011    |
|      |2011                          |                  |                |
|      |Artillery fire lands in       |UPI               |24 March 2011   |
|      |Mogadishu market              |                  |                |
|      |At least 10 dead in Somalia   |UPI               |23 March 2011   |
|      |fighting                      |                  |                |
|      |Fighting hits parts of        |UPI               |16 March 2011   |
|      |Mogadishu; 10 die             |                  |                |
|      |The Rise of a Jihadi Movement |Marchal, Roland   |1 March 2011    |
|      |in a Country at War           |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict: March |SomaliaReport     |1 March 2011    |
|      |2011                          |                  |                |
|      |Suicide car bomb near         |Reuters           |21 February 2011|
|      |Mogadishu police camp in      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Suicide car bomb in Somalia   |Reuters           |21 February 2011|
|      |kills 10: police              |                  |                |
|      |Gunfire, suicide bombing rock |UPI               |21 February 2011|
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Suicide Blast Kills 11 in     |VOA News          |20 February 2011|
|      |Somali Capital                |                  |                |
|      |UNHCR condemns killings and   |UNHCR             |4 February 2011 |
|      |displacement of civilians in  |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Conflict takes Toll on|VOA News          |3 February 2011 |
|      |Civilian Mental Health        |                  |                |
|      |Street FIGHT: Conflict:       |SomaliaReport     |1 February 2011 |
|      |February 2011                 |                  |                |
|      |At Least 17 Killed in         |VOA News          |31 January 2011 |
|      |Mogadishu Violence            |                  |                |
|      |20 die in Mogadishu violence  |UPI               |31 January 2011 |
|      |Somalia: ever higher numbers  |International     |27 January 2011 |
|      |of war-wounded in Mogadishu   |Committee of the  |                |
|      |hospitals                     |Red Cross         |                |
|      |World Report 2011 - Somalia   |Human Rights Watch|24 January 2011 |
|      |Somalia chooses new leader in |The Guardian      |10 September    |
|      |presidential elections        |                  |2010            |
|      |Harsh War, Harsh Peace: Abuses|Human Rights Watch|1 April 2010    |
|      |by al-Shabaab, the            |                  |                |
|      |Transitional Federal          |                  |                |
|      |Government, and AMISOM in     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Counter-terrorism in Somalia: |Hoehne, Markus    |17 December 2009|
|      |How external interference     |Virgil            |                |
|      |helped to produce militant    |                  |                |
|      |Islamism                      |                  |                |
|      |Comment to The Independent    |Mullen, Joseph    |15 November 2009|
|      |Letter published in The       |Mullen, Joseph    |20 September    |
|      |Independent                   |                  |2009            |
|      |Annex C - Somali Clan         |UK Border Agency  |24 February 2009|
|      |Structure (extract from COI   |                  |                |
|      |Report)                       |                  |                |
|      |Report on Profiling of        |Danish Refugee    |18 May 2007     |
|      |Internally Displaced Persons, |Council / UNHCR   |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |Branch Office     |                |
|      |                              |Somalia           |                |
|      |Conflict in Somalia: Drivers  |World Bank        |1 January 2005  |
|      |and Dynamics                  |                  |                |
|      |A Gap in their Hearts: the    |UNOCHA            |6 January 2003  |
|      |experience of separated       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Children              |                  |                |
|      |Villes en Guerre en Somalie:  |Centre Francais   |1 April 2000    |
|      |Mogadiscio et Hargeisa        |sur la Population |                |
|      |                              |et le             |                |
|      |                              |Developpement/INED|                |
|      |Somalia: Genealogical table of|UNHCR             |2000            |
|      |Somali clans                  |                  |                |
                                 APPENDIX B

                Schedule of Background Evidence (Respondent)

|Item  |Document                      |Source            |Date            |
|      |Mogadishu Food security &     |FSNAU             |Undated         |
|      |Nutrition Situation trends    |                  |                |
|      |(July 2011 - April 2012)      |                  |                |
|      |Available Services at Selected|Somali Health     |Undated         |
|      |Hospitals in Mogadishu        |Cluster           |                |
|      |SAACID: Mogadishu Food        |SAACID            |Retrieved 2014  |
|      |Kitchens                      |                  |                |
|      |DFID in Somalia               |UKaid             |Autumn 2013     |
|      |Somalia: Somalia twin bombing |Agence            |1 February 2014 |
|      |toll rises to 11: police      |France-Presse     |                |
|      |Africa: Wildlife Poaching     |Inter Press       |11 January 2014 |
|      |Thought to Bankroll           |Service           |                |
|      |International Terrorism       |                  |                |
|      |IOM Aids Somalis Evacuated    |IOM               |10 January 2014 |
|      |from South Sudan              |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Somalis From Diaspora|Sabahi            |9 January 2014  |
|      |Denounce Al-Shabaab Threats   |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Evacuates 300 More of |Sabahi            |8 January 2014  |
|      |its Citizens From South Sudan |                  |                |
|      |Iraq Body Count: Recent Events|iraqbodycount.org |5 January 2014  |
|      |Somalia: Saudi Arabia Deports |Dalsan Radio      |4 January 2014  |
|      |More Than 200 Somalis to      |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Somalia's Shebab     |Agence            |2 January 2014  |
|      |boasts of twin hotel bombing  |France-Presse     |                |
|      |killing 11                    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: PM Family Relocated  |Dalsan Radio      |29 December 2013|
|      |for Security Purpose          |                  |                |
|      |Market Data Update - November |FSNAU             |20 December 2013|
|      |2013                          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: IDP settlement       |UN Human          |16 December 2013|
|      |planning and strategy         |Settlements       |                |
|      |presented in Mogadishu        |Program           |                |
|      |Update 6: reduction of Somali |UNOSAT            |10 December 2013|
|      |IDP shelter concentrations in |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu, Somalia (03/06/2013|                  |                |
|      |- 24/11/13)                   |                  |                |
|      |UNOSAT: updated assessment of |UNOSAT            |10 December 2013|
|      |IDP shelter concentrations in |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu, Somalia (24/11/13) |                  |                |
|      |Saudi Deportations Gain       |SSBSAQ            |6 December 2013 |
|      |Momentum                      |                  |                |
|      |UNSC S/2013/709               |UNSC              |2 December 2013 |
|      |Somalia: Shooting in Somalia? |Agence            |2 December 2013 |
|      |Dial 888 for police           |France-Presse     |                |
|      |Talking to the other side     |HPG               |December 2013   |
|      |Somalia: How Safe is Going    |IRIN              |28 November 2013|
|      |Home to Somalia?              |                  |                |
|      |Humanitarian Bulletin Somalia |UNOCHA            |18 November 2013|
|      |Kenya: new procedures set for |UNHCR             |11 November 2013|
|      |Somali refugees to return home|                  |                |
|      |voluntarily from Kenya        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: ten killed in Al     |Garowe Online     |11 November 2013|
|      |Shabaab militants clash       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Somali Vendors Cash  |Sabahi            |1 November 2013 |
|      |in on Free Rent at Mogadishu  |                  |                |
|      |Market                        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Fact Sheet           |UNHCR             |November 2013   |
|      |SAACID: Hawl-wadag district   |SAACID            |November 2013   |
|      |Somalia: President welcomes   |Dalsan Radio      |26 October 2013 |
|      |'Historic Visit Demonstrating |                  |                |
|      |the UN's Unwavering Support   |                  |                |
|      |for Somalia', As UN opens new |                  |                |
|      |office in Somalia             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Lower Shabelle       |Landinfo          |18 October 2013 |
|      |Amid dangers, Mogadishu       |swissinfo.com     |17 October 2013 |
|      |residents relish ordinary     |                  |                |
|      |pleasures                     |                  |                |
|      |Humanitarian Bulletin  Somalia|UNOCHA            |15 October 2013 |
|      |Somalia: Diaspora Drawn Back  |Voice of America  |14 October 2013 |
|      |to Mogadishu                  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: First installations  |Dalsan Radio      |14 October 2013 |
|      |of Solar-Powered traffic      |                  |                |
|      |Lights in Mogadishu Since 1990|                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Braving the tide     |Oxfam             |09 October 2013 |
|      |together with E-cash in       |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu roads get much      |Sabahi            |3 October 2013  |
|      |needed upgrades               |                  |                |
|      |Turkish aid in Somalia: the   |guardian.com      |30 September    |
|      |irresistible appeal of boots  |                  |2013            |
|      |on the ground                 |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Humanitarian         |UNOCHA            |30 September    |
|      |Dashboard (as of 30 September |                  |2013            |
|      |2013)                         |                  |                |
|      |UNHCR: Guidance on the        |UNHCR             |25 September    |
|      |application of the internal   |                  |2013            |
|      |flight or relocation          |                  |                |
|      |alternative, particularly in  |                  |                |
|      |respect of Mogadishu, Somalia |                  |                |
|      |Tri-Cluster: Mogadishu,       |REACH             |15 September    |
|      |Dharkenley X-Control-K13 09-17|                  |2013            |
|      |September 2013                |                  |                |
|      |Report of the Secretary       |UNSC              |3 September 2013|
|      |General on Somalia S/2013/521 |                  |                |
|      |Story: Somalia/Mogadishu Roads|AU/UN             |1 September 2013|
|      |(transcript)                  |                  |                |
|      |Operational Guidance Note:    |Home Office       |September 2013  |
|      |Somalia: v.24.0               |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu still not a|Institute for     |28 August 2013  |
|      |safe place                    |Security Studies  |                |
|      |Iraq Body Count: Recent Events|iraqbodycount.org |26 August 2013  |
|      |Somalia: Returning Diaspora   |Sabahi            |23 August 2013  |
|      |Men Transform Mogadishu       |                  |                |
|      |Wedding Industry              |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Country of Origin    |Home Office       |5 August 2013   |
|      |Information Report            |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Extremist Violence   |Inter Press       |3 August 2013   |
|      |Returns to Hit Mogadishu      |Service           |                |
|      |Civilian casualties up 23% in |WN.com            |1 August 2013   |
|      |Afghan War                    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Redux?                |CSIS              |August 2013     |
|      |Iraq Body Count: Recent Events|iraqbodycount.org |29 July 2013    |
|      |Update 5: reduction of Somali |UNOSAT            |19 July 2013    |
|      |IDP shelter concentrations in |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu, Somalia (02/05/12 -|                  |                |
|      |03/06/2013)                   |                  |                |
|      |UN Monitoring Report          |UNSC              |12 July 2013    |
|      |S/2013/413                    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Improved Security    |Sabahi            |4 July 2013     |
|      |Brings Prosperity to Property |                  |                |
|      |Owners in Mogadishu           |                  |                |
|      |ACLED: Conflict trends (No.16)|Armed Conflict    |July 2013       |
|      |                              |Location & Event  |                |
|      |                              |Dataset           |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabaab Admits    |Garowe Online     |30 June 2013    |
|      |Killing its Own Senior        |                  |                |
|      |Officials                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Aweys Arrested in    |Sabahi            |30 June 2013    |
|      |Mogadishu, Al- Shabaab Denies |                  |                |
|      |'execution' of Leaders        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al-Shabaab Leader    |Sabahi            |28 June 2013    |
|      |Twists Islamic Tenets to      |                  |                |
|      |Enforce Obedience, Justify    |                  |                |
|      |Killings                      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al Shabaab Dispute   |Garowe Online     |21 June 2013    |
|      |turns violent, Factions emerge|                  |                |
|      |Somalia: UN 'not deterred' by |AP                |20 June 2013    |
|      |attack on its Mogadishu       |                  |                |
|      |compound                      |                  |                |
|      |Quarterly Brief               |FSNAU             |20 June 2013    |
|      |Somalia: New Taxi Companies   |Sabahi            |14 June 2013    |
|      |Offer Peace of Mind to        |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu Residents           |                  |                |
|      |Report of the Chairperson of  |AUC               |14 June 2013    |
|      |the Commission on the         |                  |                |
|      |Situation in Somalia          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu residents  |Sabahi            |3 June 2013     |
|      |welcome, vow to protect solar |                  |                |
|      |streetlights                  |                  |                |
|      |Structural Development,       |UNOSAT            |3 June 2013     |
|      |Afgooye Corridor, Somalia     |                  |                |
|      |Complex attack on UN Compound |Atmospherics      |June 2013       |
|      |in Somalia                    |Unlimited         |                |
|      |Mogadishu District Assessments|Atmospherics      |June 2013       |
|      |                              |Unlimited         |                |
|      |South Central - Functioning   |UNOCHA            |June 2013       |
|      |Health Facilities, April-June |                  |                |
|      |2013                          |                  |                |
|      |South Central - Nutrition     |UNOCHA            |June 2013       |
|      |Interventions and Implementing|                  |                |
|      |Agencies, April - June 2013   |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu - Nutrition         |UNOCHA            |June 2013       |
|      |Interventions and Implementing|                  |                |
|      |Agencies, April - June 2013   |                  |                |
|      |UNSC S/2013/326               |                  |31 May 2013     |
|      |GBVWG Mogadishu Meeting       |Somalia Protection|27 May 2013     |
|      |Minutes                       |Cluster           |                |
|      |Somalia: Amisom Spokesman     |Sabahi            |22 May 2013     |
|      |Refutes Casualty Numbers,     |                  |                |
|      |Outlines long-term plans      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Somali Govt Begins   |Sabahi            |21 May 2013     |
|      |Removing Illegal Roadblocks   |                  |                |
|      |Outside Mogadishu             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Taking Steps to       |Sabahi            |14 May 2013     |
|      |Re-Open Embassies             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu District   |Sabahi            |13 May 2013     |
|      |Provides Free Education for   |                  |                |
|      |Adult Women                   |                  |                |
|      |Streetlights bring normality  |BBC News          |11 May 2013     |
|      |to Mogadishu                  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: From Fear to Hope -  |The New Times     |9 May 2013      |
|      |Finally Getting it Right in   |                  |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Bullets to Babies, Somalia's  |Agence            |2 May 2013      |
|      |war surgeons learn skills of  |France-Presse     |                |
|      |peace                         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Security and         |Landinfo/DIS      |May 2013        |
|      |protection in Mogadishu and   |                  |                |
|      |South-Central Somalia         |                  |                |
|      |(April-May 2013)              |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu IDPs by District    |UNHCR             |May 2013        |
|      |Surviving the odds: education,|Forced Migration  |May 2013        |
|      |commerce and development among|Review            |                |
|      |displaced Somalis (Issue 43   |                  |                |
|      |(extract) May 2013)           |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al-Amriki and Foreign|Sabahi            |30 April 2013   |
|      |Fighters in Showdown With     |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabaab Leader             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Hospitals see Fewer   |Voice of America  |29 April 2013   |
|      |War Victims                   |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Foreign Secretary    |horseedmedia      |26 April 2013   |
|      |opens new British Embassy in  |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Al-Shabaab in        |Sabahi            |26 April 2013   |
|      |Crosshairs of Somalia's       |                  |                |
|      |Anti-Terrorism Law            |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Shirdon Praises Elite|Sabahi            |26 April 2013   |
|      |Police Unit for Mogadishu     |                  |                |
|      |Mail services could soon      |Universal Postal  |26 April 2013   |
|      |resume in Somalia             |Union             |                |
|      |Somalia: Women from Somali    |Sabahi            |22 April 2013   |
|      |Diaspora Return Home to Start |                  |                |
|      |Enterprises                   |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Somali Women Cashing |Inter Press       |22 April 2013   |
|      |in On Business                |Service           |                |
|      |Somali: 14,353 Refugees Return|Somalilandsun     |20 April 2013   |
|      |Home Since January: UNHCR     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Special Forces to    |Garowe Online     |20 April 2013   |
|      |Take Over Mogadishu's Security|                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu Launches   |Sabahi            |19 April 2013   |
|      |Neighbourhood Watches         |                  |                |
|      |Counter-terrorism Unit to hit |Sabahi            |18 April 2013   |
|      |Mogadishu Streets             |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: PM says 'Foreign     |Garowe Online     |16 April 2013   |
|      |Involvement' in Mogadishu     |                  |                |
|      |Courthouse Massacre           |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu Attack an  |Sabahi            |15 April 2013   |
|      |'Act of Desperation' for      |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shabaab                    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: "I found Signs of    |Catholic          |12 April 2013   |
|      |Hope in Somalia", Says Bishop |Information       |                |
|      |Bertin                        |Service for Africa|                |
|      |Mogadishu Music Festival      |Somalisunrise.org |10 April 2013   |
|      |Somalia: Immigration Officials|Shabelle Media    |10 April 2013   |
|      |Order All Foreigners in the   |Network           |                |
|      |Country to Register Themselves|                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Govt Troops Conduct  |Shabelle Media    |8 April 2013    |
|      |Operations in Darkeenley,     |Network           |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Somali Officials Vow |Sabahi            |3 April 2013    |
|      |to Improve Human Rights       |                  |                |
|      |Following Rape report         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Amisom Opens the Last|Government of     |2 April 2013    |
|      |Section of the Mogadishu to   |Ethiopia          |                |
|      |Baidoa Road                   |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Humanitarian Snapshot|UNCHA             |April 2013      |
|      |(April 2013)                  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Relative Peace Belies|IRIN              |26 March 2013   |
|      |Rocky Road Ahead              |                  |                |
|      |Allafrica: Somalia:           |Garowe Online     |18 March 2013   |
|      |Intelligence Official Targeted|                  |                |
|      |in Suicide Car Bomb Attack    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia frees journalist in   |Sabahi            |17 March 2013   |
|      |'rape case'                   |                  |                |
|      |Allafrica: Somalia: Somalis   |Sabahi            |4 March 2013    |
|      |seek government jobs without  |                  |                |
|      |fear of Al-Shabaab            |                  |                |
|      |Donors step up ties with      |Reuters           |1 March 2013    |
|      |Somalia; praise rebuilding    |                  |                |
|      |efforts                       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu-Baidoa     |Sabahi            |28 February 2013|
|      |highway now safe, Shirdon says|                  |                |
|      |UNSC S/2013/69                |                  |31 January 2013 |
|      |Gatekeepers in Mogadishu      |The Somalis Cash  |31 January 2013 |
|      |                              |Consortium        |                |
|      |Somalia beginning 'profound   |UN News Service   |30 January 2013 |
|      |transformation', UN official  |                  |                |
|      |says during visit             |                  |                |
|      |Suicide blast by offices of   |BBC News          |29 January 2013 |
|      |Somalia president and PM      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Somali forces tighten|Sabahi            |22 January 2013 |
|      |security in Mogadishu         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: return of Somali     |UN Radio          |7 January 2013  |
|      |refugees "a positive          |                  |                |
|      |indicator": UN envoy          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu and        |Sabahi            |6 January 2013  |
|      |government-controlled regions |                  |                |
|      |secure, AMISOM spokesman says |                  |                |
|      |                              |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Emergency Weekly      |WHO               |January 2013    |
|      |health Update                 |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Security and human   |Danish/Norwegian  |January 2013    |
|      |rights issues in S-C Somalia, |Fact-Finding      |                |
|      |including Mogadishu (October  |Mission to Nairobi|                |
|      |2012)                         |and Mogadishu     |                |
|      |Somalia: Humanitarian snapshot|UNOCHA            |January 2013    |
|      |- Jan 2013                    |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu - Health Facilities |UNOCHA            |January 2013    |
|      |and Implementing Partners -   |                  |                |
|      |January 2013                  |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu - Health Facilities |Somali Health     |January 2013    |
|      |and Implementing Partners     |Cluster           |                |
|      |Keeping the Lifeline Open     |Oxfam             |2013            |
|      |Somalia Emergency Health      |WHO               |2013            |
|      |Update 13/05/13 - 02/06/13    |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Situation Report      |WHO               |2013            |
|      |August - October 2013         |                  |                |
|      |Hostages of the Gatekeepers   |HRW               |2013            |
|      |South Central Dashboard       |UNHCR             |2013            |
|      |01/01/13 - 28/03/13           |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu residents welcome   |Sabahi            |5 December 2012 |
|      |removal of illegal roadblocks |                  |                |
|      |Humanitarian Bulletin         |UNOCHA            |December 2012   |
|      |(Somalia)                     |                  |                |
|      |SAACID: Community-Based       |SAACID            |December 2012   |
|      |Therapeutic Care [CTC]        |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |PMT Quarterly Dashboard       |UNHCR             |30 October 2012 |
|      |(October 2011 - September     |                  |                |
|      |2012)                         |                  |                |
|      |Allafrica: Somalia: govt      |RFI               |13 October 2012 |
|      |arrests over 300 suspected    |                  |                |
|      |Al-Shebab                     |                  |                |
|      |Allafrica: Somalia has made a |UN News Service   |4 October 2012  |
|      |'quantum leap' in its progress|                  |                |
|      |but security threats remain,  |                  |                |
|      |UN envoy warns                |                  |                |
|      |The Shelter Bulletin -        |UNHCR             |October 2012    |
|      |Emergency Shelter/NFI Cluster,|                  |                |
|      |Somalia (Issue 3)             |                  |                |
|      |Allafrica: Somalia: Hizbul    |Garowe Online     |25 September    |
|      |Islam group withdraws         |                  |2012            |
|      |allegiance, says              |                  |                |
|      |'Al Shabaab is weakened'      |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: 200 former Al Shabaab|Garowe Online     |23 September    |
|      |agents Surrender to Allied    |                  |2012            |
|      |Forces                        |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Suicide bomb attack  |Globalpost        |20 September    |
|      |targets popular Mogadishu     |                  |2012            |
|      |restaurant                    |                  |                |
|      |Tri-cluster (Zona K mapping)  |REACH             |19 September    |
|      |                              |                  |2012            |
|      |Kismayo Population Movements &|UNHCR             |September 2012  |
|      |Protection Monitoring         |                  |                |
|      |(01/09/12 - 26/09/12)         |                  |                |
|      |Somalia successfully concludes|Sabahi            |29 August 2012  |
|      |first elections in over 20    |                  |                |
|      |years                         |                  |                |
|      |Tri-Cluster (Camp 77 mapping) |REACH             |22 August 2012  |
|      |Population Movement Tracking  |UNHCR             |August 2012     |
|      |Monthly Report (August 2012)  |                  |                |
|      |Saferworld - Mogadishu Rising |                  |August 2012     |
|      |One Million return to         |IRIN              |18 July 2012    |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Population Movement Tracking  |UNHCR             |July 2012       |
|      |Monthly Report (July 2012)    |                  |                |
|      |Violence waning, Mogadishu    |UPI               |23 June 2012    |
|      |experiences building boom     |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu boom turns famine   |Reuters           |20 June 2012    |
|      |victims into urban labourers  |                  |                |
|      |Small businesses a sign       |Sabahi            |15 June 2012    |
|      |improving economy, security in|                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu                     |                  |                |
|      |Can Somalia's cheap           |BBC News          |11 June 2012    |
|      |peacekeeping defeat al-Shabab?|                  |                |
|      |ICRC: Mogadishu IDP survey -  |ICRC              |June 2012       |
|      |June 2012                     |                  |                |
|      |Population Movement Tracking  |UNHCR             |June 2012       |
|      |Monthly Report (June 2012)    |                  |                |
|      |IDP settlement changes as of 2|UNOSAT            |30 May 2012     |
|      |April 2012: Afgoye Corridor,  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Update 4: continued expansion |UNOSAT            |22 May 2012     |
|      |of Somali IDP shelter         |                  |                |
|      |concentrations in Mogadishu,  |                  |                |
|      |Somalia (18/10/11 - 02/05/12) |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Mogadishu on the Up  |IRIN              |18 May 2012     |
|      |UNSC S/2012/283               |                  |1 May 2012      |
|      |Population Movement Tracking  |UNHCR             |May 2012        |
|      |Monthly Report (May 2012)     |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: AU troops in Somalia |Agence            |20 April 2012   |
|      |report gains against rebels   |France-Presse     |                |
|      |A taste of hope in Somalia's  |New York Times    |3 April 2012    |
|      |battered capital              |                  |                |
|      |Security and human rights     |DIS               |April 2012      |
|      |issues in South-Central       |                  |                |
|      |Somalia, including Mogadishu  |                  |                |
|      |(30/01/12 - 19/02/12)         |                  |                |
|      |Protection Cluster Update -   |IASC              |10 February 2012|
|      |weekly report                 |                  |                |
|      |UN says Somalia famine is over|al jazeera        |4 February 2012 |
|      |UNSC S/2012/74                |                  |31 January 2012 |
|      |UN GASC A/66/657 - S/2012/33  |                  |13 January 2012 |
|      |ICRC Annual report (excerpt)  |ICRC              |2012            |
|      |2012                          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Common Humanitarian   |UNOCHA            |2012            |
|      |Fund - Annual report 2012     |                  |                |
|      |SPC Protection Cluster Annual |UNHCR             |2012            |
|      |Report - Jan-Dec 2012         |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu EFP II              |SAACID            |November 2011   |
|      |Post-Programme Participant    |                  |                |
|      |Tracer Survey                 |                  |                |
|      |Protection Cluster Update     |IASC Somalia      |9 September 2011|
|      |Somalia: Security and conflict|Landinfo          |29 August 2011  |
|      |in the south                  |                  |                |
|      |Terrorism Monitor Volume IX,  |The Jamestown     |19 August 2011  |
|      |Issue 33                      |Foundation        |                |
|      |Safety and Security: Mogadishu|Observatory of    |August 2011     |
|      |                              |Conflict and      |                |
|      |                              |Violence          |                |
|      |                              |Prevention (OCVP) |                |
|      |AU force closing in on        |Daily Nation      |22 June 2011    |
|      |Mogadishu's prized market in  |                  |                |
|      |tricky urban warfare          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia Helath Cluster        |                  |1 May 2011      |
|      |Bulletin #47                  |                  |                |
|      |Terrorism Monitor Volume IX,  |The Jamestown     |14 April 2011   |
|      |Issue 15                      |Foundation        |                |
|      |UNPOS Quarterly, March 2011,  |UNPOS             |March 2011      |
|      |Issue No.1                    |                  |                |
|      |ICRC Annual Report (excerpt)  |ICRC              |2011            |
|      |2011                          |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu EFP II              |SAACID            |2011            |
|      |Socio-Economic Survey         |                  |                |
|      |WHO's support to hospital care|WHO               |November 2010   |
|      |for conflict-related          |                  |                |
|      |communities in Somalia in 2011|                  |                |
|      |Terrorism Monitor Volume VIII,|The Jamestown     |21 October 2010 |
|      |Issue 38                      |Foundation        |                |
|      |Somalia: Report of Fact       |UKBA              |8 October 2010  |
|      |Finding Mission to Nairobi    |                  |                |
|      |(8-15 September 2010)         |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu Periphery - IDP     |UNOCHA            |September 2010  |
|      |Population Assessment         |                  |                |
|      |Policy Briefing - Somalia's   |International     |18 May 2010     |
|      |Divided Islamists             |Crisis Group      |                |
|      |ORB/BBC: The View From        |Opinion Research  |April 2010      |
|      |Mogadishu: Opinion Poll       |Business (ORB)    |                |
|      |Results April 2010            |                  |                |
|      |Whose Peace is it anyway?     |Accord            |2010            |
|      |Connecting Somali and         |                  |                |
|      |international peacemaking     |                  |                |
|      |(issue 21)                    |                  |                |
|      |ICRC Annual Report (excerpt)  |ICRC              |2010            |
|      |2010                          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia: Reer Hamar           |Landinfo          |17 December 2009|
|      |Clans in Somalia - Report on a|Austrian Red Cross|December 2009   |
|      |Lecture by Joakim Gundel, COI |and Austrian      |                |
|      |Workshop Vienna, 15 May 2009  |Centre for Country|                |
|      |(Revised Edition)             |of Origin & Asylum|                |
|      |                              |Research and      |                |
|      |                              |Documentation     |                |
|      |                              |(ACCORD)          |                |
|      |ICRC Annual Report (excerpt)  |ICRC              |2009            |
|      |2009                          |                  |                |
|      |Somalia - Afgooye Corridor -  |UNOCHR            |30 April 2008   |
|      |IDP Settlements               |                  |                |
|      |Report on Key Local Leader    |SAACID            |June 2007       |
|      |Informants For Rapid          |                  |                |
|      |Assessment of IDPs in         |                  |                |
|      |Mogadishu and Afgoye District,|                  |                |
|      |Lower Shabelle                |                  |                |
|      |U.N. Urges Attention to       |Associated Press  |22 May 2007     |
|      |Somalia                       |                  |                |
|      |Report on Profiling of        |Danish Refugee    |18 May 2007     |
|      |Internally Displaced Persons  |Council and UNHCR |                |
|      |(Mogadishu) Final Draft       |                  |                |
|      |Dialogue for Peace Somali     |Centre for        |January 2007    |
|      |Programme - Pioneers of Peace |Research and      |                |
|      |Advancing the Involvement of  |Dialogue - Somalia|                |
|      |Women in Peace-building in    |                  |                |
|      |South-Central Somalia         |                  |                |
|      |SAACID: results of the "Rapid |SAACID            |2007            |
|      |Population Assessment of IDP  |                  |                |
|      |settlements in Mogadishu      |                  |                |
|      |Stateless Justice in Somalia: |Dr Andre Le Sage, |July 2005       |
|      |formal and Informal Rule of   |Centre for        |                |
|      |Law Initiatives               |Humanitarian      |                |
|      |                              |Dialogue          |                |
|      |Benadir-Watch letter to IGAD  |                  |26 August 2004  |











                                 APPENDIX C

                     Summary of written expert evidence




                    MOJ, MAA AND SSM v SECRETARY OF STATE

                           Expert Written Evidence

There were three expert witnesses  who  prepared  reports  on  the  security
position in South-Central Somalia, specifically Mogadishu,  and  its  impact
on returnees to that area.  Each  expert  prepared  an  initial  or  primary
report that was supplemented with written responses to  questions  posed  by
the Secretary of State.

The reports issued were as follows:

|Appellant|Expert        |Date of       |Date of supplemental     |
|         |              |initial report|responses                |
|MOJ      |Dr Mullen     |18 Nov 2013   |20 Dec 2013 & 19 Jan 2014|
|         |Dr Hoehne     |18 Nov 2013   |23 Dec 2013 & 23 Jan 2014|
|         |Ms Harper     |3 Dec 2013    |6 Jan 2014 & 21 Jan 2014 |
|         |              |              |                         |
|MAA      |Ms Harper     |23 Jan 2014   |                         |
|         |Dr Mullen     |              |26 Jan 2014              |
|         |              |              |                         |
|SSM      |Dr Hoehne     |11 Aug 2013   |                         |
|         |              |(updated on 11|                         |
|         |              |Oct 2013)     |                         |
|         |Ms Harper     |18 Jan 2014   |29 Jan 2014              |

Summary of reports

Dr Mullen

In his report for the first appellant, Dr Mullen wrote the following:

Al-Shabaab

The Al-Shabaab movement had deep roots in Mogadishu as it was  the  offshoot
of the Union of Islamic  Courts  which  confronted  the  warlords  that  had
plagued and undermined security in Mogadishu since 1991. Since the  fall  of
the government in 1991, the country had fragmented into  a  mosaic  of  clan
and sub-clan based conflicts which led to famine, internal  displacement  of
populations (IDP), and a collapse of formal judicial  structures,  rape  and
looting. Mogadishu became the crucible of conflict between two  Hawiye  sub-
clans. With the splintering off  of  a  radical  youth  wing  known  as  Al-
Shabaab, a phenomenon of jihadist armed struggle was created, as  it  was  a
major departure from previous Islamic movements  in  Somalia.  Its  fighting
force was estimated originally at 7,500 men, but more recently  5,000,  with
as many as 1,000 being foreign nationals.  They  had  become  engaged  in  a
variety of bombings, suicide killings and murders  and  had  been  denounced
for such by the UN Security Council. As of July 2011, Al-Shabaab  controlled
eight of the sixteen districts of the capital with a strategy to  intimidate
people and infiltrate the city.

With the withdrawal  of  Al-Shabaab  from  Mogadishu  in  August  2011,  the
security situation had unquestionably improved  but  in  a  rather  eclectic
manner. There had been substantive changes  of  governance  for  the  better
underpinning the improved security  situation.  However,  reports  suggested
that the situation of security was temporary and fragile, falling  short  of
the standard of durability required. It was further  reported  that  towards
the end of 2013, the overall security situation  had  actually  deteriorated
due to significantly increased clan tension, which was  partly  due  to  the
fact that the government was slow to fill the space  vacated  by  Al-Shabaab
in and around Mogadishu.

Mogadishu Clans

The major clan controlling Mogadishu was the Hawiye and its  two  main  sub-
clans: the Abgal and the Habr Gedir. The Ayr  and  the  Murusade  were  also
influential actors. The sixteen districts of Mogadishu were shaped by  their
clan configurations  which  reflected  itself  in  the  choice  of  District
Commissioners and their militia support. A corollary  of  clan  control  was
that they had a shared interest in maintaining a  degree  of  peace  as  the
peace dividend was prosperity and  an  enabling  economic  environment.  The
approach was inclusive and offered opportunities  to  the  select  few  with
services to offer or  resources  to  invest,  but  excluded  the  vulnerable
minority clan member. Clanship may be partly replaced by wealth but  at  the
individual  level,  clanship  was  an  important   survival   attribute   or
conversely, in the case of minority clans, could be a negative  and  require
resources to rectify. A Gadabursi which was a majority clan but  numerically
minor in Mogadishu, would require cross-clan alliances and the resources  to
fund them to survive. Therefore,  low  income  migrants,  or  failed  asylum
seekers, were  unlikely  to  be  able  to  achieve  the  level  of  security
acceptable under the ECHR.

Recruitment

Al-Shabaab was  known  for  forcibly  recruiting  young  males  into  jihadi
activities. Children were especially recruited to  Al-Shabaab  as  fighters.
There was considerable evidence to indicate that the  recruitment  of  child
soldiers continued in and around Mogadishu.

Population Movement

There has always been a degree of mobility between the sixteen districts  of
Mogadishu depending upon security, clan  cohesion  and  food  security.  The
movement of populations peaked in 2011 but between 2011 and 2013  there  had
been a 45-50% decline in the level of movements, year on year. This  greater
stabilisation of population could have been indicative of a  greater  degree
of normalisation of  residential  patterns  within  the  city.  The  outward
migration from Mogadishu to other districts also showed a decline  of  about
70% per year.

IDPs

The level of IDPs on the city perimeter and the violence in  the  IDP  camps
remained a major factor of risk for returning failed asylum  seekers  and  a
fortiori to vulnerable groups.  The  driving  force  behind  the  population
movement into IDP camps had  been  insecurity.  IDPs  have  been  living  in
overcrowded and  unsafe  settlements  and  remain  extremely  vulnerable  to
various forms of human rights abuses, including widespread sexual  violence.


Protection

The ability to access protection in Mogadishu would be contingent  on  three
significant factors: financial wealth, social status  and  clan  protection.
Returning  migrant  citizens  without  a  minimal   combination   of   these
attributes would mean they would be unlikely to gain access  to  livelihoods
or safety and were likely to end up in an IDP camp.

The Security Situation

There were clearly differing perceptions of the security  situation  in  the
city of Mogadishu and it may also have been viewed differently by  different
actors in the  light  of  their  institutional  perspectives.  There  was  a
certain coalition of  interests  between  the  Government,  who  desperately
sought  international  funding,  and  the  key  international  donors.   The
geopolitical aspect of security in Somalia was locked into an  international
perception of internal security in terms of it containing a  major  jihadist
movement with ramifications to the stability of neighbouring  countries.  Dr
Mullen highlighted that according to a UN monitoring report, Al-Shabaab  had
built up  a  powerful  secret  service  under  the  direct  command  of  the
insurgent's chief  and  even  if  international  efforts  to  dismantle  the
group's fighting forces succeeded, there was still a high  chance  that  the
cells under his leadership would continue  to  operate.  In  many  frontline
zones, territory patrolled during the  day  by  AMISOM,  was  controlled  at
night by Al-Shabaab.

Many  aid  agencies  had  down-scaled  their  operations  or  stopped   work
completely due to the deteriorating security  situation.  Dr  Mullen  stated
that the UNHCR were cautious about the situation, commenting  that  although
there had been some encouraging developments in Somalia,  it  did  not  mean
that large numbers of Somali refugees could all go home  as  it  would  take
time before conditions in general, regarding security as  well  as  law  and
order, were restored  throughout  Somalia  and  local  administrations  were
rebuilt. Overall there appeared to be a reluctance  to  sanction  a  planned
return of refugees because of the unacceptable level of  risk  in  Mogadishu
and South-Central Somalia.

The  environment  of  Mogadishu  was  circumscribed  by  credible  and  real
security threats as identified by national and international agencies,  both
from a military perspective and a  human  rights  dimension.  There  was  an
under-estimation of the influence of Al-Shabaab and the  dynamics  of  local
politics  at  the  level  of  localities/districts  within  Mogadishu.   The
evidence pointed to the overt and covert  presence  of  Al-Shabaab  in  both
Mogadishu  and  South-Central  Somalia.  There  appeared  to  be  a   marked
correlation between Al-Shabaab and  individualised  targeted  assassinations
of   government   officials,   journalists   and    peacemakers.    Targeted
assassinations affected the morale of Somalis every  day  returning  to  the
city/other  areas  of  South-Central,  in  creating  a  climate   of   fear,
particularly  against  a  background  of  regular  bombings  and  Improvised
Explosive Devices (IEDs). The territories held by Al-Shabaab  were  under  a
harsh  extremist  Sharia  regime   where   amputations,   stoning,   summary
executions and exhumations of religious  dissenters  were  commonplace.  The
consensus of opinion appeared to Dr Mullen to be that the  current  security
situation could not support any large scale returns to urban areas  such  as
Mogadishu.

The  significance  of  risk  in  an  Al-Shabaab  controlled  area  had   not
materially changed since AMM, but the geographical expanse of that risk  has
somewhat  reduced  due  to  the  significant  swathes  of  territory   being
liberated from Al-Shabaab. However it was still  thought  that  75%  of  the
countryside remained under the  jurisdiction  of  Al-Shabaab.  Nevertheless,
the change in tactics and  the  increased  use  of  Iraqi-type  asymmetrical
warfare had shifted the boundaries of risk from  being  geographically-bound
to being more universal, irrespective of territorial  control.  In  changing
their tactic to operate as a clandestine underground movement, driven  by  a
fanatical religious ideology and fully committed  to  an  Islamic  Caliphate
state, they presented a specific threat to a particular profile  of  person,
such as a westernised Somali citizen. Although there had been  an  increased
international  commitment  to  Somalia  with  a   more   credible   national
government in place; Mogadishu being  administered  by  the  Somali  Federal
Government in its  totality;  the  national  security  forces  being  better
trained and expanded in numbers; and, Al-Shabaab having been pushed  to  the
margins and  acting  as  an  underground  force  rather  than  a  mainstream
administrative authority with  revenue  raising  and  security  powers,  Al-
Shabaab continued to constitute a credible risk.

There were further threats to good governance and human rights  in  Somalia:
there  was  the  threat  of  return  to  neighbouring  warlords,  clan-based
conflict,  protective  militias  and  their  corollary,  the  alienation  of
minority clans who did not have  militia  protection  and  general  criminal
gangs who thrived in a context of weak domestic society.

Human Rights Situation

It would be disingenuous  to  argue  that  the  Human  Rights  situation  in
Somalia had not improved when the Prime Minister had  committed  Somalia  to
an independent Task Force on Human Rights which presented a  possibility  of
positive implications. But it remained  to  be  seen  when  the  legislative
reforms would be introduced and what their real impact would  be  on  events
on the ground. A new resolution had  been  adopted  at  the  United  Nations
guaranteeing a stronger partnership in subsisting good  governance  and  the
enforcement of human rights legislation directly correlating  to  the  level
of  good  governance  achievable,  and  resulting  in  the   protection   of
vulnerable sections of  the  population  being  ensured,  instead  of  being
victims of human  rights  abuses  by  powerful  figures,  the  militias  and
security forces.

Civilian Casualties

Although there had been improvements  in  security,  Dr  Mullen  noted  that
Amnesty did not consider them adequate enough for  governments  to  consider
forcibly returning Somali nationals and suggested  that  in  Mogadishu,  the
conflict continued to take place, though at a lower  level,  with  civilians
persistently facing insecurity and risks,  falling  victim  to  grave  human
rights abuses. Dr Mullen included  data  of  conflict  events  and  reported
fatalities between 2009 and 2013, noting that between 2010 and 2011, it  was
reported that more  than  14,700  war-wounded  civilians  were  admitted  to
hospitals in Mogadishu. Furthermore, there were 1.1 million IDPs  on  Somali
territory and in many respects they were the  weathervane  of  the  security
status of an area.

Conclusion

It was therefore the opinion of Dr Mullen that there were cogent  evidential
facts to support the proposition that Mogadishu remained unsafe for  certain
vulnerable groups of returning asylum seekers.  His  recommendation  was  to
adopt a wait-and-see  approach  that  extended  the  AMM  provisions  for  a
further twelve months whilst a new set of  differential  legal  entitlements
were refined as the security situation in South-Central Somalia clarified.

Response Report

In his response reports to the questions raised by the  Secretary  of  State
for further information, Dr Mullen added the following points:

  . In support of the definition of civilians in AMM, as 'all genuine  non-
    combatants at the time when the serious threat of real  harm  may  have
    materialised', Dr Mullen simply identified  civilians  as  non-military
    personnel.

  .  Al-Shabaab  were  identified  as  a  fully  functioning  military  and
    administrative force in the territory  south  of  Merca  in  the  Lower
    Shabelle to Jibib in Juba, South-Central Somalia.

  . The ability of Al-Shabaab to kill indiscriminately was  linked  to  two
    tactics widely used in Mogadishu: one being asymmetrical warfare  based
    on IEDs, mine deployment and assassination of known  individuals,  such
    as those associated with  the  government,  defectors  from  Al-Shabaab
    ranks, aid agency personnel  and  journalists;  the  second  being  the
    exertion of moral and religious pressure on individuals at the level of
    the mosque and of the street.

  . The tactic of Al-Shabaab was not to engage AMISOM directly  in  head-on
    battle confrontations but  rather  to  rely  on  suicide  bombings  and
    guerrilla tactics. When Al-Shabaab occupied large areas  of  Mogadishu,
    the tactic was to attack AMISOM from civilian areas  whose  populations
    were used as human shields. AMISOM often retaliated with  blanket  fire
    and  mortars,  which  often  resulted  in  high  levels   of   civilian
    casualties. Under  the  new  dispensation  of  a  SNA/AMISOM-controlled
    Mogadishu, Al-Shabaab had upped its attacking  momentum  on  government
    and affiliated personnel,  with  substantial  collateral  damage  among
    civilians.

  . Dr Mullen stated that the UNHCR found it difficult to state whether  or
    not civilian casualties had increased or decreased since February 2014,
    nevertheless, the increased involvement of individuals in disputes  may
    have also meant higher civilian casualty figures.

Dr Hoehne

In his report for the first appellant, Dr Hoehne wrote the following:

Al-Shabaab

After the collapse of its government in  January  1991,  Somalia  was  in  a
state of protracted (civil) war. The  main  actors  of  violence  were  clan
militias, Islamist militias and foreign intervention forces.  In  2007,  Al-
Shabaab, an Islamist force with ties to Al Qaida, emerged  as  an  important
political and military actor. In Al-Shabaab's battle for power with  various
transitional governments of Somalia and  the  governments'  foreign  allies,
tens of thousand of people (mostly civilians) had been killed  and  hundreds
of thousands had to flee their homes. Until early  2011  Al-Shabaab  was  in
control of much of South-Central Somalia including many parts of  Mogadishu.
In August 2011, Al-Shabaab officially withdrew from the  capital  Mogadishu,
but retained a strong presence around the city and in much of  South-Central
Somalia. From 2009 to mid 2011, Al-Shabaab had been the de facto  government
in most parts of South-Central Somalia and had physically  controlled  areas
including 90 per cent of the capital city. But from mid 2012 onward,  a  new
trend regarding the security situation in Southern Somalia emerged:  on  the
one hand, Al-Shabaab was severely weakened as a military  power  in  Somalia
with the security in Mogadishu being strengthened; but on  the  other  hand,
they  had  retained  some  considerable  military  capabilities  in  several
regions.

In June and July 2013, Al-Shabaab stepped  up  its  operations  considerably
and  conducted  dozens  of  smaller  and  several  big  attacks  on   Somali
government troops, AMISOM forces and institutions of governments  supporting
the government in Mogadishu that resulted in  dozens  of  people,  including
security forces and civilians,  being  killed.  Heavy  fighting  erupted  in
Southern Somalia and in other regions of  South-Central  Somalia,  Al-Shabab
retained the capacity to operate, conduct  terror  attacks  and  engage  its
enemy forces in battle.

Al-Shabaab, according to Dr Hoehne, became smaller  but  even  more  radical
over the course of 2013. The evidence  suggested  that  Al-Shabaab  recently
reorganised itself as a smaller  movement.  Scores  of  civilians  had  been
killed  between  September  2012  and  January  2013  by   gunmen,   through
indiscriminate use of force by armed groups  or  in  bomb  attacks.  The  UN
Security General  mentioned  that  'civilian  casualties  and  extrajudicial
killings were frequently reported in conflict areas, with  civilians  caught
in the crossfire between the parties.

The preliminary conclusion by  Dr  Hoehne  was  that  Al-Shabaab  in  South-
Central Somalia was not  a  spent-force.  It  had  been  seriously  weakened
militarily and lost direct control over main resources  bases  in  Mogadishu
and Kismayo. However, it had turned into  an  effective  guerrilla  movement
operating mostly through hit-and-run attacks. In  some  areas  the  movement
was still able to engage in more conventional clashes with its  enemies.  It
was  reported  that  despite  its  setbacks,  Al-Shabaab   still   commanded
territory and fighters, remaining a serious threat capable of  destabilizing
Somalia and the great Horn  of  Africa  region,  and  potentially  inspiring
attacks globally.

The Security Situation

There was a sharp decline in security related incidents between the  end  of
2012 and early 2013. However, the fact that hand  grenade  attacks,  attacks
with IEDs and assassinations/assassination attempts  were  on  the  increase
again since April/May 2013 showed that  Al-Shabaab  retained  a  clandestine
presence in Mogadishu and had reorganised its operations in the  city.  News
reports indicated that government and army officials in Mogadishu  were  the
main targets of assassinations and  bomb  attacks,  even  occasional  shoot-
outs. But since around May 2013, many civilians were  again  falling  victim
to Al-Shabaab attacks. The security situation had deteriorated  due  to  the
lack of capacity, funds and expertise of the Somali  government.  Al-Shabaab
obviously reorganised itself into a smaller,  more  radical,  more  flexible
guerrilla  force  that  employed  tactics  of  asymmetrical  warfare   quite
successfully. It stepped up operations in  Mogadishu  and  even  proved  its
capacity to conduct complex terror attacks  abroad  in  Kenya  in  September
2013.

Civilian Casualties

The Secretary General of the  United  Nations  reported  that  despite  some
improvements in  Mogadishu,  Al-Shabaab  continued  to  launch  asymmetrical
attacks on soft targets using  terrorist  tactics  that  often  resulted  in
civilian casualties. The intensification of Al-Shabaab attacks led  to  many
civilian  casualties  in  Mogadishu  in  recent  months.   Al-Shabaab   even
published a list of its  operations.  In  October  2013,  Al-Shabaab  had  a
considerable capacity to operate  in  Mogadishu  and  to  mount  attacks  on
government and military officials, but also on civilians who fell victim  to
suicide and other bomb attacks,  were  on  the  increase.  Al-Shabaab  still
posed  a  very  serious  threat  to  people  in  Mogadishu  and   that   was
corroborated by a statement of the mayor of Mogadishu.  Besides  Al-Shabaab,
undisciplined government soldiers were proving to be  a  security  risk  for
ordinary civilians.

Conclusion

Dr Hoehne's view was that the battle against Al-Shabaab was  far  from  over
and Mogadishu was not a safe place where ordinary Somalis would be  able  to
live  without  a  considerable  threat  to  their  physical  integrity   and
psychological well-being. He considered an Article 15(c) risk  to  exist  as
in AMM. Although there were up to 17,000 AMISOM troops  in  Sothern  Somalia
that provided some services to ordinary civilians, it was not a  force  that
would provide protection to individual civilians,  apart  from  its  general
services such as  guarding  important  public  spaces.  Therefore,  ordinary
civilians were extremely unlikely to receive any individual protection  from
AMISOM.

Supplementary Points

In his reports for the third appellant, Dr Hoehne added  more  substance  to
the  security  situation  in  South-Central  Somalia  and  the  impact  upon
returnees as follows:

  . In early 2013, the situation had been gradually changing for the better
    but many people still faced severe challenges for survival.  Insecurity
    was still a major issue in Mogadishu and other parts of South  Somalia.
    The new government was struggling to contain lawlessness and  establish
    security in Mogadishu. It was still  in  no  position  to  prevent  Al-
    Shabaab from operating or in providing a reasonable level  of  law  and
    order. The security situation declined in  2013,  suggesting  that  Al-
    Shabaab  was  not  defeated.  The  evidence  suggested  Al-Shabaab  had
    reorganised itself as a smaller movement under radical leadership. Even
    if Al-Shabaab were pushed back, the  structural  problems  of  Somalia,
    including lack of regard for  human  rights,  a  culture  of  violence,
    massive conflicts even within the 'government's camp',  corruption  and
    impunity, endemic poverty, and the vulnerability of women and girls  to
    endemic sexual violence, would remain.

  . According to the September 2013 report of the UN Secretary  General  on
    the situation in Somalia, the intensification of Al-Shabaab attacks led
    to many civilian casualties in Mogadishu, with the  security  situation
    remaining volatile.

  . As of mid-October 2013, insecurity was still a major issue in Mogadishu
    and other parts of southern Somalia.  The  Somali  government  had  not
    managed to increase security permanently or establish itself firmly  in
    the country. It still depended on massive military backing  by  foreign
    forces and it could not prevent  frequent  and  devastating  Al-Shabaab
    attacks.

  . The return of a Somali, who had no strong or active family  network  or
    protection, provided great risks for that person's  physical  integrity
    and survival.

Ms Harper

In her report for the first appellant, Ms Harper wrote the following:

Al-Shabaab

Al-Shabaab had changed tactics in Mogadishu to asymmetric,  insurgent  style
warfare. It carried out regular attacks using suicide  bombers,  car  bombs,
grenades and  IEDs.  The  scale,  sophistication  and  regularity  of  these
attacks had increased in Mogadishu in 2013.

Al-Shabaab had a particularly  strong  presence  in  outlying  districts  of
Mogadishu with its fighters emerging at night and controlling  some  of  the
streets.  As  well  as  conducting  regular  acts  of  violence,  Al-Shabaab
continued  other  activities  in  Mogadishu:  reports   mentioning   general
intimidation and abuse, harassment, forced recruitment and  infiltration  in
the capital's neighbourhoods and  districts.  It  was  not  only  Al-Shabaab
conducting acts of violence and abuse  against  civilians,  members  of  the
Somali security forces, and to a lesser  extent  AMISOM  troops,  were  also
responsible. Somalis in Mogadishu were not able to depend on the  police  or
judicial system for protection. The judiciary was corrupt and virtually non-
existent and there were frequent  reports  of  abuse  of  civilians  by  the
police. In some districts, most civilian  males  carried  weapons  and  were
prepared to use them.

The Security Situation

The security situation in Mogadishu  had  changed  significantly  since  Al-
Shabaab's abrupt withdrawal from the city in  August  2011.  There  were  no
longer running battles involving heavy weaponry between Al-Shabaab  fighters
and government troops. The city remained dangerous,  with  regular  acts  of
violence carried out by Al-Shabaab, the Somali security services  and  other
armed groups  and  individuals.  Civilians  were  often  caught  up  in  the
violence. The violence had become more unpredictable because a  conventional
war was  no  longer  being  fought.  Mogadishu  was  no  longer  a  city  of
frontlines; attacks could happen anywhere at anytime.

Al-Shabaab maintained a presence and ability to strike in most of the  towns
in South-Central Somalia  from  which  it  had  officially  withdrawn.  Many
regions were  also  politically  and  militarily  unstable  with  inter-clan
violence on the rise. The changes in the security in  South-Central  Somalia
since August 2011, and their  durability,  were  heavily  dependent  on  the
continued presence of AMISOM troops. The Somali security forces were  unable
to take charge, with  clashes  sometimes  erupting  between  different  clan
groups within the Somali army and increased tension over land leading  to  a
resurgence of clan violence.

Al-Shabaab was likely to maintain a presence in Mogadishu and there  was  no
indication that the number and scale of attacks would diminish.  Discord  at
the centre of power of the Somali administration could  further  lead  to  a
diminishing focus on security. There were also significant tensions  between
the federal government and the Somali regional authorities.

Civilian Casualties

Civilians often bore the brunt of the  violence,  as  many  of  the  attacks
occurred  in  public  places,  including  restaurants,  hotels,  roads   and
roundabouts.  Civilian  casualties  had  also  been  high  in   attacks   on
government and foreign targets, or on specific  individuals,  as  Al-Shabaab
were carrying out more  complex  assaults  with  more  powerful  explosives.
Previously, they would conduct targeted  assassinations  or  plant  roadside
bombs intended for vehicles carrying government officials,  members  of  the
Somali security forces or African Union (AMISOM) troops. However, they  were
now ramming cars packed with explosives into  public  buildings,  government
offices and the premises of international organisations.  Armed  men,  often
wearing suicide vests, then stormed the  buildings,  shooting  and  throwing
grenades before blowing themselves  up.  Many  attacks  by  Al-Shabaab  went
unreported, with only the more spectacular attacks  receiving  international
media attention.

Ongoing violence and instability meant it was impossible to obtain  accurate
casualty figures for Mogadishu or elsewhere  in  South-Central  Somalia.  Ms
referred to some figures for weapons related casualties that were  available
from the World Health Organisation: 5279 in 2010;  9689  in  2011;  6687  in
2012; and 3889 until October 2013.  There  were  discrepancies  in  casualty
figures from different sources but they did illustrate the  unpredictability
of the violence in the city and the fluctuations in its intensity.

Relocation

Relocating removed or deported Somalis from  Mogadishu  to  other  parts  of
South-Central Somalia would not be a viable  option  as  sending  people  to
areas within which they had no family or clan connection  would  leave  them
isolated and vulnerable to persecution or attack. People also often  had  to
travel through areas controlled by many different and sometimes  conflicting
armed groups. The situation was by  no  means  safe,  especially  for  those
without significant resources, both in  terms  of  financial  means  and  in
terms of having wealthy and powerful relatives and other contacts.  Further,
those persons returning from a Western country would face possible  violence
from Al-Shabaab and be vulnerable  to  recruitment.  They  would  also  face
hostility from other armed groups.

Conclusion

Somalia  remained  a  dangerous  and  unpredictable  place,  with   frequent
suicide, grenade and other attacks, as well  as  more  conventional  warfare
between armed groups.

Supplementary Points

In her reports for the second and third appellants,  Ms  Harper  added  more
substance to the security situation in South-Central Somalia and the  impact
upon returnees as follows:

  . A person who had been absent for several years would probably  be  more
    at risk than someone who had been away for a shorter period because  of
    the dramatic ways in which Mogadishu had  changed,  both  in  terms  of
    physical geography and in terms of security,  clan  dynamics,  politics
    and society. A person who had been away for many years  would  find  it
    harder to navigate and negotiate  his  way  around  the  dangerous  and
    unpredictable city than would someone who had left more recently.


  . Civilians in Mogadishu were at risk of serious harm  from  Al-Shabaab's
    regular attacks. Civilians were often killed and injured during regular
    acts of violence (whether  carried  out  by  Al-Shabaab,  the  security
    forces or other armed groups) because they were  directly  targeted  or
    just because they were in the wrong place at the wrong time. Nobody  in
    Mogadishu can fully protect themselves  from  such  attacks.  Civilians
    were at risk during those incidents  because  they  often  occurred  in
    public places. Many civilian males carried weapons  mainly  to  protect
    them from the Somali police and  army,  who  they  said  could  not  be
    trusted and were responsible for much of  the  violence  in  Mogadishu.
    Female civilians faced the additional risk of rape and other  forms  of
    sexual violence, and forced marriage of under-age girls was  a  growing
    problem in the city.


  . There were more than 360,000 IDPs living  in  makeshift  camps  in  the
    city. Conditions in most camps were desperate with  inadequate,  flimsy
    shelters, limited food, water and sanitation and poor security.


  . Members of minority clans were at an increased risk of serious harm  in
    Mogadishu because they suffered  prejudice,  and  lacked  any  residual
    degree of protection members of majority clans might have. Although  an
    individual's clan membership was  of  relevance  in  Mogadishu,  family
    connections were more  important  in  terms  of  providing  protection,
    shelter and other basic necessities. However, families were less likely
    to help with protection and livelihood if a person  had  brought  shame
    onto that family.


                                 APPENDIX D

                           Error of Law decisions




               1. MOJ

               2. MAA

               3. SSM


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00210/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 July 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                                     MOJ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Cheng, Legal Representative, instructed by
                    Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, a national of Somalia, has been granted  permission  to
      appeal against the determination by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT),
      Judge Walker and Mr D R Brewster, sent on 23 April 2013 dismissing his
      appeal on all grounds against the decision of the respondent to make a
      deportation order under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007  and
      to further certify that  his  case  fell  within  section  72  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  because  he  had  been
      convicted by a final judgment of  a  particularly  serious  crime  and
      constituted a danger to the community of the United Kingdom.

   2. The grounds do not seek to challenge the panel's findings that section
      72(2) of the 2007 Act applied against the appellant (the appellant had
      failed to rebut the presumption that the crime he was convicted of was
      a particularly serious one  or  the  presumption  that  his  continued
      presence in the UK constituted a danger to the  community).  The  only
      ground of challenge to the FtT decision is  that  it  failed  to  give
      sufficient reasons for its conclusions, contrary to  R  (Iran)  [2005]
      EWCA Civ 982 in particular because it failed to recognise  that  there
      was an "applicable country guidance case... binding on the  First-tier
      Tribunal". As amplified in the skeleton  argument  of  the  appellant:
      "Country guidance cases are binding on the Tribunal, and  a  departure
      can only come about if all  the  evidence  is  weighted  and  properly
      considered, which, in this case, looking at [42(9)] cannot be said  to
      have been the case. In light of the authorities cited above,  and  the
      departure from a binding authority, the FtT  should  have  given  more
      details as to its reasoning in weighing up the evidence".

   3.  [42(9)] of the FtT determination stated:


         "As Section 72 applied then he is precluded from  being  considered
         as a refugee.  Even if Section 72 did not apply we  do  not  accept
         the Appellant's asylum claim and Appeal.  The reasons  he  has  put
         forward for fearing a return to Somalia do not amount to convention
         reasons.  His claim is based upon a general  fear  for  his  safety
         arising  from  the  activities  in  Mogadishu  of  Al-Shabab.   The
         objective evidence shows that Al-Shabab have not been in control in
         Mogadishu  since  they  were  expelled   in   August   2011.    The
         transitional government is now in  control  in  Mogadishu  and  the
         security situation there is much improved although there are  still
         incidents of terrorist violence.  The Appellant is a young man  who
         is fit and healthy and who is a member of a majority clan.   We  do
         not accept his evidence that there are no contacts or  family  left
         in Somalia.  His first language is Somali and as such  we  consider
         he would be able to return there without  any  risk  to  his  life,
         safety or welfare."

   4. I heard submissions from Mr Cheng and Mr Wilding and  I  commend  them
      for the clarity of their presentations, although it will  be  apparent
      that I do not think either paid  sufficient  regard  to  the  guidance
      given in AMM in respect of Article 3 risk in Mogadishu.

   5. I have decided that this ground is in substance made out.

   6. There being  no  challenge  raised  to  the  respondent's  section  72
      certificate, the challenge is  potentially  confined  to  the  panel's
      assessment of the  appellant's  eligibility  for  either  humanitarian
      protection (under paragraph 339C) or protection under  Articles 3  and
      2 of the ECHR.

   7. As regards the appellant's claim for humanitarian protection, the only
      reason the panel gave for rejecting it was that, as set out  in  [45],
      that "[b]ased upon our above conclusions, we are  satisfied  that  the
      Appellant's claim for humanitarian protection must,  similarly,  fail,
      for the reason that we conclude that substantial grounds have not been
      shown for believing that the Appellant, if returned to Somalia,  would
      face a real risk of sufferings serious harm". This paragraph can  only
      have had in mind the earlier conclusion  drawn  at  [42(9)]  which  is
      prefaced by the observation that as section 72 applies the  panel  was
      precluded from considering the appellant as a refugee but  that,  even
      if section 72 did not apply, it was not considered that on  return  to
      Mogadishu there would be any risk to his "life, safety or welfare".

   8. The only paragraph where the panel addressed Articles 3 and 2 was [46]
      in which it merely stated that  it  had  examined  the  arguments  put
      forward but, in  the  light  of  the  facts  as  established,  it  had
      concluded that the appellant had not established a risk under Articles
      3 or 2.  As with [45], this paragraph can only have had in  mind  what
      was said in {42(9)].

   9. I consider that even read together with 42(9), [45] does  not  furnish
      adequate  reasons  for  rejection  of  the  appellant's   humanitarian
      protection grounds. Unlike refugee protection,  which  is  subject  to
      Article 33(2) of the refugee Convention and has been the subject of  a
      section 72 certificate, there is no  corresponding  provision  in  the
      Qualification Directive, not even a  provision  which  corresponds  to
      Article 14 (dealing with revocation, ending of  or  refusal  to  renew
      refugee status). Hence  the  panel's  reliance  on  [42(9)]  was  only
      justifiable if that could  be  said  to  have  furnished  satisfactory
      reasons for considered the appellant had failed to show he was at real
      risk of serious harm.

  10. First of all, the issue of whether return to Mogadishu would expose  a
      person to a real risk of persecution, serious  harm  or  ill-treatment
      was the subject of country guidance  from  the  Tribunal  in  AMM  and
      Others (conflict; humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  CG
      [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC) and pursuant  to  Practice  Directions  Tribunal
      judges should not depart from current country  guidance  except  where
      very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence are adduced:  see  SG
      (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [47]. In AMM the Tribunal had  concluded
      that in Mogadishu there was a real risk of Article 15(c) serious  harm
      to all but persons who might obtain the protection of powerful actors.

  11. Second, not only did the panel fail to refer to AMM and  its  findings
      on Article 15(c) risk but there is nothing to  indicate  that  it  had
      regard to its analysis of relevant factors for deciding the  level  of
      risk in Mogadishu.  That  was  all  the  more  important  because  the
      Tribunal in AMM went out of its way to emphasise that the situation in
      Mogadishu was highly contingent and considered it  was  necessary  (at
      least for Refugee Convention and humanitarian protection purposes)  to
      consider whether any changes occurring would be durable  and  to  what
      extent there were changes not just in the quantitative but also in the
      qualitative nature of the violence: see AMM [345]-[371].

  12. Whilst there was certainly a very significant body of evidence  before
      the panel, much of it contained in the two Danish Fact-finding reports
      of April 2012  and  January  2013  respectively,  indicating  that  in
      Mogadishu the level of civilian casualties  had  fallen  considerably,
      that Al-Shabab no longer controlled the city, that the markets had re-
      opened etc, there were also some indications that such  changes  might
      not be durable.  Accordingly, if the panel was minded to  depart  from
      the view taken in AMM as to  durability  in  the  context  of  Article
      15(c), it was incumbent upon it to indicate (i) why it  preferred  the
      view that Mogadishu was now generally safe to the opposite view;  (ii)
      why it considered that the  evidence  in  support  of  the  view  that
      Mogadishu was generally safe demonstrated durable change.   The  panel
      failed on both counts.

  13. I would observe that had the grounds confined themselves only  to  the
      panel's findings in respect of Article 3, I doubt that  I  would  have
      granted permission because, in contrast to  its  decision  on  Article
      15(c) harm in Mogadishu, the Tribunal  in  AMM  expressly  found  that
      there was no Article 3 risk in Mogadishu for  the  generality  of  its
      population. Hence for the panel to have concluded that Articles 2  and
      3 did not apply could not be  said  to  have  been  a  departure  from
      country guidance. However, given that I have found  an  error  in  the
      panel's findings on humanitarian protection, I consider that it  would
      be wrong to exclude from the scope of the next hearing any ground  not
      covered by section 72, i.e. any ground other than refugee protection.

  14. For the above reasons, I consider that the panel erred in law and that
      it is necessary for its decision to be set aside.

  15. I discussed with the parties whether, if I were to decide the FtT  had
      erred, they would have any objection to the  case  proceeding  as  new
      country guidance on Mogadishu.  Both representatives confirmed that in
      that eventuality they would have no objections to such a course.

  16. For the avoidance of doubt, there has been no challenge to the  First-
      tier Tribunal's primary finding of fact.  Hence the only issue at  the
      hearing (which will be concerned with re-making the decision) will  be
      whether a person whose home area is Mogadishu will be at a  real  risk
      of serious harm contrary to Article 15(c) or ill-treatment contrary to
      Article 3 or a violation of his right to life contrary to  Article  2.
      The appellant has been found not credible and the only characteristics
      which it is accepted that he has for the purposes of the next  hearing
      is that he is a native of Somalia, from Mogadishu and is a member of a
      majority clan (the Gadarbursi).

  17. I will issue instructions for the case to be subject to a CMR  hearing
      to settle the ambit of the potential country guidance.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        AA/05376/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House                                        Determination
                                             promulgated
On 5 March 2013
                                     .......................................


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                     MAA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                     Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms.  S.  Panagiocopoulou  of  Counsel  instructed  by
                       Trott & Gentry LLP.
For the Respondent:    Mr. G. Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                         DETERMINATION: ERROR OF LAW

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Bart-Stewart dated 23 July 2013,  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision dated 3 May 2012 to refuse leave  to
      enter the UK following a refusal to grant asylum.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Somalia born on 13  November  1986.  He
      arrived in the UK on 8 April 2012 and claimed asylum at  port  on  the
      same day. His application for asylum was refused for reasons  set  out
      in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated  2  May  2012  and  a
      decision was taken to refuse leave to enter the UK in consequence.


   3. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      refused  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons   set   out   in   his
      determination.


   4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal: this was initially  refused
      by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Frankish,  but  was  granted  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 15 November 2012. Permission to appeal  was
      granted for the following reason:

"I believe that the application does raise a properly arguable  issue  which
      may identify an error of law, namely the alleged failure by the  First
      Tier Tribunal Judge to deal adequately with the issue of  Article  15c
      risk on return."


   5. The Respondent has not filed a Rule 24 response.


Error of Law

   6. The Appellant's claim for protection under the Refugee Convention was,
      in my judgement, given careful and anxious scrutiny by the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge. It is plain that the Judge had regard to  all  of  the
      available evidence, and has given clear and  sustainable  reasons  for
      rejecting the credibility of the Appellant's account in respect of the
      events he claims to have experienced in Somalia, and in respect of his
      claimed clan membership (paragraphs 41-51). The Judge also gave brief,
      but  sustainable,  reasons  in  respect  of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
      (paragraph 54).


   7. However, the Judge erred in law in his consideration  of  humanitarian
      protection. He addressed the matter  with  reference  to  the  country
      guidance  case  of  AMM  &  others  (conflict;  humanitarian   crisis;
      returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC), at paragraph  53  of
      the determination in the following terms:

"In AMM, the risk of Article 15(c) harm is to those returning  to  Mogadishu
      after a significant period of time abroad. The appellant has only been
      outside of the country for a few months. Further as he  has  not  told
      the truth, his background is unclear. He may well be from the class of
      persons who are living to a reasonable standard in Somalia. The  armed
      conflict does not pose a real risk of Article 3  harm,  regardless  of
      circumstances. The Upper Tribunal found that it  is  unlikely  that  a
      proposed return to Mogadishu at the present time  will  raise  Refugee
      Convention issues. I find that the appellant can be removed there  and
      there would not be a breach of the United Kingdom's  obligation  under
      the Refugee Convention or Qualification Directive."




   8. The Judge misdirects himself in the following respects:

(i) The risk of harm identified in  AMM  is  not  apparently  restricted  to
      "those returning to Mogadishu  after  a  significant  period  of  time
      abroad". Reference is made, for example at paragraphs 350 and 358 to a
      risk "in respect of the majority of those in Mogadishu" and "for  most
      people in Mogadishu". Whilst reference is made to risk "as  a  general
      matter" in respect of those returning to Mogadishu from the UK,  I  do
      not read this to  mean  that  the  period  of  absence  is  considered
      significant.

(ii) The Judge does not identify a cogent  basis  for  concluding  that  the
      Appellant falls within a class of person who can live to a  reasonable
      standard. Beyond the fact of his adverse credibility  assessment,  the
      Judge  advances  no  reasoning  for  such  a  conclusion;  further  in
      expressing his consideration in this regard with the  phrase  "He  may
      well be..." it appears that the Judge is misapplying the  standard  of
      proof. It is relevant to note the  following  aspect  of  the  Country
      Guidance, to which the Judge does not appear to have had due regard:

      "The significance of the  category  we  have  identified  should  not,
           however, be overstated. For most people in Mogadishu the Article
           15(c) risk persists, at the present  time.  In  the  case  of  a
           claimant for international protection, a fact-finder would  need
           to be satisfied that there were cogent grounds for finding  that
           the claimant fell within such a category." (paragraph 358).

      See also from the headnote: "the existence of  this  category  is  not
           automatically to be assumed to exist, merely  because  a  person
           has told lies."


   9. In all of the circumstances I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge's decision in respect of Humanitarian  Protection  cannot  stand
      and is to be set aside. However, for the reasons identified  above,  I
      do not consider that there is any basis  for  revisiting  the  Judge's
      credibility findings in respect of the Appellant's historical account.
      The issue of humanitarian protection may  be  dealt  with  by  way  of
      submissions before the Upper Tribunal, with leave to both  parties  to
      file any  further  country  information  that  they  consider  may  be
      relevant bearing in  mind  the  passage  of  time  since  the  factual
      assessment in AMM -  in  particular  in  respect  of  any  changes  of
      circumstances in respect of the influence of Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu.


Decision

  10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside.  The  decision  in  the  appeal  in  respect  of
      Humanitarian Protection is to be remade by the Upper Tribunal.

     Consequent Directions

     (i) The appeal is to be listed before any judge of the  Upper  Tribunal
      on the first available date for  submissions  only  on  the  issue  of
      Humanitarian Protection.

     (ii) The parties are  at  liberty  to  file  any  further  evidence  in
      respect of the country situation. Any such further evidence should  be
      filed and served at least seven days  prior  to  the  resumed  hearing
      date.

     (iii) The Appellant is to file and serve a Skeleton Argument  at  least
      seven days prior to the resumed hearing date in support of  his  claim
      to be entitled to Humanitarian Protection, to include cross-references
      to the  guidance  in  AMM  and  to  any  relevant  supporting  country
      information.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis   9 May 2013
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00728/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 November 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     SSM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Eaton instructed by Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant, who is a national of Somalia where  he  was  born  on  2
    December 1985 in Mogadishu, appeals with permission the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brenells  and  Mr  G  F
    Sandall) who dismissed his appeal against the decision  dated  2  April
    20913 refusing to revoke the deportation order made  9  November  2006.
    The appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom as a dependant  on  his
    mother on 16 July 1997.  Asylum was refused however the  appellant  was
    granted exceptional leave to remain on 31 August  2004  and  thereafter
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 2. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Eaton explained  that
    the appellant now only wished to pursue his appeal  on  Article  3  and
    humanitarian protection grounds.   As observed by the tribunal in  [15]
    of its determination :

         "As  the  appellant  is  now  only  pursuing  his  Article  3   and
         humanitarian  protection  claims  we  have  only  to  consider  the
         situation now prevailing in Mogadishu.   The  only  personal  facts
         which we have taken into account in doing so is that the  appellant
         is not a minority clan  member  and  that  he  does  not  have  any
         significant resources such would assist  him  in  re-  establishing
         himself in Mogadishu."

 3. The tribunal recorded in its determination in tabular form  submissions
    from the Presenting Officer and Mr Eaton in respect  of  the  following
    reports:

      i) By Mr Hoehne on behalf of the appellant

     ii) UN Security Council Report dated  31 May  2013  on  behalf  of  the
         Secretary of State

    iii) Landinfo Report dated May 2013 on behalf of the Secretary of State

     iv) Material otherwise comprising  country  of  origin  information  on
         current conditions in Somalia of some 30 pages.

 4. The tables comprise a brief summary of extracts from this  material  to
    which the panel's attention was drawn.

 5. The Tribunal directed itself as to the relevant country guidance  case,
    AMM & Others (Conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG
    [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC) and quoted an extract from [357] and [38] of  the
    determination in respect of the conclusions on humanitarian protection.
     It observed there was no evidence showing that the appellant would, on
    arrival, belong to the category of middle class or professional persons
    who could live to a reasonable standard and it was on  that  basis  the
    current situation was considered.

 6. The Tribunal thereafter expressed its conclusions at [27] and  [28]  of
    the determination as follows:

         "27. We have given close attention to these submissions and to  the
             information contained in the background information  presented
             to us. We are satisfied that  Al-Shabab  continues  to  remain
             excluded from Mogadishu although they have not  been  entirely
             defeated and femasni as a threat to the country  as  a  whole.
             The background material however shows  that  they  are  not  a
             direct  threat  to  civilians  other  than  employees  of  the
             Government, the UN and Aid Agencies and the security situation
             has improved since AMM was  decided.  There  is  a  danger  of
             injury to innocent civilians as a result of being in the  line
             of fire when a terrorist  attack  is  being  perpetrated,  but
             particularly in Mogadishu these are not so frequent as to pose
             a real danger to all civilians.  Whilst there have  been  some
             misdemeanours perpetrated by a  member  of  the  national  and
             international civilians.

         28.  Significant resources derived from the international community
             have been made available  in  Somalia.  International  flights
             have been resumed to  Mogadishu  and  other  airports  in  the
             country. There is evidence that the road to Mogadishu  airport
             is  normally  open.  Comparatively  wealthy   Somaliland   are
             returning from exile  and  are  boosting  the  local  economy.
             Infrastructure  is  being  repaired.   Street   lightning   in
             Mogadishu has been restored. The  international  community  is
             committed to supporting the current  government.  The  country
             still has a long  way  to  go,  but  real  progress  is  being
             achieved."

 7. The tribunal then explained that return  of  the  appellant  would  not
    therefore breach his Article 3 rights and furthermore that he  was  not
    entitled to humanitarian protection.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers
    on the basis that it was arguable that the evidence before the Tribunal
    was not sufficient to depart from the country guidance.

 9. The application identifies four grounds as follows:

      i) Failure to resolve dispute and facts and failure  to  give  reasons
         for findings of fact,  the  tribunal  having  failed  to  give  any
         reasons for preferring the evidence  submitted  by  the  respondent
         over that submitted  by  the  appellant.  The  differences  in  the
         evidence were not resolved in the determination.

     ii) The tribunal failed to consider the expert evidence  of  Mr  Markus
         Hoehne.  This was the  most  contemporaneous  evidence  before  the
         panel and it is argued that the tribunal failed  to  consider  that
         evidence at all in its actual conclusions on the  current  security
         situation.

    iii) The tribunal failed to  consider  the  specific  findings  of  AMM.
         There  are  examples  given  of  the  improvements   the   tribunal
         considered which had occurred  at  the  time  when  AMM  was  being
         considered and were included in its consideration.

     iv) The panel made findings of fact that were contradicted by  evidence
         submitted by the appellant and the respondent with reference to the
         UN Security Council Report indicating that Al-Shabab  continued  to
         launch asymmetrical attacks (on Mogadishu) and  the  report  of  Mr
         Hoehne who had referred to scores of civilians having  been  killed
         particularly in Mogadishu and surroundings between  September  2012
         and August 2013.

10.  After  hearing  submissions  from  the   parties   we   reserved   our
    determination. In summary, Mr Eaton did  not  add  anything  new  of  a
    material nature to the grounds  of  application.   Mr  Wilding  made  a
    number of references to AMM in  support  of  his  contention  that  the
    predicted possibility of durable change had come  about  based  on  the
    evidence before the tribunal.

11. We drew the attention of the parties to the tribunal's decision in  DSG
    and Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from  CG)  [2013]  UKUT  148  which
    explains that a judge may depart from existing country guidance in  the
    circumstances described in the Practice Direction 12.2 and 12.4 and the
    UT (IAC) Guidance No. 2011 No. 2 paragraphs 11 and 12.

12. We did not hear specific submissions on the Practice Direction  or  the
    Guidance Note. Both are of importance to our approach to the challenge.
     [12.4] of the former is in these terms:

         "Because of the principle that like cases should be treated in like
         manner, any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,  apparently  applicable
         country guidance case or to show why it does not apply to the  case
         in question is likely to be regarded as grounds  for  appeal  on  a
         point of law."

13. The Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber  Guidance  Note  2011
    No. 2 at  [11] states:

         "If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the issue that has
         not  been  considered  in  the  country  guidance  cases  or  if  a
         subsequent  case  includes  further  issues  that   have  not  been
         considered in the CG case, the judge  will  reach  the  appropriate
         conclusion on the evidence, taking into account the  conclusion  of
         the CG case so far as it remains relevant."

14. AMM is a formidable work revealing an  authoritative  analysis  of  the
    situation in Somalia at the date of promulgation.  It  is  correct,  as
    observed by Mr Wilding in his submissions, that at [342]  the  Tribunal
    observed there was common ground between the parties  that  Al-Shabab's
    military withdrawal from Mogadishu was  of  significance.   However  it
    concluded at [344] that an Article 15(c) risk continued  to  exist  for
    the majority of those returning  to  Mogadishu  after  any  significant
    period of time abroad.  It went on to explain  why,  for  the  ordinary
    inhabitant, there was still a significant risk of  harm  from  conflict
    related incidents in the southern district and with specific  reference
    to the withdrawal of Al-Shabab observed that it "cannot yet be said  to
    be durable" [at 345].  The Tribunal in AMM did  not  confine  its  risk
    assessment to the  Al-Shabab  factor  but  took  account  also  of  the
    humanitarian crises in Mogadishu, the risk of ending up in one  of  the
    districts where  conventional  fighting  is  still  occurring  and  the
    inability to find of a person who stood to  get  funds  then  available
    (1,500) to surmount the problems identified.

15. This brief summary does not do justice to the careful analysis  in  AMM
    of the evidence and the conclusions drawn.

16. The tribunal in the appeal before us did not explain  how  it  resolved
    the differences in the opinion expressed by Mr Hoehne and the  positive
    aspects the UN Security Council and Landinfo reports  as  urged  by  Mr
    Zukunft.  Instead, it reached conclusions on the facts  which  did  not
    appear to be supported by the evidence  before  it  and  then,  in  the
    following paragraph, after  identifying  positive  developments  (which
    were in play at the time AMM was decided), decided the appellant  would
    not be at risk.

17. The First-tier Tribunal was not expected to undertake  a  task  of  the
    kind in AMM.  But at the very least it was required  to  give  adequate
    reasons  why  it  considered  the  evidence  before  it  supported  its
    conclusion that the changes which  have  occurred  are  such  that  the
    guidance in AMM on the issue of humanitarian protection was  no  longer
    applicable.

18. What is missing from  the  determination  is  a  sufficiently  detailed
    analysis of the evidence and sufficient reasons to give confidence that
    return of the appellant would not breach his  absolutely  rights  under
    Article 3 or otherwise entitled him to  humanitarian  protection.   Had
    the tribunal engaged with the body of the evidence in a  way  that  the
    case required it might have been able to give sustainable  reasons  for
    departing from country guidance. But this is not at  all  evident  from
    its determination.

19. We are satisfied therefore that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law
    such that its decision is required to be set aside.  We do so.

20. As indicated to the parties, the Upper Tribunal  will  be  hearing  two
    further  appeals  in  the  near  future  by  appellants  who   are   in
    circumstances similar to the appellant before us.   Consideration  will
    be given to whether it is appropriate for this appeal to join those  in
    that exercise or for the further hearing  to  be  adjourned  until  the
    outcome is known.  In either event there  will  be  a  case  management
    review of the appeal on 10 December 2013  when  consideration  will  be
    given to the future conduct of the appeal.

Signed
                                                           Date  7  November
    2013
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

