

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 NA (Excluded decision; identifying judge) Afghanistan [2010] UKUT 444 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 September 2010                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GRUBB



                                   Between

                                     NA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. There is no right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  not
to extend time under rule 10 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
when a notice of appeal has been given out of time.  It  is  a  "preliminary
decision made in relation to an appeal"  within  Art  3(m)  of  the  Appeals
(Excluded  Decisions)  Order  2009  (as  amended)  and  consequently  is  an
"excluded decision" for the purposes of s.11 of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007.

2. The parties are entitled to know the judge who makes  a  decision  in  an
appeal.  In the case of an appeal determined without a  hearing  that  means
that the determination or decision must identify the judge.  The absence  of
the Duty Judge's name identifying the decision-maker of the decision not  to
extend time resulted in a fundamental breach of justice which  vitiated  the
decision.


                                  DECISION

 1. On 16 April 2010, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claim
    for asylum and made a decision to remove him  as  an  illegal  entrant.
    The deadline for lodging an appeal by a notice of appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) was  11  May  2010.   In
    fact, a Notice of Appeal was lodged on 17 May 2010 and  thus  was  four
    working days out of time.  On 19 May 2010, it appears (and  the  reason
    for our particular phraseology will become clear shortly) that  a  Duty
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal concluded that the  Notice  of  Appeal
    was out of time and refused to extend time  under  rule  19(5)  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's Procedure Rules.  The appellant sought permission
    to appeal this decision to the Upper Tribunal which was granted by  SIJ
    Eshun on 10 June 2010

 2. At  the  hearing  before  us  the  appellant  was  unrepresented.   The
    respondent was represented by Mr Hibbs who helpfully told us  something
    about the appellant's immigration history which was  not  disclosed  on
    the file.  The appellant, who claims to come  from  Afghanistan,  first
    arrived in the UK on 8 January 2009.  He claimed asylum at Calais.   He
    absconded on 10 January 2009 for 6 days and then again on 27  February.
    His claim was deemed to have been abandoned because he  absconded.   He
    reappeared at Reading Police Station on 22 March 2010 claiming that  he
    had just arrived in the UK.  He was  detained  and  removal  directions
    were made for 26 March 2010.  On 24 March 2010 he claimed asylum again.
     His claim was processed in  the  usual  way.   There  was  an  initial
    interview, a screening  interview  on  26  March  2010  and  an  asylum
    interview on 8 April 2010.  Further representations were  made  by  the
    appellant's solicitors,  Albany  Solicitors  on  19  April  2010.   The
    Secretary of State's decision refusing asylum was served  on  22  April
    2010 and also, on that date, he was served with notice to remove him as
    an illegal entrant.   The appellant had undergone a 'Merton'  compliant
    assessment and assessed as an adult.

 3. The circumstances  that  followed  the  service  of  the  decision  are
    contained in the Notice of  Appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  together
    with an accompanying handwritten letter dated 25  May  2010  from  Ruth
    O'Neill  of  Asylum  Justice.   The  appellant  told  us,  through   an
    interpreter, that following the receipt of the Home Office decision  on
    Monday 26 April 2010 he went to see a  solicitor  (at,  we  understand,
    Albany Solicitors) and was told to  await  a  letter.   He  received  a
    letter from them with an appointment for Thursday 6 May 2010.  When  he
    attended he was told that the solicitor would not take  his  case.   On
    Saturday 8 May 2010, he went to the offices of Asylum Justice.  He  was
    told to come back on Tuesday 11 May 2010  which  was,  of  course,  the
    final day for lodging a notice of appeal.  When  he  returned  on  that
    day, the offices of Asylum Justice were closed.  He subsequently lodged
    a notice of appeal on Saturday 15 May 2010 with, it  is  apparent  from
    what it contains, the assistance of Asylum Justice.

 4. In their letter of 25 May 2010, Ruth O'Neill  points  out  that  Asylum
    Justice is staffed by volunteers.   They operate open sessions only  on
    Tuesdays and Saturdays each week.  Asylum Justice was closed on Tuesday
    11 May 2010 due to a shortage of volunteers and, it  is  noted,  it  is
    perfectly plausible that as a result the appellant  was  delayed  until
    Saturday 15 May when there was the next open session.

 5. The letter concludes that the delay in lodging the notice "was  not  in
    the most part" that of the appellant.

      The Decision

 6. The decision which is the subject of  this  appeal  is  set  out  in  a
    document  headed  "Decision  on  Preliminary  Issue  -  Timeliness"  as
    follows:

                            "THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Between


                                     NA


                                                                   Appellant


                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Rspondent




                 DECISION ON PRELIMINARY ISSUE - TIMELINESS
           (PURSUANT TO RULES 7 & 10 OF THE ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION
                      TRIBUNAL (PROCEDURE) RULES 2005)


        1. The Appeal


        1:1      The Appellant seeks to Appeal  the  Respondent's  decision
           dated 22 April 2010 refusing the appellant's Asylum/Human Rights
           applications.  The Notice of Appeal records the deadline date as
           being 11 May 2010.  That date has not  been  challenged  by  the
           Appellant.  The appeal was lodged 17 May 2010.  I  am  satisfied
           that the appeal is out of time.


        2. The Relevant Law


        2:1      For an extension of time to be granted I must be satisfied
           on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  there   are   special
           circumstances that would render it unjust not  to  do  so  (Rule
           10(5) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
           2005).


        2:2      The principles to be followed in  considering  an  out  of
           time application are set out in  the  AIT  decision  of  BO  and
           Others (Extension of time for appealing) Nigeria  [2006]  00035.
           The decision sets out the factors that  are  to  be  taken  into
           account when determining the application.   These  include:  the
           explanation for the  delay,  the  strength  of  the  grounds  of
           appeal, the consequences of  the  decision  and  the  length  of
           delay.


        2:3       BO  provides  that  the  starting  point  must   be   the
           explanation for the Appeal being out of time.  If  there  is  no
           explanation at  all,  or  no  satisfactory  explanation,  or  an
           explanation which is not supported by  evidence  that  ought  to
           have been readily available,  it  is  very  unlikely  that  time
           should be extended.  In the absence of an explanation time could
           only be extended where there are obvious and  quite  exceptional
           reasons for doing so and where the issue is one of wider  public
           importance or where (despite the lack of information provided by
           the Appellant) it is clear that there has been a serious  denial
           of justice.


        3. The Explanation for the Delay


        3:1      The application asserts that the Appellant  was  asked  to
           attend at the offices of Asylum Justice on the deadline date for
           the appeal.  On arrival there was no volunteer lawyer  available
           to assist.  No action was taken.  The Appellant revisited AJ  at
           the "next possible opportunity" namely Sat 15 May 2010.


        4. The Decision


        4:1      I am satisfied that the Appellant would have been aware of
           the time constraints for the Appeal as these are set out in  the
           body of the decision Notice.  They also  appear  in  the  margin
           notes in the Appeal form which would have  been  delivered  with
           the  Decision  Notice.   It  was  for  the  Appellant   or   his
           Representatives to arrange for the despatch of Appeal  forms  to
           ensure that they were received by  the  AIT  on  or  before  the
           deadline date.


        4:2      The extension application is inadequate.  I  observe  that
           there  is  no  evidence  from  Asylum  Justice  to  support  the
           Appellant's  application  and  no  explanation  as  to  why  the
           Appellant was unable to seek assistance  again  before  15  May.
           The application refers to the Appellant revisiting at the  "next
           possible opportunity" but it is unclear why he was not  able  to
           do so earlier. In any event it  is  not  a  prerequisite  to  an
           appeal that a person be represented or have accessed  a  lawyer.
           Accordingly the lack of assistance from a  Legal  Representative
           cannot in itself justify an extension of time.  The  application
           fails to establish why the Appellant was unable to complete  and
           submit the appeal form himself particularly as he was  aware  of
           the deadline date for the appeal.  I conclude that the Appellant
           has failed to establish to the standard of proof  required  that
           there is an acceptable explanation for the entire period of  the
           delay.


        4:3      Having considered the papers as a  whole  to  include  the
           Grounds of Appeal I am satisfied that this Appeal does not  fall
           within the category as outlined in paragraph 2:3  above.   I  am
           not assisted by the fact that the Appellant has failed to submit
           a copy of the refusal letter.   I  am  unable  to  identify  any
           special circumstances relating to this Appeal which would render
           it unjust not to exercise my  discretion  under  Rule  10(5)  by
           enlarging time.


                                  DECISION

                         The Appeal is out of time.

                    The time for Appeal is not extended.



                 Signed                                             Date:
19 May 2010


                      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal"

 7. Mr Hibbs submitted that the Duty Judge had not erred in  law.   He  had
    applied the correct approach set out in BO  and  Others  (Extension  of
    time for appealing) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00035.

 8. We have to say that we see considerable force in that submission.   The
    only explanation offered  by  the  volunteer  from  Asylum  Justice  in
    "section 2" of the Notice of Appeal  relates  to  the  appellant  being
    required to attend on the last day for lodging (Tuesday 11th  May)  and
    then explaining no volunteer was available and the appellant was  asked
    to attend "at the next possible opportunity" which  was  Saturday  15th
    May.  The more detailed explanation which we have from  Asylum  Justice
    was not submitted with the Notice of Appeal and was  not  available  to
    the Duty  Judge  who  made  the  decision  not  to  extend  time.   The
    appellant's explanation of what happened in  respect  of  his  previous
    solicitors prior to his seeking advice from Asylum Justice was not made
    available to the Duty Judge.  Further, the Notice  of  Appeal  was  not
    accompanied by the Refusal Letter.  The only basis for the  appellant's
    claim and the strength of his claim was as set out by him  (or  on  his
    behalf) in the Notice of Appeal.  What is found there is  cursory  and,
    at times, wholly unenlightening when attempting to assess the  strength
    of his claim.  In essence, it is repeated on three  occasions  that  he
    has "told the truth" and is in "grave danger" or faces a "real risk  of
    serious harm" if returned.  His country of origin is not mentioned.

 9. The Duty Judge  correctly  applied  the  approach  in  BO  (cited  with
    approval by Dyson LJ in R (MK) v AIT [2007] EWCA Civ 554 at [4]). Given
    the patent lack of information about  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
    limited scope of the explanation for the delay in lodging a  notice  of
    appeal, we see no basis for saying that the Duty Judge failed  to  have
    regard to any relevant matter  or  reached  a  decision  that  was  not
    properly open to her on the evidence for the reasons given.

10. That was the scope of the argument we heard.  There are,  however,  two
    matters of difficulty raised in this appeal which do not turn upon  the
    particular circumstances of the appellant.   One concerns the  form  of
    the decision which is unsigned and does not identify the Duty Judge who
    made the decision.   The other concerns  the  jurisdictional  issue  of
    whether there is a  valid  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   That
    latter, in particular, is an issue which we are  bound  to  address  in
    dealing with this case.

      The Form of the Decision

11. First, there is the form of  the  Judge's  decision.   We  set  it  out
    earlier in the precise way in which it appears.   The  Duty  Judge  (if
    that be whose work it is) has neither included his or her name  on  the
    formal part at the beginning or at the  end  which  remains  blank  and
    unsigned.  It is wholly unclear from the  document  who  has  made  the
    decision and whether, in fact, it is  the  work  of  one  of  the  Duty
    Judge's of the First-tier Tribunal.  In our judgment, this is  a  fatal
    flaw which vitiates the decision.

12. It is a fundamental principle of justice that the public and  litigants
    should know the name of any judge who is deciding or sitting as a judge
    in a case.  That was made clear by the Divisional Court of the  Queen's
    Bench Division in R v Felixstowe Justices, ex parte Leigh  and  another
    [1987] 1 All ER 551 (Watkins LJ, Russell and Mann JJ).  There, a  bench
    of magistrates adopted a policy of withholding the  names  of  justices
    during the hearing of cases and from the public and press  after  cases
    were heard.  In deciding that this was unlawful, Watkins LJ, with  whom
    Russell and Mann JJ agreed, observed that (at p.560h)

         "So far as I am able to ascertain, anonymity has never been claimed
         other than by the number of justices I have mentioned by anyone who
         can be said to  be  a  judicial  or  quasi-judicial  person.   This
         applies as much to High Court judges and circuit judges as to,  for
         example, members of tribunals."

13. Watkins LJ noted that magistrates took the oath of allegiance  and  the
    judicial oath using their names (at p.560c-d).  The same is, of course,
    true of Judges of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Also,  he  noted  that  a
    litigant was entitled to have his case heard and dealt with by a  judge
    who was not disqualified by actual or apparent bias  from  adjudicating
    upon his case.  Without knowledge of the judge's name there would be no
    effective way  of  the  right  to  object  being  "fully  and  properly
    exercised" (at p.560f).  Watkins LJ observed that  from  time  to  time
    judges were  the  subject  of  criticism  or  worse  but  this  was  no
    justification for anonymity (at  pp.560j-561b).   The  Court  concluded
    that it was a principle of open justice that "those who do  justice  be
    known" (at p.561b).  A bona fide inquirer was entitled to know the name
    of a magistrate sitting on a case or who had done so (at p.561d).

14. In our judgment, this principle is no less applicable to  decisions  by
    judges of the First-tier  Tribunal  or,  indeed,  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Watkins LJ specifically embraced within the principle he identified all
    judicial officers  ranging  between  High  Court  Judges  and  tribunal
    members.

15. Of course, this is not a case where a judge has  sought  anonymity  but
    that is the effect of what has happened.  No-where on the face  of  the
    decision in this case can there be found the name of the Judge who made
    the decision.  Indeed, it is simply not possible to  know  whether  the
    person who made the decision was, or was not, a Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal at all.  The parties are entitled to know who the  judge  was.
    In the case of an appeal determined without a hearing that  means  that
    the determination or decision must identify the judge.  In practice, of
    course the decision should, and will, also  be  signed  (personally  or
    electronically)  by  its  author  (see  Senior   President's   Practice
    Statements: Immigration and Asylum chambers of the First-tier  tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal, para 10.1) and, in any event, where  a  hearing
    took place at which the appellant or his  representative  was  present,
    there is likely to be no difficulty over identity.  In some  cases,  it
    may be that the omission could  be  corrected  under  the  'slip  rule'
    provision in rule 60 of the First-tier Tribunal Procedure  Rules.   The
    time for that has, however, passed in this case.  The  absence  of  the
    Duty Judge's name  identifying  the  decision-maker  of  this  decision
    resulted  in  a  fundamental  breach  of  justice  which  vitiated  the
    decision.

      Right of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

16. There is a second, and more  fundamental,  difficulty  raised  by  this
    appeal.  Does a right of appeal lie to the  Upper  Tribunal  against  a
    decision that a notice of appeal is out of time and not to extend  that
    time?  The short answer is: it does not.

17. The relevant provisions dealing with the right of appeal from decisions
    of the First-tier Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal are contained in  s.11
    of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 as follows:

         "11. Right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal


         (1) For the purposes of subsection (2), the reference to a right of
         appeal is to a right to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  any  point
         of law arising from a decision  made  by  the  First-tier  tribunal
         other than an excluded decision.


         (2) Any party  to  a  case  has  a  right  of  appeal,  subject  to
         subsection (8).


         (3) That right may  be  exercised  only  with  permission  (or,  in
         Northern Ireland, leave).


         (4) Permission (or leave) may be given by -
            (a) the First-tier Tribunal, or
            (b) the Upper Tribunal,


         on an application by a party." (our emphasis)


18. As will be clear, the right of appeal is from any decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal on a point of law  other  than  an  "excluded  decision".
    Section 11(5) of the 2007 Act  sets  out  what,  for  the  purposes  of
    subsection (1) is an "excluded" decision.  None  of  the  decisions  in
    s.11(5), as originally enacted, are relevant to this appeal.   However,
    Article 3 of the Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order 2009  (SI  2009/275
    as amended) adds a  further  decision  to  the  category  of  "excluded
    decisions" which is relevant.  Article 3 states that:

         "3. For the purposes of section 11(1) and 13(1) of  the  Tribunals,
         Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, the  following  decisions  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal are excluded decisions -
         ....
         (m) any procedural,  ancillary  or  preliminary  decision  made  in
         relation to an appeal against a decision under section 40A  of  the
         British  National  Act  1981,  section  82,  83  or  83A   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, or regulations 26  of
         the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."

19. That provision reflects the wording of s.103A(7)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (now repealed) which excluded from  the
    category of decisions of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  which
    could be subject to the reconsideration process  any  "decision  on  an
    appeal" which was "a procedural, ancillary  or  preliminary  decision".
    The words "procedural,  ancillary  or  preliminary"  which  define  the
    nature of the decision remain the same; the current provision (s.11(1))
    requires that the decision be "in relation to an  appeal",  whilst  the
    reconsideration framework (s.103A(7)) required it to be a decision  "on
    an appeal".

20. There is no doubt that the decision in this  case  is  a  "preliminary"
    decision by the First-tier Tribunal.  Indeed, rule 10(6) of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Procedure Rules states, inter alia, that

         "The Tribunal must decide any issue  as  to  whether  a  notice  of
         appeal was given in  time,  or  whether  to  extend  the  time  for
         appealing,  as  a  preliminary  decision  without   a   hearing..."
         (emphasis added)

21. That, in our judgment, reflects what must be the natural  meaning,  and
    consequent effect of, the legislative words initially in  s.103A(7)  of
    the 2002 Act and now found in Art 3(m) of the 2009 Order as amended.

22. Is it, however, a decision made "in relation to an appeal"?   It  might
    be argued that only if an "appeal" is  pending  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal could any decision be "in relation to an appeal".  If so,  any
    decision made prior to an appeal being instituted - such  the  decision
    in this case that one has not been instituted - would not  fall  within
    the category of "excluded" decisions.  We do not consider that argument
    to be correct.  The argument we have identified, if  good,  would  also
    have  meant  that  such  a  decision  would  have   been   subject   to
    reconsideration when the AIT existed.  Such a decision could no more be
    said to be a preliminary decision "on an appeal" than one "in  relation
    to an appeal".   It is the collective understanding of the  members  of
    the Upper Tribunal sitting in this case that the  effect  of  s.103A(7)
    was understood to exclude reconsideration of 'out  of  time'  decisions
    made by judges of the AIT.  The only legal  recourse  was  to  judicial
    review to challenge adverse decisions (see, e.g.  R(MK)  v  AIT  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 554).  We do  not  consider  that  the  minor  change  in  the
    legislative  wording  in  the  excluded  category  from  a  preliminary
    decision "on an appeal" to one "in relation to an appeal" was  intended
    to effect, or has in fact effected, any change in the  legal  procedure
    by which a challenge to 'out of time'  decisions  can  be  made.   Such
    decisions were not subject to reconsideration and are  not  subject  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  We are in no doubt that the decision was
    "in relation to" an  appeal,  namely  whether  one  had  been  properly
    instituted by the lodging of a notice of appeal in  time  or,  if  not,
    because time was to be extended.  A decision such as the  one  in  this
    case can only be challenged by way of judicial review.

23. In our judgment, there was no  statutory  basis  upon  which  to  grant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in this case.  The fact that
    it was granted cannot confer a jurisdiction  upon  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which it does not have.  There is no  valid  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

24. Although we have expressed our views on the merits of the case and  the
    validity of the decision itself, the decision we make is that there  is
    no valid appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  Having said that,  it  will
    be apparent from our comments on the form of the decision that our view
    is that the First-tier Tribunal has not yet made any valid decision  on
    whether time should be extended or the appeal accepted.  It may well be
    that in the light of those views the First-tier Tribunal will take  the
    opportunity to look at the appellant's Notice of Appeal again and  make
    a further decision on it.




                                              Signed






                                             Senior Immigration Judge Grubb
                                             Judge of the Upper Tribunal


