

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

EA & Ors (Article 3 medical cases - Paposhvili not applicable)  [2017]  UKUT
00445 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 August 2017                              |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                    1) EA
                                    2) MO
                                                                 Respondents

                                     And

                                   Between

                           3) ASHRIFIN AND RASHID


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For EA:       Ms R Chapman, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For MO:       Miss C Fletcher, instructed by Immigration Advice Service
For Ashrifin and Rashid:   Mr Z Malik, instructed by SG Law
For the Secretary of State:     Mr W Hansen instructed by GLD


        The  test  in  Paposhvili  v  Belgium,  13  December  2016,   ECtHR
        (Application No 41738/10) is not a test that  it  is  open  to  the
        Tribunal to apply by reason  of  its  being  contrary  to  judicial
        precedent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. (i)  EA (whom we refer to as an appellant although  the  appeal  to
         the Upper Tribunal is brought by  the  Secretary  of  State)  is  a
         citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 1  January  1993.  Differing
         opinions  have  been  provided  as  to  his  mental  illness,   one
         describing it as a schizoaffective disorder and a mixed personality
         disorder;  another,  that  it  is   paranoid   schizophrenia.   The
         difference is immaterial for our purposes.  He is under a regime of
         anti-psychotic medication.  It is a chronic ailment of a  relapsing
         and  remitting  nature.  He  is  currently  housed  in   a   secure
         accommodation under the MHA and has been since 2012.

    (ii) MO (whom we also refer to as an appellant although there are cross-
         appeals) is a citizen of Nigeria who suffers from HIV/AIDS.  He has
         been receiving medical treatment in the form of a  drug,  Stribild,
         which  appears  to  have  been  most  effective  at  relieving  his
         symptoms.  His wife has also been  diagnosed  as  HIV-positive  and
         receives treatment.  Neither  has  a  right  to  remain  under  the
         Immigration Rules.


    (iii)    Mrs Ashrifin and her  husband,  Mr  Rashid,  are  citizens  of
         Bangladesh.  Mrs Ashrifin's appeal was dismissed for what was  said
         to be her failure  to  provide  specified  documents  to  meet  the
         requirements to establish her proficiency in English in  accordance
         with paragraph 10 of Appendix  B  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   In
         addition Mr Rashid suffers from  ankylosing  spondylitis,  a  long-
         term, chronic condition in which the spine and other areas of  the
         body become inflamed causing back pain and stiffness and  pain  and
         swelling in other parts of the body caused by inflammation of  the
         joints or where a tendon joins the bone.   It  can  cause  extreme
         tiredness and fatigue. He is receiving treatment for it in the form
         of medication, brand-named Humira, an anti-inflammatory medication.
          Etanercept is available in Bangladesh  but  was  not  said  to  be
         effective.


 2. There is no suggestion that the  conditions  of  these  appellants  (or
    their dependants) has reached the stage where any of  them  are  dying.
    Indeed with treatment provided by the NHS, their  condition  could  not
    reasonably be bettered.

 3. In each case, the appellants sought leave to remain on the  basis  that
    their removal would violate their rights under Article 3 of the  ECtHR.
    It is sometimes as well to remind ourselves of the scope of Article 3:


         No one shall be  subjected  to  torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading
        treatment or punishment.


 4. Shorn away from those elements that it has now become almost  redundant
    to make out, such as torture or punishment (both of  which  suggest  an
    intentional infliction of suffering), we are almost invariably focussed
    on that protean concept of inhuman or degrading treatment.  The enquiry
    moves from the motivation of the actor  behind  the  suffering  to  the
    effect of the relevant circumstances upon the individual.

 5. That  said,  there  is  nothing  untoward  in  seeing  the  progressive
    decisions of the United Kingdom Courts and the ECtHR as  extending  the
    ambit of the Convention which has been described  by  Lord  Hope  as  a
    'living instrument', (paragraph 21, N v SSHD [2005] 2 AC 296).

 6. The claims before us centred  upon  a  violation  of  their  Article  3
    rights.  The centrepiece of their arguments was  directed  towards  the
    effect of the Strasbourg decision in Paposhvili v Belgium, 13  December
    2016, ECtHR (Application No 41738/10) and the  seminal  restatement  of
    Article 3 set out in paragraph 183 of  the  Grand  Chamber  of  ECtHR's
    judgment:



         183. The Court considers that the "other  very  exceptional  cases"
             within the meaning of the judgment in N. v. the United  Kingdom
             (� 43) which may raise an  issue  under  Article  3  should  be
             understood to refer to situations involving the  removal  of  a
             seriously ill person in which  substantial  grounds  have  been
             shown for believing that he or she, although  not  at  imminent
             risk of dying, would face  a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the
             absence of appropriate treatment in the  receiving  country  or
             the lack of access to such treatment, of  being  exposed  to  a
             serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state  of
             health resulting in  intense  suffering  or  to  a  significant
             reduction in life expectancy. The Court points out  that  these
             situations correspond to a high threshold for  the  application
             of Article 3 of the Convention in cases concerning the  removal
             of aliens suffering from serious illness.


 7. At this stage we are not concerned with whether the  three  appellants'
    claims have established that they are seriously  ill  or  whether  they
    face a real risk of a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  their
    health resulting in intense suffering or  a  reduction  in  their  life
    expectancy.  In the  cases  of  these  three  appellants,  there  is  a
    significant range in the seriousness of their conditions.

 8. The Tribunal required the application of  the  Paposhvili  test  to  be
    decided as a preliminary issue because it is only  by  determining  the
    correct approach to be adopted by  the  Tribunal  to  the  decision  in
    Paposhvili that the Tribunal might assess how the three  appeals  might
    proceed.


The status of a decision made by the ECtHR

 9. Lord Neuberger giving the judgment of  the  Court  in  Manchester  City
    Council v Pinnock [2011] UKSC 6 stated in paragraph 47  that  decisions
    of the House of Lords and the Supreme Court have to be seen against the
    'backdrop' of the evolving Strasbourg jurisprudence.  He  continued  in
    paragraph 48:
         This Court is not bound to follow every decision of the ECtHR.  Not
         only would it be impractical  to  do  so:  it  would  sometimes  be
         inappropriate, as it would destroy the  ability  of  the  Court  to
         engage in the constructive dialogue with  the  ECtHR  which  is  of
         value to the development of Convention law (see e g R v  Horncastle
         [2009] UKSC 14; [2010] 2 WLR 47).  Of  course,  we  should  usually
         follow a clear and constant line  of  decisions  by  the  ECtHR:  R
         (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator [2004] UKHL 26; [2004] 2 AC 323.  But
         we are not actually bound to do so or  (in  theory,  at  least)  to
         follow a decision of the Grand Chamber. As Lord Mance  pointed  out
         in Doherty v Birmingham [2009] 1 AC 367, para 126, section 2 of the
         HRA requires our courts to "take into account" ECtHR decisions, not
         necessarily to follow them. Where, however, there is  a  clear  and
         constant line of decisions whose effect is  not  inconsistent  with
         some fundamental substantive or procedural aspect of our  law,  and
         whose reasoning does not appear to overlook or  misunderstand  some
         argument or point of principle, we consider that it would be  wrong
         for this Court not to follow that line.
10. From this passage it emerges that


      i) The Supreme Court is not bound to follow a decision of the ECtHR.


     ii) The decisions of the ECtHR are of persuasive  effect  because  they
         come from an authoritative source and from a  Court  whose  rulings
         are acknowledged by statute.  Indeed, s. 2(1) of the  Human  Rights
         Act 1998 expressly provides that a court or tribunal determining  a
         question which has arisen in connection  with  a  Convention  right
         'must take into account' a judgment or decision of the ECtHR.   The
         obligation is absolute, 'must', but the nature of the obligation is
         to take it 'into account', not necessarily to apply it.


    iii) However, a different approach is called for  on  the  part  of  the
         Supreme Court when there has been a  clear  and  constant  line  of
         authority but only if it is consistent with United Kingdom law  (or
         at least some 'fundamental substantive or procedural aspect' of it)
         or the decision of the ECtHR is not flawed in a material way.


11. It is, therefore, a somewhat limited duty to comply with the  ECtHR  at
    least on the part of the Supreme Court.   It suggests  that  the  ECtHR
    must be followed ('would be wrong not to follow') but  only  if  it  is
    consistent with United Kingdom law.  It raises the question of  whether
    there is the need to follow the ECtHR,  if  the  principle  is  already
    enshrined in the United Kingdom's domestic law.

12. The ECtHR's own statements as to its role speak of a subsidiary one, at
    least when it comes to implementation.  For example, in  paragraph  184
    of Paposhvili we find:

         As to whether  the  above  conditions  are  satisfied  in  a  given
         situation, the Court observes that in cases involving the expulsion
         of aliens, the Court does not itself examine the  applications  for
         international protection or verify how States  control  the  entry,
         residence and expulsion of aliens. By virtue of Article  1  of  the
         Convention  the  primary  responsibility   for   implementing   and
         enforcing the  guaranteed  rights  and  freedoms  is  laid  on  the
         national  authorities,  who  are  thus  required  to  examine   the
         applicants' fears and to  assess  the  risks  they  would  face  if
         removed to the receiving country, from the standpoint of Article 3.
         The machinery of complaint to the Court is subsidiary  to  national
         systems safeguarding human rights.


13. Whilst the statements of principle set out in Manchester City Council v
    Pinnock are directed  towards  the  Supreme  Court's  own  approach  to
    decisions of the ECtHR, they shed light  on  how  the  Tribunal  is  to
    approach such decisions.  They say, nothing, of course, to  the  effect
    that the Tribunal is to apply decisions of  the  ECtHR  which  are  not
    consistent with United Kingdom domestic law, including decisions of the
    Court of Appeal.

A clear and constant line of authority consistent with United Kingdom law

14. For the reasons that have emerged from the foregoing, if  the  decision
    in Paposhvili is part of a continuum of developing jurisdiction on  the
    part of the ECtHR consistent with the United Kingdom's domestic law, it
    should be followed.  In order to determine this,  it  is  necessary  to
    look at the decision of Paposhvili itself.

15. The ECtHR identified a  clear  and  consistent  line  of  authority  in
    paragraph 179 of Paposhvili:


         The Court has applied the case-law established in N. v. the  United
         Kingdom in declaring inadmissible, as being manifestly ill-founded,
         numerous applications raising similar issues, concerning aliens who
         were HIV positive (see, among  other  authorities,  E.O.  v.  Italy
         (dec.), no. 34724/10, 10 May 2012)  or  who  suffered  from  other
         serious physical illnesses (see, among other authorities, V.S.  and
         Others v. France (dec.), no. 35226/11, 25 November 2014) or mental
         illnesses (see, among other authorities,  Kochieva  and  Others  v.
         Sweden (dec.), no. 75203/12, 30  April  2013,  and  Khachatryan  v.
         Belgium (dec.), no. 72597/10, 7 April 2015). Several judgments have
         applied this case-law to the removal of seriously ill persons whose
         condition  was  under  control  as   the   result   of   medication
         administered in the Contracting State concerned, and who  were  fit
         to travel (see  Yoh-Ekale  Mwanje  v.  Belgium,  no.  10486/10,  20
         December 2011; S.H.H. v.  the  United  Kingdom,  no.  60367/10,  29
         January 2013; Tatar, cited above;  and  A.S.  v.  Switzerland,  no.
         39350/13, 30 June 2015).

16. The only decision identified by the ECtHR as running counter  to  these
    decisions is the decision in Aswat v United Kingdom (2014) 58  EHRR  1.
    This was a case that, on its facts, was  highly  unusual,  not  to  say
    exceptional.  It was an extradition case in which  the  United  Kingdom
    authorities intended to comply with  the  US  government's  request  to
    extradite him  to  stand  trial  for  terrorist  offences.   There  was
    inadequate information about the pre-trial period, the length  of  time
    the applicant would be detained pending trial, the consequences for the
    applicant if he was found to be unfit to  stand  trial.  The  applicant
    himself was suffering from paranoid schizophrenia and was  detained  in
    the United Kingdom in Broadmoor. It was argued that  he  would  face  a
    sentence of up to 35 years imprisonment.   Although  this,  in  itself,
    would not be grossly disproportionate in view  of  the  nature  of  the
    alleged offences, there was  a  real  risk  that  his  extradition  and
    detention would include a move to a different and more  hostile  prison
    environment resulting in a serious  deterioration  in  his  mental  and
    physical health capable of reaching the Article 3 threshold.  He  could
    be detained in a maximum  security  facility  and  subject  to  special
    administrative  measures  including  solitary  confinement.  The  Court
    determined that whether or  not  the  applicant's  extradition  to  the
    United States would breach  Article  3  of  the  Convention  very  much
    depended upon the conditions in which he  would  be  detained  and  the
    medical services that  would  be  available  to  him.  There  was  much
    uncertainty and the US Department of Justice had given no indication of
    what conditions would be like.  It is perhaps unsurprising  that  these
    circumstances amounted to an Article 3 violation, not on health grounds
    alone (although these featured to a significant  extent),  but  arising
    from  conditions  in  US  detention  facilities  which   were   largely
    unascertained.


17. The ECtHR's  intention  in  the  case  of  Paposhvili  is  revealed  in
    paragraph 181:

         The Court concludes from this recapitulation of the  case-law  that
         the application of Article 3 of the Convention only in cases  where
         the person facing expulsion is close to death, which has  been  its
         practice since the judgment  in  N.  v.  the  United  Kingdom,  has
         deprived aliens who are seriously ill, but whose condition is  less
         critical, of the benefit of that provision.

18. What then follows,  therefore,  is  a  departure  from  the  clear  and
    constant case law identified by the Court in  paragraph  179.  This  is
    performed  according  to  paragraph  182,  by  the  Court   using   its
    interpretative powers to render the Convention rights in a way that  is
    'practical and effective and not theoretical and illusory'. Whilst this
    was, of course, an entirely proper approach to be adopted by the ECtHR,
    there is no doubt that it was an extension of earlier jurisprudence and
    a departure from  it.  Furthermore,  in  seeking  to  depart  from  the
    decision in N v UK  [2008] EHRR 39 it extended the principle in  a  way
    we have already identified so as to include  situations  involving  the
    removal of a seriously ill  person  in  respect  of  whom  'substantial
    grounds had been shown to believe in that he or she,  although  not  at
    imminent risk of dying, would face  a  real  risk  on  account  of  the
    absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving country or  the  lack
    of access to such treatment of  being  exposed  to  serious  rapid  and
    irreversible decline to his or her state of health resulting in intense
    suffering  or  a  significant  reduction  in  life  expectancy',  ('the
    Paposhvili test'). As is made plain by the  reference  to  the  earlier
    case law in paragraph 179, the ECtHR was departing from  its  own  case
    law as established in N v UK that such  claims  were  inadmissible,  as
    being manifestly ill founded.


19. Paposhvili is an example of the ECtHR  departing  from  the  clear  and
    constant line of authority and, as we shall later observe, resulted  in
    a decision that is not consistent with  United  Kingdom  domestic  law.
    This is most clearly seen from the analysis that  is  provided  by  the
    Court of Appeal in GS (India) [2015] 1 WLR 3312 to which we will return
    later.  It is at this stage that we turn to consider the effect of  the
    decision on the jurisprudence affecting health  cases  in  England  and
    Wales.

The role of precedent

20. In Kay & Anor v. London Borough of Lambeth & Ors  [2006]  UKHL  10  the
    House of Lords considered the case of a group of gypsies whose caravans
    who occupied land without a  licence  permitting  them  to  do  so  but
    alleged that the claim for possession against them violated their human
    rights.  The House of Lords had no doubt, although domestic courts were
    not strictly required to follow the rulings of the  European  Court  of
    Human Rights that they were obliged to give  practical  recognition  to
    Article 8 which necessitated a constructive collaboration  between  the
    Strasbourg Court and the national authorities. In doing so, it was  for
    the domestic courts to determine initially how the principles were laid
    down. It was here that the role of precedent came into play. It  was  a
    cornerstone of the domestic legal system by which a degree of certainty
    in legal matters was best achieved. Judges could give leave  to  appeal
    where  they  considered  binding  precedent   was   inconsistent   with
    Strasbourg authority. The question arose  whether  the  United  Kingdom
    domestic rules of precedent should be  modified  and  whether  a  Court
    should no longer be bound to follow a decision of a higher Court if  it
    appeared to be inconsistent with the ruling in the court in Strasbourg.
    This question is set out in paragraph 40 of the opinion of Lord Bingham
    of Cornhill. In paragraph 43, he determined that issue by reference  to
    established case law that a degree of certainty was  best  achieved  by
    adhering, even in the context of an inconsistency with  the  Convention
    to the United Kingdom's rules of precedent. Whilst the duty  to  comply
    with the proper application of an individual's  Convention  rights  was
    not derogable, that duty would be  discharged  if,  in  an  appropriate
    case, the grant of  permission  to  appeal  were  made.  Lord  Bingham,
    however, concluded by saying:


        But they should follow the binding precedent ...


GS (India) as binding precedent?

21. Hence, the determination of this preliminary issue depends upon whether
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in GS (India)  [2015]  1  WLR  3312
    operates as a binding precedent upon the  Tribunal.   Inevitably,  this
    requires us to give consideration to the  reasons  that  the  Court  of
    Appeal provided based upon its understanding of the relevant  decisions
    in the House of Lords in D v United Kingdom [1997] ECHR 30240/96;  N  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] 2 AC  296   and  N  v
    United Kingdom (2008) EHRR 39.

22. The starting point in this part of the analysis is found  in  paragraph
    50 of the decision of Laws LJ to which Sullivan LJ gave his  agreement.
    Although both Underhill and Sullivan declined to consider the Article 8
    claims in respect of the three appellants as  a  matter  of  discretion
    rather than on the basis of a lack of jurisdiction, this difference  of
    opinion has no bearing on  the  judgment  of  Laws  LJ  on  the  matter
    relevant to our consideration.

23. The six appellants, all foreign nationals, were being  treated  in  the
    United Kingdom for serious medical  conditions.  The  Court  of  Appeal
    approached Article 3 by reference to the paradigm case of a  breach  of
    Article 3 being an intentional  act  by  the  state  which  constituted
    torture or inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment.  Accordingly,
    the case of a person whose life would be foreshortened by the  progress
    of natural disease if removed to his home state did not fall within the
    paradigm unless justified by  a  pressing  reason  to  hold  the  state
    responsible for the claimant's plight. Such an exception was  justified
    in deathbed cases  where  the  person's  illness  had  reached  such  a
    critical stage that it would constitute inhuman  treatment  to  deprive
    him of the care he was currently receiving. In essence, the  exception,
    referred to as the 'D exception' arising from D v United Kingdom [1997]
    24 EHRR 423 arose from what is surely the repellent prospect of a dying
    man forced onto an aircraft with the prospect of his  death  inevitable
    unless adequate care was in hand to enable him to die with dignity.  It
    would be truly shocking if a state felt itself able to behave in such a
    way.


24. Such a circumstance was an  extension  of,  or  an  exception  to,  the
    Article 3 paradigm of a person being subjected to an intentional act by
    the state which constituted torture or in human or degrading  treatment
    or punishment. Hence, Laws LJ asked the question, in  paragraph  50  of
    his judgment:

         Is the exception to the Article 3  paradigm  vouched  by  D's  case
         limited to a state of affairs in which the applicant is, in effect,
         on his death bed whether or not he is removed from the host state?

25. Laws LJ then set out paragraphs 42 to 45 of N v United  Kingdom  (2008)
    47 EHRR  39  which  is  the  section  in  the  judgment  entitled  'The
    principles to be derived from the case law' which we repeat here:


         42.  In summary, the Court observes  that  since  D  v  the  United
             Kingdom it has consistently applied the following principles.


             Aliens who are subject to expulsion cannot in principle  claim
             any entitlement to remain in the territory  of  a  Contracting
             State in order to continue to benefit from medical, social  or
             other  forms  of  assistance  and  services  provided  by  the
             expelling State. The fact that the applicant's  circumstances,
             including his life expectancy, would be significantly  reduced
             if he were to be removed from the  Contracting  State  is  not
             sufficient in itself to give rise to breach of Article 3.  The
             decision to remove an alien who is suffering  from  a  serious
             mental or physical illness to a country where  the  facilities
             for the treatment  of  that  illness  are  inferior  to  those
             available in the Contracting State may raise  an  issue  under
             Article 3, but only in a  very  exceptional  case,  where  the
             humanitarian grounds against the removal are  compelling.  In
             the D case the very exceptional circumstances  were  that  the
             applicant was critically ill  and  appeared  to  be  close  to
             death, could not be guaranteed any nursing or medical care  in
             his country of origin and had no family there willing or  able
             to care for him or provide him with  even  a  basic  level  of
             food, shelter or social support.


         43.  The Court does not  exclude  that  there  may  be  other  very
             exceptional cases where the  humanitarian  considerations  are
             equally compelling.  However,  it  considers  that  it  should
             maintain the high threshold set in D v the United Kingdom and
             applied in  its  subsequent  case-law,  which  it  regards  as
             correct in principle, given that in  such  cases  the  alleged
             future harm would emanate not from  the  intentional  acts  or
             omissions of  public  authorities  or  non-State  bodies,  but
             instead from a naturally occurring illness  and  the  lack  of
             sufficient resources to deal with it in the receiving country.




         44.  Although many of the rights it contains have implications of a
             social or  economic  nature,  the  Convention  is  essentially
             directed at the protection of civil  and  political  rights...
             While it is necessary, given  the  fundamental  importance  of
             Article 3 in the Convention system, for the Court to retain a
             degree of flexibility to prevent expulsion in very exceptional
             cases,  Article 3  does  not  place  an  obligation  on  the
             Contracting State to alleviate such  disparities  through  the
             provision of free and unlimited  health  care  to  all  aliens
             without a right to stay within its jurisdiction. A finding  to
             the contrary would place too great a burden on the Contracting
             States.


         45.   Finally,  the  Court  observes  that,  although  the  present
             application, in common with most of those referred  to  above,
             is concerned with the expulsion of a person with  an  HIV  and
             AIDS-related condition, the  same  principles  must  apply  in
             relation to the expulsion of any  person  afflicted  with  any
             serious, naturally occurring physical or mental illness  which
             may cause suffering, pain  and  reduced  life  expectancy  and
             require specialised medical treatment  which  may  not  be  so
             readily available in the  applicant's  country  of  origin  or
             which may be available only at substantial cost."


26. Laws LJ then went on to consider the associated case law as set out  in
    MSS v Belgium & Greece (2011) 53 EHRR 2, Sufi & Elmi  v  UK  (2012)  54
    EHRR 9, SHH  v  UK  (2013)  57  EHRR  18  and  Tarakhel  v  Switzerland
    (Application No. 29217/12).  Having examined these cases, he  concluded
    in paragraph 62 that the jurisprudence upon Article  3  to  be  derived
    from them did not extend the reach of the departure  permitted  in  D's
    case. Accordingly, he concluded in paragraph 63 that these  cases  cast
    no significant light on the approach to be taken by the Court of Appeal
    to the binding authority of  N  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Terence Higgins Trust intervening) [2005] 2 AC 296 to which
    he then turned.

27. Laws LJ then recorded the crucial opinions of Lord Nicholls, Lord  Hope
    and Baroness Hale.  Once again, these passages must be set out in full:




         15.  Is there, then, some  other  rationale  [sc.  other  than  the
             pressing nature of  the  humanitarian  claim]  underlying  the
             decisions in the many immigration cases where  the  Strasbourg
             court has distinguished D's case?  I  believe  there  is.  The
             essential distinction is  not  to  be  found  in  humanitarian
             differences. Rather it lies in recognising that article 3 does
             not require contracting states to undertake the obligation  of
             providing aliens indefinitely with medical  treatment  lacking
             in their home countries. In the case of D and in  later  cases
             the  Strasbourg  court  has  constantly  reiterated  that   in
             principle  aliens  subject  to  expulsion  cannot  claim   any
             entitlement to remain in the territory of a contracting  state
             in order to continue to benefit from medical, social and other
             forms of assistance provided by the expelling state. Article 3
             imposes no  such  'medical  care'  obligation  on  contracting
             states. This is so even  where,  in  the  absence  of  medical
             treatment,  the  life  of  the  would-be  immigrant  will   be
             significantly shortened. But in the  case  of  D,  unlike  the
             later cases, there  was  no  question  of  imposing  any  such
             obligation on the United Kingdom. D was dying, and beyond  the
             reach  of  medical  treatment  then  available."   (per   Lord
             Nicholls)
         ...


         36.  What was it then that made the case exceptional? It is  to  be
             found, I think, in the  references  to  D's  'present  medical
             condition' (para 50) and to that fact that he  was  terminally
             ill  (paras  51:  'the  advanced  stages  of  a  terminal  and
             incurable illness'; para 52: 'a terminally ill man'; para  53:
             'the critical stage  now  reached  in  the  applicant's  fatal
             illness'; Judge Pettiti: 'the final  stages  of  an  incurable
             illness'). It was the fact that he was already terminally  ill
             while still present in the territory of  the  expelling  state
             that made his case exceptional." (per Lord Hope)
         ...


         69.  In my view, therefore, the test, in  this  sort  of  case,  is
             whether the applicant's illness has reached  such  a  critical
             stage (ie he is dying) that it would be inhuman  treatment  to
             deprive him of the care which he is  currently  receiving  and
             send him home to an early death unless there is care available
             there to enable him to meet that fate with dignity." (per Lady
             Hale)


28. These citations represent the authoritative statement of United Kingdom
    domestic law. They are also consistent with, and an application of, the
    clear and constant line of authority of the ECtHR prior to  Paposhvili.
     The words of Baroness Hale, set out above, permit  no  departure  from
    the 'D exception', that is, the deathbed threshold.

29. More importantly, for our purposes, they underpin the reasons  for  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in paragraph 66 in answer  to  the  question
    Laws LJ had earlier asked himself in paragraph 50:

         These citations demonstrate that in the view of the House of  Lords
         the D exception is confined to deathbed cases.

30. This is a binding precedent and the Tribunal is bound to follow it.  It
    is not, as Ms Chapman suggested, a careless slip of the pen on the part
    of Laws LJ which the other judges overlooked and what he meant  to  say
    was that the D exception contained within it another category of  cases
    that a decision maker might find exceptional.  Indeed, there  would  be
    very little purpose in mentioning 'deathbed cases' if what he meant  to
    say was 'exceptional cases' of which, of course, a deathbed case  would
    undoubtedly be one.


31. It is not permissible for the Tribunal to depart  from  this  authority
    and, in particular, cannot  do  so  by  reliance  upon  the  Paposhvili
    enlargement set out in paragraph  183  of  the  ECtHR's  judgment  (see
    paragraph 6 above).  Hence, the  recasting  of  Article  3  to  include
    'situations involving the removal of a seriously ill  person  in  which
    substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing  that  he  or  she,
    although not at imminent risk of dying, would  face  a  real  risk,  on
    account of the  absence  of  appropriate  treatment  in  the  receiving
    country or the lack of access to such treatment, of being exposed to  a
    serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state  of  health
    resulting in intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life
    expectancy' is not part of United Kingdom domestic law.


32. Furthermore, there is an internal logic in setting the  threshold  very
    high.  Ms  Chapman  took  forensic  offence  to  the  emotive  language
    contained in paragraph 20 of Mr Hansen's skeleton argument in which  he
    quoted the expression that the parties to the Convention, including the
    United Kingdom, cannot  be  turned  into  'hospitals  for  the  world'.
    However, avoiding any emotive language, if  the  effect  of  a  lowered
    threshold is to impose a  burden  that  is  disproportionate  upon  the
    receiving state such  that  it  damages  its  own  efforts  to  provide
    healthcare,  accommodation  and  services  then  that  disproportionate
    effect can properly be taken into account in construing what  is  meant
    by the humanitarian obligation  not  to  cause  suffering.  Ms  Chapman
    submitted that if this is what is the nature of the obligation  imposed
    by Article 3, then it matters not whether the effect is  a  burden  too
    great to bear. We agree.  But this begs the question as to what is  the
    nature of the obligation.  If the  invaluable  scheme  of  humanitarian
    protection is to operate, it must be made to work.   It  can  and  does
    work if a high threshold is maintained. Conversely, if the demands upon
    it cannot be met, it will not work.   Further,  it  runs  the  risk  of
    becoming arbitrary if the threshold is  over-elastic  and  ill-defined.
    That is precisely why the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal set the
    threshold  at  a  level  which   is   both   high,   intelligible   and
    ascertainable, thereby avoiding the injustice of a  test  which  is  as
    long as the judge's sleeve.

33. Whilst, for the reasons we have given, the Paposhvili  test  is  not  a
    test that it is open to the Tribunal to apply by reason  of  its  being
    contrary to judicial precedent, it may in the event add very little  to
    the debate, useful as it is in enlarging  our  understanding  of  these
    complex humanitarian issues.  After all, the ECtHR concluded  that  the
    threshold was a high one with no suggestion it might become  a  routine
    argument based on disparities between healthcare -  and  access  to  it
    -across the world.

34. Our decision is consistent with the decision of Lavender J in  Ismailov
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department (JR/3660/2016) to which we
    were referred by Mr Malik in fulfilment of his duty to the Tribunal  to
    refer us to other relevant cases.  In Ismailov, Lavender J accepted  Mr
    Malik's submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  GS
    (India) operated as a binding precedent  permitting  the  Secretary  of
    State to certify the claim as 'clearly unfounded'.

The disposal of EA's appeal


35. In EA's case, from paragraphs 30 to 36, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    considered the case law in Article  3  cases  solely  by  reference  to
    Paposhvili and  concluded  that  the  case  law  contained  within  the
    decisions of the Supreme Court deprived aliens who were  seriously  ill
    but whose condition was less  than  critical  of  the  benefit  of  the
    provisions of Article 3. That suggests  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered the UK jurisprudence  including  decisions  of  the  Supreme
    Court and concluded these decisions were wrong in  law  as  potentially
    violating  the  human  rights  of  those  concerned  by  limiting   the
    application of Article 3.  In paragraph 36 he went on to find that,  as
    a result of Paposhvili, the application of D and N principles


         'are not perhaps correctly expressed now'.


36. There are  two  matters  that  are  immediately  apparent.  First,  the
    determination contains no discussion as to the approach that has to  be
    adopted to decisions of the ECtHR in cases which appear to run  counter
    to decisions of the House of Lords or the Supreme  Court.  Second,  the
    decision which was made on 31 March 2017  makes  no  reference  to  the
    decision in the Court of Appeal in GS (India) and its potential  effect
    as a matter of judicial precedent.

37. This has inevitably skewed the Article 3 assessment, the sole ground on
    which the appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

38. In the course of  the  hearing,  we  invited  Ms  Chapman  to  consider
    whether, on the basis of our findings  on  the  preliminary  issue,  we
    should list the appeal for further  hearing  to  consider  whether  the
    determination contained a material error of law.  She was content  that
    we go on to consider that issue on the basis of the  findings  made  by
    the judge and her submissions. We are satisfied that, as  a  result  of
    our decision on the preliminary issue, there is no arguable  case  that
    the appellant can put forward in support of the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    approach both as to error and the materiality of the  error.  In  these
    circumstances, we allow the appeal of the Secretary of  State  and  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


39. In the course of the hearing  we  raised  the  practical  effect  of  a
    remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Such  an  order  ends  the  Upper
    Tribunal's jurisdiction in the appeal. In accordance with the  decision
    of AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 944 (11 July 2017) the appellant is permitted, if  so  advised,  to
    appeal the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  without  having  to  await  the
    outcome of the remaking of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This distinguishes the case of  VOM  (Error  of  law  when  appealable)
    Nigeria [2016] UKUT 410 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal decides  to  re-
    make the decision itself.  A successful application  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal would operate as a stay on  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Such a remaking would, in accordance with our  findings  and
    as  things  presently  stand,  be  conducted  on  the  basis  that  the
    Paposhvili principle has no  application  in  light  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in GS (India).   Were we to be wrong on  this  issue,
    the remaking  of  the  decision  would  then  have  become  a  wasteful
    exercise.  Were an application to be made for permission to  appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal, we would be minded to grant permission to appeal.

The disposal of MO's appeal

40. The Upper Tribunal has already found an error on a point of law in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination in MO's appeal and  set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision dismissing the appeal on Article 3
    grounds and allowing the appeal on  Article  8  grounds.   The  further
    disposal of the appeal was adjourned.  We remit the case to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for it to be re-made.  Once again,  the  effect  of  this
    direction is to permit the appellant to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal
    without having to await the outcome of the re-making of  the  decision.
    Suffice it to say that, without a  viable  Article  3  claim  based  on
    health grounds, the appellant's claim to remain on the basis of Article
    8 as found by the First-tier Tribunal is not adequately  reasoned.   It
    fails to take into account the limitations in the operation of  Article
    8 in health cases identified by Underhill LJ in  paragraph  111  of  GS
    (India):
         It is that question which this Court addressed  in  MM  (Zimbabwe).
         Moses LJ, with whom the other members of  the  Court  agreed,  held
         that the "no obligation to treat" principle must apply  equally  in
         the context of Article 8: see paras. 17-18 of his  judgment,  which
         Laws LJ sets out at paragraph 89 above. He then sought to  identify
         what role that left for Article 8. He  acknowledged  that  "despite
         that clear-cut principle, the courts in  the  United  Kingdom  have
         declined to say that Article 8 can never be engaged by  the  health
         consequences of removal from  the  United  Kingdom",  referring  to
         Razgar and also to AJ (Liberia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1736 (another mental health  case);  but
         he drew attention to  statements  in  both  cases  emphasising  how
         exceptional the circumstances would have to be before a breach were
         established. In particular, he set out, at paragraph 20, a  passage
         to that effect from the opinion of Lady Hale in Razgar which starts
         with the observation that "it is not easy to  think  of  a  foreign
         health care case which would fail under Article 3 but succeed under
         Article 8". He concluded, at paragraph 23 with a passage which Laws
         LJ has already quoted but which for ease of reference  I  will  set
         out again:
         The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be  deported  will
         be relevant to Article 8, is where it is an additional factor to be
         weighed in the balance, with  other  factors  which  by  themselves
         engage Article 8.


41. We see no material that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  identified  in
    paragraphs 47 to 57 as amounting to additional factors that weighed  in
    the balance of the sort envisaged by the Court of Appeal.

The disposal of Rashid's appeal


42. The Secretary of State has agreed - and  we  place  that  agreement  on
    record - that the  appellant  should  have  been  granted  leave  under
    paragraph 10 of Appendix B.  If this  has  resulted  in  the  grant  of
    further leave to remain, this may already have operated to require  the
    appeal to be treated as abandoned by operation of  law,  s.104  of  the
    2002 Act.  However, we  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    finding that Mr Rashid's circumstances were not such  as  to  meet  the
    high threshold set in D  and  N.   As  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    properly found, absent a successful Article 3 health claim,  there  was
    no room for the appeal to succeed under Article 8.


DECISION

 i) EA: The determination of the First-tier Tribunal revealed an error on a
    point of law and we remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it
    to be re-made.

ii) O: The determination of the First-tier Tribunal revealed an error on a
    point of law and we remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it
    to be re-made.

iii) Rashid and Ashrifin: By concession, the appeal is allowed under the
    Immigration Rules.





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                               7 August 2017

