
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  Boktor and Wanis (late application for permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442
                                                                       (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 September 2011                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                          Treza Sabry eshak boktor
                                     and
                         REMON WILLIAM GADOON WANIS

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms V Easty, instructed by Brighton Housing Trust
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Senior Presenting Officer

Where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been  granted,  but  in
circumstances where the application  is  out  of  time,  an  explanation  is
provided, but that explanation is  not  considered  by  the  judge  granting
permission, in the light of AK (Tribunal appeal  -  out  of  time)  Bulgaria
[2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the clear wording  of  rule  24(4)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration (Procedure) Rules 2005, the grant  of  permission  to
appeal is conditional,  and  the  question  of  whether  there  are  special
circumstances making it unjust not to extend time has to be considered.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The respondents (hereafter referred to as the claimants)  appealed  to
    an Immigration Judge against decisions of the Secretary of State of  19
    November 2009 to remove  them  as  illegal  entrants  from  the  United
    Kingdom.   The Immigration Judge found the claimants to be credible and
    allowed their appeals.  The determination was dated 3 February 2011.

2.    An application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State.  It is recorded as having been received by the  Tribunal  on  17
    March 2011.  The date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  at
    section B of the appeal form was said to be 9 February 2011.   Attached
    to the grounds was an explanation as to why the  application  was  made
    late.  It was said that the application was drafted before the deadline
    to appeal expired but was not faxed to the  Tribunal  on  the  date  of
    drafting.  It was said that this was a unique oversight and  a  genuine
    error. The person who provided the reasons for lateness said that  when
    she was on maternity leave there was a change of  process  in  how  the
    grounds of reconsideration were served on the  IAC  and  she  had  been
    unaware of this change which resulted  in  the  application  not  being
    faxed even though it was clearly drafted  within  time.   Reliance  was
    placed on the decision of the Tribunal in the case  of  BO  and  Others
    (Extension of the time for appealing) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT  00035.   It
    was submitted that the explanation  for  lateness  covered  the  entire
    period of the delay in each case and that  the  delay  was  not  caused
    after the deadline had already expired and it was  submitted  that  all
    the attached applications were drafted in time and evidence of this was
    attached in the form of screen printouts with the relevant  date  cited
    in each case.   It was said that once it became apparent on  Monday  14
    March that this mistake had occurred the  grounds  for  reconsideration
    were quickly retrieved.  The  determinations  in  each  case  were  not
    attached as it was said  that  this  would  require  further  delay  in
    requesting the documents from Home Office files.  It was submitted this
    was not a routine request for an extension of time but a  unique  error
    which amounted to a special circumstance.

3.    Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 24 March 2011.  There was no reference to the  lateness  of
    the application or to the reasons given as to why the  application  was
    late.

4.    At the hearing before me Ms Easty raised  an  issue  of  jurisdiction,
    contending that the application had  been  made  out  of  time  and  no
    decision had been made to extend time.   She argued that as  there  was
    no decision to extend time in the present case, in accordance with Rule
    24(4)(b) of the Procedure Rules there was no appeal before the Tribunal
    until such a decision was made.  It was argued that the  entire  period
    of delay was not covered by the explanation  given.   The  reasons  for
    delay did not fulfil the obligation to disclose all  material  matters.
    Issues in respect of prejudice had not been dealt with.

5.    The judge's decision  had  been  promulgated,  it  was  argued,  on  3
    February, although the date of 9 February had been given  by  the  Home
    Office and Ms Easty would proceed on the  basis  of  that  later  date.
    Grounds  were  put  in  on  16  March.   Proper,  precise   and   clear
    explanations were  needed.   It  had  only  been  discovered  what  had
    happened because the appellant's representatives had alerted  the  Home
    Office to the issue.  The explanation was required to cover the  entire
    period of delay.  It was unclear when  the  drafter  was  on  maternity
    leave and when she returned.  She had made reference to BO but had  not
    followed the guidance set out in that case.  There was  no  explanation
    for the later delay nor why the grounds were not served  on  14  March.
    A third of the period of delay had not been explained.  As regards  the
    issue of prejudice, the appellant and her mother  had  deteriorated  in
    health due to the shock of the appeal.  The grounds were not strong and
    that was a relevant factor.  There was no challenge to the  credibility
    findings.

6.    Mr Gulvin said he did not wish to dispute the dates and was  happy  to
    leave the matter to the Tribunal.  If he were allowed to  he  would  be
    pursuing the grounds.

7.    In light of the issue raised it seemed to  me  best  to  have  written
    submissions from Ms Easty with the opportunity for Mr Gulvin to respond
    if he so wished.  Written submissions were received from Ms Easty on 20
    September, and I have received no  response  from  Mr Gulvin.   It  is
    therefore proper in my view to proceed to determine the matter.

8.    Rule 24 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005
    states as follows:

         "Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal


         24-(1)         A party seeking permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
                 Tribunal must make a written application  to  the  Tribunal
                 for permission to appeal.


           (2)   Subject to paragraph (3), an application  under  paragraph
                 (1) must be sent or delivered to the Tribunal so that it is
                 received no later than five days after the  date  on  which
                 the party making the application is  deemed  to  have  been
                 served with written reasons for the decision.


           (3)   Where an appellant is outside the UK, the time  limit  for
                 that person sending  or  delivering  an  application  under
                 paragraph (1) is 28 days.


           (4)   If a person makes an application under paragraph (1) later
                 than the time required by paragraph (2) -


                 (a)   The Tribunal may extend the  time  for  appealing  if
                       satisfied that by reason of special circumstances  it
                       would be unjust not to do so; and


                 (b)   Unless the Tribunal extends time under  sub-paragraph
                       (a), the Tribunal must not admit the application.


            (5)  An application under paragraph (1) must -

                 (a)   Identify the decision of the  Tribunal  to  which  it
                 relates;


                 (b)   Identify the alleged error or errors of  law  in  the
                 decision; and


                 (c)   State the result the party making the application  is
                 seeking."


9.    The timescale in this case is essentially as set  out  in  Ms  Easty's
    written  submissions.   That  is  to  say,  the   Immigration   Judge's
    determination was promulgated on 9 February 2011, the time limit for an
    application for permission to appeal expired on 16  February  2011  and
    the application for permission to appeal was faxed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 17 March 2011 (not 16 March, as Ms Easty thought).   It  is
    clear, therefore, that the application was made late and that of course
    is acknowledged in the reasons for its lateness that were  attached  to
    the grounds.

10.   In her written submissions  Ms  Easty  refers  first  of  all  to  BO,
    reference to which is set out above, and also to the decision in  TR  v
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal [2010] EWHC 2055 (Admin).   Both  these
    cases were concerned with late applications for  permission  to  appeal
    against  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  rather  than   late
    applications  for  permission  to  appeal  against  a  decision  of  an
    Immigration Judge.  It is relevant to note, however, that the  relevant
    procedure rule (Rule 10) like Rule 24 also permits  the  identification
    of "special circumstances" enabling time to be extended if the Tribunal
    is satisfied it will be unjust not to do so.  I shall return  to  these
    two decisions shortly, but it is I think relevant to make the point  at
    this stage that of course  since  they  are  dealing  with  a  somewhat
    different issue of a late appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State rather than a  late  appeal  against  an  Immigration  Judge's
    decision the context is inevitably somewhat different.

11.   I have derived  assistance  from  an  earlier  decision,  one  of  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal, in AK (Tribunal  appeal  -  out  of  time)
    Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201, a starred decision of that Tribunal.   The
    Tribunal had before it three cases in each of which  the  Secretary  of
    State had been granted permission to appeal against  the  determination
    of an Adjudicator despite the  fact  the  application  was  late.   The
    relevant provision was Rule 18 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
    (Procedure) Rules 2000.  The relevant parts of this provide as follows:

         "Leave to Appeal


         18 (1)   An appeal from the determination of an Adjudicator may  be
                 made only with the leave of the Tribunal.


         (2)           An application for leave to appeal shall be  made  no
                 later than 10 days, or in the case of an  application  made
                 from  outside  the  United  Kingdom,  28  days,  after  the
                 appellant has received written notice of the  determination
                 against which he wishes to appeal.


         (3)           A time limit set out in paragraph (2) may be extended
                 by the Tribunal where  it  is  satisfied  that  because  of
                 special circumstances it is just for the time limit  to  be
                 extended.


                  ....."


12.    It  can  be  seen,  therefore,   that   the   concept   of   "special
    circumstances" was employed in those Rules, although  rather  than  the
    Tribunal being satisfied that by reason of those circumstances it would
    be unjust not to extend time it is rather  a  matter  of  the  Tribunal
    being satisfied because of special circumstances it  is  just  for  the
    time limit to be extended.  There is also an absence of  an  equivalent
    provision to Rule 24(4)(b).   In two of the three cases before the  IAT
    permission to appeal had been  granted  by  a  Vice  President  of  the
    Tribunal with no reference being made to any problems  in  relation  to
    time although in each case the application was out  of  time.   In  the
    other case procedural points in respect of lateness were taken before a
    panel of the IAT, since the application was a day late,  but  the  Vice
    President presiding indicated that his practice was to consider whether
    the application was roughly in time or not and if it were the case, the
    Vice President who granted permission should be deemed to have  granted
    the necessary extension.

13.   The Tribunal commented that it was of course impossible to  provide  a
    list of what might be "special circumstances".  It was clearly  of  the
    view that the strength of grounds of appeal could not by  itself  be  a
    ground for extending time, for if that was the  case,  as  was  pointed
    out, a person who had strong grounds of  appeal  would  never  need  to
    comply with any time  limits.   The  strength  of  the  grounds  might,
    however, be relevant in assessing the circumstances as a whole.

14.   The Tribunal did not accept  that  a  grant  of  permission  could  be
    deemed to include the granting of an extension of time.  As it  pointed
    out, it is difficult to see that failure to notice that the application
    was out of time could be regarded as exercising the discretion involved
    in granting an extension of time.

15.   The Tribunal went on to conclude that the grant of leave to appeal  on
    an out of time application was one  which  was  merely  irregular,  and
    therefore if neither  party  took  the  point  about  time  before  the
    Tribunal issued its  final  determination  then  the  irregularity  was
    simply waived, and it would  be  too  late  for  an  objection  to  the
    Tribunal hearing the matter on the ground that the application was  out
    of time.  The Tribunal commented that the absence of objection  by  the
    respondent  to  the  appeal  proceeding  itself   constituted   special
    circumstances for the Tribunal's implicit extension of time.   However,
    if the respondent did take the point about time the grant of  leave  to
    appeal could be seen as conditional upon time being extended and it was
    an indication of what the decision on the application would  be  if  it
    were in time.  If the applicant demonstrated the existence  of  special
    circumstances and persuaded the Tribunal to extend time, then the grant
    of leave to appeal would stand.  If, however, on the other  hand  there
    were no special circumstances or the Tribunal declined to exercise  its
    discretion to extend time, the grant of permission was ineffective.

16.   I am bound by AK as a  starred  decision  of  the  IAT  (see  Practice
    Direction 12-1).  It is the case, therefore, that the grant of leave to
    appeal in this case is conditional and  in  this  regard  I  think  the
    reasoning in AK is reinforced by  Rule  24(4)(b).    The  question  is,
    therefore, whether there are any special  circumstances,  and  in  this
    regard the reasoning  in  BO  and  TR  is  relevant.   In  her  written
    submissions Ms Easty has argued that no explanation was given as to why
    the grounds were not faxed on the day they were drafted.   The  drafter
    of the grounds does not state when she returned  from  maternity  leave
    and therefore it is entirely unclear  how  the  return  from  maternity
    leave relates to the deadline date.  There was  a  failure  to  specify
    when the procedure for service on the IAC changed and what that  change
    was and therefore no indication as to whether it  was  very  recent  or
    whether it was a fundamental or marginal change, and the point is  also
    made that it is clear that the drafter knew of the error  on  14  March
    but that the grounds were not served on that day but three days  later,
    on 17 March.  Ms Easty argues, therefore, that the contention that  the
    explanation covers the entire period of the delay is erroneous.

17.   In BO the Tribunal  stated  that  the  first  question  was  what  the
    explanation was for the lateness and if there was no explanation or not
    a satisfactory explanation or one that was not  supported  by  evidence
    that ought to have  been  readily  available  then  it  would  be  very
    unlikely, indeed it would be right to say that time should be extended.
     The point is also made that the  judge  should  ensure  that  whatever
    explanation is given covers the whole of the period of delay.  Delay by
    representatives cannot be an explanation for the appellant's own  delay
    and, therefore, if the case is one in  which  the  appellant  might  be
    expected to have himself been prompt ensuring a timely notice of appeal
    was entered on his behalf or if  the  representative's  delay  occurred
    only after time had already expired it  would  be  very  unlikely  that
    delay by the representatives would be an effective explanation for  the
    lateness of the notice.  It is  also  said  that  the  requirement  for
    evidence is important.  In  assessing  the  explanation  for  delay  an
    Immigration Judge will be making findings of fact and  if  he  has  not
    been shown evidence that ought readily to have been available or if  he
    does not believe the  explanation  given  on  the  appellant's  behalf,
    whether or not evidence is produced, he is entitled to say  so  and  to
    decide there has been no effective explanation for  the  delay.   Other
    relevant factors may include the strength  of  the  grounds  of  appeal
    (bearing in mind what was said above in this regard)  the  consequences
    of the decision, the length of delay, prejudice to the  respondent  and
    mistakes, delays and breaches of Rules by the respondent.

18.   This decision was roundly endorsed by a Deputy  High  Court  Judge  in
    TR.  He applied it to the facts of that case, noting that the judge had
    not  undertaken  a  structured  decision-making  process  and  had  not
    faithfully followed the BO guidelines.

19.   I consider there is force in the points made by  Ms  Easty  concerning
    the claimed special circumstances in this case.  There  is  a  lack  of
    explanation as to relevant matters such as why  the  grounds  were  not
    faxed on the day they were  drafted,  the  relevant  timescale  of  the
    drafter's maternity  leave,  return  from  maternity  leave,  when  the
    procedure for service on the IAC changed, what that change was and why,
    when the grounds were "quickly retrieved" on 14 March,  they  were  not
    served until 17 March.  The period of delay is clearly  a  significant
    one in this case and that would be so even if it were  just  the  three
    days between 14 and 17 March.  The grounds of appeal are not especially
    strong, and Ms Easty has made the point that there is no  challenge  to
    the credibility findings.  She makes the point, though I am  not  aware
    of any evidence supporting this, that the claimants'  health  has  been
    affected by the late challenge to the decision in their favour.  I have
    already commented on the length of delay which I consider to be of some
    significance in this case.  There have  been  no  mistakes,  delays  or
    breaches of Rules by the claimants.  Taking  all  these  matters  as  a
    whole, therefore,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  by  reason  of  special
    circumstances it would be unjust not to  extend  time.   I  accordingly
    decline to extend time in this case.  It follows that, the  appeals  of
    the appellants having been  allowed  by  the  Immigration  Judge,  that
    decision stands.







Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

