
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

FMB (EEA reg 6(2)(a) - 'temporarily unable to work') Uganda [2010] UKUT 447
 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 November 2010                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FB

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson of Counsel

A state of affairs is 'temporary' if it is not permanent.  Accordingly,  for
the purposes of reg 6(2)(a) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006, a person whose inability to work as a  result  of  illness
or accident is not permanent is temporarily unable to work.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  a  determination  by
    Immigration Judge Oxlade.  In a decision dated  17  February  2010  the
    Secretary of State refused the  Claimant  a  permanent  residence  card
    under  reg  15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.  The Claimant's appeal was allowed by the Immigration
    Judge and permission to appeal was granted on the Secretary of  State's
    application.

 2. The claimant was born on 5 January 1988 and is a  national  of  Uganda.
    She first entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 1 July  2004.   On
    18 November 2004 she was granted residence as a family member of an EEA
    national, namely her father,  who  is  a  Swedish  national.   She  was
    refused a permanent residence card in the decision giving rise to  this
    appeal because the Secretary of State was not satisfied that her father
    was a qualified person who had exercised Treaty rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of 5 years.

 3. The acquisition of a permanent right of residence is addressed  in  reg
    15 of the 2006 Regulations in the following terms:

      "15(1)   The following persons shall acquire the right  to  reside  in
      the United Kingdom permanently:


          a) an EEA national who has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
             accordance with these regulations for a continuous period of 5
             years;


          b) a family member of an EEA national who is not himself  an  EEA
             national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the
             EEA national  in  accordance  with  these  regulations  for  a
             continuous period of 5 years;

          c) a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;

          d) the family member of a worker or self-employed person who  has
             ceased activity;

          e) a person who was a family member of a worker or  self-employed
             person where -

              i) the worker or self-employed person has died;
             ii) the family member resided with him immediately  before  his
                 death;  and
            iii) the worker or self-employed person has resided continuously
                 in  the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least  the   two   years
                 immediately before his death or the death was a  result  of
                 an accident at work or an occupational disease;

          f) a person who -


              i) has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with  these
                 Regulations for a continuous period of five years; and


             ii) was, at the end of that period, a  family  member  who  has
                 retained the right of residence."

 4. Rights of residence prior  to  acquisition  of  a  permanent  right  of
    residence are set out in the Regulations at regs 13 and 14.  Regulation
    13, headed "Initial right of residence", states:

       "13 - (1)  An EEA national is  entitled  to  reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom for a period not exceeding 3 months  beginning  on  the
             date on which he is admitted to  the  United  Kingdom  provided
             that he holds a valid national identity card or passport issued
             by an EEA state.


          2) A family member of an  EEA  national  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom under paragraph (1) who is not himself an EEA  national
             is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom  provided  that  he
             holds a valid passport.


          3) But -


          a) this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b); and


              b) an EEA  national  or  his  family  member  who  becomes  an
                 unreasonable burden on the social assistance system of  the
                 United Kingdom shall cease to  have  the  right  to  reside
                 under this regulation."

 5. Regulation 14(1), headed  "Extended  right  of  residence",  begins  as
    follows:

       "14 - (1)  A qualified person is entitled to reside  in  the  United
       Kingdom for so long as he remains a qualified person."

 6. The definition of a "qualified person" is found in reg 6.  In terms  of
    reg 6(1) a "qualified person" means a person who is an EEA national and
    in the United Kingdom as -

          a) a job seeker;


          b) a worker;

          c) a self-employed person;

          d) a self-sufficient person; or

          e) a student.

 7. Regulation 6(2) sets out circumstances in which  a  person  who  is  no
    longer working does not cease to be treated as a worker for the purpose
    of reg 6(1)(b).  These circumstances include, at reg 6(2)(a), that  the
    person "is temporarily unable to work as the result of  an  illness  or
    accident".

 8. Regulation 15(1)(c) refers to a  permanent  right  of  residence  being
    acquired by a worker or self-employed person who has  ceased  activity.
    This term is defined in reg 5, which includes at reg 5(3) the following
    definition of a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity:

      "(3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -


          a) he terminates his activities in the United Kingdom as a worker
             or self-employed person as a result of permanent incapacity to
             work; and


          b) either -

              i) he resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than
                 two years prior to the termination; or


             ii) the incapacity is the result of an accident at work  or  an
                 occupational disease that entitles him to a pension payable
                 in full  or  in  part  by  an  institution  in  the  United
                 Kingdom."

 9. When this appeal was heard before the Immigration Judge,  the  evidence
    of the claimant's father was  accepted  that  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2002 and worked as a teacher until the summer of 2004,  when
    he was forced to give up work owing to illness.  The Immigration  Judge
    concluded that the claimant's father worked  for  about  2  years  from
    around September 2002 until September 2004 and during that period  fell
    within the definition of  a  "worker"  in  the  EEA  Regulations.   The
    claimant's father remained incapable of work from 2004  until  February
    2008, when he enrolled as a student.

10. The Immigration Judge noted in  the  EEA  Regulations  the  distinction
    between a worker who is temporarily unable  to  work  as  a  result  of
    illness or accident, and remains a worker  under  reg  6(2)(a),  and  a
    worker who has ceased activity because of permanent incapacity to  work
    in terms of reg 5(3)(a).  While a worker who is temporarily  unable  to
    work remains a qualified person under reg 6, a  person  who  terminates
    his activity as a worker as a result of permanent incapacity to work is
    not a qualified person under reg 6 but may be a worker who  has  ceased
    activity under reg 5(3) provided the conditions therein are  satisfied.
    If those conditions are satisfied,  then  the  worker  who  has  ceased
    activity  will  acquire  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under  reg
    15(1)(c).

11. The Immigration Judge accepted a submission on behalf of  the  claimant
    that any inability or incapacity to work which was less than  permanent
    must be regarded as temporary.  The length of the period of  incapacity
    was not determinative.  It was argued before the Immigration Judge that
    the purpose of the EEA Regulations was to facilitate  the  exercise  of
    Treaty rights by EEA nationals and  this  required  that  their  family
    members should be able accompany or follow them and put down roots in a
    Member State.  The Immigration Judge was satisfied that the  claimant's
    father was a worker from 2002 to 2004, when he was teaching,  and  from
    2004 to 2008, when he was temporarily unable to work as the  result  of
    illness.  In February 2008 he became a student and as such  remained  a
    qualified person under reg 6(1).  Accordingly he was a qualified person
    continuously from 2002.  On this basis the appeal by his  daughter,  as
    his family member, was allowed.

12. The grounds originally relied upon by the Secretary  of  State  in  the
    application for permission to appeal were  brief  and,  it  transpired,
    misconceived.  The Secretary of State submitted  that  the  Immigration
    Judge should have taken account of reg 13(3)(b), in terms of which  the
    claimant's father ought to have been regarded as an unreasonable burden
    on the social assistance system of the United Kingdom and had therefore
    not been  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period  of  five  years,  as  required  to
    qualify for a permanent right of residence.   It  was  on  this  ground
    which permission to  appeal  was  granted.   Before  us  Mr  Richardson
    pointed out that reg 13, on which the Secretary of State  was  relying,
    was headed "Initial right of residence" and set out, at reg 13(1),  the
    right of an EEA national to reside in the United Kingdom for  a  period
    not exceeding 3 months provided a passport or  national  identity  card
    was held.  In terms of reg 13(3)(b), an  EEA  national  who  became  an
    unreasonable burden on the  social  assistance  system  of  the  United
    Kingdom ceased to have the right to  reside  "under  this  Regulation",
    meaning reg  13.   Accordingly  the  restriction  in  reg  13(3)(b)  in
    relation to an EEA national who  was  an  unreasonable  burden  on  the
    social assistance system applied only in respect of the  initial  right
    of residence for 3 months.

13. We accept that Mr Richardson's submission in respect of the application
    of reg 13(3)(b) is correct in that this  particular  provision  of  the
    Regulations has no application to the present appeal.

14. One day prior to the hearing before us the Secretary of State sought to
    submit two additional grounds on which to challenge  the  determination
    of the Immigration Judge.  The first of these was that the  Immigration
    Judge erred in law in relation to  the  question  of  what  constituted
    temporary inability to work.  The term "temporary" ought  not  to  have
    been interpreted as any period which preceded permanent incapacity.

15. The second additional ground advanced on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was that the Immigration Judge did not make adequate findings  on
    the claimant's father's current status as a student.  In particular, it
    was submitted that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not  make  sufficient
    findings on whether the requirements of reg 4(1)(d), which sets out the
    conditions under which a student is  to  be  regarded  as  a  qualified
    person, were satisfied.

16. Mr Richardson submitted that not only had he not received the Secretary
    of State's amended grounds prior to the hearing, but that  it  was  far
    too late for the Secretary of State to seek to amend the grounds,  more
    than 3 months after  the  application  for  permission  was  made.   He
    acknowledged, nevertheless, that as the issue of whether the  cessation
    of work by the claimant's father was temporary had been  argued  before
    the Immigration Judge, he would be in a position to address us on  this
    question.  He further submitted  that  the  merits  of  the  additional
    grounds should be a relevant factor in deciding whether to  admit  them
    for consideration.

17. For our part we decided to hear submissions as to  the  merits  of  the
    additional grounds before deciding whether to admit them.

18. So far as the second  ground  is  concerned,  it  can  be  disposed  of
    briefly.  By the time the claimant's father enrolled as a  student,  in
    February 2008, he would already have  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
    residence, if he was eligible to do so, either as  a  worker  or  as  a
    worker who had ceased activity.  Accordingly the question of whether he
    satisfied the requirements of reg 4(1)(d) as a  student  from  February
    2008 was not material to the outcome of this appeal.  The focus of  the
    appeal was on whether the Immigration Judge was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the claimant's father remained a worker from 2004 onwards  because
    of his temporary inability to work as a result of illness, in terms  of
    reg 6(2)(a).  For as long as the claimant's father remained within  the
    definition of a worker, he was a qualified person in terms of reg  6(1)
    and his family members were entitled to reside in  the  United  Kingdom
    with him for as long as  they  remained  family  members.   It  is  not
    disputed in this appeal  that  the  claimant  is  her  father's  family
    member.  After the claimant's father had resided in the United  Kingdom
    in accordance with the Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years he would  acquire  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under  reg
    15(1)(a) and his daughter, if she had resided  in  the  United  Kingdom
    with him in accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period  of
    5 years, would  acquire  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under  reg
    15(1)(b).

19. In relation to whether the claimant's father required a permanent right
    of residence, the crucial  issue  arising  from  the  findings  of  the
    Immigration Judge was whether the claimant's father continued to  be  a
    worker, and accordingly, a qualified person, for  5  years  from  2002,
    notwithstanding that from 2004  he  became  unable  to  work  owing  to
    illness.  If his inability to work  was  temporary,  then  he  remained
    within the definition of a worker for the 5 year period.

20. For the Secretary of State, Mr Gulvin submitted that a temporary period
    of incapacity could not be as significant  in  length  as  four  years,
    although he was not able to refer to any authority on  the  point.   He
    acknowledged that if a person's incapacity was  neither  temporary  nor
    permanent, then it was difficult to define it further.

21. For the claimant, Mr Richardson submitted that if  incapacity  was  not
    permanent, then in terms of the ordinary meaning of  language,  it  was
    temporary.  He put to us two further arguments.   The  first  of  these
    relied upon certain regulations where requirements were expressed as  a
    finite period.  In this regard he referred us by way of an  example  to
    reg 5(3)(b), which requires that the person who has ceased activity  as
    a result of permanent incapacity to work  has  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom continuously for more than two years prior to the  termination.
    Mr Richardson  submitted  that  by  contrast  no  period  of  time  was
    specified in reg 6(2)(a) in relation to temporary  inability  to  work.
    This omission should be regarded as deliberate.

22. Secondly, Mr Richardson argued that when the EEA Regulations were  read
    as a whole, reg 6(2)(a), relating to temporary inability to  work,  and
    reg 5(3)(b), relating to permanent cessation of  activity,  dove-tailed
    together in a manner implying that a person not  permanently  incapable
    of work was to be regarded as temporarily incapable of work.

23. For our part we consider  that  there  is  considerable  merit  in  the
    argument advanced on behalf of the claimant as to the  meaning  of  the
    words "temporary" and "permanent", in the  sense  that  if  a  person's
    inability or incapacity is not permanent, then it should be regarded as
    temporary.  The definition of "permanent" in Collins English Dictionary
    (1991) is  given  as  "1.   Existing  or  intending  to  exist  for  an
    indefinite period" and "2. Not expected to  change  for  an  indefinite
    time; not temporary".  The definition of "temporary" is  given  as  "1.
    Not permanent; provisional" and then "2.  Lasting only  a  short  time;
    transitory".  These definitions give strong support  for  the  argument
    that a state of affairs which is not permanent is  temporary  although,
    reflecting Mr  Gulvin's  submission,  temporary  is  also  regarded  as
    lasting only a  short  time.   We  note  that  reg  5(3)(a)  refers  to
    "permanent incapacity to work" while reg 6(2)(a) refers to a person who
    is "temporarily unable to work" but we do not  consider  that  in  this
    appeal anything  material  hinges  on  any  distinction  between  being
    incapable of work or unable to work.

24. To assist us in our interpretation of the Regulations we have also  had
    regard to the Council Directive 2004/38/EC on the rights of citizens of
    the Union and their family members to move and reside freely within the
    territory of the Member States, which the Regulations are  intended  to
    implement.  Article 7 of the Directive sets out the right of  residence
    for more than three months, which is conferred  by  article  7.1(a)  on
    workers or self-employed persons in  the  host  Member  State  and,  by
    article 7.1(d) on their family members accompanying  or  joining  them.
    In terms of article 7.3(a) a Union citizen who is no  longer  a  worker
    retains the status of worker where he or she is temporarily  unable  to
    work as the result of an illness or  accident.   Article  16  sets  out
    eligibility for the right of permanent residence, which  as  a  general
    rule is conferred upon Union citizens who have resided  legally  for  a
    continuous period of five years in the host Member State and upon their
    family members who are not nationals of a  Member  State.   Article  17
    provides certain exemptions for persons no longer working in  the  host
    Member State and their family members.  In particular  article  17.1(b)
    confers the right of permanent residence on  working  or  self-employed
    persons who have resided continuously in the host Member State for more
    than two years  and  stop  working  there  as  a  result  of  permanent
    incapacity  to  work.   In  terms  of  Article  17.3,  irrespective  of
    nationality, the family members of a worker or a  self-employed  person
    who are residing with him in the territory of  the  host  Member  State
    shall have the right of permanent residence in that  Member  State,  if
    the worker or self-employed person has acquired himself  the  right  of
    permanent residence in that Member State under Article 17.1.

25. An examination of the Directive shows that the provisions  in  the  EEA
    Regulations relating to  temporary  inability  to  work  and  permanent
    incapacity  to  work,  and  the  consequences  flowing  therefrom,  are
    faithful to the terms of the Directive.  In addition, article 16, which
    sets out the general rule on eligibility for  the  right  of  permanent
    residence, is a significant statement of principle conferring the right
    of permanent residence on Union citizens and their family  members  who
    have resided legally for the required period of five years in the  host
    Member State.

26. Having regard to the wording of the  relevant  provisions  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, in particular regs 5(3)(b) and 6(2)(a), to  the  terms  of
    the Directive,  and  to  the  meaning  of  the  words  "temporary"  and
    "permanent", we are satisfied that the Immigration Judge did  not  make
    an error of law in categorising the claimant's  father's  inability  to
    work as temporary and in concluding that he was a qualified person  who
    had acquired a permanent  right  of  residence  under  reg  15(1).   It
    follows from this that the claimant herself is entitled to a  permanent
    right of residence as a family member under reg 15(1)(b).  Although the
    claimant attained the age of 21 shortly before applying  for  permanent
    residence, it has not been suggested that she ceased  to  be  a  family
    member in terms of Regulation 7.  Accordingly, as the Immigration Judge
    made no error of law,  the  determination  allowing  the  appeal  shall
    stand.

27. In this appeal it was accepted on the basis  of  the  medical  evidence
    that there was  a  genuine  inability  to  work  on  the  part  of  the
    claimant's father.  A finding of temporary inability  to  work  for  an
    extended period would not be sustainable if a person  having  given  up
    work owing to illness then abstained  from  working  voluntarily.   The
    evidence in this appeal, however, shows the claimant's father  to  have
    been unable to work until  such  time  as  developments  in  medication
    together with new combinations of medication  stabilised  and  relieved
    his condition sufficiently to enable him to commence his studies.

28. Finally, we note that Mr Richardson put before us a determination by an
    Immigration   Judge   in   respect   of   the   claimant's   stepmother
    (IA/13184/2010), although he did not refer to it in argument.   In  the
    determination in respect of the stepmother's  appeal,  the  Immigration
    Judge found on the evidence that the claimant's father was  temporarily
    unable to work.  The Immigration Judge went on to  find  that  even  if
    this was wrong, the claimant's  father  had  resided  lawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom for more than two years from his arrival  in  June  2002
    until the termination of his employment, recorded as having taken place
    in August 2004, and thereby satisfied the definition of  a  person  who
    terminates his activity in the United Kingdom as a worker as  a  result
    of permanent incapacity to  work,  in  terms  of  reg  5(3).   On  this
    alternative basis the claimant's father qualified for a permanent right
    of residence under reg 15(1)(c).  The appeal before  us,  however,  was
    not argued on this basis and  indeed,  the  principal  finding  by  the
    Immigration Judge in the claimant's stepmother's appeal  was  that  the
    claimant's  father's  inability  to  work   was   temporary,   although
    prolonged.  There is no material inconsistency between the  appeals  in
    this regard.

                                  DECISION

29. The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law.  Accordingly the previous decision allowing the  appeal
    shall stand.




Signed           [pic]       Date

President of the Upper Tribunal,
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

