

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Al - Sirri (Asylum - Exclusion - Article 1F(c)) [2016] UKUT 00448 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |       Decision Promulgated  |
|On 04 and 25 July 2016                        |       On 17 August 2016     |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         YASSER TOUFIQ ALI AL-SIRRI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr J Auburn, of Counsel, instructed by the
Government Legal Department
For the Respondent:     Mr A Mackenzie, of Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
Pierce and Partners


In every case involving exclusion of protection  under  Article  1F  of  the
Refugee Convention, the onus of proof  is  on  the  Secretary  of  State,  a
detailed and individualised examination of  the  facts  is  required,  there
must be clear and credible  evidence  of  the  offending  conduct,  and  the
overall evaluative judgment involves the application of  a  standard  higher
than suspicion or belief.






                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. While this is the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (the "Secretary  of  State"),  we  shall,  for  convenience,
    continue to describe Mr Al-Sirri as the Appellant.


 2. From Appendix 1, the "Chronology of Events", one quickly  discerns  the
    protracted and moderately complex history of  this  appeal.   In  brief
    compass, the Appellant is a national of Egypt, now aged 53 years.  Upon
    entered the United Kingdom in 1994, accompanied by his spouse and  four
    children, the Appellant  made  an  application  for  asylum  which  was
    refused some six years later on the basis that he was excluded from the
    protection of  the  Refugee  Convention  by  reason  of  Article  1F(c)
    thereof. Some 22 years after his arrival, the  Appellant  continues  to
    reside in the United Kingdom.  His  interaction  with  the  U.K.  legal
    system dates from September  2006.   During  the  ensuing  period,  the
    landmark events in the litigation calendar have included  the  decision
    of the Supreme Court, promulgated on 21 November 2012; see  Al-Sirri  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 54.


 3. The effect of the decision of the Supreme Court was to require a  fresh
    hearing of the Appellant's  appeal  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the
    "FtT").  The period thereafter was punctuated by case management review
    hearings, much inter-partes correspondence, debates  about  disclosure,
    exchanges regarding a proposed further interview of  the  Appellant  by
    the Secretary of State's agents and, ultimately, a  fresh  decision  by
    the Secretary of State dated 10  January  2014.   This  represents  the
    current, active decision which culminated in the decision  of  the  FtT
    now under appeal.

THE REFUGEE CONVENTION

 4. By Article 1A(2) of the Refugee  Convention,  a  person  qualifies  for
    refugee status if -


         "....  owing to well founded fear of being persecuted  for  reasons
         of race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
         group or political opinion, [he] is  outside  the  country  of  his
         nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is  unwilling  to
         avail himself of the protection of that country ...."


    Article 1F provides:


         "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:


          a) He has committed a crime against peace,  a  war  crime,  or  a
             crime  against  humanity,  as  defined  in  the  international
             instruments drawn up to make  provision  in  respect  of  such
             crimes.


          b) He has committed a serious  non-political  crime  outside  the
             country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as  a
             refugee.


          c) He has been guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
             principles of the United Nations."


    The operative provision in this case is Article 1F(c).

THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S DECISIONS

 5. On 30 April 1994, upon arrival in the  United  Kingdom,  the  Appellant
    claimed asylum.  His application was, ultimately, refused on 11 October
    2000.  By a supplementary decision dated 31  March  2004  the  original
    decision was affirmed.  This was followed by a fresh decision dated  05
    December 2006.  The ensuing six  years  were  occupied  by  proceedings
    before various courts and tribunals.


 6. The current, operative decision of the Secretary of State is  contained
    in a letter dated 10 January 2014.  This detailed letter is susceptible
    to the following breakdown:


      a) The Appellant claimed that  while  in  Egypt  he  was  involved  in
         Islamic charities with  a  view  to  implementing  Sharia  Law  and
         establishing an Islamic regime  in  Egypt.   This  included  public
         demonstrations and he was detained periodically.


      b) In 1993 he was accused of the  attempted  murder  of  the  Egyptian
         Prime Minister. This was the impetus for his flight to  the  United
         Kingdom.


      c) The basis of the Appellant's claim for asylum is his fear  that  if
         repatriated to Egypt he will be murdered by the regime.


      d) On 29 October 2001 he was charged with  conspiracy  to  murder  the
         leader of the  "Afghan  Northern  Alliance"  (whom  we  shall  call
         "ASM"), who had been killed in Afghanistan on  09  September  2001,
         which charge was withdrawn some months later.


      e) The decision continues:


             "It  has  therefore  been  considered  whether  the   act   of
             conspiracy to murder [ASM] was an act that attacked  the  very
             basis of the international community's  co-existence,  whether
             it had an international dimension and whether  the  crime  was
             capable  of  affecting  international  peace,   security   and
             peaceful relations between states.  This has been assessed  in
             light of the international repercussions of the murder."


      f) ASM was the  established  leader  of  the  anti-Taleban  forces  in
         Afghanistan  and  his  murder  was  perpetrated  by   Al-Qaeda,   a
         proscribed terrorist group which has been held responsible for  the
         terrorist attacks in the United Kingdom on 11 September 2001.


      g) Since the late  1990s,  Al-Qaeda  has  been  considered  "the  most
         infamous worldwide terrorist organisation".


      h) ASM was a towering figure in the war between the  Taleban  and  the
         Northern Alliance:


             "It is considered that his elimination  from  [this  conflict]
             had a significant impact on the conflict and on the course  of
             the war.  The terrorist attacks in the US on 11 September 2001
             and  the  subsequent  involvement  of  the  US  in   the   war
             demonstrate not only the international impact of the  conflict
             but, in the elimination of  the  most  prominent  anti-Taleban
             leader, the international impact of his murder.  Therefore the
             event of the murder of [ASM] had a  significant  international
             dimension.  The  background  information  indicates  that  the
             impact was that it was more difficult for the US to inflict  a
             decisive defeat against Taleban throughout Afghanistan in  the
             absence of the  unifying  force  and  military  capability  of
             [ASM]."


      i) The above is the preface to the following conclusion:


             "It is therefore considered that the murder of  [ASM]  was  an
             act of terrorism of such  gravity  and  international  impact,
             committed by a terrorist group of worldwide notoriety, that it
             was clearly against the principles and purpose of  the  United
             Nations  outlined  under  Article   1F(c)   of   the   Refugee
             Convention, as interpreted in  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme
             Court."


      j) The decision then discusses the Appellant's "alleged role"  in  the
         murder in question:


             "It is noted that you have been accused of providing a  letter
             of introduction to the perpetrators of the  murder  of  [ASM].
             It is considered that this allegation, if proven,  amounts  to
             organising a terrorist act.  Careful  consideration  has  been
             given to whether the evidence against you amounts  to  serious
             reasons for considering  that  you  conspired  to  commit  the
             murder ....


             The evidence that has been included in this  consideration  is
             that which was available to the criminal court when  you  were
             charged  with  conspiracy  to  murder  [ASM].    Additionally,
             available circumstantial evidence has been  included  in  this
             consideration."


      k) The decision continues:


             "The evidence contained in  the  attached  Case  Research  and
             Analysis Report has  been  considered  and  its  evidence  and
             conclusions support the conclusions set out in this letter."


      l)  There  follows  a  recitation  of  various  items  of  documentary
         evidence: documents found in the possession of the assassins at the
         scene of the murder, which included in particular  certain  letters
         containing the Appellant's particulars and prima facie linking  him
         with a purported journalistic  exercise,  the  object  whereof  was
         direct access to ASM; evidence of the  police  examination  of  the
         Appellant's computer following his arrest on 23 October 2001; other
         documents  found  at  the  Appellant's  home  at  this  stage;  the
         Appellant's statements to the police and the records of his  police
         interviews.


      m) Next, the decision maker notes the Appellant's  admission  that  he
         provided documentation to ASM's assassins, who posed as journalists
         and his claim that he did so innocently without  knowledge  of  the
         murder plot.  The Appellant  further  claimed  that  the  operation
         involved  the  creation  of   a   broadcasting   arm,   Arab   News
         International, of his organisation, the Islamic Observation  Centre
         ("IOC").  This  would  provide  the  organisation  with  both  news
         dissemination capacity and some profit.  In return,  the  Appellant
         would provide the assumed journalists with letters of  introduction
         and identity cards from IOC.


      n) The decision maker notes that the Appellant was entirely passive in
         matters  of  broadcasting  and  news  dissemination   subsequently,
         thereby  undermining  the  credibility  of  his  explanation.   The
         Appellant's evident failure to check the credentials of the persons
         concerned  is  also  highlighted.   In  addition,  the  Appellant's
         failure to provide an explanation for a letter dated  approximately
         one month preceding the murder requesting that he "... get  rid  of
         all the letters which I sent you previously because you  are  aware
         of the circumstances" is underlined, together  with  his  continued
         assistance to the person concerned subsequently.  Also  highlighted
         was the Appellant's failure  to  mention  certain  email  exchanges
         during interview,  indicative  of  the  deliberate  withholding  of
         information  concerning  his  involvement  in  the  alleged  murder
         conspiracy.


      o) The decision maker then draws attention to the Appellant's  alleged
         failure to avail  himself  of  opportunities  to  account  for  his
         conduct and the documents found in his possession and to answer the
         evidence against him, in particular by failing to give evidence  at
         the initial tribunal hearing and  refusing  to  attend  a  proposed
         interview with the Home Office.


 7. The case  against  the  Appellant  is  encapsulated  in  the  following
    passage:


         "As such it is considered that you deliberately provided  documents
         for individuals posing as journalists to gain access to [ASM].   It
         is considered that  your  knowledge  that  they  were  not  genuine
         journalists yet wanted to gain access to him means  that  you  were
         aware that they  wished  to  cause  him  harm.   Therefore,  it  is
         considered that you conspired with others to murder [ASM]."


The decision maker then considers evidence of  the  Appellant's  conduct  in
    the  publication  and  distribution  of  texts  supporting   terrorist.
    Attention is also drawn to the discovery in the Appellant's home  of  a
    substantial quantity of press articles concerned an  American  military
    base in Saudi Arabia which was bombed in 1996, together with  documents
    relating to two suspects  which  included  passports  and  photographs,
    coupled with the Appellant's refusal to answer  questions  about  these
    documents during  his  police  interview  and  to  account  for  aerial
    photographs of an oil well in California  and  envelopes  addressed  to
    California and Texas, giving rise to a negative inference. Furthermore,
    he failed to account for the discovery at his home of military  manuals
    and related documents, giving rise to the negative  inference  that  he
    had in his possession material relating to  terrorism  for  a  sinister
    purpose.  In  addition,  the  decision  alleged  that  the  Appellant's
    associates include the leadership of Gama  Al  Islamiya,  a  proscribed
    terrorist organisation and that through the IOC  platform  he  defended
    one of those convicted in the United States of seditious conspiracy  in
    relation to the 1993 World Trade Centre bombing.


 8. The decision expresses the following conclusion:


         "With all the evidence considered, for the above reasons there  are
         serious reasons for considering that  you  have  committed  an  act
         contrary to the principles and purposes of the United  Nations  and
         therefore you are excluded from a grant of refugee status as you do
         not qualify under Article 1F(c)."


    This  is  followed  by  an  adverse  assessment  of   the   Appellant's
    credibility  under  the  auspices  of  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.  The decision  maker
    made two further conclusions, namely that the  principal  decision  did
    not entail any infringement of the Appellant's rights under  Article  8
    ECHR and that discretionary leave was not considered appropriate.

DECISION OF THE FtT

 9. By its decision promulgated on 13 April 2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") allowed the Appellant's appeal.  At the outset of its decision,
    the Tribunal noted the Secretary of State's decision under  section  55
    of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   Section  55
    provides:


         "55  Refugee Convention: certification


             (1)  This section  applies  to  an  asylum  appeal  where  the
                  Secretary of State issues a certificate that the appellant
                  is not entitled to the protection of Article 33(1) of  the
                  Refugee Convention because-


                  (a)  Article 1(F) applies to him (whether or not he  would
                      otherwise be entitled to protection), or


                  (b)  Article 33(2) applies to him on grounds  of  national
                      security  (whether  or  not  he  would  otherwise  be
                      entitled to protection).


             (2)  In this section-


                  (a)  'asylum appeal' means an appeal-


                      (i)  which  is  brought  under  [section  82  of  the
                             Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
                             (c.  41)]  or  section   2   of   the   Special
                             Immigration Appeals  Commission  Act  1997  (c.
                             68), and


                      [(ii)    which is brought on the ground mentioned  in
                             section 84(1)(a) or (3)(a) of that Act  (breach
                             of  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under   the
                             Refugee Convention), and]


                  (b)   'the  Refugee  Convention'  means   the   Convention
                      relating to the Status of Refugees done at Geneva  on
                      28th July 1951.


             (3)  The [First-tier  Tribunal]  or  the  Special  Immigration
                  Appeals Commission must begin substantive deliberations on
                  the asylum appeal by considering  the  statements  in  the
                  Secretary of State's certificate.


             (4)   If  the  Tribunal  or  Commission  agrees   with   those
                  statements it must dismiss such part of the asylum  appeal
                  as amounts to an  asylum  claim  (before  considering  any
                  other aspect of the case).


             (5)  Section 72(10)(a) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
                  Asylum Act 2002 (serious criminal: Tribunal or  Commission
                  to begin by considering  certificate)  shall  have  effect
                  subject to subsection (3) above.


             [(5A)    Subsections (3) and (4) also apply in relation to the
                  Upper Tribunal when it acts under section 12(2)(b)(ii)  of
                  the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.]


             (6)  Section 33 of the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security  Act
                  2001 (c. 24) (certificate of  non-application  of  Refugee
                  Convention) shall cease to have effect."


    The certificate made by the Secretary of  State  is  in  the  following
    terms:


         "With all the evidence considered, it is concluded that  there  are
         serious reasons for considering that you committed acts contrary to
         the purposes and principles of the United Nations.


         ...


         With all the evidence considered, for the above reasons  there  are
         serious reasons for considering that  you  have  committed  an  act
         contrary to the principles and purposes of the United  Nations  and
         therefore you are excluded from a grant of Refugee Status as you do
         not qualify under Article 1F(c)."


    The FtT continued:


         "The effect of the certificate is that the issue we are required to
         determine is a narrow one.  We must consider the certificate  first
         and, if in agreement with the statements contained in  it,  we  are
         required to dismiss the asylum grounds of appeal."


    The evidential matrix had two basic components.   First,  there  was  a
    substantial quantity of documentary evidence, certain  aspects  whereof
    we have  highlighted  above.   Second,  the  FtT  heard  evidence  from
    Detective Chief Inspector Dingemans.


10. The FtT also noted, inter alia, the circumstances in which  the  charge
    against the Appellant of conspiracy to murder came to a conclusion.  It
    is evident that an application was made to have the charge dismissed on
    the basis that the evidence was insufficient  to  warrant  putting  the
    Appellant on trial.  The Common Serjeant of the Old Bailey  acceded  to
    this application, as recorded in the decision of the Supreme Court,  at
    [23]:


         "The Common Serjeant concluded that the evidence was as  consistent
         with the innocence of the Accused (who had made no  secret  of  his
         authorship of the templates which could easily be traced to him and
         had  not  destroyed  any  of  the  relevant  documentation  in  his
         possession) as it was with his guilt.  Accordingly, on 16 May 2002,
         he dismissed the charge on the ground that the evidence  would  not
         be sufficient for a jury properly to convict."


    The FtT formulated its task in the following terms:


         "Conscious of the need to avoid over-simplification,  the  critical
         issue between the parties is this: has the Appellant been shown  to
         have been sufficiently involved in the assassination ....  to  show
         in turn that he falls to be excluded from  the  Refugee  Convention
         under Article 1F(c) or, on the other hand, has such involvement not
         been shown and, further, may he be properly described as  a  person
         (one of many, perhaps) innocently duped by the real actors  in  the
         plot?"


11. The FtT made the following specific findings and conclusions:


      i) The "international dimension required for the purposes  of  Article
         1F(c)" is present.


     ii)  The  assassination  in   question   was   the   product   of   "an
         internationally co-ordinated attack".


    iii) The evidence did not show any direct link between the assassination
         and the attacks in the United States two days later: however,  this
         nexus was not necessary to demonstrate the international  dimension
         of the assassination.


     iv) There was no forensic link between the letters found at  the  scene
         of the assassination and the items recovered from  the  Appellant's
         home subsequently.


      v) The "Osman letter" does not amount to  "significant  evidence  that
         Osman  and  the  Appellant  were  involved  in  activities   which,
         presumably to safeguard Osman in some way, led to the request  that
         the Appellant destroy letters", particularly  since  the  Appellant
         made no attempt to either destroy or conceal the documents.


     vi) There was nothing sinister  about  the  Appellant's  possession  of
         �3,000 in cash.


    vii) The letters of introduction recovered from the scene, which were of
         central importance in the  assassination,  were  forgeries  of  the
         documents  found  at  the  Appellant's  home.   The  inclusion   of
         particulars of the Appellant and the IOC in the documents concerned
         "...  falls  short  as  reliable  evidence   of   the   Appellant's
         involvement in the conspiracy as a conscious and knowing agent".


   viii) Substantial support for the Appellant's account was provided by the
         evidence of AM, which the Tribunal accepted.


     ix)  The  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  interviews,   including   his
         demeanour, "falls  short  of  showing  that  the  Appellant  was  a
         conspirator involved in the plot, rather than an innocent dupe".


      x) Some of the publications recovered from the Appellant's  home  were
         undoubtedly extreme, radical  and  would  cause  outrage  to  many.
         However, this constituted at most "circumstantial evidence  of  the
         Appellant's sympathy for extremist views and support for Jihad  but
         it does not go  further  and  does  not  overcome  the  absence  of
         reliable evidence that he was involved in  the  assassination  ....
         other than indirectly and innocently".


     xi) The same  assessment  of  the  "military  manuals"  was  considered
         appropriate by the Tribunal.


    xii)  The  Appellant  gave  detailed  explanations  during  his   police
         interviews.  These were "capable of dispelling the  suspicion  that
         he had been involved in terrorism" as noted by the Court of Appeal:
         see [2009] EWCA Civ 222, at [67], per Sedley  LJ.   No  substantial
         new evidence had emerged since the interviews. While the  Appellant
         had not given evidence to the Tribunal and had  refused  to  attend
         further  interview  by  the  Secretary  of  State's  agents,   this
         constituted no more than "an adverse factor of modest weight".


    The appeal was allowed accordingly.





PERMISSION TO APPEAL

12. Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted on the basis that all
    of the grounds of appeal are arguable.  The grounds are the following:


      i) The FtT erred in  its  approach  to  adverse  inferences  from  the
         Appellant's failure to answer questions or give evidence,  adopting
         the wrong approach to section 8 of the 2004 Act.


     ii) The FtT erred in law in its approach  to  the  standard  of  proof,
         formulating the test correctly but applying it incorrectly.


    iii) The FtT misstated and misunderstood certain material aspects of the
         evidence.

PREVIOUS JUDICIAL DECISIONS


13. The Appellant was charged with conspiring with others unknown to murder
    ASM, contrary to section  1(a)  of  the  Criminal  Law  Act  1977.   An
    application was made to dismiss the charge.  This resulted in a  ruling
    by the Common Serjeant of the Old Bailey, dated 16 May 2012.  The  test
    applied was formulated thus:


         "In short, the Court is required to take into account the whole  of
         the evidence against the applicant and  to  decide  whether  it  is
         satisfied that it is sufficient for a jury properly to convict."


    The first part of the ruling  was  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    evidence from which the jury could find proven that ASM was murdered by
    persons identified as Touzani and Bakkali and, further, that the letter
    of  introduction  emanating  from  the  Appellant's  organisation,  the
    Islamic Observation Centre ("IOC"),  played  a  part  in  securing  the
    interview at which the  assassination  was  carried  out.   The  Common
    Serjeant then posed the following question:


         "Third, the question remains -  and  it  is  determinative  of  the
         application - is the [there] evidence of the writing of the letters
         of  introduction  by  the  [Appellant]  -  strictly  speaking,  the
         creation of them by means  initiated  by  him  ....  sufficient  to
         permit the interference to be drawn, so that the jury is sure, that
         in doing so he was a knowing party to the murder ...   that  is  to
         say, at the time of writing them or, as indicated, causing them  to
         be written he knew that they were intended for use in  securing  an
         interview with the General  at  which  it  was  intended  that  the
         General should be killed?"


    To this question the Judge supplied a negative answer.  He  ruled  that
    the  evidence  was  insufficient.   He   considered   that   inferences
    consistent with the Appellant's innocence could not be safely excluded.
    In particular, the conclusion that the Appellant was "an innocent  fall
    guy" could not be  disregarded.  The  Common  Serjeant  identified  two
    additional factors of significance.  First, the Appellant's position as
    "a highly visible figure in the Muslim world, thus  providing  a  trail
    which led back to him".  Second, the  Appellant  had  made  no  attempt
    either to abscond or to destroy documentary evidence at  his  home  and
    office potentially incriminating of him.


14. Given the thrust of the Secretary of State's appeal, it is necessary to
    draw attention to two further passages in  the  ruling  of  the  Common
    Serjeant.  First:


         "...  The two letters in fact carried by the assassins  are  proved
         to be, as  [Counsel]  characterised  them,  careful  and  elaborate
         forgeries of the letters that the [Appellant] created ....


         'Elaborate' because they included the  use  of  the  forged  rubber
         stamps ...


         'Careful' because they involved - the forgery that is - back dating
         what was created in order to fit into a forged trail that had  been
         created for [the assassins] in their passports,  supported  by  the
         visas within them."


    And in a later passage:


         "....  It is common ground that the [Appellant] cannot have created
         his letters before, at the earliest, 28 July, and more  likely  29,
         it is in my judgment consistent  with  [the  assassins]  using  the
         letters  created  by  the  [Appellant]  as  the  template  for  the
         documentation that they were to forge, thus using  the  [Appellant]
         as  an  innocent  fall  guy  and  furthermore  one  who  could,  if
         necessary, provide very similitude to the cover  that  was  created
         for the assassins, as it is with the irresistible inference that at
         the time he provided his letters, by inference, he ....  knew  that
         they were intended to be used for the purpose of killing  [ASM]  by
         the persons or through the medium of the persons for  whom  he  was
         providing those letters by way of introduction."


    We draw attention to these passages because, as will appear infra,  one
    of the grounds of appeal to this Tribunal is that the FtT misunderstood
    the case which the Secretary of State was making as regards the letters
    of introduction, specifically in relation to the issue of forgery.


15. In 2009 the Court of Appeal became seized  of  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the AIT which had  affirmed  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse protection to the  Appellant  under  Article
    1F(c) of the Refugee Convention: see Al-Sirri v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department  and  UNHCR  (Intervening)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  222.
    Delivering the main judgment of the Court, Sedley LJ  adverted  to  the
    witness statement of Detective Chief Inspector Dingemans, who had  been
    a Case Officer in the police investigation operation stimulated by  the
    assassination. Reference was made in particular to  a  passage  in  his
    statement relating  to  evidence  recovered  during  a  search  of  the
    Appellant's home - the letters of introduction, a fax, shipping orders,
    records of banking  and  money  transfers  in  particular.   Sedley  LJ
    observed in this context, at [54]:


         "The Appellant was interviewed under caution about  this  and  much
         else. On the advice of his solicitor, who was  present  throughout,
         he answered some questions and declined to answer others."


    Next, he noted that while the transcripts of interviews had formed part
    of the evidence before the AIT, the latter "derived no assistance  from
    them".  He continued, at [55]:


         "For reasons to which I will be coming, it is not necessary to  say
         more about the Dingemans' statement than that the  desirability  of
         seeing and evaluating primary material in preference  to  secondary
         accounts of it grows in proportion to the damaging effects  of  the
         latter ...


         The preferable course was for the AIT to be shown  the  documentary
         material supporting the allegation, to hear  what  each  side  said
         about it, to consider anything relevant the Appellant had said (or,
         if the circumstances permitted an adverse inference  to  be  drawn,
         declined to say) about it at interview and to make up its own  mind
         about it."


    The "primary material" was not, however, adduced.


16. At [67] Sedley LJ returned to the issue of the police interviews:


         "The record shows that, although initially his solicitor spoke  for
         him and [the Appellant] declined to answer questions because of the
         generality of the investigation, as  time  went  by  the  Appellant
         began to offer detailed explanations, all of them  if  accepted  or
         acceptable, capable of dispelling the suspicion that  he  had  been
         involved in terrorism ....


         In particular, intelligible explanations were offered of  the  sums
         of money."


         [Emphasis added.]


    Next, in the context of a general reference to "the literature found in
    the Appellant's possession", Sedley LJ stated:


         "About the latter I would say a cautionary word. It is one thing to
         have written, say, a foreword to a book; it is another  to  believe
         all that the book says or argues. Whether the latter  is  the  case
         has to depend in some degree, perhaps a  large  one,  on  what  the
         foreword says. Equally, most literate people own books  with  which
         they do not agree.   Some  caution  is  needed  in  attributing  to
         anyone, in the absence of linking evidence,  the  contents  of  the
         books on his shelf."


    The  passages  we  have  reproduced  above  are  (mere)   observations,
    discursive dicta.  This is abundantly clear from the preface  contained
    in [66].


17. The decision of the AIT  was  reversed  and  remittal  ordered  on  the
    grounds that the AIT should have attributed no weight whatsoever to the
    Appellant's convictions in absentia in Egypt and  should  have  treated
    the evidence of the bare US indictment against the Appellant similarly:
    see [44]  and  [56].   This  explains  the  following  passage  in  the
    concurring judgment of Arden LJ, at [79]:


         "The result of this  Court's  decision  is  that  at  the  remittal
         hearing the Respondent can at best succeed  on  some  only  of  the
         grounds that it originally placed before the AIT."


18. The Appellant appealed  to  the  Supreme  Court,  the  outcome  whereof
    appears in the following excerpt from the judgment of Baroness Hale, at
    [77]:


         ".... [The  Appellant]  was  challenging  certain  aspects  of  the
         guidance given [by the Court of Appeal] to the Tribunal which would
         hear the remitted case.  In that he has succeeded to some extent."


    The Supreme Court  concluded,  following  receipt  of  further  written
    submissions, that remittal to the FtT, rather than the Upper  Tribunal,
    was appropriate.


19. The specific question of law raised by the appeal to the Supreme  Court
    was formulated by Lady Hale in [2]:


         "...  The question is whether all activities defined  as  terrorism
         by our domestic law are for that reason alone, acts contrary to the
         purposes and principles of the  United  Nations,  or  whether  such
         activities must constitute a  threat  to  international  peace  and
         security or to the peaceful relations between nations."

     The Supreme Court enunciated three guiding principles:

      i) First, Article 1F of the Refugee Convention is  to  be  interpreted
         narrowly and applied restrictively.


     ii) Second, Article 1F(c) applies to acts which, even if they  are  not
         covered by the definitions of crimes against peace, war  crimes  or
         crimes against humanity as  defined  in  international  instruments
         within  the  meaning  of  Article  1F(a),  are  nevertheless  of  a
         comparable egregiousness and character,  such  as  sustained  human
         rights violations and acts which have been clearly  identified  and
         accepted by the international community as being  contrary  to  the
         purposes and principles of the United Nations.


    iii) In determining whether there are serious  reasons  for  considering
         that the person concerned had individual  responsibility  for  acts
         within the scope of Article 1F(c), there must be "an individualised
         consideration of the facts of  the  case,  which  will  include  an
         assessment of the person's involvement in the  act  concerned,  his
         mental  state  and  possible  grounds  for   rejecting   individual
         responsibility": see [15].

    Lady Hale summarised the correct approach in [16], in these terms:


         "In our view, this is the correct approach.  The article should  be
         interpreted restrictedly and applied with caution.  There should be
         a high threshold 'defined in terms of the gravity  of  the  act  in
         question,  the  manner  in  which  the  act   is   organised,   its
         international impact and long-term objectives and the  implications
         for international peace and security.' And there should be  serious
         reasons for considering that the person concerned  bore  individual
         responsibility for acts of that character."

20. The Supreme Court  provided  the  following  general  guidance  on  the
    construction and application of the exclusion clauses  in  the  Refugee
    Convention, at [75]:


        "We are, it is clear, attempting to discern the autonomous  meaning
        of the words 'serious reasons for considering'. We  do  so  in  the
        light of the UNHCR view, with which we agree,  that  the  exclusion
        clauses in the Refugee Convention must be restrictively interpreted
        and cautiously  applied.  This  leads  us  to  draw  the  following
        conclusions:


           1) 'Serious reasons' is stronger than 'reasonable grounds.'


           2) The evidence from which those reasons  are  derived  must  be
              'clear and credible' or 'strong.


           3) 'Considering' is stronger than 'suspecting'. In our  view  it
              is also stronger than 'believing.' It requires the considered
              judgment of the decision-maker.


           4) The decision-maker need not be  satisfied  beyond  reasonable
              doubt or to the standard required in criminal law.


           5) It is unnecessary to import our domestic standards  of  proof
              into the question. The circumstances of refugee  claims,  and
              the nature  of  the  evidence  available,  are  so  variable.
              However, if the decision-maker is satisfied that it  is  more
              likely than not that the  applicant  has  not  committed  the
              crimes in question or has not been guilty of acts contrary to
              the purposes and principles of  the  United  Nations,  it  is
              difficult to see how  there  could  be  serious  reasons  for
              considering that he had done so. The reality  is  that  there
              are  unlikely  to  be  sufficiently   serious   reasons   for
              considering the applicant to be guilty unless  the  decision-
              maker can be satisfied on the balance of  probabilities  that
              he is. But the task of the decision- maker is  to  apply  the
              words of the Convention (and the Directive) in the particular
              case."

21. The Supreme Court also examined the central tenets of the Secretary  of
    State's case against the Appellant.   It  noted  the  decision  of  the
    Common Serjeant, at [23], in the following pithy terms:


         "The Common Serjeant concluded that the evidence was as  consistent
         with the innocence of the accused (who had made no  secret  of  his
         authorship of the templates which could easily be traced to him and
         had  not  destroyed  any  of  the  relevant  documentation  in  his
         possession) as it was with his guilt."


    The  Supreme  Court  approved  the  following  passage  in  the   UNHCR
    Guidelines:


         "[17]    Article 1F(c) is only triggered in  extreme  circumstances
             by activity which attacks the very basis of the  international
             community's  co-existence.  Such   activity   must   have   an
             international  dimension.    Crimes   capable   of   affecting
             international peace, security and peaceful  relations  between
             states, as well as serious and sustained violations  of  human
             rights would fall under this category."


    With regards to whether the test can be set aside where a person  plots
    in one country to de-stabilise conditions in another, the Court  added,
    at [40]:


         "The test is whether the resulting acts have the requisite  serious
         effect upon international peace, security  and  peaceful  relations
         between states."

    The decision of the FtT under appeal to this Tribunal followed upon the
    judgment of the Supreme Court and ensuing remittal.


    FIRST GROUND OF APPEAL: SECTION 8 AND ADVERSE INFERENCES


22. Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants  etc)
    Act 2004 provides, in material part:


         "8   Claimant's credibility


             (1)   In determining whether to believe a statement made by or
                  on behalf of a person who makes an asylum claim or a human
                  rights claim, a deciding authority shall take account,  as
                  damaging the claimant's credibility, of any  behaviour  to
                  which this section applies.


             (2)  This section applies to any  behaviour  by  the  claimant
                  that the deciding authority thinks-


                  (a)  is designed or likely to conceal information,


                  (b)  is designed or likely to mislead, or


                  (c)  is designed  or  likely  to  obstruct  or  delay  the
                      handling or resolution of the claim or the taking  of
                      a decision in relation to the claimant.


             (3)  Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2) the
                  following kinds of behaviour shall be treated as  designed
                  or likely to conceal information or to mislead-


                  (a)  failure without reasonable explanation to  produce  a
                      passport on request to an immigration officer  or  to
                      the Secretary of State,


                  (b)  the production of a document which  is  not  a  valid
                      passport as if it were,


                  (c)  the destruction, alteration or disposal, in each case
                      without reasonable explanation, of a passport,


                  (d)  the destruction, alteration or disposal, in each case
                      without reasonable explanation, of a ticket or  other
                      document connected with travel, and


                  (e)  failure without reasonable explanation  to  answer  a
                      question asked by a deciding authority.


             ......


              (7) In this section-


                  'asylum claim' has the meaning given by section 113(1)  of
                  the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (c.  41)
                  (subject to subsection (9) below),


                  'deciding authority' means-


                  (a)   an immigration officer,


                  (b) the Secretary of State,


                  (c) [the First-tier Tribunal] , or


                  (d)   the   Special   Immigration    Appeals    Commission
                      .............
             ......


             [(9A)    In paragraph (c) of the  definition  of  a  'deciding
                  authority' in subsection (7) the reference to  the  First-
                  tier Tribunal includes a reference to the  Upper  Tribunal
                  when acting under section 12(2)(b)(ii) of  the  Tribunals,
                  Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.]"


23. The central thrust of this ground of appeal is that the FtT misdirected
    itself in law in its purported application of section  8  of  the  2004
    Act.  The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal advance this  discrete
    challenge in the following terms:

         "[The FtT] failed to properly apply section 8 .......  It failed to
         reach necessary findings on the elements of that statutory test and
         failed to apply a mandatory statutory consideration in that test."

    The factual substratum of this ground of appeal is uncontentous.  It is
    based on the Appellant's twofold failure (a) to accede to the Secretary
    of State's request  to  undergo  further  interview  and  (b)  to  give
    evidence to the FtT.  These, Mr Auburn  argued,  are  "at  the  highest
    possible end of actions giving rise to  adverse  inferences"  -  to  be
    contrasted with, for example, a (mere) failure to produce a passport.

24. Developing this ground, Mr Auburn criticised the FtT's failure to apply
    section 8 to the framework of this  appeal  in  a  structured  way.  He
    submitted that the FtT considered the issue of  inferences  in  general
    terms only. The proper application of section 8,  he  contended,  would
    have yielded the conclusion that the Appellant had concealed and misled
    "immigration  authorities"  on  "fundamental  matters",   requiring   a
    consequential evaluation which the  Tribunal  did  not  undertake.   Mr
    Auburn submitted that the FtT erred by  applying  its  own  generalised
    concept of inferences rather than giving effect to what he  termed  the
    "mandatory considerations" enshrined in section 8.

25. The record of Mr Auburn's closing submissions to  the  FtT,  which  was
    provided in that forum and which we have considered, discloses that the
    following main submission was advanced on this issue.  It was contended
    that by reason of the Appellant's twofold refusal  (noted  above),  the
    FtT should attach little or no weight  to  his  account  and  draw  the
    adverse inference that he had no explanation for  a  series  of  issues
    which would have withstood the scrutiny of cross examination.  The main
    issues detailed were the falsity of the letters  of  introduction,  the
    inherent improbability that an innocent participant would be engaged by
    the  assassins  (and  others)  in  a  plot  of   such   magnitude   and
    sophistication; the unlikelihood that the Appellant did  not  know  the
    assassins and others; the flimsy nature of the Appellant's claims about
    the  media  production  benefit  to  him  and  his  organisation;   the
    Appellant's explanations of the "Osman letter"; and his explanations of
    the radical, inflammatory Islamic materials found in his possession.


26. The chief riposte of Mr Mackenzie on behalf of the Appellant  was  that
    the main issue in the appeal was whether the  Secretary  of  State  had
    discharged the onus of proving that the Appellant  should  be  excluded
    from protection. The case, he  argued,  was  not  primarily  about  the
    Appellant's credibility and, further, the Appellant  bore  no  onus  of
    proof.  Mr Mackenzie submitted that section  8  is  directed  to  cases
    where the burden of proof is on the applicant and where the applicant's
    credibility is crucial.

27. Mr Mackenzie further submitted that the FtT's  approach  to  section  8
    accorded  with  the  leading  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  JT
    (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  1  WLR
    1411.  We pause to consider this decision.

28. Pill LJ, delivering the main judgment of the Court  of  Appeal,  noted,
    firstly, drawing on the Hansard Debates, that the impetus for section 8
    had been the perception that those entering  the  United  Kingdom  were
    being advised to -

         "....  throw away documents or refuse to co-operate either with the
         process of determining their country of origin  and  their  passage
         into the country or with re-documentation for return purposes."


    The Court diagnosed the following error of law in the decision  of  the
    AIT, at [16]:


         "....   there is a real risk that section 8 matters  were  given  a
         status and a compartment  of  their  own  rather  than  taken  into
         account, as they should have been, as part of a  global  assessment
         of credibility."


    At [19] Pill LJ added:


         "Section 8 ....   plainly has its dangers, first, if it is read  as
         a direction as to how fact finding should be conducted, which in my
         judgment it is not and,  in  any  event,  in  distorting  the  fact
         finding exercise by an undue concentration on  minutiae  which  may
         arise under the section at the expense of,  and  as  a  distraction
         from, an overall assessment.  Decision makers should guard  against
         that.  A global assessment of credibility is required."


    He continued, at [21]:


         "Section 8 ....  is  no  more  than  a  reminder  to  fact  finding
         tribunals that conduct  coming  within  the  categories  stated  in
         section 8 shall be taken into account in assessing credibility."


    The next passage is important, as it makes unambiguously clear that  in
    any case where there is evidence of any of the behaviours specified  in
    section 8, the weight to be given thereto in the overall assessment  of
    the claimant's credibility is a matter for the tribunal:


         "....  at one end of the spectrum, there may, unusually,  be  cases
         in which conduct of the kind identified in section  8  is  held  to
         carry no weight at all in the overall assessment of credibility  on
         the particular facts ....


         Where section 8 matters are held to be entitled to some weight, the
         weight to be given to them  is  entirely  a  matter  for  the  fact
         finder."


    Laws LJ was in agreement with Pill LJ that the correct construction  of
    section 8 involves the notional insertion of the  adverb  "potentially"
    immediately before the word "damaging" in section 8(1).


29. In [32] of its determination, the FtT noted the  following  aspects  of
    the Secretary of State's case:


         "The Appellant's refusal to be interviewed and his refusal to  give
         evidence in  his  own  appeal  gave  rise  to  certain  inferences.
         Section 8 of the [2004 Act] fell to be applied and the two refusals
         were at the highest possible end of actions giving rise to  adverse
         inferences,  as  amounting  to   a   failure   without   reasonable
         explanation to answer a  question,  which  was  to  be  treated  as
         behaviour designed or likely to conceal information or mislead."


      We pause here to observe that this is  a  faithful  portrayal  of  the
      submission contained in the record of Mr  Auburn's  closing  argument.
      The FtT returned to this issue in [111]:

         "What inferences may properly be drawn from the Appellant's refusal
         to attend a substantive asylum interview and his  refusal  to  give
         evidence before us?  Mr Auburn submitted that his failure to answer
         questions was behaviour designed or likely to  conceal  information
         or mislead, falling within section 8 ....  and  that  it  would  be
         appropriate to draw adverse inferences as a result ....


         The Appellant's explanation that he had given all  the  information
         previously was insufficient.  He was last interviewed by  the  Home
         Office regarding  his  asylum  claim  in  1994,  years  before  the
         principal events in issue.   When  interviewed  by  the  police  in
         October 2001, he refused to answer questions before giving what  Mr
         Auburn described as a brief, pre-prepared account on his own  terms
         and  he  declined  to  answer  any  questions   about   individuals
         associated with Islamist or terrorist causes."


      We can find no trace in this lengthy  passage  of  any  distortion  or
      misunderstanding by the Tribunal of the Secretary of State's  case  on
      this issue.

30. In the immediately ensuing paragraph, [112], the FtT continues:

         "Although we agree with Mr Auburn that  public  confidence  in  the
         asylum system is capable of being undermined by a  refusal  to  co-
         operate with the authorities of the United Kingdom and by a refusal
         to give evidence in proceedings, the particular circumstances  have
         to be considered carefully.  The precis of  the  police  interviews
         and the statements made by the Appellant on 27 October 2001 through
         his solicitor show, as Sedley LJ noted in the Court of Appeal, that
         detailed explanations were in fact given by the Appellant which, if
         accepted or acceptable, were capable of  dispelling  the  suspicion
         that he had been involved in terrorism."


    [Emphasis added.]


    This is followed by:


         "Since the events in issue and the police enquiries, no substantial
         evidence has emerged. Those events took place some  thirteen  years
         ago. At an earlier stage in the litigation, the  appellant  offered
         to answer questions so long as they were  put  to  him  in  writing
         first.  That stance might perhaps be taken to indicate some measure
         of non-cooperation but it does not amount to a  refusal  to  engage
         with the process.  And, of course, the burden of showing  that  the
         appellant is  excluded  lies  with  the  Secretary  of  State.   As
         submitted by Mr MacKenzie, there is no new  salient  feature  which
         the appellant has been invited to deal with but has refused  to  do
         so.  We have already noted the adverse impact, such as  it  is,  of
         his uncertain answers when questioned about the  Osman  letter  and
         some of the financial transactions the IOC was involved with."


    This passage continues:


         "Having carefully considered the application of section  8  of  the
         2004 Act and  its  impact  in  this  case,  we  conclude  that  the
         appellant's credibility might well be potentially undermined by his
         refusal to answer questions or give  evidence  but,  on  the  other
         hand, the account he gave in October 2001 is one we can assess  and
         weigh without difficulty.  His failure to give  evidence  does  not
         obscure any part of  the  case  he  has  put  in  response  to  the
         Secretary of State's contention that he falls within Article  1F(c)
         and, similarly, the Secretary of State has been able to put a clear
         case, identifying the particular parts of it where the  appellant's
         silence can be highlighted as damaging.  Overall,  the  appellant's
         conduct in this context is an adverse factor of modest weight."


31. It is trite that these passages must be considered  in  their  entirety
    and in the context of the Tribunal's decision as  a  whole.  They  must
    also be viewed against the framework of the main issues  thrown  up  by
    the appeal. Furthermore, these passages must  be  juxtaposed  with  the
    salient parts of  the  evidence  considered  by  the  Tribunal.   These
    include the terms of the letters exchanged between the parties relating
    to the proposed further interview of the Appellant by the Secretary  of
    State's officials and the Appellant's proposal  in  this  respect,  the
    records of the police interviews and the written  statements  proffered
    by the Appellant during the interview phase.


32. As regards the further interview issue, we are satisfied that  the  FtT
    understood the case being made on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Furthermore, there is no challenge to its  portrayal  of  the  evidence
    bearing  on  this  issue.  The  Tribunal  stated  correctly  that   the
    Appellant's  stance  was  not  one  of  outright  refusal  to   engage.
    Furthermore, the Tribunal reproduced  accurately  the  observations  of
    Sedley LJ and was entitled to adopt these.  From  the  records  of  the
    police  interviews  the  Tribunal  would  have  been  aware  that   the
    Appellant's initial stance, which was one of silence, was based on  his
    experienced solicitor's advice and, as the  19  interviews  progressed,
    was overtaken by two lengthy written statements which  were  read  into
    the record,  coupled  with  a  fundamental  change  of  position  which
    entailed  the  Appellant  engaging  with  the  interviewing   officers.
    Notably, this occurred at a stage when the Appellant had asked in terms
    for, and had been given, an assurance  that  the  interviews  were  not
    based upon any preconception of guilt but  were,  rather,  an  exercise
    genuinely designed to establish the truth.


33. The second limb of this  ground,  namely  the  Appellant's  failure  to
    testify to the FtT, overlaps somewhat with the first.  Once again,  the
    Tribunal plainly understood the case which the Secretary of  State  was
    making and, inter alia, characterised some of the Appellant's responses
    during  the  police  interviews  as  "uncertain".   Taking  both  limbs
    together, the Tribunal's decision on the section 8  issue  is  properly
    analysed, in our  view,  as  involving  two  conclusions.   First,  the
    Appellant's twofold  failure,  or  refusal,  damaged  his  credibility.
    Second, in the Tribunal's judgment, the damage  was  considered  to  be
    modest.  We consider that the first of these conclusions, coupled  with
    the Tribunal's antecedent approach, involved the correct application of
    section 8 of the 2004 Act and discloses no error of law. Our assessment
    of  the  second  conclusion  is  precisely  the  same.   This   further
    conclusion, in our opinion, is a paradigm illustration of  giving  full
    effect to the Court of  Appeal's  recognition  in  JT  (Cameroon)  that
    where, at the first stage, a Tribunal decides that there is evidence of
    conduct falling within the compass of section 8, this leads to a second
    stage of assessing the consequential damage, if any, to the  claimant's
    credibility, an exercise in which the weight  to  be  accorded  to  the
    relevant fact or factor is "entirely a matter for" the Tribunal.


34. On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated above, we  conclude  that
    there is no merit in the first ground of appeal.

SECOND GROUND OF APPEAL: THE STANDARD OF PROOF ISSUE

35. The Secretary of State has  been  granted  permission  to  advance  the
    following, further ground of appeal:


         "The FtT erred in its approach to the standard of proof.  While the
         FtT cited the correct test, when it came to applying that test  ...
         (it) erred in approach, resulting in legal error."

    The outworkings of this ground involve  the  contention  that  the  FtT
    focused only on doubts or uncertainties in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    version of events, rather than evaluating the  relative  likelihood  of
    both  parties'  accounts.   We  have  summarised  in  [7]   above   the
    improbabilities in the Appellant's case canvassed by the  Secretary  of
    State.  Mr Auburn further submitted that the FtT  failed  to  discharge
    its duty of analysing all of the evidence in the round before  deciding
    whether it was sufficient to warrant the application of Article  1F(c).
    The discrete misdemeanour advanced is a failure to "critically analyse"
    the Appellant's account.


36. The essence of the response made on behalf of  the  Appellant  is  that
    this ground of appeal is fallacious as it overlooks that the burden was
    on the Secretary of State and the fundamental question for the FtT  was
    whether the Secretary of  State  had  discharged  this  burden  to  the
    appropriate standard. Mr Mackenzie further emphasised that there was no
    onus on the Appellant to disprove the Secretary of State's case  or  to
    demonstrate the truth or correctness of his version of events.


37. This ground of appeal, comparatively, received the least coverage in Mr
    Auburn's submissions.  In this context we remind ourselves of what  the
    Supreme  Court  decided  in  this  case.  First,  there  must   be   an
    individualised consideration of the  facts  of  the  case,  which  will
    include an assessment of the person's involvement in the act concerned,
    his  mental  state  and  possible  grounds  for  rejecting   individual
    responsibility: see [15].  Second, the onus rested on the Secretary  of
    State  to  demonstrate  "serious  reasons",  something  stronger   than
    reasonable grounds, based on clear and credible,  or  strong,  evidence
    for considering (a standard higher than suspecting or  believing)  that
    the Appellant had been guilty of acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
    principles of the United Nations.  We consider that,  bearing  in  mind
    the several  ingredients  in  this  formulation,  the  overarching  and
    ultimate question for the FtT was whether the Secretary  of  State  had
    discharged this burden.


38. The framework of the appeal to the FtT was fashioned by  the  Secretary
    of State's detailed decision.  The  FtT  examined  this  in  impressive
    detail, at [9] - [28] of its decision.  There is no suggestion  of  any
    distortion or misunderstanding in these passages.  Next,  the  Tribunal
    summarised the submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State, at [29]
    - [43] and those on behalf of the Appellant, at [44] - [62].  This  was
    followed by a precis of the further submissions developed on behalf  of
    both parties at the hearing, at [64] - [87]. This included the  written
    format of Mr Auburn's final submissions.  Next, at [88],  the  Tribunal
    stated:


         "Conscious of the need to avoid over-simplification,  the  critical
         issue between the parties is this: has the Appellant been shown  to
         have been sufficiently involved in the assassination  of  (ASM)  to
         show in turn  that  he  falls  to  be  excluded  from  the  Refugee
         Convention under Article 1F(c) or, on  the  other  hand,  has  such
         involvement not  been  shown  and,  further,  may  he  be  properly
         described as a person (one of many perhaps) innocently duped by the
         real actors in the plot?  We begin our assessment with the relevant
         burden and standard of proof."


    The Secretary of State's case does not involve any  criticism  of  this
    self-direction.  Furthermore, contrary to the thrust of this ground  of
    appeal, the FtT was, demonstrably, alert to both parties' cases.


39. In the section which follows, the FtT, quoting from the decision of the
    Supreme Court, considers the issues of burden and  standard  of  proof.
    There is no challenge to the way in which it did so and we find no flaw
    in any event.  From [93] - [110], the FtT considered the main  elements
    of the documentary evidence, interspersed with occasional comments.  At
    [111] - [112] the Tribunal addressed the section 8 issue  (supra).   At
    [113], it continued:


         "We return to our central task, to assess whether there are serious
         reasons for considering that the  Appellant  falls  within  Article
         1F(c) and is excluded from the Refugee Convention."

    Next, it noted that there had been some growth  and  evolution  in  the
    Secretary of State's case against the Appellant  with  the  passage  of
    time. It then noted the evidence of DCI Dingemans and the  "substantial
    amount of documentary evidence in support of the assessment he has made
    of  the  Appellant's  involvement  in  the  assassination  ....".   The
    Tribunal continued:


         "Having weighed that evidence, however, and being acutely conscious
         that our task is a different one from  that  faced  by  the  Common
         Serjeant, we conclude that serious reasons have not been shown  for
         considering that the Appellant was an  active  participant  in  the
         assassination plot or that he has been guilty of acts  contrary  to
         the purposes and principles of the United Nations."

40. We have highlighted above those passages in the  decision  of  the  FtT
    which seem to us to bear most directly on this  ground  of  appeal  and
    have considered them in the light of the principles enunciated  by  the
    Supreme Court.  Having done so, we consider that the FtT did not  lapse
    into error in its approach to or application of the burden and standard
    of proof.  We find no merit in this ground of appeal accordingly.

THIRD GROUND OF APPEAL: MISUNDERSTANDING CERTAIN EVIDENCE

41. The last of the three permitted grounds of appeal is formulated in  the
    following terms:


         "The FtT misunderstood the most important piece of evidence ....


         The FtT misstated the Secretary of State's account of some  of  its
         most important evidence,  describing  the  drafts  of  the  crucial
         letters of introduction held by the  assassins  as  'forgeries'  of
         those held by [the Appellant]."


    This ground is directly linked to two paragraphs of the FtT's decision.
    The first [94], contains the following material passages:


         "The letters of introduction constitute a very important  part  of
    the evidence ....


         These are letters found at  the  scene  of  the  assassination  and
         purport to be letters of  introduction  relating  to   .....    the
         assassins ....


         [Other  exhibits]  are  letters  of  introduction  found   at   the
         Appellant's premises.  There are differences between the  two  sets
         of letters ....  [duly  elaborated] ....


         A report from a forensic document examiner, prepared in the  course
         of the criminal investigation,  contained  a  conclusion  that  the
         letters found at the scene  were  not  printed  or  copied  on  any
         machine linked to the Appellant and were probably  not  printed  or
         copied on the same machine as the letters found at the  Appellant's
         home. The letters found at the scene were described by  the  Common
         Serjeant as 'careful and elaborate forgeries of  the  letters  that
         [the Appellant] created'."


42. The second paragraph of the FtT's decision which, through  this  ground
    of appeal, the Secretary of State specifically attacks is [102].   Here
    the Tribunal states:


         "The specific evidence of the Appellant's involvement, as  set  out
         by DCI Dingemans, does not, as he accepts, implicate the  Appellant
         directly in the conspiracy.  The items found at the  scene  of  the
         assassination fall short in this regard."


    The Tribunal then pronounces the uncontroversial finding that there  is
    no forensic nexus between a series of items of evidence recovered  from
    the scene of the  murder  and  the  Appellant.   The  Tribunal,  having
    specifically  rehearsed  Mr  Dingemans'  opinion  that  the   documents
    recovered from the scene were suggestive  of  direct  knowledge  of  or
    involvement  in  the  conspiracy  on  the  part   of   the   Appellant,
    continues:


         "As with the letters of introduction, there is a gulf  between,  on
         the one hand, the items found at the Appellant's home and  business
         premises and the explanations in relation to them  (which  we  deal
         with below) and, on the other hand, the items found at  the  scene,
         notwithstanding the fact that some contained  details  relating  to
         the Appellant and the IOC.  As Mr MacKenzie  submitted,  it  is  of
         very substantial importance that the letters of introduction  found
         at the scene were forgeries of the  items  found  in  London.   The
         extent of human agency  in  the  reproduction  of  the  letters  of
         introduction, which included the altering of the dates  and  errors
         such as the Appellant's name being misspelled, is simply unknown."


    This is followed by the finding, at [103]:


         "....  We find that the inclusion of the  Appellant's  details  and
         those of the IOC in some  of  the  items  fall  short  as  reliable
         evidence of the Appellant's involvement  in  the  conspiracy  as  a
         conscious and knowing agent."


43. The time devoted by both parties' counsel  to  this  ground  of  appeal
    comfortably eclipsed that consumed by the other two  grounds  together.
    Mr Auburn developed his argument with some energy and  enterprise.   In
    doing so, we consider  that  he  strayed  well  beyond  the  boundaries
    imposed by the grant of permission to appeal.  The  framework  of  this
    appeal was determined by the terms  of  the  three  grounds  of  appeal
    advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State and the  decision  of  the
    permission Judge that  each  overcame  the  threshold  of  arguability.
    There was no application to amend the  grounds.   At  times,  counsel's
    submissions roamed freely and widely.  We, for our part, shall  confine
    our determination of this ground to the content and contours authorised
    by the grant of permission to appeal.

44. It was at all times common ground that the versions of the two  letters
    of introduction recovered during a search of the Appellant's  premises,
    while replicating the text of the equivalent documents recovered at the
    scene of the assassination, differ in a number of significant  respects
    from the latter.  The Tribunal noted these, with particularisation,  in
    [94] of its decision.  As appears from the  last  quoted  passage,  the
    Tribunal was also alert to, and  took  into  account,  the  Appellant's
    "explanations" concerning the letters.  These were noted in [95] of its
    decision. In this context the Tribunal also considered the evidence  of
    a witness, contained in a police  statement  and,  correctly,  observed
    that this supported the Appellant's explanation.


45. The Tribunal gave further  consideration  to  this  discrete  issue  in
    [104], making the following assessment:


         "It is certainly true that the [witness's] statement  reveals  that
         the  Appellant  made  the  approach  for  help  but  if  the  plot,
         sophisticated, carefully  planned  and  well  resourced,  genuinely
         involved the Appellant, it is  perhaps  surprising  that  he  would
         openly seek help, on the basis  of  his  poor  English,  from  [the
         witness], who was in a position to tell the police exactly what  he
         knew."


    The witness proceeded to do precisely that in  the  event.   Next,  the
    Tribunal considered the evidence of the police interviews,  making  the
    assessment that from the cessation of the Appellant's stance of silence
    he provided -


         ".... an account which, in all important  respects,  has  remained
    his account to date."


46.  The  Tribunal's  characterisation  of  the  letters  of   introduction
    recovered from the scene of the assassination as  "forgeries"  lies  at
    the heart of this ground of appeal.  The origins and evolution  of  the
    word "forgeries" are  apparent  from  the  following  forensic  tracing
    exercise:


         (i)  The Appellant's application to the Crown  Court  to  have  the
             charges against him dismissed  involved  an  argument  by  his
             counsel that the  aforementioned  letters  were  "careful  and
             elaborate  forgeries  of  the  letters  that  the  [Appellant]
             created ....":  per the Common Serjeant - see [14] above.


         (ii) The Common Serjeant's assessment was that the forgery involved
             "backdating what was created in order to  fit  into  a  forged
             trail that had been  created  for  [the  assassins]  in  their
             passports, supported by the visas within them".


         (iii)    The Common Serjeant, recognising that  the  Appellant  had
             been the  creator  of  the  letters,  stated  that  they  were
             subsequently used as "the template for the documentation  that
             they [the assassins] were to forge ....."


         (iv) In [94] of its  decision,  the  FtT  quoted,  accurately,  the
             "careful and elaborate forgeries" passage from the  ruling  of
             the Common Serjeant.


         (v)  In [102] of its decision, the FtT recorded the  submission  of
             Mr MacKenzie that the letters recovered from  the  scene  were
             'forgeries of the items found in London'.  In the same passage
             the Tribunal crafted  the  phrase  'the  reproduction  of  the
             letters of introduction'.


47. It is also of importance to trace how the  Secretary  of  State's  case
    concerning the letters of introduction unfolded before the FtT:


      i) It was contended on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  initially,
         that the two sets of letters were the same.


     ii) The record of Mr Auburn's closing submission to  the  FtT  contains
         the following passage:


             "These are different drafts - 'forgery' is a misnomer -
             assassins copy' was not a forgery of A's letter ....


             The different versions are simply plotter's perfecting their
             story ...


             Important issue  is  verifiability,  ie  when  [the  victim's]
             security contact the IOC the story will stack up."


    In a later passage, one finds the submission that  the  issue  was  not
    whether the Appellant personally had composed the letters found at  the
    scene. Rather, the real issue was that of verifiability.


48. The FtT clearly did not accept the Secretary of State's case  that  the
    two sets of letters of introduction were different drafts.  Rather,  it
    evidently aligned itself with the Common Serjeant's  assessment  -  and
    accepted the submission on behalf of the Appellant - that  the  letters
    recovered  from  the  scene  were  forgeries  of  those  found  at  the
    Appellant's premises in London.  We consider that  neither  the  Common
    Serjeant nor the FtT  was,  consciously,  attributing  any  special  or
    technical meaning to the word "forgeries".  This is particularly  clear
    in the  FtT's  further  statement  that  the  letters  created  by  the
    Appellant had been the subject of subsequent human intervention  giving
    rise to "reproduction" of them.   We  consider  that  in  adopting  the
    formula of the Common Serjeant, and, simultaneously,  acceding  to  the
    submission of counsel for the Appellant, the FtT cannot be said to have
    erred in law in any recognisable way.


49. Contrary to Mr Mackenzie's submission, it is not clear to  us  from  Mr
    Auburn's skeleton argument at first  instance  that  the  Secretary  of
    State was making the case that the two sets of letters were  the  same.
    Given the obvious and critical differences between the two  sets,  this
    case would have been manifestly unsustainable in any  event.   What  is
    clear is that in closing submissions, Mr Auburn unequivocally  espoused
    the appellation "drafts",  simultaneously  characterising  "forgery"  a
    misnomer.  While the FtT clearly adopted the language of forgery in its
    decision, we are satisfied that the terms "forgery" and  "drafts"  were
    used in a loose and non-technical sense. Furthermore, neither of  these
    descriptions necessarily excluded the  other.   The  FtT  unequivocally
    held that the versions of the letter recovered from the  scene  of  the
    assassination  were  reproductions.   This  finding   is   not   merely
    unassailable in the context of an error of law  appeal.   It  is  also,
    objectively, indisputably correct.  In making  this  finding,  the  FtT
    clearly both understood the Appellant's case on this discrete issue and
    accepted it.


50. Bearing in mind the terms of this permitted ground of appeal, the  real
    question, in  our  judgment,  is  whether  the  FtT  misunderstood  the
    Secretary of State's contention,  advanced  by  Mr  Auburn  in  closing
    submissions, that one of the functions of the letters  of  introduction
    and the Appellant's involvement in their  creation  was  to  provide  a
    mechanism whereby, if certain checks and enquiries were pursued by  the
    proposed victim's entourage, the letters could be  verified,  as  could
    the  assassins'  previous  contact  with  the  Appellant  and  his  IOC
    organisation.  In our view the FtT's characterisation of these  letters
    as forgeries, as we have analysed this above, is not supportive of  the
    suggestion that it misunderstood the Secretary of State's case in  this
    respect.  Furthermore, the careful forensic examination  of  the  FtT's
    decision which we have undertaken demonstrates  clearly  that  it  paid
    attention to the closing submission of Mr Auburn.  It is  well  settled
    that there was no judicial duty to rehearse this in  its  full  detail.
    Indeed, we would add that the trail of verifiability issue was such  an
    obvious function of the letters  that  it  was  not  incumbent  on  the
    Tribunal to spell it out in  extenso.   The  Tribunal,  in  any  event,
    summarised Mr  Auburn's  submission  on  this  issue  in  [65]  of  its
    decision. Furthermore, it characterised these letters "a very important
    part of the evidence", in [94]  and  then  proceeded  to  examine  this
    discrete issue with some care.  In so doing it  gave  consideration  to
    the differences between the two sets of letters, the  evidence  of  the
    forensic document examiner, the Appellant's explanation of the letters,
    the evidence of the witness noted above, the lack  of  attempt  by  the
    Appellant to conceal or destroy this vital documentary evidence and the
    absence of any forensic link between the two sets of letters.


51. Giving effect to our analysis above, we conclude that  this  ground  of
    appeal is not made out. To this we would  add  that  having  regard  to
    elementary doctrine,  reflected  in  decisions  such  as  R  (Iran)   v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,  the
    threshold which this ground of appeal would have  had  to  overcome  in
    order to prevail is that of Wednesbury irrationality or,  adopting  the
    less attractive taxonomy, perversity.  The terms in which  Mr  Auburn's
    arguments were framed suggested clearly a recognition and acceptance of
    this analysis.

CONCLUSION

52. The Secretary of State grounds of appeal, by some measure, do not  pass
    muster. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed. The decision of the  FtT
    is, therefore, affirmed.  We would highlight that this latter  decision
    has two elements.  First, the Appellant's appeal against the  Secretary
    of State's decision that he is excluded  from  the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention under Article 1F(c) was allowed.   Second,  the  FtT
    decided that the Appellant is a refugee.

                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                          Date: 28 July 2016


                                 Appendix 1

                                 Chronology

                ============================================
IN THE FIRST TIER TRIBUNAL          Appeal ref: AA/10668/2006
IMMIGRATION & ASYLUM CHAMBER
TAYLOR HOUSE

Between

                               YASSER AL-SIRRI
                                                                   Appellant

                                      V


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




                            CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS


Key:
A = Appellant.
BPP = Birnberg Peirce & Partners, present solicitors for the Appellant.
CPS = Crown Prosecution Service.
DG = Deighton Guedalla, previous solicitors for the Appellant.
R = Respondent.
TSols = Treasury Solicitors.

Egypt

22.11.62 A born in Dumiat, near Port Said, Cairo.  A grows up  in  Suez  and
                attends school there.

Sept 1981     President Sadat makes  emergency  law  and  orders  arrest  on
                national security grounds of 1536 of those he believes to be
                his opponents, including A.

03.09.81 Order for A's arrest signed (pursuant to  emergency  law).   Police
                come to A's house in his absence.  Mother sends message  and
                A hides.

05.09.81 Following above speech, A surrenders to police  and  is  imprisoned
                in Istiqbal Tora high security prison in Cairo.

06.10.81 Assassination of President Sadat.

1982 A banned from  Egyptian  military  service  because  of  detention.   A
                resumes Islamist activities.

1984 A detained for  approximately  three  weeks  by  Security  Services  in
               Cairo.  No reasons given.  A subjected to torture.

1985 A detained in 'appeal prison'  following  demonstration  -  tortured  -
                released without charge after three months.

1986 A travelling between Cairo & Suez - detained by  Security  Service  and
                held in Cairo for 45 days - tortured - released by judge.

1987 A detained in 'appeal prison' for one month,  accused  of  distributing
                leaflets - tortured - accused of  breaking  prison  rules  -
                sent elsewhere for more than one month  -  released  without
                trial.

                A shot at by security - his friend is  hit  by  a  bullet  -
                detained for 45 days at Tora prison,  Cairo  -  tortured  by
                Deputy of SIS - released by court - no proof of guilt.

1987 (Approximate date) A's first  marriage.

1988 A takes part in memorial for massacre  in  refugee  camp  in  Chatilla,
                Lebanon - detained for three days for being pro-Palestinian.

Jordan / Yemen

22.08.88 A leaves Egypt having received warning of  imminent  arrest.   Goes
                to Jordan, and a short time later, to Yemen.

Sudan

Nov 93   A is warned to leave Yemen because  of  claims  of  involvement  in
                plot to kill Dr Sidqi.  A goes to Sudan with his family.

17.03.94 A  sentenced  to  death  in  absentia  by  Egyptian  Supreme  State
                Security Court Martial Criminal Court for involvement in the
                attempt to kill Dr Sidqi.

United Kingdom

29.04.94 A arrives in the UK from Sudan and applies for asylum at port.   He
                is  detained.   His  wife  and  four  children  are  granted
                temporary admission.

02.05.94 Asylum application.

03.05.94 Amnesty International Urgent Action -  five  co-accused  have  been
                executed - A is one of four sentenced in absentia.

Dec 94   A released from detention.

30.11.95 A is sentenced in  absentia  by  Egyptian  Supreme  State  Security
                Court  (Military  Felonies)  to  15  years  hard  labour  on
                conviction of membership of a terrorist organisation.

Late 95  A establishes the  one-man  'Islamic  Observation  Centre'  ("IOC")
                from his flat.

Jan 99   Egyptian  Supreme  State  Security  Court  Martial  Criminal  Court
                sentences A  in  absentia  to  life  with  hard  labour  for
                involvement in illegal Jihad movement and plotting to  carry
                out attacks  on  officials  and  police.   Nine  others  are
                sentenced to death.  There are 107 Defendants in all  (known
                as the 'return from Albania' case).

11.10.00 R refuses A's asylum application on the grounds  of  Article  1F(c)
                exclusion.   R  indicates  A  will  be  granted  four  years
                Exceptional Leave to Enter (but this is never implemented).

13.10.00 Four years Exceptional Leave to Remain granted  in-country  to  A's
                spouse and daughter.

09.09.01 Assassination of General Ahmad Shah Masoud ("ASM").

23.10.01 A arrested in connection with assassination  of  ASM.   Represented
                by BPP in connection with criminal matters.

29.10.01 A charged with (1) Conspiracy to murder ASM; (2)  Inviting  support
                for a  proscribed  organisation  -  'Al-Gamm'a  al-Islamiya'
                under the Terrorism Act 2000 s.12(1); (3) Inviting funds for
                the purposes of  terrorism  under  the  Terrorism  Act  2000
                s.15(1)(a);  (4)  Arranging  availability  of  property  for
                purposes of terrorism under the Terrorism Act 2000  ss.17  &
                22; (5) Publishing written material likely to stir up racial
                hatred under the Public Order Act 1986 ss.19(a) & 27(3).

06.02.02 R withdraws the unimplemented ELR decision.

03.05.02 CPS serves case summary re charges (1) and (5) only.   It  did  not
                formally discontinue the other charges but advised it  would
                notify the Court and the defence if it intended  to  proceed
                with them, which it never did.

16.05.02 Charge (1), conspiracy to murder, dismissed by the Common  Serjeant
                of the Central Criminal Court  on  the  application  of  the
                defence.  Charge (5) remained pending.

                A immediately re-arrested in connection with  United  States
                extradition request  on  allegation  of  providing  material
                support to a terrorist organisation,  Al-Gamm'a  al-Islamiya
                (aka The Islamic Group, 'IG').

29.07.02 A  discharged  in  the  extradition  proceedings.   Home  Secretary
                (David Blunkett) declined  to  issue  an  order  to  proceed
                because there was no evidence to support the charges.

28.10.03 CPS discontinue charge 5, the last of the UK criminal  charges,  on
                the grounds that it was unable to comply with the  order  to
                serve a full translation of the  book  giving  rise  to  the
                charge.

                A granted 6 months' Discretionary Leave to Remain  (DLR)  to
                30.09.04.

15.06.04 Leave in line with mother and sister granted to daughter.

13.04.05 A granted less than six months DLR to 09.10.05.

05.09.06 A granted six months DLR to 04.03.07.

Asylum appeal proceedings

20.09.06 A gives notice of appeal under  s.83  Nationality  Immigration  and
                Asylum Act 2002.

05.12.06 R maintains decision to refuse asylum and serves fresh reasons  for
                refusal letter & a Respondent's Bundle.

01.05.07 Appeal heard by the AIT.
& 19.06.07

20.07.07 Date of AIT determination, dismissing A's appeal against  exclusion
                from refugee status.

03.09.07 Application to the AIT for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
                Appeal.

03.10.07 Application [above] refused.

04.06.08 Permission to appeal granted by the Court of Appeal before  May  LJ
                and Moses LJ.

27.11.08 Appeal heard by the Court of Appeal.

18.03.09 Judgment of the Court of Appeal, allowing the appeal to the  extent
                of remittal to the AIT for  reconsideration  on  the  proper
                basis.

15.05.09 Petition to the Supreme Court.

14-17.05.12   Appeal heard in the Supreme Court  (with  joined  case  of  DD
                (Afghanistan). (UNHCR intervening).

21.11.12 Supreme Court judgment.  Dismisses appeal  against  the  order  for
                remittal but accepts  A's  legal  arguments  concerning,  in
                particular, the standard of proof to be applied in exclusion
                cases.

14.05.13 FtT CMR and Directions.

25.06.13 R fails to comply with above direction.

08.07.13  TSols  notify  BPP  of  intention  to   interview   A   and   that
                consideration was being given to  exclusion  under  Articles
                1F(a) and (b), in addition to (c).

23.07.13 BPP ask to be informed of proposed subject matter of interview  and
                for sight of the documents on which it would be based.

06.08.13 TSols propose to BPP that by 16th August they will  serve  'a  copy
                of any material on which the SSHD  proposes  to  either  put
                questions to the Appellant in interview or to rely  upon  in
                any decision'.

07.08.13 BPP agree to timescale for disclosure but  request  that  R  should
                also supply any CPS material reviewed by her but not  relied
                on. BPP advise A's instructions will be taken in relation to
                proposed interview but week of 16th September  (proposed  by
                TSols) would be unsuitable as solicitor with  conduct  would
                be on leave.  This was followed by further disclosure.

12.09.13 TSols advise interview is to  take  place  in  Liverpool  over  the
                course of three days (the previous proposal had been  for  a
                one day interview in Croydon).

23.09.13 TSols advise that  proposed  interview  would  cover  all  relevant
                aspects of A's life since  the  1980s  and  would  be  based
                around the disclosure  provided  in  August.  BPP  asked  to
                confirm within 14 days whether A would attend.

30.09.13 Further CMR.

10.01.14 R's further reasons for refusal letter.

27.01.14 Further CMR.

31.01.14 Grant of Restricted Leave to A and imposition of  restricted  leave
                conditions.

25.02.14 Letter before claim challenging restricted leave conditions.

07.04.14.     Further CMR.

09.04.14 FtT decision on witness summons issue.

25.04.14 Judicial Review claim issued re decision to grant Restricted  Leave
                (JR/5697/2014)

28.05.14 &    FtT hearing.
17.03.15 A's appeal against exclusion allowed by the FtT.

13.04.15 CMRH: Counsel for SSHD confirms SSHD accepts that  A  would  be  at
                risk on return to Egypt.

16.04.15 Promulgation  of  final  FTT  determination:   A's  appeal  against
                refusal of refugee status allowed.

20.04.15 R applies for permission to appeal.

01.05.15 R's application refused.

15.05.15 R renews application to Upper Tribunal.

16.10.15 Upper Tribunal grants permission to appeal to R.

04 & 25 July 2016 Upper Tribunal hearing.

28 July 2016  Upper Tribunal's judgment.

17 August 2016    Unembargoed judgment disseminated.
