
  [pic]


Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG
[2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 to 21 June and 15 July 2011             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P R LANE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     AMM
                                     MW
                                     ZF
                                     FM
                                     AF

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

              THE UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES

                                                                 Intervening

Representation:

For Appellants AMM:    Ronan Toal, instructed by South Manchester Law
Centre
For Appellant MW:      Harriet Short, instructed by Avon & Bristol
                           Community Law Centre
For Appellant ZF:      Mark Schwenk, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
                           Solicitors
For Appellant FM:      Mark Symes, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For Appellant AF:      Ronan Toal, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Tim Eicke QC and Christopher Staker, instructed by
                           the Treasury Solicitor
For the UNHCR:   Tom Hickman, instructed by Baker & McKenzie LLP


                                     Law

  1)  Whilst section 2 of the Human Rights Act 1998 and its associated  case
 law requires United Kingdom tribunals in general to  give  effect  to  the
 jurisprudence of the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights,  including  that
 Court's guidance on how to approach evidence in  international  protection
 cases, the weighing of evidence and the drawing of conclusions as  to  the
 relative weight to be placed on items of evidence adduced before a  United
 Kingdom tribunal are ultimately matters  for  that  tribunal.  Whilst  the
 factual finding the Strasbourg Court has made as a result of applying  its
 own guidance is something to which the domestic tribunal must have regard,
 pursuant to section 2, it is not bound to reach the same finding.

  2)  There is nothing jurisprudentially  problematic  with  the  Strasbourg
 Court's judgment in Sufi & Elmi v the United Kingdom [2011] ECHR 1045,  as
 regards Article 3 of the ECHR. The Court's finding, that  the  predominant
 cause of the humanitarian crisis in southern and central Somalia  was  due
 to the current warring parties, meant that the high threshold (identified,
 inter alia, in N v United Kingdom [2008] ECHR 453) for finding an  Article
 3 violation in the case of naturally occurring phenomena did not  need  to
 be met.

  3) That high threshold is, however, still capable  of  being  crossed  in
 cases of  sufficient  exceptionality.  In  deciding  what  constitutes  an
 exceptional case, regard must be had to all  the  factors,  including  the
 actions of the parties to a conflict, albeit that those  actions  are  not
 the predominant cause of the humanitarian crisis.

 4)  Despite the suggestion in the judgment in Sufi & Elmi that there is no
 difference in the scope of, on the one hand, Article 3 of the  ECHR  (and,
 thus, Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive)  and,  on  the  other,
 Article 15(c) of  the  Directive,  the  binding  Luxembourg  case  law  of
 Elgafaji [2009] EUECJ C-465/07 (as well as the binding domestic  authority
 of QD (Iraq) [2009] EWCA Civ 620) makes it plain that Article 15(c) can be
 satisfied without there being such a level of  risk  as  is  required  for
 Article 3 in cases of generalised violence  (having  regard  to  the  high
 threshold identified  in  NA  v  United  Kingdom  [2008]  ECHR  616).  The
 difference appears to involve the fact that, as the CJEU found at [33]  of
 Elgafaji, Article 15(c) covers a "more general risk  of  harm"  than  does
 Article 3 of the ECHR; that Article 15(c) includes types of harm that  are
 less severe than those encompassed by Article 3;  and  that  the  language
 indicating a  requirement  of  exceptionality  is  invoked  for  different
 purposes in NA v United Kingdom and Elgafaji respectively.


 5)  Article 10 of the Qualification Directive requires the holding of some
 sort of belief, comprising a coherent and genuinely held system of values,
 whether these be theistic, non-theistic or atheistic, and is not satisfied
 in the case of a person who holds no  such  belief.  Social  restrictions,
 such as bans on watching  football  or  television,  do  not  comprise  an
 interference with the right to religion, in the case  of  a  person  whose
 religious etc beliefs do not require him or her to  participate  in  those
 activities. It is immaterial that a person may be permitted, according  to
 those beliefs, to participate in the activities concerned.


 6)  Even where the motivation for a law is religious, the religious aspect
 will not, without  more,  lay  the  basis  of  a  claim  to  international
 protection in relation to anyone who might fall foul of that law. However,
 the more such religiously motivated laws interfere with someone's  ability
 to hold and practise their religious or other beliefs,  the  more  intense
 will be the scrutiny.


 7) The necessary religious element to satisfy Article 1(A) of the  Refugee
 Convention is not satisfied solely by reference  to  the  persecutor;  but
 that element can be satisfied if the persecutor ascribes to the  victim  a
 perceived religious opinion.


 8)  There is no general legal principle that, in  determining  a  person's
 entitlement to international protection, the Tribunal must  leave  out  of
 account any possibility of that  person's  carrying  out  an  act  in  the
 country of proposed return, which - if carried out in the United Kingdom -
 would constitute a criminal offence. A genuine conscientious objection  to
 complying with unjust laws or demands may, however, provide an entitlement
 to such protection.


  9)  On the assumption that Al-Shabab's likely behaviour towards those who
 transgress its rules is as found in this determination, the position is as
 "extreme" as the factual basis in RT (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ  1285.  In
 the light of RT, a person from an Al-Shabab area who can show they do  not
 genuinely adhere to Al-Shabab's ethos will have a good  claim  to  Refugee
 Convention  protection,  once  outside  Somalia   (subject   to   internal
 relocation and exclusion clause issues), regardless of whether the  person
 could and would "play the game", by adhering to Al-Shabab's rules. As  can
 be seen from a  comparison  with  Sufi  &  Elmi,  the  effect  of  RT  is,
 accordingly, to take the Refugee Convention beyond the comparable ambit of
 Article 3 ECHR protection.


 10)  There is no legal burden on the Secretary  of  State  to  prove  that
 there is a part of the country of nationality etc of an appellant, who has
 established a well-founded fear in their home area, to which the appellant
 could reasonably be expected to go and live. The appellant bears the legal
 burden of proving entitlement to international protection; but  what  that
 entails will very much depend upon the  circumstances  of  the  particular
 case. In practice, the issue of internal relocation needs to be raised  by
 the Secretary of State in the letter of refusal or (subject to  procedural
 fairness) during the appellate proceedings.


 11)  It will then be for the appellant to make  good  an  assertion  that,
 notwithstanding  the  general  conditions  in  the   proposed   place   of
 relocation, it would not be reasonable to relocate there. In an Article  3
 claim, a  similar  position  pertains,  in  that,  although  the  test  of
 reasonableness/undue harshness  does  not  formally  apply,  unduly  harsh
 living conditions etc - albeit not themselves amounting  to  a  breach  of
 Article 3 - may nevertheless be reasonably likely  to  lead  to  a  person
 returning to their home area, where such a breach is reasonably likely.


 12) An appellant who pursues  their  appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
 protection grounds, following a grant of leave, is entitled to have  their
 appeal decided on the hypothetical basis (if  the  facts  so  demonstrate)
 that family  members  would  be  reasonably  likely  to  return  with  the
 appellant and that potential harm to those family members would cause  the
 appellant to suffer persecution or Article 15(b) harm.


 13) A person is not entitled to protection under the  Refugee  Convention,
 the Qualification Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR, on the  basis  of  a
 risk of harm to another person, if that harm would be willingly  inflicted
 by the person seeking such protection.


 14) Article 8(1) of  the  Qualification  Directive  provides  that  Member
 States may determine that  a  person  is  not  in  need  of  international
 protection "if in a part of the country of origin there is no well-founded
 fear of being persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm and the
 applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that part of the  country.
 Article 8(3) states that Article 8(1) applies  "notwithstanding  technical
 obstacles to return to the country  of  origin".  Although  the  Court  of
 Appeal in HH & Others [2010] EWCA Civ 426 found that Article 8 was "to  do
 principally with internal relocation", there is nothing in  that  judgment
 or in the Qualification Directive that  demonstrates  the  Article  is  so
 confined, and it  would  be  illogical  for  it  to  be  so.  Accordingly,
 difficulties in securing documentation to effect a return  to  a  person's
 home area may not entitle that person to international protection, whether
 or not there are real risks to that person  in  some  other  area  of  the
 country concerned.


 15)  In assessing the effect  of  an  appellant's  lies  (whether  to  the
 Secretary of State or  a  judicial  fact-finder),  it  is  unnecessary  to
 construct a prescribed set of steps from  the  judgments  of  the  Supreme
 Court in MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, particularly if they might lead to a
 "mechanistic"  rather  than  a  holistic  approach.  The  significance  or
 "negative pull" of the lie will possibly depend not only on  the  strength
 of the background evidence but on whether the lie - looked at in  its  own
 terms - is about an issue that  is  central  to  the  disposition  of  the
 appeal. Where a person tells lies about issues which  that  person  thinks
 are important to their claim but which, because of the passage of time  or
 otherwise, are not, it is open to the Tribunal, given the earlier lies, to
 approach with caution the person's evidence  regarding  matters  that  are
 central to the current claim.




                              Country guidance


                                  Mogadishu

       1)   Despite  the  withdrawal  in  early  August  2011  of  Al-Shabab
   conventional forces from at least most of  Mogadishu,  there  remains  in
   general a real risk of Article 15(c)  harm  for  the  majority  of  those
   returning to that city after a significant period of time abroad. Such  a
   risk does not arise in the case  of  a  person  connected  with  powerful
   actors or belonging  to  a  category  of  middle  class  or  professional
   persons, who can live to a reasonable standard in circumstances where the
   Article  15(c)  risk,  which  exists  for  the  great  majority  of   the
   population, does not apply. The significance of this category should not,
   however, be overstated and, in particular, is  not  automatically  to  be
   assumed to exist, merely because a person has told lies.

      2)  The armed conflict in Mogadishu does not,  however,  pose  a  real
   risk of Article 3 harm in respect of any person in that city,  regardless
   of circumstances. The humanitarian crisis in southern and central Somalia
   has led to a declaration of famine in  IDP  camps  in  Mogadishu;  but  a
   returnee from the United Kingdom who  is  fit  for  work  or  has  family
   connections may be able to avoid  having  to  live  in  such  a  camp.  A
   returnee may, nevertheless, face a real risk of Article 3 harm, by reason
   of his or her vulnerability.

      3)  Except as regards the issue of female  genital  mutilation  (FGM),
   it is unlikely that a proposed return to Mogadishu at  the  present  time
   will raise Refugee Convention issues.


               Southern and central Somalia, outside Mogadishu

      4)  Outside Mogadishu, the fighting in southern  and  central  Somalia
   is both sporadic and localised and is not such as to place every civilian
   in that part of the country at  real  risk  of  Article  15(c)  harm.  In
   individual cases, it will be necessary to establish where a person  comes
   from and what the background information says is the present position  in
   that place. If fighting is going on, that will  have  to  be  taken  into
   account in deciding  whether  Article  15(c)  is  applicable.  There  is,
   likewise, no generalised current risk of Article 3 harm as  a  result  of
   armed conflict.

      5)  In general, a returnee with no  recent  experience  of  living  in
   Somalia will be at real risk of being subjected to  treatment  proscribed
   by Article 3 in an Al-Shabab  controlled  area.  "No  recent  experience"
   means that the person concerned left Somalia before the rise of Al-Shabab
   in 2008. Even if a person has such experience, however, he  or  she  will
   still be returning from the United Kingdom, with all that  is  likely  to
   entail, so far as Al-Shabab perceptions are concerned, but he or she will
   be less likely to be readily identifiable as a returnee. Even  if  he  or
   she were to be so identified, the evidence may point to the person having
   struck up some form of accommodation with Al-Shabab, whilst living  under
   their rule. On the other hand, although having family  in  the  Al-Shabab
   area of return may alleviate the risk, the rotating nature  of  Al-Shabab
   leadership and the fact  that  punishments  are  meted  out  in  apparent
   disregard of local sensibilities mean that, in general, it cannot be said
   that the presence of family is likely to mean the risk  ceases  to  be  a
   real one.

       6)   Al-Shabab's  reasons   for   imposing   its   requirements   and
   restrictions, such as regarding manner of dress and spending  of  leisure
   time,  are  religious  and  those  who   transgress   are   regarded   as
   demonstrating that they remain in a state of kufr (apostasy). The same is
   true of those returnees who are  identified  as  coming  from  the  West.
   Accordingly, those at real risk of such Article 3 ill-treatment from  Al-
   Shabab will in general be refugees, since the persecutory harm is  likely
   to be inflicted on the basis of imputed religious opinion.

      7)  Although those with recent experience of  living  under  Al-Shabab
   may be able to "play the game", in  the  sense  of  conforming  with  Al-
   Shabab's requirements and avoiding suspicion  of  apostasy,  the  extreme
   nature of the consequences facing anyone who  might  wish  to  refuse  to
   conform (despite an ability to do so) is such as to attract the principle
   in RT (Zimbabwe). The result is that such people will also in general  be
   at real risk of persecution by Al-Shabab for a Refugee Convention reason.

      8)  The same considerations apply to those who are  reasonably  likely
   to have to pass through Al-Shabab areas.

     9)   For someone at real risk in a home area  in  southern  or  central
   Somalia, an internal relocation alternative to Mogadishu  is  in  general
   unlikely to be available, given the risk of  indiscriminate  violence  in
   the city, together with the present humanitarian situation. Relocation to
   an IDP camp in the Afgoye Corridor will, as a general matter, likewise be
   unreasonable, unless there is evidence that the person concerned would be
   able to achieve the lifestyle of  those  better-off  inhabitants  of  the
   Afgoye Corridor settlements.

      10)  Internal relocation to an area controlled  by  Al-Shabab  is  not
   feasible for a person who has had no history of living under Al-Shabab in
   that area (and is in general unlikely to be a reasonable proposition  for
   someone who has had such a history -  see above). Internal relocation  to
   an area not controlled by Al-Shabab is  in  general  unlikely  to  be  an
   option, if the place of proposed relocation is stricken by famine or near
   famine.

      11)   Within  the  context  of  these  findings,  family  and/or  clan
   connections may have  an  important  part  to  play  in  determining  the
   reasonableness of a proposed place of relocation. The importance of these
   connections is likely to grow, as the nature of the present  humanitarian
   crisis diminishes and if Al-Shabab continues to lose territory.

      12)  Travel by land across southern and  central  Somalia  to  a  home
   area or proposed place of  relocation  is  an  issue  that  falls  to  be
   addressed  in  the  course  of  determining   claims   to   international
   protection. Such travel may well, in general, pose real risks of  serious
   harm, not only from Al-Shabab checkpoints but also as  a  result  of  the
   present famine conditions.  Women  travelling  without  male  friends  or
   relatives are in general likely to face a real risk of sexual violence.

      13)  An issue that may have implications for future Somali appeals  is
   the availability of air travel within Somalia (including to  Somaliland).
   Flying into Mogadishu International Airport is sufficiently  safe.  There
   is no evidence to indicate a real risk to commercial aircraft  flying  to
   other airports in Somalia.


                           Somaliland and Puntland

      14)  The present appeals were not designed to be vehicles  for  giving
   country guidance on the position within Somaliland or Puntland. There  is
   no evidential basis for departing from the conclusion in NM  and  others,
   that Somaliland and Puntland in general only accept back persons who were
   former residents of those regions and were members of locally based clans
   or sub clans. In the context of Somali immigration to the United Kingdom,
   there is a close connection with Somaliland.

      15)  A person from Somaliland will not, in general,  be  able  without
   real risk of serious harm to travel overland from Mogadishu International
   Airport to a place where he or she might be able to obtain an  unofficial
   travel document for the purposes of gaining entry to Somaliland, and then
   by land to Somaliland. This is particularly the case  if  the  person  is
   female. A proposed return by air to Hargeisa, Somaliland (whether or  not
   via Mogadishu International Airport) will  in  general  involve  no  such
   risks.


                          Female genital mutilation

      16)  The incidence of FGM in Somalia is universally agreed to be  over
   90%. The predominant type of FGM is the "pharaonic", categorised  by  the
   World Health Organisation as Type III. The societal requirement  for  any
   girl or woman to undergo FGM is strong.  In  general,  an  uncircumcised,
   unmarried Somali woman, up to the age of 39, will  be  at  real  risk  of
   suffering FGM.

      17)  The risk will be greatest in cases  where  both  parents  are  in
   favour of FGM. Where both are opposed, the question of whether  the  risk
   will reach the requisite level will need to be determined by reference to
   the extent to which the parents are likely to be able  to  withstand  the
   strong societal pressures. Unless the parents are from  a  socio-economic
   background that  is  likely  to  distance  them  from  mainstream  social
   attitudes, or there is some other particular feature of their  case,  the
   fact of parental opposition may well as a general matter be incapable  of
   eliminating the real risk  to  the  daughter  that  others  (particularly
   relatives) will at some point inflict FGM on her.


This determination is arranged as follows:

                         Paragraphs

A.  PRELIMINARY
      1 - 4




B.  THE FIVE APPELLANTS
5 - 26

Appellant AMM
            5 - 8

Appellant MW
                 9 - 14

Appellant ZF
            15 - 17

Appellant FM
                 18 - 23

Appellant AF
                 24 - 26


C.  SOMALI COUNTRY GUIDANCE CASES                        27 - 43

NM and Others (lone women - Ashraf                                  28 - 34
Somalia CG [2005] UKAIT 00076

HH (Mogadishu: armed conflict: risk)                                35
Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00022

AM & AM (Armed conflict: risk categories)                     36 - 43
Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091



D.  SCOPE OF THE PRESENT APPEALS                         44 - 54
AND COUNTRY GUIDANCE


E.  THE ECtHR JUDGMENT IN SUFI & ELMI                    55 - 133
AND ITS BEARING ON THE PRESENT APPEALS

The applicants' circumstances
57 - 63

Background on Somalia
      64 - 69

Case law
                 70 - 72

Relevant country information
73 - 81

The ECtHR's assessment
82 - 96

Mogadishu
                 82 - 84

Southern and central Somalia
85 - 96

(a)  The internal relocation alternative
85 - 86
(b) The risk in transit or upon settling
87 - 92
elsewhere in southern or central Somalia
(c) Humanitarian conditions in refugee
93 - 96
 and IDP camps

The significance of Sufi & Elmi to the
97 - 133
Present appeals and country guidance

(a)  Formal status
                 97 - 123
(b)  Article 3 and humanitarian conditions
124 - 133


F.  THE UNITED NATIONS HIGH                                         134 -
156
COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES

Submissions and evidence
      134 - 152

The Tribunal's assessment
      153 - 156


G.  UKBA'S SOMALIA - REPORT OF                                      157 -
168
FACT-FINDING MISSION TO NAIROBI
(8-15 SEPTEMBER 2010) AND WILSON
SOLICITORS' EVIDENCE FROM NAIROBI
(14 - 21 MAY 2011)


H.  FURTHER LEGAL ISSUES
169 - 240

(1)  Al-Shabab and religion
      170 - 199

The Tribunal's assessment
      190 - 199

(2)  No requirement to act illegally?
200 - 206

(3)  "Playing the game" - RT (Zimbabwe)                             207 -
217

(4) Internal relocation and the burden
218 - 227
of proof

(5)  Legal issues arising from appellant
228 - 240
MW's appeal
(a)  Effect of Beoku-Betts
            228 - 237
(b)  Refugee protection for the persecutor?
238 - 240


I.  ASSESSMENT OF THE GENERAL EVIDENCE             241 - 587

Introduction
                 241 - 249

(1)  Mogadishu
250 - 371

Evidence and submissions
      250 - 326

The Tribunal's findings
      327 - 371

(a)  Article 15(c)
                 328 - 363
(b)  Article 3
                 364 - 369
(c)  Refugee Convention
      370 - 371

(2)  Southern and central                                           372 -
497
        Somalia, outside Mogadishu

Evidence and submissions
      372 - 447

The Tribunal's findings
      448 - 497

(a)  Article 15(c)
                 448 - 450
(b)  Article 3
                 451 - 490
      -  Armed conflict
            452
      -  Living under Al-Shabab
      453 - 473
      -  Humanitarian situation
      474 - 490
(c)  Refugee Convention
      491 - 497

(3)  Internal relocation
      498 - 507
(a)  To Mogadishu
            499 - 500
(b)  To an IDP camp in the Afgoye
501
Corridor
(c)  To an area controlled by Al-Shabab                             502
(d)  To an area not controlled by Al-Shabab                         503 -
507

(4)  Travelling home or to another place of               508 - 524
 safety

(5)  Somaliland and Puntland                                          525 -
546

(6)  Female genital mutilation                                         547
- 567


J.  ASSESSING THE NEGATIVE PULL                               568 - 578
 OF LIES: MA (SOMALIA)


K.  SUMMARY OF LEGAL FINDINGS                                 579 - 593


L.  COUNTRY GUIDANCE ON SOMALIA                          594 - 610

Mogadishu
            594 - 596

Southern and central Somalia, outside Mogadishu          597 - 606

Somaliland and Puntland
607 - 608

Female genital mutilation
      609 - 610


M.  RE-MAKING THE DECISIONS IN THE                       611 - 665
APPEALS

Appellant AMM
      611 - 620

Appellant MW
            621 - 636

Appellant ZF
            637 - 644

Appellant FM
            645 - 658

Appellant AF
            659 - 665


                      --------------------------------

APPENDIX 1 - Summary of oral evidence

APPENDIX 2 - Background evidence



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


                                   PART A

                                 PRELIMINARY

1.    In this determination the Tribunal gives country guidance  on  Somalia
    in the light of  matters  arising  after  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal gave its guidance on that country in AM & AM (Armed  conflict:
    risk categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091.  We do so also  in  the
    light of the recent decision of the European Court of Human Rights (4th
    Section) in Sufi  &  Elmi  v  the  United  Kingdom  [2011]  ECHR  1045.
    Although the country guidance touches on  matters  concerning  northern
    Somalia (that is to say, the semi-autonomous entity of Puntland and the
    self-proclaimed but internationally unrecognised state of  Somaliland),
    it is primarily concerned with the situation pertaining in central  and
    southern Somalia, including Mogadishu.   The  major  issues  concerning
    current risk on return to central and southern Somalia  are  the  armed
    conflict taking place  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Transitional
    Federal Government (TFG) and  the  African  Union  Mission  in  Somalia
    (AMISOM) and, on the other, the militant Islamists known as  Al-Shabab;
    the threat of harm posed by Al-Shabab and (to a much lesser extent) the
    TFG to those living in their  respective  areas  of  control;  and  the
    humanitarian crisis, amounting in large areas to famine, occasioned  by
    the most sustained drought in the region for many decades.

2.    The Tribunal sat on 13 to 21 June and 15 July  2011.   We  heard  oral
    evidence from the five appellants, whose appeals are the basis of  this
    determination.  We heard oral evidence from the partner of appellant MW
    and from two expert witnesses, Tony Burns and Laura Hammond.  The  oral
    evidence is summarised in Appendix 1.  The Tribunal was provided with a
    very large amount of documentary material, which is listed in  Appendix
    2.   Throughout  the  determination,  certain   spellings   have   been
    standardised.

3.   The original background evidence covered the position up to early  July
    2011 but, following the withdrawal in early August  2011  of  Al-Shabab
    from military positions in  Mogadishu,  further  written  evidence  and
    submissions were submitted by the parties, pursuant to directions  from
    the Tribunal, covering the position up to late  September  2011.  Those
    directions included provision for  the  appellants  to  have  until  10
    October to provide a written response to the  submissions  and  further
    evidence of the respondent. In the event, the  appellants'  submissions
    were received on 12 October and sought to adduce  yet  further  written
    evidence, not contemplated in  the  directions  or  identified  at  the
    hearing, and on which the respondent had  not  had  an  opportunity  to
    comment. We have not  had  regard  to  this  further  evidence  or  the
    submissions relating  to  it,  but  we  have  taken  into  account  the
    remainder of the appellants' submissions served on 12 October, and  the
    accompanying report of the UN Monitoring Group of July 2011, which  was
    identified during the hearing, together with all the other written  and
    oral submissions (including in skeleton arguments),  in  assessing  the
    totality of the oral and written  evidence  that  was  properly  placed
    before us.  After discussion with the parties, we viewed two television
    programmes: a Channel 4 documentary and  a  more  recent  BBC  Panorama
    programme, each regarding Mogadishu. In  the  event,  neither  had  any
    material impact upon our findings.

4.   These appeals have been conspicuously well-argued by Counsel,  and  the
    evidence assembled with evident industriousness  by  those  instructing
    them.  We are particularly  grateful  to  the  experts  who  gave  oral
    evidence. As will be apparent, the issues upon which  country  guidance
    is necessary are multi-faceted and  in  several  respects  raise  legal
    issues, about which the parties made detailed submissions.    This  has
    resulted in a very  long  determination;  but,  having  regard  to  the
    observations of the Court of Appeal at [6] and [52] of the judgments in
    PO (Nigeria) [2011] EWCA Civ 132, we have  adopted  a  structure  which
    sets out the full extent of  the  country  guidance  and  is  generally
    intended  to  preclude  the  determination's  length   from   adversely
    affecting the clarity of its exposition.


                                   PART B

                             THE FIVE APPELLANTS

Appellant AMM

5.    Appellant AMM was born on 6 January 1977.  He  comes  from  Jowhar  in
    southern Somalia.  Although,  as  we  shall  see,  a  large  amount  of
    appellant  AMM's  story  of  his  experiences  has  been   legitimately
    disbelieved by those tasked with  considering  it,  his  home  area  in
    Somalia is not in dispute.  Nor is the fact that  his  journey  to  the
    United Kingdom has been tortuous - not to say accidental - in  that  he
    was rescued by a Danish merchant ship  from  a  broken-down  motorboat,
    somewhere in the Mediterranean, and brought to a  port  in  the  United
    Kingdom, where he claimed asylum, in June 2005.  It is evident from the
    determination of Immigration Judge Gladstone, who  dismissed  appellant
    AMM's appeal against the respondent's refusal in 2005 to grant  asylum,
    that the account given by appellant AMM of how he came  to  be  on  the
    motorboat was not believed; in particular:  the  alleged  factors  that
    caused appellant AMM to leave Somalia and whether and if so how he  had
    spent time in other countries.

6.    Following the dismissal of his appeal by Immigration Judge  Gladstone,
    appellant AMM went to the Republic of Ireland and claimed  asylum.   He
    was returned to the United Kingdom by the Irish authorities in February
    2006, whereupon he made a further  claim  for  asylum.   Following  the
    refusal of that claim, appellant  AMM  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Glossop, who dismissed the appeal in December 2006.  Like the  previous
    Immigration Judge, Immigration Judge Glossop rejected  appellant  AMM's
    claim to be from  a  minority  clan  (the  Bantu).   Immigration  Judge
    Glossop also rejected  appellant  AMM's  assertions  that  his  son  in
    Somalia had been killed and his wife and another child forced  to  flee
    to Ethiopia, following an attack upon his farm in Somalia.  Immigration
    Judge  Glossop's  determination  was  not  successfully  challenged  by
    appellant AMM.  For some reason, however,  the  respondent  decided  to
    accept a further claim to asylum by appellant AMM.  That  claim  having
    been rejected, appellant AMM again appealed and his appeal was heard by
    Immigration Judge Harris, who dismissed it, by means of a determination
    sent on 18 February 2008.  The grounds upon which appellant AMM  sought
    reconsideration under section 103A of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 of Immigration Judge Harris's determination related  to
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR and Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive (risk to life  or  person  from  indiscriminate  violence  in
    situation of internal armed conflict).  On 4 August  2008,  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal in  effect  set  aside  the  determination  of
    Immigration Judge Harris,  save  as  regards  the  Immigration  Judge's
    findings of fact in relation to AMM's history.

7.    The reconsideration of appellant AMM's appeal  was  completed  by  the
    Tribunal at a hearing in  October  2008,  held  jointly  with  that  of
    another appellant, which resulted in the country guidance determination
    of  AM  &  AM.   Appellant  AMM's  appeal   was   dismissed   in   that
    determination,  in  which  the  Tribunal  considered   his   claim   to
    international protection by reference to Refugee Convention,  ECHR  and
    Qualification Directive grounds.  Permission to appeal to the Court  of
    Appeal was sought on the basis that the Tribunal had wrongly  concluded
    that there was uncertainty as to the "method of  return"  of  appellant
    AMM to Somalia by the respondent and that the Tribunal had  accordingly
    materially erred in  law  in  its  conclusion  as  to  appellant  AMM's
    entitlement to refugee  status  or  humanitarian  protection.   Further
    challenges related to the alleged error in  acquiring  a  "differential
    impact" to be shown in relation to real risk  of  being  persecuted  or
    suffering serious harm  and  in  relation  to  the  assessment  of  the
    situation in central and southern Somalia, as  regards  persecution  or
    other serious harm.

8.    Permission to appeal was granted by Sedley LJ on 18 December  2009  on
    all of the grounds advanced by appellant AMM.  On  23  April  2010  the
    Court of Appeal allowed appellant AMM's appeal and remitted the  matter
    to the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber).


Appellant MW

9.    Appellant MW was born on 26 June 1980.  In August 2005 she applied  at
    the British Embassy at Addis Ababa for entry clearance as the spouse of
    a British citizen of Somali origin, resident  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Appellant MW's application was refused by an  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    but she was successful in her appeal  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal.  As a result, she was issued with a two-year spouse  visa  on
    30 May 2006 and entered the United Kingdom the following  month.   MW's
    relationship with her husband had collapsed by May 2007, by which  time
    she was living with Mr Abdullahi, bearing him a son on  2  April  2008.
    Mr Abdullahi has since changed his name by deed poll to Osman Ali Omar.
     Appellant MW's leave to enter the United Kingdom came to an end on  30
    May 2008.  Appellant MW had  been  divorced  from  her  husband  on  16
    November 2007.

10.   Appellant MW claimed asylum on 27  May  2008,  which  was  refused  in
    August 2008.  She appealed against that decision  and  her  appeal  was
    heard  by  Immigration  Judge  Woolley  on  12  September  2008.    The
    Immigration Judge found appellant MW to be a majority clan member  from
    Merka, in lower Shabele, south-west of Mogadishu.  The judge found that
    appellant MW had left Somalia in 1999 to  live  in  Ethiopia  with  her
    aunt.  The Immigration Judge made no finding as to appellant MW's claim
    that she and her aunt lived in Ethiopia without immigration status  and
    were supported by money sent from Canada from a cousin.  Nor was  there
    any specific  finding  regarding  appellant  MW's  assertion  that  her
    parents  were  dead  and  that  she  had  no  brothers   and   sisters.
    Immigration Judge Woolley heard evidence from Mr Osman (as he  now  is)
    but did not find him to be credible.  The Immigration  Judge  concluded
    that Mr Osman could return to live in Somalia  with  appellant  MW  and
    their son.

11.    In  dismissing  appellant  MW's  appeal  on   asylum   grounds,   the
    Immigration Judge had  regard  to  the  background  evidence  regarding
    violence against women in Somalia, in particular in relation  to  those
    who had been displaced.  On the basis that appellant MW had been  found
    to be from a majority clan, Immigration Judge Woolley found that  there
    was no "differential impact" of the kind required by the House of Lords
    in Adan [1998] UKHL 15, over and above that faced by others  caught  up
    in clan warfare.  On the basis of the country guidance set out in HH  &
    Others (Mogadishu: armed conflict: risk) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00022,
    the Immigration Judge found that appellant MW had not demonstrated that
    she was entitled to humanitarian protection  by  reference  to  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

12.   Reconsideration of Immigration Judge Woolley's  decision  was  ordered
    under section 103A of the 2002 Act on 10 October 2008 and on 1 December
    2009 the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal found that  the  determination
    contained a material error of law.  The Immigration Judge had concluded
    that much of the background material adduced by appellant  MW  referred
    back to country information considered by the Tribunal in HH &  Others,
    whereas the AIT found that this was "quite inaccurate as a  description
    of the materials before" the Immigration Judge.  Those  materials  were
    capable of giving rise to  a  different  assessment  of  conditions  in
    Somalia, as could now be seen from the case of AM &  AM.   The  present
    proceedings accordingly constitute in  effect  the  completion  of  the
    reconsideration of appellant MW's appeal.

13.   Since the hearing before Immigration Judge Woolley, two more  children
    have been born to appellant MW and Mr  Omar.   A  son  was  born  on  5
    January 2010 and on 7 February  2011  appellant  MW  gave  birth  to  a
    daughter.  In view of Mr  Osman's  status,  the  children  are  British
    citizens.

14.   During the present hearings,  the  respondent  informed  the  Tribunal
    that a decision had been made to grant appellant MW discretionary leave
    to remain, having regard to Article 8 of the ECHR.   Appellant  MW  has
    given notice under section 104(4B) of the 2002 Act and rule  17A(c)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 that she  wished  to
    pursue her appeal, in so far as it is brought on Refugee Convention and
    humanitarian protection grounds.


Appellant ZF

15.   Appellant ZF was born on 1 January 1944.  She arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 17 September 2009 and claimed asylum, asserting that she was
    a member of the Reer Hamar minority clan, having been born in Mogadishu
    and  lived  there  until  fleeing  to  Afgoye.   In  October  2009  the
    respondent refused appellant ZF's application and appellant ZF appealed
    to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  Immigration Judge Upson  heard
    her appeal on 18 March 2010.  The Immigration Judge found appellant  ZF
    not to be a witness of truth.  The Immigration Judge essentially  found
    that appellant ZF came from  north-western  Somalia,  noting  that  the
    linguistic report prepared by the respondent in respect of appellant ZF
    had found her "with certainty" to come from that part  of  Somalia,  on
    the basis of her speech and vocabulary.  The most the Immigration Judge
    was prepared to accept of her account was that there was "a chance that
    she has lived in Mogadishu".  Her story of living in  southern  Somalia
    with two nieces, being regularly beaten but nevertheless raising $3,000
    to pay agents for her passage to  the  United  Kingdom  was,  likewise,
    rejected by the Immigration Judge.  The Immigration Judge was presented
    at the hearing with documents showing that appellant ZF  suffered  from
    asthma, high blood pressure and rheumatism.   She  said  she  had  been
    taking paracetamol for these conditions.

16.   On the basis of these findings, the Immigration Judge  concluded  that
    appellant ZF had  failed  to  establish  that  she  was  a  refugee  or
    otherwise entitled to international protection.  Permission  to  appeal
    against the Immigration Judge's determination was refused by the First-
    tier Tribunal on 27 April 2010 but granted by Blake J, President of the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber, on 28 May 2010 on the basis that:-

         "The question  of  whether  [appellant  ZF]  can  access  effective
         internal  protection  if  returned  to  Mogadishu   needs   further
         consideration in light of the Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  HH
         (Somalia) [2010] EWCA Civ 426 April 2010 that indicates that a safe
         route of return is not a matter for administrative decision  as  to
         the time of  removal  but  may  require  the  grant  of  subsidiary
         protection status unless and until safe access is identified."

17.   On 13 January 2011, Mr Kandola,  a  Presenting  Officer,  conceded  on
    behalf of the respondent  that  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of Immigration Judge Upson and  that  that  determination
    should be set aside.  Mr Schwenk, for  appellant  ZF  conceded  on  her
    behalf that the adverse credibility findings of the  Immigration  Judge
    should nevertheless stand for the purpose of the  present  proceedings.
    It is also necessary to observe at this stage  that  the  reference  to
    appellant ZF coming from north-west  Somalia  is  a  reference  to  her
    coming from Somaliland.


Appellant FM

18.   Appellant FM was born in Mogadishu on 5 August 1987 and lived  in  the
    district of that city known as Hamar JaabJab.  He claimed to have  left
    Somalia in February 2006 and gone to Kenya, where he lived  and  worked
    in Nairobi, before flying from Kenya to an Arab country on 3 July  2006
    and then on to the  United  Kingdom,  which  he  entered  using  forged
    documentation.  Appellant FM claimed asylum  in  Liverpool  on  6  July
    2006.

19.   The respondent refused that claim on 26 July  2006  and  appellant  FM
    appealed to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal,  which  dismissed  his
    appeal on 6 October 2006.  Appeal  rights  against  that  determination
    having become exhausted, appellant FM made further  submissions,  which
    were treated as a fresh claim, generating a refusal from the respondent
    on 2  October  2007.   Further  representations  were  refused  by  the
    respondent on 18 April 2008.  Eventually, the respondent made a further
    decision that appellant FM should be  removed  by  way  of  directions.
    This decision was dated 11 June 2008 and appellant FM appealed  against
    it.  Immigration Judge Blake dismissed that appeal on asylum and  human
    rights grounds, by means of a determination dated  13  September  2008.
    Reconsideration of that determination was  ordered  by  the  AIT  on  1
    October 2008.  The reconsideration was completed by  Immigration  Judge
    Sweet on 26 January 2009, leading to  a  determination  of  27  January
    2009,  dismissing  appellant  FM's  appeal.   That  determination  was,
    however, set aside by the Deputy President of the AIT on 10 August 2009
    on the basis that the determination had not engaged  with  the  country
    guidance case of AM & AM.

20.   Accordingly, the reconsideration of  appellant  FM's  appeal  fell  to
    Immigration Judge Courtney.  In a determination that followed a hearing
    on 27 November 2009, Immigration  Judge  Courtney  dismissed  appellant
    FM's  appeal  on  asylum,  human  rights  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

21.   Appellant FM claimed he was a member of the minority Ashraf  clan  who
    had married a member of the Hawiye clan,  against  the  wishes  of  his
    wife's family.  That family had detained appellant  FM  for  four  days
    until his aunt bribed a guard to have him released, after which he left
    Somalia.

22.   The Immigration Judge did not find appellant FM or his witness  to  be
    credible, as regards appellant FM's claim to come from the Ashraf clan.
     The Immigration Judge nevertheless accepted  that  appellant  FM  came
    from Hamar JaabJab in Mogadishu.  Applying the country guidance in AM &
    AM, the Immigration Judge concluded  that  return  to  Mogadishu  would
    cause appellant FM to face a real risk of serious harm  as  defined  in
    Article 15 of the Qualification Directive  and  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 of  the  ECHR  (paragraph  56  of  the  determination).   The
    Immigration  Judge  accordingly  considered  the  issue   of   internal
    relocation.  At paragraph 65, she did not  consider  the  situation  in
    central and southern  Somalia  had  deteriorated  since  AM  &  AM  was
    decided, to the point that it reached the threshold where civilians per
    se or Somali civilian IDPs per se faced a real risk of  persecution  or
    serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.   Appellant  FM
    was 22 years old and able-bodied with no reported health problems.   On
    the other hand, he had been out of Somalia for nearly  four  years  and
    might be "less adept than persons living  there  currently  at  dealing
    with ongoing difficulties.  It is also reasonably likely that  it  will
    become known he has been in the UK and that as a consequence he may  be
    perceived as  someone  who  has  or  has  access  to  relative  wealth"
    (paragraph 66).  Nevertheless, at paragraph 67, having considered  "all
    relevant factors" the Immigration Judge concluded that appellant FM had
    "a viable internal relocation alternative.  This would be so even if he
    is required to live in an IDP camp."

23.    On  1  July  2010  Sedley  LJ  ordered  appellant  FM  to  renew  his
    application for permission to appeal in court  and  on  notice  to  the
    respondent.  This was on the basis that Sedley LJ found it "hard to see
    how such a finding [of internal relocation  away  from  Mogadishu]  can
    stand without some prior finding as to (a) where in Somalia  A  can  be
    reasonably safe and (b) whether he can get there in reasonable safety".
     Sedley LJ also thought it presently arguable that "it  may  have  been
    irrational to conclude that  a  condition  affecting  up  to  half  the
    population does not represent a real risk for anyone without access  to
    special protection".  On 27 October 2010 the Court  of  Appeal  ordered
    that  "the  appeal  against  the  determination  of  the   Asylum   and
    Immigration Tribunal promulgated on 20 December 2009  be  withdrawn  on
    the basis that the appeal be remitted  for  a  differently  constituted
    Tribunal to carry out a de novo second  stage  reconsideration  of  the
    applicant's appeal".





Appellant AF

24.   Appellant AF was born on 6 October 1957 in Merka, a city on the  coast
    of southern Somalia, some 70kms south-west of Mogadishu.  He arrived in
    the United Kingdom on 9 November 2001 and  claimed  asylum.   Appellant
    AF's application was refused on 29 January 2003 and he appealed  to  an
    Adjudicator, who dismissed his appeal on 10 October 2003.  On  2  March
    2006, appellant AF made a fresh claim for asylum, which was refused  on
    13  March  2006.   His  subsequent  appeal  against  that  refusal  was
    dismissed by an Immigration Judge on 24 April 2006  but  on  15  August
    2006 the High Court  ordered  reconsideration  of  that  determination,
    pursuant to section 103A of the 2002 Act.

25.   On 11 June 2007 the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal found  a  material
    error of law in the determination and, following a re-hearing, a  panel
    of two  Immigration  Judges  dismissed  appellant  AF's  appeal  on  13
    November 2007.  Permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  against
    that determination was granted by the AIT on 10 January 2008 and on  10
    April 2008, by consent, the Court of Appeal remitted the appeal to  the
    AIT.

26.   On 26 September 2008, the AIT (Senior Immigration  Judge  Freeman  and
    Immigration Judge Monson) dismissed appellant AF's appeal.  The  panel,
    in its determination, rejected the submission made by Mr Toal on behalf
    of appellant  AF  that  they  should  consider  not  only  humanitarian
    protection but also revisit the earlier Tribunal findings in respect of
    asylum and human rights.  Applying the conclusion of the Tribunal in HH
    & Others, the panel found that there needed to be shown a "differential
    impact" in order for appellant AF to succeed by  reference  to  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  The panel concluded  that  there
    was  no  evidence  to  show  that,  in  appellant  AF's  case,  such  a
    differential impact existed.  On 24 August 2009  the  Court  of  Appeal
    allowed appellant AF's appeal and remitted the appeal to  the  AIT  for
    reconsideration.  It is common ground that appellant  AF  is  a  Midgan
    (Madhiban) who, despite coming from Merka, had  lived  for  significant
    periods of time in various areas of Mogadishu,  including  Hamar  Weyne
    and Hamar JaabJab, during periods of intense fighting in the city,  and
    that  whilst  there  he  suffered  harm  which  judicial   fact-finders
    categorised as insufficient to constitute persecution.



                                   PART C

                        SOMALI COUNTRY GUIDANCE CASES

27.   From the start of the civil war in Somalia in the  early  1990s  until
    the rise of the Union of Islamic Courts and, more recently,  Al-Shabab,
    the  internal  conflict  in  Somalia  was  primarily  clan-based,  with
    majority clans using their militias to battle  rival  armed  clans  and
    also to dominate minority clans, which lacked militias of their own  or
    majority clan patronage.  A number  of  the  earlier  country  guidance
    cases of both the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  and  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration  Tribunal  were,  accordingly,  intended  to  address   the
    significance of membership of a particular clan.


NM and Others (Lone women - Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005] UKAIT 00076

28.   Immediately prior to  its  demise  in  2005,  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal issued more general country guidance in  NM  and  Others.   At
    [117] the Tribunal held that the starting point in  any  assessment  of
    risk was that

          "Male and female members of minority clans from the south will, in
          general, be at risk of breaches of their  Article  3  rights,  and
          will be refugees, in the absence of any evidence that they have  a
          clan or personal patron and the  means  to  access  that  area  of
          safety without a real risk.  Were such evidence to exist, which at
          present would be unusual, their return would involve no breach  of
          either Convention.  We recognise that there may be minority  clans
          who are, at least locally, integrated  with  majority  clans,  and
          other groups who may not be a minority clan at all,  being  closer
          to a caste.  Those will require specific consideration.   We  also
          recognise that a division between minority and majority  does  not
          represent a bright line on one or other side of which  every  clan
          must fall, because there are some which could be considered to  be
          intermediate."

29.   At [118] the Tribunal held that there was "obviously  a  greater  risk
    for lone females both in the place of safety and  in  access,  both  in
    terms of degree of risk of occurrence and degree of  severity  of  ill-
    treatment.  Their position would call for  particular  care."   On  the
    other hand, a person of either  gender  who  was  not  found  to  be  a
    minority clan member would  be  subject  to  different  considerations.
    There was likely to be a location in  southern  Somalia  in  which  the
    majority clan would be  able  to  afford  protection  sufficiently  for
    neither Convention to apply.  It was, however, important not  to  over-
    generalise [119].  The question of assessing risk in  accessing  places
    of safety would arise more  strongly  for  females  than  males.   Many
    routes had checkpoints or roadblocks.  Majority clans, which will  have
    their own militias, could be expected to provide military  escorts  for
    returnees and such returnees would be objectively able in most cases to
    prearrange such protection [122].

30.   At [123] the Tribunal said this:-

         "123.    There are problems with  those  whose  case  has  been  so
             disbelieved that it is not known what their clan or  place  of
             origin is.  It is difficult to see that such  a  person  could
             succeed; he or she would be a majority clan member who was  in
             effect declining to demonstrate, even to the low  standard  of
             proof that they were at  risk  on  return  because  unable  to
             arrange for clan militia escorts from  Mogadishu  or  wherever
             else they might be returned to."

31.   At [125] the Tribunal did not accept that the  general  conditions  of
    life or circumstances in Somalia engage the obligations of the  Refugee
    Convention for all returnees or all female returnees, in the  light  of
    Adan.  Being a single woman returnee was not  in  itself  a  sufficient
    "differential impact" in terms of Adan  to  engage  those  obligations.
    Nor did the Tribunal consider that general conditions or  circumstances
    engaged Article 3.

32.   At [126]  the  Tribunal  addressed  the  position  of  Somaliland  and
    Puntland:-

         "126.    Returnees or  lone  women  returnees  claiming  protection
             under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  under  the  Human  Rights
             Convention who are found to be former residents of  Somaliland
             or Puntland or persons having a connection with a clan or sub-
             clan based in either of those regions, would  not  in  general
             face a real risk of serious harm, whether or  not  they  could
             arrange in advance for clan militia protection to meet them at
             the airport and escort them  thereafter,  provided  that  they
             were returned directly to those areas and not  via  Mogadishu.
             If they were to be returned via  Mogadishu,  we  do  not  know
             whether a majority clan militia escort could be  arranged  for
             them."

33.   As for internal relocation, this was considered not in general  to  be
    a viable option for members of minority clans except where  they  would
    be able to obtain majority clan protection in a secure area [128].  For
    majority clan members, it might be a viable option for those whose clan
    had a secure location elsewhere within southern Somalia than where  the
    claimant originated, if the claimant's home area was not or had  ceased
    to be one where the majority clan was sufficiently  strong  to  provide
    protection.

34.   In the present appeals,  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for
    Refugees has exercised the right of intervention, as recognised in rule
    9(5) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   In  the
    light of the submissions and evidence of the UNHCR, to which  we  shall
    turn in due course, it is relevant to observe what the IAT had  to  say
    in NM & Others about the position of the UNHCR and the significance  of
    its work to the Tribunal's task of giving country guidance:-

         "108.    The extensive reliance upon UNHCR  material  makes  a  few
             observations germane.  The value  of  the  UNHCR  material  is
             first that where it has observers on the ground, it  is  in  a
             good position to provide first hand information as to what  in
             fact is happening.  The process then whereby its  observations
             of what is happening become position papers or recommendations
             is likely to increase the objectivity  and  soundness  of  its
             observations in that  respect.   It  has  a  special  role  in
             relation to the Geneva Convention.  It may also well  be  able
             to offer Governments advice on the practical  implications  of
             the forced or mass return of  people  who  are  not  refugees;
             these  implications  may  include   infrastructure,   economic
             conditions, resettlement facilities and absorption capacity; a
             slower rate of return may make the local government's task  or
             the UNHCR task as a reception body that much easier to perform
             well.


         109.     But their comments have their limitations and  these  need
             equally  to  be  understood.   The  UNHCR  often   speaks   of
             inhibitions on the return, usually forced,  of  failed  asylum
             seekers, who have been rejected after a  proper  consideration
             of their claims.  It  follows  that  the  UNHCR  is  not  then
             commenting  on  the  return  of  refugees  at   all;   it   is
             acknowledging that they  would  not  face  persecution  for  a
             Convention reason and it is going  beyond  its  special  remit
             under the Geneva  Convention.   This  is  not  a  question  of
             picking up on loose language.  The UNHCR is perfectly  capable
             of using language which shows that it is  or  is  not  dealing
             with the risk of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason,  and
             sometimes does so.  These are considered papers after all.


         110.     This is illustrated by UNHCR position papers, such as  the
             January  2004  one  dealing  with  Somalia,  where  UNHCR  has
             responsibility   for   voluntary   repatriation    programmes,
             currently  confined  to  northern  Somalia,  and  has  evident
             consequential concerns referred to  in  paragraph  3  of  this
             report about "over-stretched absorption capacity" even in  the
             relatively stable northern part of Somalia.  Reasons  of  this
             kind lead UNHCR to  discourage  signatory  states  from  going
             ahead  with  enforced  returns  of  rejected  asylum  seekers.
             However, the only issue arising on statutory appeals on asylum
             or asylum-related grounds before Adjudicators and the Tribunal
             is whether the claimant is a refugee and  if  so,  whether  to
             return a person to Somalia would breach the Geneva  Convention
             or constitute treatment contrary to  Article  3  ECHR  or  any
             other Article, where  engaged.   The  question  of  absorption
             problems that might flow from any  United  Kingdom  government
             decision to enforce returns in numbers is not  of  itself  the
             basis for showing that return would breach either Convention.


         .111.    The UNHCR, in  such  circumstances  and  they  arise  very
             frequently, is pursuing what it sees as  its  wider  remit  in
             respect of humanitarian and related  practical  considerations
             for the return of people, particularly on a large scale.  This
             is a common problem where the country of  refuge  borders  the
             country of past   persecution or strife.  What it has  to  say
             about the practical problems on the ground will  be  important
             where it  has  staff  on  the  ground  or  familiar  with  the
             conditions which a returnee would face.


         .112.    But the assessment of whether someone can be  returned  in
             those circumstances is one which has to be treated  with  real
             care, if it is sought to apply it to  non  Refugee  Convention
             international obligations, especially ECHR.  The measure which
             the UNHCR uses is unclear; indeed, realistically,  it  may  be
             using no particular measure.  Instead, it  is  using  its  own
             language to convey its  own  sense  of  the  severity  of  the
             problem, the degree of risk  faced  and  the  quality  of  the
             evidence which it has to underpin its assessment.  It is often
             guarded and cautious rather  than  assertive  because  of  the
             frailties  of  its  knowledge  and  the  variability  of   the
             circumstances.


         .113.    This is not to advocate an unduly nuanced reading  of  its
             material, let alone an unduly legalistic reading.   It  is  to
             require that the material be read for what it actually conveys
             about the level  of  risk,  of  what  treatment  and  of  what
             severity and with what certainty as to the available evidence.
              But there may be times when a lack of information or evidence
             permits  or  requires  inferences  to  be  drawn  as  to   its
             significance, which is for the decision-maker to draw.   There
             is often other relevant material as well.


         .114.    UNHCR's language is not framed by reference  to  the  ECHR
             and to the high threshold of Article 3 as  elaborated  in  the
             jurisprudence of  the  Strasbourg  Court  and  of  the  United
             Kingdom.  That is not a criticism - it is not an expert  legal
             adviser to the United Kingdom courts and couches its papers in
             its  own  language.   So   its   more   general   humanitarian
             assessments of international protection  needs  should  to  be
             read with care, so as to avoid giving  them  an  authority  in
             relation to the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  ECHR
             which they do not claim.  They may give part of  the  picture,
             but the language and threshold of their assessments show  that
             the UNHCR quite often adopts a standard which is not  that  of
             the United Kingdom's ECHR obligations.


         .115.     UNHCR  papers  are  often  not  the   only   ones   which
             Adjudicators  or  the  Tribunal  has   to   consider.    Other
             organisations may have  first-hand  sources  and  differ  from
             UNHCR; experts may bring a further perspective.  A  considered
             UNHCR paper is therefore entitled to weight but may  well  not
             be decisive."



HH (Mogadishu: armed conflict: risk) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00022

35.   It fell to the AIT in  HH  to  consider  the  meaning  and  effect  of
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, under which serious  harm
    consists, inter  alia,  of  a  "serious  and  individual  threat  to  a
    civilian's life or person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    situations  of  international  or  internal   armed   conflict".    The
    Tribunal's conclusion, that the existence of such a conflict was to  be
    determined  by  reference  to  international  humanitarian   law,   was
    disapproved by the Court of Appeal in QD (Iraq) [2009]  EWCA  Civ  620.
    The Court's  conclusion,  that  the  provision  fell  to  be  given  an
    autonomous meaning, was confirmed  by  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European Union in Elgafaji [2009]  EUECJ  C-465/07.   It  is,  however,
    common ground between the present parties that the  Tribunal's  finding
    in HH, that an internal armed conflict existed  in  Mogadishu  and  its
    immediate environs as at the end of 2007, was correct.   The  fighting,
    which at that time was between the TFG and its Ethiopian allies on  the
    one hand and the Union of Islamic Courts on the other, was found not to
    be clan-based.   The  finding  of  the  Tribunal  was  that,  generally
    speaking,  neither  side  was  engaging  in  indiscriminate   violence.
    Although clan support mechanisms were under strain, they had not broken
    down [301].  A person displaced from Mogadishu to a  makeshift  shelter
    along the road to Afgoye  or  in  an  IDP  camp  "may  well  experience
    treatment that would  be  proscribed  by  Article  3  of  ECHR"  [299].
    Although there was no current evidence  that  women  were  specifically
    targeted in Somalia at the present time  [303]  there  were  risks  for
    women who found themselves having  to  negotiate  roadside  checkpoints
    alone.  Neither air  travel  to  and  from  Mogadishu  nor  the  mobile
    telephone  network  in  southern   Somalia   had   been   significantly
    interrupted  by  the  conflict  [370].   The  indiscriminate   violence
    generated by the armed conflict in Mogadishu was not of such a level as
    to place the population of Mogadishu at risk of a consistent pattern of
    such violence [345].



AM & AM (Armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091

36.   Examining the evidence as at late October 2008, the AIT  in  AM  &  AM
    found that, since HH

         "The situation in Mogadishu  has  changed  significantly,  both  in
         terms of the extent of population of  displacement  away  from  the
         city, the intensity of the fighting and of the security  conditions
         there.  On the present evidence we consider that  Mogadishu  is  no
         longer safe as a place to  live  for  the  great  majority  of  its
         citizens.  We do not rule out that notwithstanding the above  there
         may be certain individuals who on the facts may be considered to be
         able to live safely in the city, for example if they are likely  to
         have close connections with powerful actors in Mogadishu,  such  as
         prominent businessmen or senior figures in  the  insurgency  or  in
         powerful criminal gangs.  However, barring cases of this  kind,  we
         consider that in the cases of persons found to come from  Mogadishu
         who are returnees from the UK, they would face on  return  to  live
         there a real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  and  it  is
         reasonably likely, if they tried staying  there,  that  they  would
         soon be forced to leave or that they would decide not  to  try  and
         live there in the first  place"  [178].   The  TFG,  Ethiopian  and
         AMISOM forces were "pitted against insurgent forces  around  Bakara
         Market"  so  that  "at  least  33  civilians  were  killed  in  the
         exchanges" on 22 September 2008.   The  UN  Secretary  General  had
         spoken of "frequent attacks on civilians" which together with  "the
         incessant level of harassment and intimidation by  all  militarised
         actors in the city  is  making  living  conditions  for  the  civil
         population intolerable" [176].

37.   At [179] the  Tribunal  held  that,  although  Article  15(c)  had  "a
    protective scope additional to that afforded by the Refugee  Convention
    and Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive [and Article 3 of  the
    ECHR], it is unnecessary on the facts of this  case  to  rely  on  such
    additional scope, since return to that  city  for  the  great  majority
    would amount to a real risk  of  persecution,  serious  harm  and  ill-
    treatment".  Given these findings regarding  return  to  Mogadishu,  in
    order for most Somali claimants from that city to  succeed  "they  need
    only show that they have no  viable  internal  relocation  alternative"
    [183].

38.   At [144] the Tribunal found that, since  HH,  the  armed  conflict  in
    central  and  southern  Somalia  "had  spread  to  many  other  areas".
    Accordingly, it held that "a situation of internal armed  conflict  now
    exists throughout central and southern Somalia".  Notwithstanding  this
    and the deterioration in the humanitarian situation in southern Somalia
    in HH, the Tribunal in AM & AM was not persuaded that the situation  in
    central and southern Somalia generally had reached the threshold  where
    civilians per se or Somali civilian IDPs per se could be said to face a
    real risk of persecution or serious harm  or  treatment  proscribed  by
    Article 3 ECHR [156].  Although the level of  violence  had  increased,
    the numbers of those killed and wounded were not  of  great  magnitude.
    Civilians per se did not face a real risk of denial of basic  food  and
    shelter  and  other  bare  necessities  of  life.   In  reaching   this
    conclusion, the Tribunal had regard, inter alia, to the evidence  which
    indicated that "even though aid agencies can meet with obstruction  and
    dangers in delivering aid to IDPs in need ... a significant  percentage
    of those in need are reached" [157].  Furthermore, as regards those not
    so reached, evidence emanating from Nairobi indicated that "most people
    [in IDP camps] are helped by Somalis from the Diaspora".   Accordingly,
    the assessment of the extent to  which  IDPs  face  greater  or  lesser
    hardships, outside Mogadishu, would vary significantly:-

         "depending on a number of factors: e.g. IDPs from more  influential
         clans or  sub-clans  appear  to  have  a  better  chance  of  being
         tolerated in the area to which they have fled ...; IDPs who have  a
         traditional clan area they can travel to,  especially  if  in  that
         area they have family,  or  friends,  or  close  clan  or  sub-clan
         affiliations, appear to have better prospects of finding safety and
         support, although not if the area concerned  is  already  saturated
         with fellow-IDPs ...; those who lack recent experience of living in
         Somalia appear more likely to have difficulties  dealing  with  the
         changed environment in which clan loyalties  have  to  some  extent
         fractured ...; persons returning to their home area from the UK may
         be perceived as having relative wealth and be more  susceptible  to
         extortion, abduction and the like ...; those who live in areas  not
         particularly affected by the fighting and which  are  seen  as  not
         important strategically to any of the main parties to the  conflict
         would appear less subject to security problems;  whether  the  IDPs
         are female also appears a significant factor, given the evidence of
         the additional risks women and girls face of  abduction,  rape  and
         harassment.  To these factors,  of  course,  one  has  to  add  the
         variables of age and state of health.  Also relevant  will  be  the
         evidence about the prevailing  economic  conditions  in  the  area,
         bearing in mind the recent history of cruel droughts, poor harvests
         and rising food prices." [160]

39.   At [182] the Tribunal found that in relation  to  IDPs  who  had  fled
    Mogadishu in recent times, their  plight  was  connected  to  what  had
    happened to them there as a  result  of  the  armed  conflict  and  was
    "sufficient to meet the 'by reason of' test  contained  within  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive".  Those originating from  outside
    Mogadishu who sought to rely on Article 15(c) would, however,  need  to
    demonstrate that their particular area was  experiencing  a  consistent
    pattern of  indiscriminate  violence  giving  rise  to  a  serious  and
    individual threat, since as  a  general  matter  central  and  southern
    Somalia (other than Mogadishu) was not in such  a  state  [184].   Even
    then, the person concerned would have to establish that he or  she  had
    "no viable internal relocation alternative".

40.   As for internal relocation,  a  person  who  would  have  to  spend  a
    substantial period of time in an IDP camp, as a  means  of  relocation,
    would generally be able to demonstrate that such relocation alternative
    was  unreasonable  [190].   Each  case  would,  however,  need  to   be
    considered individually.

41.   As with HH, the Tribunal's analysis of internal armed conflict  in  AM
    & AM was subsequently found to  have  wrongly  drawn  on  international
    humanitarian law concepts.  Nevertheless, as with  HH,  the  Tribunal's
    conclusions regarding Article  15(c)  both  as  regards  Mogadishu  and
    elsewhere in central and southern Somalia, were accepted by the parties
    to the present appeal as constituting the  appropriate  starting  point
    for the up-to-date evaluation that this determination will undertake.

42.   The one qualification to this that we must record  at  this  stage  is
    that the appellants, led  in  this  regard  by  Mr  Toal,  queried  the
    validity of the finding that an association with "powerful actors"  and
    the like was likely to be a significant factor.   We  shall  return  to
    this in due course.

43.   In AM & AM, the Tribunal held that it was not "possible  to  say  that
    matters  relating  to  the  method  of  return  are  implicit  in   the
    immigration decision and on that basis it  does  not  fall  within  our
    jurisdiction to assess risk relating to it" [191].   That  finding  now
    has to be read in the light of the Court of Appeal judgments in HH  and
    others [2010] EWCA Civ 426.  Nevertheless, the Tribunal went on to make
    obiter  findings  regarding  the  security   situation   at   Mogadishu
    International Airport and the road from it  to  Mogadishu  [191].   The
    Tribunal concluded that,  despite  the  evidence  of  difficulties  the
    overall evidence "does not demonstrate that for travellers from MIA  to
    Mogadishu there is a real risk en route of persecution or serious harm"
    [195].


                                   PART D

              SCOPE OF THE PRESENT APPEALS AND COUNTRY GUIDANCE

44.   For the respondent, Mr Eicke adopted the  position  that  the  Refugee
    Convention was not before the  Tribunal  in  the  present  proceedings.
    There were two basic strands to this submission.  First, as set out  in
    the respondent's original skeleton argument, it was submitted that  the
    stance of the appellants in seeking  to  demonstrate  a  real  risk  on
    return of persecution from Al-Shabab on the basis of imputed  political
    opinion or religion, and appellant MW's claim to face persecution as  a
    member of a  political  social  group,  namely  women,  were  "new  and
    extended issues" that should not be entertained by  the  Tribunal.   In
    support, the respondent cited the following passage from [201] of AM  &
    AM:-

         "Of course in the case of Somali claimants who are able to  satisfy
         the respondent or the Tribunal that  they  have  given  a  credible
         account of the existence of a risk personal  to  them,  there  will
         often be little difficulty in showing a Convention ground based  on
         race (clan) or religion (if pro-  or  anti-jihadist)  or  political
         opinion (if perceived as pro- or anti-government or pro-  or  anti-
         insurgents).  However (excluding the fact that in the case  of  AM2
         it is an accepted fact that he is a member of the  Sheikhal  Logobe
         clan), our focus in these appeals is confined to persons  who  have
         failed to show  any  personal  risk  characteristics  beyond  their
         nationality  and  home  area.   Is  it  possible  to  identify  any
         Convention ground at this level of generality?  We think not."

45.   The second strand, advanced in Mr Eicke's oral  submissions,  appeared
    to be that - at least in the case of some of the appellants - the basis
    upon which their appeals came before the present Tribunal was not  such
    as to encompass the Refugee Convention.

46.   We have no hesitation in rejecting both  of  these  submissions.   All
    five of the appellants raised the Refugee Convention  as  a  ground  of
    appeal against the respective immigration decisions of the  respondent.
    The present appeals have, as is common ground, been set down in  order,
    inter alia, for this Tribunal to give country  guidance  which  updates
    that in AM & AM.  As can be seen from Part  C  of  this  determination,
    both HH and AM & AM considered Refugee Convention issues,  as  well  as
    other  forms  of  serious  harm.   Indeed,  at  paragraph  366  of  the
    respondent's written submissions, reliance is placed by her on passages
    in the determination in AM & AM which include this:-

         "As Ms Laing herself put it during her closing  submissions,  there
         are no 'hermetic seals' between this issue [Article 15(c)] and  the
         subject-matter covered by the  refugee  protection  and  Article  3
         grounds.  It is apparent from the Tribunal cases of HH and KH  that
         the subject-matter of Article 15(c) protection is seen  to  overlap
         heavily with the subject-matter of refugee protection and Article 3
         protection" [13].

      In this regard, we would add that  the  scheme  of  the  Qualification
    Directive requires decision-makers to give primacy to an assessment  of
    refugee protection over subsidiary protection.

47.   On 12 November 2010, the Tribunal gave directions, prior to the  first
    of a number of case management hearings  in  relation  to  the  present
    appeals, in which the proposed new country guidance was  identified  as
    "risk on return to Mogadishu; conditions in that city and its  environs
    for those who come from there or might be expected  to  live  there  on
    return; conditions in other areas  of  Somalia;  and  safety  en  route
    between the airport and those other areas; as well as risk to  men  and
    women respectively".   Following  discussion  at  the  case  management
    hearing on 13 January 2011, at which the  respondent  was  represented,
    that proposed description of country guidance  was  confirmed.   At  no
    point prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  substantive  hearing  (and
    submission of the  respondent's  initial  skeleton  argument),  was  it
    suggested by the respondent that - contrary to the approach adopted  in
    HH and AM & AM -  the  Refugee  Convention  was  not  expected  by  the
    respondent to play any part in the current appeals.

48.   There is force in what the appellants say regarding the fact that,  in
    framing the instructions to the expert witnesses, it  would  have  been
    evident to the respondent that issues relating to serious harm, capable
    of falling within the Refugee Convention, were to be explored.  This is
    particularly the case in relation to having to live under the  rule  of
    Al-Shabab.  Although that organisation was in existence at the time  of
    AM & AM and the determination in  that  case  makes  reference  to  its
    attitude towards civilians within its control,  one  of  the  important
    developments that has undoubtedly occurred since AM & AM has  been  the
    widening of Al-Shabab's sphere of influence, so as to encompass most of
    southern Somalia.  The evidence gathering exercise has also uncovered a
    good deal about alleged Al-Shabab practices.

49.   The directions issued by the Tribunal on 8 March 2011 stated that  the
    "parties are encouraged to co-operate with each other in  refining  and
    supplementing  [the  proposed  country  guidance  issues],  as  may  be
    necessary in the course of  preparing  the  cases  and  to  inform  the
    Tribunal in writing of the results (including any request for a further
    direction  that  may  be  necessary,   in   the   event   of   material
    disagreement)".  Any concerns the respondent might  have  had  in  this
    regard ought, therefore, to have been resolved  through  this  process,
    rather than by attempting to take the point at the substantive hearing.

50.   Of course, regardless of what has just been  said,  it  would  not  be
    possible  for  this  Tribunal  to  engage  substantively  with  Refugee
    Convention issues if, as a matter of law, it was precluded  from  doing
    so; in particular, by the terms on which an appeal had been remitted to
    it by the Court of Appeal.  There is, however, no such  restriction  in
    the Court of Appeal's orders in respect of appellants AMM,  FM  and  AF
    (see Part B above).  The same is true in relation to the means by which
    the other two appellants' appeals have reached us.  Furthermore and  in
    any event, the respondent has not identified anything in the  structure
    of the appellate system under the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 and the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 that  might
    have the effect of precluding the Tribunal  from  resolving  a  Refugee
    Convention issue that it finds has properly  arisen  in  respect  of  a
    pending appeal.  In this regard, Mr Symes was, we  consider,  right  to
    rely  upon  R  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  and
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal, exp Robinson [1997] Imm AR 568:-

         "[37]    It follows from what we have said that it is the  duty  of
             the  appellate  authorities  to  apply  their   knowledge   of
             Convention jurisprudence to the facts as established  by  them
             when they determine whether  it  would  be  a  breach  of  the
             Convention to refuse an asylum-seeker  leave  to  enter  as  a
             refugee, and that they are not limited in their  consideration
             of the facts by the arguments actually advanced by the  asylum
             seeker or his representative."

51.   Mr Symes also relied upon Article 18 (right to asylum) and Article  47
    (right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial) of  the  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights of the European Union, as well as Article 13 of  the
    Qualification Directive  (granting  of  refugee  status),  under  which
    Member States "shall grant refugee status to a third  country  national
    or a stateless person, who qualifies as a refugee  in  accordance  with
    Chapters 2 and 3".  It may well be  moot  what  part  these  provisions
    might play, where the effect of our domestic law was such as to prevent
    judicial adjudication of a Refugee Convention  issue.   The  provisions
    are, however, pointers  towards  the  need  to  identify  a  clear  and
    specific legal restriction upon the Tribunal's  ability  to  adjudicate
    the issue.  No such provision has been identified in relation to any of
    these appeals.

52.   So far as the particular social group of women is concerned, Mr  Eicke
    raised an objection to the Tribunal  giving  country  guidance  on  the
    issue of female genital mutilation in Somalia.  As will  be  seen  from
    Part H of this determination, the respondent, in  her  closing  written
    submissions, has raised a legal issue as to the  legal  entitlement  of
    appellant MW  to  succeed  in  an  international  protection  claim  by
    reference  to  the  risk  of  FGM  being  performed  on  her  daughter.
    Regardless of the resolution of that issue, however, the fact  is  that
    appellant  MW  has,  pursuant  to  the   Tribunal's   case   management
    directions, put forward a large amount of detailed  evidence  regarding
    FGM in Somalia.  Ms Short, for appellant MW, was correct to state  that
    the AIT had been "poised to give country guidance on the risk of FGM in
    Somalia in a case called SH (Somalia) Court Ref ..." as set out in  the
    witness statement of James Elliot at  page  78  of  bundle  MW1.   That
    appeal was required to be treated as  abandoned  after  the  respondent
    conceded the appeal and granted the appellant  refugee  status,  before
    the country guidance hearing could take place.

53.   In  the  event,  we  heard  a  considerable  amount  of  evidence  and
    submissions from both the appellants and the respondent on the issue of
    FGM.  Both on this issue and in  relation  to  the  Refugee  Convention
    matters to which we have earlier made reference, it was quite  apparent
    that Mr Eicke QC and Mr Staker, on behalf of the  respondent,  were  in
    the event placed at no procedural disadvantage, so as to give  rise  to
    any issue of procedural fairness and,  indeed,  no  submission  to  the
    contrary has been made.

54.   Accordingly, the issues in these  appeals  and  the  country  guidance
    which arises therefrom, encompass the Refugee Convention, Article 15(b)
    and (c) of the Qualification Directive and Article 3 of the ECHR.   The
    risks and related issues with which we  are  concerned  are  risk  from
    armed conflict, in Mogadishu and, separately, elsewhere in southern and
    central Somalia; risks from Al-Shabab, as regards  that  organisation's
    religious and  social  practices,  including  punishments;  risks  from
    allegedly lawless elements of the TFG/AMISOM; risks from other criminal
    elements; internal displacement; the general humanitarian position; and
    the practice of female genital mutilation.  We  approach  the  task  of
    giving  country  guidance  by  taking  the  existing  relevant  country
    guidance on Somalia as our starting point. There is no formal burden on
    a party to show there has been any change in circumstances (see EM  and
    Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) 98).


                                   PART E

  THE ECtHR JUDGMENT IN SUFI & ELMI  AND ITS BEARING ON THE PRESENT APPEALS

55.   On 28 June 2011 the Fourth Section of  the  European  Court  of  Human
    Rights gave judgment in the case of Sufi & Elmi v  the  United  Kingdom
    [2011] ECHR 1045.  Both Sufi and Elmi asserted that they  risked  being
    ill-treated or killed, if the Government of the United Kingdom returned
    them to Mogadishu.  The ECtHR granted interim measures under rule 39 of
    the Rules of Court on 27 February and 14 March  2007  respectively,  to
    prevent the removal of Sufi and Elmi to Mogadishu, prior to the Court's
    consideration of their  applications.   Some  214  similar  cases  are,
    apparently, pending before the ECtHR.

56.   The judgment delivered on 28 June is not a final  one.   Each  of  the
    parties had three months, from its delivery, in which to  request  that
    the case be referred to the Grand Chamber of the Court. The  respondent
    has informed us that such a request has been made by the United Kingdom
    government.  A panel of five judges will, therefore,  consider  whether
    the judgment, or certain parts of it, deserves further examination.  If
    it does, the Grand Chamber will hear  the  case  and  deliver  a  final
    judgment.  Otherwise, the judgment becomes final.


The Applicants' circumstances

57.   Sufi, born in 1987, entered the United Kingdom illegally in  September
    2003 and subsequently claimed asylum on the basis that he was a  member
    of a minority clan who had been persecuted by  majority  clan  militia,
    who had also killed members of his immediate family.  The Secretary  of
    State rejected Sufi's claim and his subsequent appeal to an Adjudicator
    was dismissed, on the basis that Sufi's account of  events  in  Somalia
    was not credible.

58.   Just over three months later, Sufi pleaded guilty to two  offences  of
    burglary, five offences of dishonestly obtaining goods by deception and
    one offence of attempting to dishonestly obtain goods by deception.  He
    was sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment.  On  14  February  2006
    Sufi was convicted, amongst other things, of threats to kill, for which
    he received a further six months sentence of imprisonment.  In  October
    2007 he was  sentenced  to  three  months'  imprisonment  for  indecent
    exposure.  In July 2009 Sufi received 32 months' imprisonment for  five
    counts of burglary and theft and two counts of attempted burglary.

59.   Given the seriousness  of  these  offences,  the  Secretary  of  State
    decided that Sufi should be deported from the United  Kingdom.   Sufi's
    appeal against that decision was dismissed by an Immigration  Judge  in
    September 2006 and a subsequent judicial review was refused in  January
    2007.

60.   Elmi was born in 1969 in  Hargeisa,  now  the  capital  of  the  self-
    declared state of Somaliland.  It appears that, when  he  was  2  years
    old, his family moved to Mogadishu and he did not  subsequently  return
    to Somaliland.  Elmi's father became the Military Attach at the Somali
    Embassy in London in 1988 and Elmi joined him  in  this  country  later
    that year.  In April 1989 Elmi made an application for asylum based  on
    his father's position in the Somali army and beginning of the civil war
    in Somalia.  In October 1989 Elmi  was  recognised  as  a  refugee  and
    granted leave to remain until 31 October 1993.  In January 1994 he  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

61.   Elmi was convicted of a road traffic offence in June 1992.   In  March
    1996 he received a sentence of five and a half years' imprisonment  for
    handling stolen goods, obtaining property  by  deception,  robbery  and
    possession of an imitation firearm for committing an  offence.   On  30
    November 2000 he was convicted of perverting the course of justice  for
    which he received a sentence of three months'  imprisonment.   Also  in
    2000 he was convicted of further  offences  of  theft,  and  also  road
    traffic offences.  In March 2001 he was convicted of theft  and  placed
    on a curfew.  In  June  2001  he  was  again  convicted  of  theft  and
    sentenced to three  months'  imprisonment.   On  23  May  2002  he  was
    convicted on eight counts of  supplying  Class  A  drugs  (cocaine  and
    heroin)  and  in  November  2002  he  was  sentenced  to   42   months'
    imprisonment in respect of these  offences.   In  June  2004  Elmi  was
    sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment for burglary and theft.

62.   In June 2006 the Secretary  of  State  decided  that  Elmi  should  be
    deported, as a result of his  criminal  behaviour.   The  Secretary  of
    State considered that Elmi could be returned to Somalia  as  he  was  a
    member of the Isaaq majority clan.

63.   In October 2006 Elmi's appeal against  the  deportation  decision  was
    dismissed by the AIT.  The Tribunal accepted that Elmi would  not  find
    support in relation to his drug dependency in  Somalia  but  considered
    that he would not be at risk, as a member of a  majority  clan.   There
    was also a real likelihood of Elmi reoffending.  That conclusion proved
    to be correct.  After Elmi had been granted the benefit of rule  39  of
    the ECtHR's Rules of  Court,  he  was  convicted,  in  March  2008,  of
    possession of a Class A controlled drug  with  intent  to  supply,  for
    which he received eighteen months' imprisonment.


Background on Somalia

64.   Paragraphs 37 to  47  of  the  ECtHR's  judgment  contained  a  useful
    description of the factual background to the conflict in Somalia, which
    was agreed by the parties to the applications.  It can be summarised as
    follows.

65.   Somalia comprises three autonomous areas: the  self-declared  Republic
    of Somaliland in the north-west, the state of Puntland  in  the  north-
    east and the remaining southern and central  regions.   Somali  society
    has traditionally been characterised by  clan  membership,  with  clans
    being divided into sub-divisions.  The four majority clans  are  Darod,
    Hawiye, Isaaq, and Dir.  There are also a number  of  minority  groups,
    also  sub-divided,  whilst  the  Digil  and  the   Mirifle   take   "an
    intermediate position between the majority clans and  minority  groups"
    [38].

66.   There has been no functioning  central  government  in  Somalia  since
    President Barre was overthrown by opposing clans  in  1991.   As  those
    clans could not agree on a replacement, lawlessness, civil conflict and
    clan warfare ensued.  Mogadishu is fragmented into  rival,  clan  based
    factions.  The  Transitional  Federal  Government  was  established  in
    October 2004 but has failed to become a functioning government.

67.   In June 2006 the Union of Islamic Courts  took  control  of  Mogadishu
    and, later, control of most of central and southern Somalia.  In  2006,
    a United Nations Resolution authorised a deployment of an African Union
    and Intergovernmental Authority on Development  force  to  protect  the
    TFG.  Ethiopian forces also moved into Somalia to support the TFG, with
    the result that by the end of 2006 the Union of Islamic Courts had been
    ousted from Mogadishu  and  much  of  the  rest  of  southern  Somalia.
    However, the semblance of order in Mogadishu that had been  established
    under the rule of the UIC deteriorated, with a return to  banditry  and
    violence, as well as attacks on the  TFG  and  Ethiopian  forces,  with
    civilians caught up in the fighting on a  frequent  basis.   There  was
    significant displacement of the civilian population.

68.   In 2007 Somali Islamists  and  opposition  leaders  joined  forces  to
    fight the TFG/Ethiopians.  Although a ceasefire was  signed  in  August
    2008, Islamic insurgents were not party to the agreement and,  by  late
    2008, these insurgents, including Al-Shabab, had  regained  control  of
    most of southern Somalia.

69.   Ethiopia removed its troops from  Somalia  in  January  2009  and  Al-
    Shabab took control of Baidoa, formerly a  government  stronghold.   In
    May 2009 insurgents launched an attack on Mogadishu and by  October  of
    that year Al-Shabab had consolidated its position as the most  powerful
    insurgent group, driving its main  rival,  Hisbul  Islam,  out  of  the
    southern city of Kismayo.  Al-Shabab openly declared allegiance with Al-
    Qaeda.  In December 2010 Hisbul Islam and Al-Shabab merged.


Case law

70.   The ECtHR had specific  regard  to  the  Tribunal's  country  guidance
    cases of NM & Others, HH & Others and (most significantly,  because  it
    was the most recent) AM & AM.  The Court was also aware of the Court of
    Appeal judgments in HH and others [2010] EWCA Civ  426,  including  the
    fact that, in addition to HH, appellant AM number 1 in AM & AM had also
    appealed to the Court of Appeal and was dealt  with  in  the  judgments
    there, as well as two other  appellants  including  one  known  as  MA.
    Appellant MA's case is described at paragraph 77 of the ECtHR judgment.
     However, it does not appear that the ECtHR's attention  was  drawn  to
    the fact that the Secretary of State's subsequent appeal in  MA's  case
    to the Supreme Court was successful (MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49).

71.   Two other cases were noted by the Court.  In AM (Evidence -  route  of
    return) Somalia [2011] UKUT 54 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found  that  it
    would not be a breach  of  Article  3  for  a  person  to  travel  from
    Mogadishu International Airport to  Afgoye,  noting  that  travel  took
    place with some degree of regularity along this route and that, as  the
    appellant had lived in Yemen and Saudi Arabia, he would be well able to
    anticipate and comply with the requirements of Al-Shabab.

72.   Finally, the Court noted the judgment  of  24  February  2011  of  the
    Swedish Migration Court of Appeal where the Swedish Court found that an
    internal armed conflict existed throughout the  whole  of  central  and
    southern Somalia, which was sufficiently serious to expose  the  Somali
    applicant in question to a risk of serious harm, even though  he  could
    not demonstrate that he would  be  specifically  targeted.   The  Court
    considered that  the  situation  in  recent  months  "had  become  very
    unstable and unpredictable" and that the presence of the United Nations
    and  other  international  organisations  "had  decreased  and,  as   a
    consequence, detailed updated information was hard to  come  by"  [79].
    Although safety in Somaliland and Puntland  was  acceptable,  a  Somali
    returnee could only gain admittance to those areas if seen as belonging
    or having a connection to them.


Relevant country information

73.   At [80] to [97], the Court described, in some detail,  the  report  of
    the Fact-Finding Mission to Nairobi of September 2010,  which  is  also
    one of the sources of evidence before us.  There was general  agreement
    that the TFG/AMISOM controlled the airport, seaport, Villa Somalia  and
    the road between the airport and Villa Somalia.  The security situation
    in Mogadishu was described by sources as poor.  Al-Shabab areas of  the
    city were at risk of shelling by AMISOM, and  vice-versa.   Both  sides
    carried out indiscriminate shelling and there was constant movement  of
    IDPs in and out of the city.  One diplomatic source suggested, however,
    it would be possible to live in non-conflict areas of the  city,  which
    were generally considered to be safe.  Al-Shabab  violence  had  become
    more sophisticated over the past year as some foreign fighters had been
    brought in.

74.   There were regular flights into Mogadishu  International  Airport  and
    the position there was generally safe, although there were reports of a
    failed attack on  the  airport  in  September  2010.   Certain  sources
    considered that Diaspora returnees who regularly  travel  to  Mogadishu
    were well connected and anyone seeking to return would need  a  lot  of
    preparation to ensure they had contacts in Mogadishu.

75.   There was no consensus on which groups  controlled  other  regions  in
    central and southern Somalia, although it  was  agreed  that  Al-Shabab
    controlled most of the land south of the line drawn between  Beletweyne
    and Dhusarmareb.  Militias aligned with the TFG controlled  pockets  of
    land on the Ethiopian border.  Hisbul Islam was nominally in control of
    some small areas, but even here Al-Shabab's influence was  significant.
    A region known  as  Galmudug  was  controlled  by  a  local  clan-based
    administration acting under the umbrella of Ahlu Sunna Waljamaca  [89].
    Certain sources considered areas controlled by Al-Shabab to  be  stable
    and safe for Somalis who were able "to play the game", contrasting with
    a view of an international NGO that there were no safe areas  in  south
    central Somalia as long as Al-Shabab  and  Hisbul  Islam  were  present
    [92].  Nevertheless, sources indicated that in  Al-Shabab  areas  human
    rights were practically  non-existent  because  of  the  organisation's
    interpretation of Sharia law and that this particularly affected  women
    [94].

76.   The Court also had regard to the UKBA's Operational Guidance  Note  of
    1 July 2010 which, amongst  other  things,  noted  the  possibility  of
    Somalis  flying  from  Mogadishu  International  Airport  directly   to
    Hargeisa, Somaliland [103].

77.   The Court had regard  to  the  Norwegian  Directorate  of  Immigration
    Country of Origin Centre Somalia: Security and Conflict  in  the  South
    report of 23 August 2010, which described  the  situation  in  southern
    Somalia and Mogadishu in particular as unstable, with areas of  control
    changing quickly.  In spite of a certain amount of stability  in  parts
    of the country,  the  civilian  population  was  still  the  victim  of
    indiscriminate violence, albeit  "to  a  slightly  lesser  extent  than
    previously" [111].  In Mogadishu, there was a  difference  between  the
    northern and southern parts of the capital.   Certain  areas  -  Hodan,
    Hawl, Wadaag, Wardhingley, Yaqshiid, Bondheere, Shibis, and Abdulaziz -
    were hardest hit; Medina, Dharkley, Hamar  Weyne,  Waaberi,  and  Hamar
    JaabJab less so.  The UNHCR figure  of  370,000  displaced  persons  in
    Mogadishu and 360,000 in the Afgoye Corridor were estimates,  based  on
    satellite images and, according to a  well-informed  international  aid
    worker, many houses have been  built  "to  mislead  aid  organisations"
    [119].  Outside Mogadishu, fighting was mostly localised around certain
    key areas and towns.  The main challenge for the population of southern
    Somalia was, however, humanitarian in nature.

78.   The Court had before it various reports of the UN  Secretary  General,
    including one dated 28 April 2011, well after the time  (October  2010)
    stated in paragraph 8 of  the  judgments  as  when  the  last  recorded
    observations of the applicants and the UK Government were made.  In the
    April 2011  report,  the  Secretary  General  noted  a  major  military
    offensive against Al-Shabab on 19 February 2011,  by  Ahlu  Sunnah  Wal
    Jama and other groups allied with  the  TFG.   Hostilities  centred  on
    Gedo,  Bay  and  Bakool  regions.   Reports  of  heavy  casualties  and
    intensified recruitment methods on the  part  of  Al-Shabab  "suggested
    that the group's capabilities might have been reduced", although it was
    still said to be receiving arms and ammunition through southern  Somali
    ports and acquiring financial resources from extortion, illegal exports
    and taxation [127].

79.   As well as the report of an "independent expert"  dated  16  September
    2010, dealing mainly with the humanitarian position and  the  behaviour
    of Al-Shabab, the Court noted the UNHCR's  Eligibility  Guidelines  for
    Assessing the International Protection Needs  of  Asylum  Seekers  from
    Somalia of 5 May 2010.  UNHCR concluded "that any  person  returned  to
    southern and central Somalia would, solely on account  of  his  or  her
    presence there, face a real risk  of  serious  harm.   Moreover,  UNHCR
    considered that there was  no  internal  flight  alternative  available
    inside southern and central Somalia" [135].  The UNHCR identified three
    potential agents of persecution: (i) Al-Shabab/Hisbul Islam, which  had
    admitted using civilians as human shields, intimidated and assassinated
    civilians  working  for  or  perceived  as   collaborating   with   the
    TFG/AMISOM, as well as engaging  in  forced  recruitment  and  imposing
    social decrees of an extreme and abusive nature; (ii) criminal elements
    in Mogadishu, who put at risk  business  persons  and  civil  societies
    there; and (iii) the TFG/AMISOM, who indiscriminately shelled  civilian
    areas of Mogadishu in reprisal for Al-Shabab mortar attacks.

80.   The UNHCR Guidelines considered that effective  state  protection  was
    unavailable in southern and central Somalia,  given  the  situation  of
    armed conflict and the inability of the government  to  extend  control
    over any territory outside a few districts in  Mogadishu.   Since  2007
    clan protection had been undermined in Mogadishu  and  increasingly  in
    other  regions,  including  as  a  result  of  Al-Shabab/Hisbul   Islam
    interpretations of Sharia law.

81.   The Court also had before it various Amnesty International  and  Human
    Rights Watch Reports, including the latter's "Harsh War, Harsh  Peace",
    which was relied on by the appellants in the present appeals.   In  the
    HRW Report "Welcome to Kenya" of June 2010, details were given of  what
    were said to be continuing abuses perpetrated by the Kenyan authorities
    against Somali refugees and asylum seekers.  World Food  Programme  and
    Mdicins Sans Frontires described  the  humanitarian  problems  facing
    those in southern and central Somalia and,  amongst  the  news  reports
    referred to by the Court, was one from the Guardian of 3 February 2011,
    that Somalia "was once again facing a malnutrition crisis" [194].


The ECtHR's Assessment

Mogadishu

82.   At [241] to  [250]  the  Court  assessed  the  then  current  security
    situation in Mogadishu.  In doing so, it in effect took as its starting
    point the country guidance conclusions of the AIT in AM & AM, that  the
    situation  in  Mogadishu  was  such  "that  everyone  except   possibly
    prominent businessmen  or  senior  figures  in  the  insurgency  or  in
    powerful criminal gangs would be at risk if returned there".  The Court
    adopted the yardstick in AM & AM for assessing whether the parties to a
    conflict were responsible for a situation of general violence  of  such
    intensity as to pose a real risk to the life or person of any  civilian
    in the capital.   The  criteria  were  (1)  whether  the  parties  were
    employing methods and tactics of warfare which increased  the  risk  of
    civilian casualties or directly targeting civilians;  (2)  whether  the
    use of such methods and/or tactics was widespread  among  the  parties;
    (3) whether the fighting was  localised  or  widespread;  and  (4)  the
    number of civilians killed, injured and displaced as a  result  of  the
    fighting.  Although these  criteria  were  not  exhaustive,  the  Court
    considered that they formed an appropriate yardstick by which to assess
    the level of violence in Mogadishu.

83.   Looking at post-AM & AM events, the Court noted that the situation  in
    Mogadishu had improved in  2009  but  that  "The  most  recent  reports
    indicate that all significant parties to the conflict have continued to
    engage in indiscriminate violence, conducting numerous  mortar  attacks
    against enemy forces in densely populated areas  of  Mogadishu  without
    regard to the civilian population" [244].  In particular, this involved
    firing mortars indiscriminately in the general direction of  opposition
    fire or bombarding areas  such  as  Bakara  Market,  considered  to  be
    opposition strongholds.   Reports  also  indicated  that  the  security
    situation in Mogadishu deteriorated in 2010.  For instance,  statistics
    from the Elman Peace Centre of Somalia recorded that 918 civilians  had
    died in the first seven  months  of  2010  and  a  further  2,555  were
    injured.  There were thus thousands of civilian  casualties,  to  which
    had to be added the displacement of hundreds of  thousands  of  people.
    Any changing tactics by Al-Shabab as a  result  of  recruiting  foreign
    fighters had not in any way reduced  the  risk  to  civilians;  on  the
    contrary one source told the  Fact-Finding  Mission  that  new  tactics
    included  random   attacks   on   civilians   [246].    The   Norwegian
    Directorate's report indicated that increasing professionalism  on  the
    part of Al-Shabab had resulted in "greater brutality".  Whilst fighting
    in Mogadishu was more intense in some areas than others,  the  position
    on the  ground  was  capable  of  changing  on  a  daily  basis  [247].
    Accordingly, at [248], the Court concluded that "The large quantity  of
    objective  information  overwhelmingly  indicates  that  the  level  of
    violence in Mogadishu is of sufficient intensity to pose a real risk of
    treatment reaching the Article 3 threshold to anyone in  the  capital".
    In reaching this conclusion the Court  had  regard  to  "indiscriminate
    bombardments and military offensives carried out by all parties to  the
    conflict,  the  unacceptable  number  of   civilian   casualties,   the
    substantial number of persons displaced within and from the  city,  and
    the unpredictable and widespread nature of the conflict".

84.   At [249] the Court considered the exception identified by the  AIT  in
    AM  &  AM  of  certain  individuals  "exceptionally  well-connected  to
    'powerful actors' in Mogadishu [who] might be able to obtain protection
    and live safely in the city".  The ECtHR noted it had not received  any
    submissions specifically  addressed  to  this  issue  and  the  country
    reports on it were "largely silent".  Nevertheless, the  Court  decided
    not to exclude the possibility that it might be shown in the case of an
    individual applicant that he or she was "a  well-connected  individual"
    who "would be protected in Mogadishu.  However it considers  it  likely
    that this would be rare.  First in the light of the  Tribunal  decision
    it would appear that only connections at the highest level would be  in
    a position to afford such protection" and it was  not  enough  to  show
    that an individual was merely a member of a  majority  clan.   Secondly
    the Court recalled that in HH and others in the Court  of  Appeal  that
    Court had found that "an applicant who had not been to Somalia for some
    time was  unlikely  to  have  the  contacts  necessary  to  afford  him
    protection on return.  It is  therefore  unlikely  that  a  contracting
    state could successfully raise such an argument unless  the  individual
    had recently been in Somalia."


Southern and central Somalia (outside Mogadishu)

(a) The internal relocation alternative

85.   Although the ECtHR observed in Sufi & Elmi  that  the  United  Kingdom
    Government intended to return the applicants to  Mogadishu,  the  Court
    decided in the light of the findings in AM & AM that it  was  necessary
    to consider whether the applicants could relocate to a safer region  in
    southern or central Somalia.

86.   So far as Somaliland or Puntland were concerned, the Court found  that
    Somali nationals would not be able to gain admittance there unless they
    were born in the region in question or had strong clan connections with
    it.  The Court was not, however, aware of the existence of any  similar
    obstacles preventing Somali returnees from gaining admittance in  other
    parts of southern and central Somalia [267].  Nevertheless,  given  the
    humanitarian crisis and resulting strain placed on individuals and  the
    traditional clan structure, the Court did not in  practice  consider  a
    returnee could find refuge or support in such an area of  southern  and
    central Somalia where he  or  she  had  no  close  family  connections.
    Without such connections, or if the returnee could not safely travel to
    an area where such connections existed, then in both  cases  the  Court
    considered "it reasonably likely that he would have to seek  refuge  in
    an IDP settlement or refugee camp".


(b) The risk in transit or upon settling elsewhere in southern  and  central
    Somalia

87.   At [268] the Court observed that, although  there  were  a  number  of
    airports in southern and central Somalia "all applicants facing removal
    from the United Kingdom have been issued  with  removal  directions  to
    Mogadishu International Airport".  We take it this is  a  reference  to
    the 216 applicants (including Sufi and Elmi) referred to earlier in the
    judgment as being subject to rule 39 orders.  The Court held  that  the
    situation in the airport was not such as to give rise to a real risk of
    ill-treatment to somebody arriving there.  It also noted  that  certain
    journeys to places in central and southern Somalia from the airport did
    not involve having to go to Mogadishu.

88.   Although there were reports of fighting in various  towns  in  central
    and southern Somalia, this fighting was categorised  by  the  Court  as
    sporadic  and  localised  and   that   "other   areas   have   remained
    comparatively stable" [270].  It was therefore possible for a  returnee
    to travel from Mogadishu  International  Airport  to  another  part  of
    central and southern Somalia "without being exposed to a real  risk  of
    treatment proscribed by Article 3 solely on account of the situation of
    general violence".  However this would "very much depend upon  where  a
    returnee's home area is.  It is not possible for the  Court  to  assess
    the level of general violence in every part  of  southern  and  central
    Somalia and, even if it were to  undertake  such  an  exercise,  it  is
    likely  that  its  conclusions  would  become  outdated  very  quickly.
    Consequently, if the applicant's home is one which has been affected by
    the conflict, the conditions there will have to be assessed against the
    requirements of Article 3 at the time of removal" [271].

89.   However, general violence was not  the  only  problem  facing  such  a
    traveller.  The areas with the lowest levels  of  generalised  violence
    were those under the control of Al-Shabab "which  are  also  the  areas
    reported to have the worst human rights conditions".  Such  a  returnee
    might therefore still be exposed to a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  on
    account of the human rights situation in the areas to which he  or  she
    would need to travel.

90.    In  the  areas  of  their  control,  Al-Shabab   was   enforcing   "a
    particularly draconian version of Sharia law, which  goes  well  beyond
    the traditional  interpretation  of  Islam  in  Somalia...and  in  fact
    amounts to a repressive form of social control" [273].  Al-Shabab  were
    concerned "with every little detail of daily life, including men's  and
    women's style of dress, the length of men's beards, the style of  music
    being listened to and the choice of mobile phone ringtone".  Women were
    "particularly targeted" in that, in addition  to  strict  dress  codes,
    they were not permitted by Al-Shabab to go out in public with men, even
    male relatives, and had been ordered to close their shops.  There  were
    also reports of systematic forced recruitment by  Al-Shabab  of  adults
    and children.

91.   These forms of control by Al-Shabab applied not only to  those  living
    in the areas under its control but also  to  those  travelling  through
    them, who would have to negotiate Al-Shabab checkpoints.  "Persons  not
    obeying  Al-Shabab's  rules  could  experience  difficulties  at  these
    checkpoints".

92.   At [275] the Court assessed the evidence from a number of sources  who
    had told the Fact-Finding Mission "that areas controlled  by  Al-Shabab
    were generally safe for Somalis provided that they were able  to  'play
    the game' and avoid the attention of Al-Shabab by obeying their rules".
     Since, however, Al-Shabab only began seizing  parts  of  southern  and
    central Somalia in late 2006, the Court considered it unlikely  that  a
    Somali "with no  recent  experience  of  living  in  Somalia  would  be
    adequately equipped to 'play the game' with a risk that he  would  come
    to the attention of  Al-Shabab,  either  while  travelling  through  or
    having settled in an Al-Shabab controlled area.   The  Court  considers
    that this risk would be even greater for Somalis who had  been  out  of
    the country long enough to become 'westernised' as certain  attributes,
    such as a foreign accent, would be impossible to disguise."  Again,  it
    was not possible to predict the fate of a  returnee  who  came  to  the
    attention  of  Al-Shabab  for  failing  to  comply  with  their  rules.
    Evidence of punishments indicated that  these  could  include  stoning,
    amputation, flogging and corporal punishment, all of which  would  fall
    within Article 3.  Although the  Court  accepted  the  likelihood  that
    punishment would depend upon the gravity  of  infringement,  there  was
    evidence that Somalis had been beaten or flogged for  relatively  minor
    transgressions, such as playing Scrabble, watching  the  World  Cup  or
    wearing inappropriate clothing.  Accordingly, the Court  found  that  a
    returnee with no recent experience of living in  Somalia  would  be  at
    real risk of being subjected to treatment proscribed by Article 3 in an
    Al-Shabab controlled area.


(c) Humanitarian conditions in refugee and IDP camps

93.   So far in this prcis of the ECtHR's findings in Sufi & Elmi, we  have
    omitted the Court's discussion of various legal issues, since these are
    best dealt with separately, later in this Part  of  the  determination.
    In  describing  the  Court's  findings   regarding   the   humanitarian
    conditions in refugee/IDP camps, however, it is necessary at this point
    to say a little about the Court's legal approach, not least because the
    respondent in the present appeals took issue with it.  In  essence,  in
    apparent reliance on the recent ECtHR case of MSS v Belgium and  Greece
    [2011] ECHR 108, the Court concluded that, if  the  "dire  humanitarian
    conditions in Somalia were solely or even predominantly attributable to
    poverty or to the state's lack of resources to deal  with  a  naturally
    occurring phenomenon, such as drought, the  test  in  N  v  the  United
    Kingdom may well have  been  considered  to  be  the  appropriate  one.
    However, it  is  clear  that  while  drought  has  contributed  to  the
    humanitarian crisis, that crisis is predominantly due to the direct and
    indirect actions of the parties to the conflict.  The reports  indicate
    that all parties to the conflict have employed  indiscriminate  methods
    of warfare in densely populated urban  areas  with  no  regard  to  the
    safety of the civilian population...  This fact alone has  resulted  in
    widespread displacement and the  breakdown  of  social,  political  and
    economic infrastructures.  Moreover, the  situation  has  been  gravely
    exacerbated by Al-Shabab's refusal to permit international aid agencies
    to operate in the areas under  its  control"  [282].   Accordingly,  at
    [283], the Court rejected the N v United Kingdom approach and preferred
    that in MSS v Belgium and Greece "which requires it to have  regard  to
    an applicant's ability to cater for his most basic needs, such as food,
    hygiene  and  shelter,  his  vulnerability  to  ill-treatment  and  the
    prospect of his situation improving within a reasonable timeframe".

94.   Assessing the position on this basis, the Court found that  conditions
    for internally displaced persons in southern and central  Somalia  were
    "dire".  Even before the recent failure of the rains, over half of  the
    population of Somalia was dependent  on  food  aid;  but,  despite  the
    humanitarian crisis, Al-Shabab continued  to  deny  international  NGOs
    access to areas under its control [284].  Although it was impossible to
    assess with any degree of accuracy how many IDPs  were  living  in  the
    Afgoye Corridor, it could be as many as 410,000.   Significant  numbers
    of these were being forced to return to Mogadishu in search of food and
    water.  IDPs were extremely vulnerable to exploitation  and  crime,  as
    well as forced recruitment to Al-Shabab.  The increased urbanisation of
    the Afgoye Corridor, as identified by the UK Government, was  supported
    by a number of country  reports,  but  did  not  demonstrate  that  the
    conditions for the majority of IDPs had  improved.   On  the  contrary,
    reports  suggested  IDPs  were  experiencing  difficulties  in  finding
    shelter in the Afgoye Corridor because landlords were selling land that
    the IDPs could otherwise have lived on [286].

95.   At [287] to [291], the Court decided that it was appropriate  to  have
    regard to the evidence in the Dadaab Camps in Kenya, to which the  NGOs
    had direct access, and which were  said  to  be  severely  overcrowded,
    besides having high levels of theft and sexual  violence,  exploitation
    by elements of the  Kenyan  authorities  and  risk  of  refoulement  to
    Somalia by the Kenyan authorities.  Having regard  to  this  situation,
    the Court decided that "any returnee forced to seek  refuge  in  either
    camp [Dadaab or the Afgoye Corridor] would be at real risk of Article 3
    ill-treatment on account of  the  dire  humanitarian  conditions".   If
    anything, conditions in Somalia were likely to be worse.

96.   The ECtHR accordingly found that to remove Sufi or Elmi  to  Mogadishu
    would be a violation of their Article 3 rights.




The Significance of Sufi & Elmi to the present appeals and country guidance

(a) Formal status

97.   It is common ground that,  as  a  matter  of  international  law,  the
    United Kingdom is bound to abide by  a  final  judgment  of  the  ECtHR
    (Article 46(1) ECHR).  As Mr Eicke pointed out, however,  this  has  no
    relevance to the present proceedings, since the duty  only  relates  to
    the actual ruling of the Court in any particular case which, in Sufi  &
    Elmi is, not to remove either of those individuals to  Somalia  and  to
    pay their costs and expenses.

98.   For our  purposes,  the  relevant  legislative  provision  is  section
    2(1)(a) of the Human Rights Act 1998, which provides that a:

         "court or tribunal determining  a  question  which  has  arisen  in
         connection with a Convention right must take into account any-


         (a)      judgment, decision, declaration or advisory opinion of the
             European Court of Human Rights,


         ...


         whenever made or given, so far as, in the opinion of the  court  or
         tribunal, it is relevant to the proceedings in which that  question
         has arisen."

99.   In R (Alconbury Developments Ltd.) v Environment  Secretary  [2003]  2
    AC 295, Lord Slynn had this to say about the duty in section 2:-

         "Although the Human  Rights  Act  1998  does  not  provide  that  a
         national court is bound by these decisions it is  obliged  to  take
         account of them so far as they are relevant.   In  the  absence  of
         some special circumstances it seems to me  that  the  court  should
         follow any clear and consistent jurisprudence of the European Court
         of Human Rights.  If it  does  not  do  so  there  is  at  least  a
         possibility that the case will go to that court which is likely  in
         the ordinary case to follow its own constant jurisprudence" [26].

100.  In Ullah v Special Adjudicator [2004] UKHL 26, Lord  Bingham  approved
    that passage in Alconbury, holding that it:-

         "reflects  the  fact  that  the  Convention  is  an   international
         instrument,  the   correct   interpretation   of   which   can   be
         authoritatively expounded only by the Strasbourg court.  From  this
         it follows that a national court subject to a  duty  such  as  that
         imposed by section 2 should not without  strong  reason  dilute  or
         weaken the effect of  the  Strasbourg  case  law...   The  duty  of
         national courts is to keep pace with the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
         as it evolves over time: no more, but certainly no less."

101.  The boundaries of that duty are described in  R  v  Horncastle  et  al
    [2009] UKSC 14, where the Supreme Court held that:-

         "There will, however, be rare occasions where  the  domestic  court
         has concerns as to whether  a  decision  of  the  Strasbourg  court
         sufficiently appreciates or accommodates particular aspects of  our
         domestic process.  In such circumstances it is open to the domestic
         court to decline to follow the Strasbourg decision, giving  reasons
         for adopting this course.  This is likely to  give  the  Strasbourg
         court the opportunity to reconsider the particular aspects  of  the
         decision that is in issue, so that there takes place what may prove
         to be a valuable  dialogue  between  the  domestic  court  and  the
         Strasbourg Court." [11]

102.  This was developed in Manchester City Council v  Pinnock  [2010]  UKSC
    45:-

         "This Court is not bound to follow every decision of  the  EurCtHR.
         Not only would it be impractical to do so: it  would  sometimes  be
         inappropriate, as it would destroy the  ability  of  the  Court  to
         engage in the constructive dialogue with the EurCtHR  which  is  of
         value to the development of Convention law...  Of course, we should
         usually follow a clear  and  constant  line  of  decisions  by  the
         EurCtHR: R (Ullah)  v  Special  Adjudicator  ...  but  we  are  not
         actually bound to do so or  (in  theory,  at  least)  to  follow  a
         decision of the Grand Chamber. Where, however, there is a clear and
         constant line of decisions whose effect is  not  inconsistent  with
         some fundamental substantive or procedural aspects of our law,  and
         whose reasoning does not appear to overlook or  misunderstand  some
         argument or point of principle, we consider that it would be  wrong
         for this Court not to follow that line." [48]

103.  As Mr Eicke submitted, it is  also  plainly  the  case  that  where  a
    judgment of the Court of Appeal or Supreme  Court  is  binding  on  the
    Upper Tribunal, we must, compatibly with the rules  of  stare  decisis,
    follow that judgment, even if it might be considered by the Tribunal to
    be  incompatible  with  the  Strasbourg  Court's  clear  and   constant
    jurisprudence.  As we shall shortly explain, Mr  Eicke  submitted  that
    there is an aspect of the judgment in Sufi & Elmi which falls  squarely
    within this principle.  As we have already indicated, it relates to the
    ECtHR's assessment of the humanitarian position in southern and central
    Somalia.

104.  Apart from that issue, to which we shall need to turn in  due  course,
    there is no suggestion of the Strasbourg  Court  in  Sufi  &  Elmi  not
    following its clear and  consistent  jurisprudence  on  Article  3,  as
    regards its analysis of the evidence relating to the armed conflict  in
    Mogadishu and elsewhere, and as to the behaviour of  Al-Shabab  towards
    those in, or attempting to traverse, areas it controls.   The  question
    for us, accordingly, is how, if at all, section 2 of the 1998  Act  and
    the domestic authorities we have cited require us to  take  account  of
    and follow the Court's conclusions as to Article 3, by reference to the
    evidence before it.

105.  In this regard, the appellants relied upon the judgments of the  Court
    of Appeal in Batayav v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2003] EWCA Civ 1489.  In that appeal, the  IAT  found  that  Batayav's
    likely imprisonment in Russia would not violate his Article  3  rights,
    by reason of the conditions pertaining then in  Russian  prisons.   The
    IAT dismissed the appellant's appeal without considering  the  judgment
    of the ECtHR in Kalashnikov v Russia (2002) 36  EHRR  587,  which  held
    that the conditions  in  which  Kalashnikov,  as  well  as  most  other
    prisoners, were detained in Russia breached Article  3.   At  paragraph
    25, the Court concluded that "If the only basis  for  deciding  whether
    the appellant faced degrading treatment if returned to a Russian prison
    were Kalashnikov, the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  would  have  to  be
    reversed".

106.  By the same token, the present appellants submitted  that  the  effect
    of the decision in Sufi & Elmi is  that  "So  far  as  the  appellants'
    circumstances are materially similar to Sufi's or Elmi's, their removal
    from the UK would violate Art 3 of the ECHR unless it is shown that the
    situation in Somalia has changed sufficiently since it was examined  by
    the Court to eliminate the identified risks".

107.  Of course, every decision of the Strasbourg Court ultimately  involves
    the application  of  the  jurisprudence  relating  to  the  ECHR  to  a
    particular set of facts, concerning a particular applicant.   As  such,
    the decision of the Strasbourg Court is unlikely  to  be  automatically
    determinative of other cases, for the simple reason that the  facts  of
    those cases are unlikely in all respects to be materially the  same  as
    those of the Strasbourg case.  However, as Batayav demonstrates,  there
    may be occasions when this is not so:-

         "22.     The Secretary of State, whilst accepting that  Kalashnikov
             is plainly  relevant,  asserts  that  it  is  neither  binding
             authority nor, says Mr Garnham,  does  it  provide  definitive
             guidance on any of the issues of substance.  The  judgment  in
             Kalashnikov, he says, is  a  conclusion  on  the  facts  of  a
             particular  case.   No  two  cases   alleging   detention   in
             conditions breaching Article 3  will  be  identical,  and  the
             Court must look at the individual circumstances of  each  case
             to  decide  if  a  violation  has   been   established.    The
             appellant's experience of  prison  in  Russia  was,  he  says,
             hugely different from Kalashnikov's and even on  the  evidence
             adduced by the appellant himself there  was  nothing  to  show
             that he had been kept in conditions breaching Article 3.


         23.      I cannot accept  Mr  Garnham's  submissions.   As  I  have
             already  said,  the  appellant's  remaining   claim   to   the
             protection of Article 3 is founded not on his  own  particular
             circumstances  but  on  the  conditions  faced  generally   by
             persons,  whether  or  not   the   victims   of   persecution,
             incarcerated in the Russian prison system.  To  establish  his
             case he does not need to refer to evidence specific to his own
             circumstances but rather to the evidence bearing on the  class
             of which he is a member.  In other words, in the circumstances
             of this case, to the evidence  showing  the  conditions  faced
             generally  by  persons  incarcerated  in  the  Russian  prison
             system.


         24.      True it is that the decision in Kalashnikov focused on the
             conditions in which Kalashnikov himself had been detained, and
             addressed the question of whether he  had  been  subjected  to
             degrading treatment.  But the wider significance of  the  case
             emerges  from  the   Russian   Federation's   admission   that
             conditions  which  the  Federation  accepted  fell  below  the
             standard set by other Member States of the Council of  Europe,
             and which the  Court  held  amounted  to  degrading  treatment
             constituting a breach of Article 3, applied to 'most detainees
             in Russia'."

108.  The Russian Federation's admission that conditions in Russian  prisons
    fell below relevant standards, as regards "most  detainees  in  Russia"
    was, thus, highly significant.  Since Batayav  was  at  risk  of  being
    imprisoned if returned to Russia, there was  really  little  else  that
    needed to be said.  Indeed, it would be difficult to see how a domestic
    court or tribunal in the United Kingdom could validly have found  that,
    notwithstanding what was in substance a concession, the treatment faced
    by a prisoner in a Russian prison would not be contrary to  Article  3.
    Another case where the factual matrix was indistinguishable  from  that
    in the relevant Strasbourg case was R (on the application of) EW v SSHD
    [2009] EWHC 2957 (Admin).

109.  But in a situation as  multi-faceted  and  complex  as  Mogadishu  and
    central and southern Somalia, it is doubtful whether a  domestic  court
    or tribunal, applying section  2  of  the  1998  Act  and  the  related
    jurisprudence,  is  necessarily  obliged  to  draw  exactly  the   same
    conclusions as regards risk to returnees, as were reached by the  ECtHR
    in Sufi & Elmi, even where the raw evidence before the  domestic  court
    or Tribunal is precisely the same as that which was before  the  ECtHR.
    In United Kingdom law, at least, it is well-established  that  a  fact-
    finding tribunal is entitled (albeit within public law  principles)  to
    decide what weight to give to each material  element  of  the  evidence
    before it.  Indeed, as we shall see, one of the areas  of  disagreement
    between the appellants  and  the  respondent  in  the  present  appeals
    centred on the weight (or, rather, lack of weight) which the ECtHR  saw
    fit to give to the respondent's report of the Fact-Finding  Mission  to
    Nairobi of September 2010.  Whilst we are prepared  to  accept  that  a
    domestic court or tribunal is still required  by  section  2  to  "have
    regard" to the weight which the ECtHR had seen fit to  place  upon  the
    particular piece of evidence, we do not  consider  that  the  House  of
    Lords and Supreme Court authorities, to which we have  made  reference,
    can be said to compel the Tribunal to follow the Strasbourg  Court,  to
    the extent of placing precisely the same weight on that evidence as the
    Strasbourg Court has seen fit to do, in a case where  the  weighing  of
    that evidence is something the domestic court or tribunal  is  required
    to  undertake.   The  references  in  the   domestic   authorities   to
    "jurisprudence" cannot properly  be  said  to  encompass  the  task  of
    attributing weight to evidence.

110. In so finding, we are aware that the Strasbourg Court  has,  from  time
    to time, seen fit to  give  guidance  on  the  approach  to  evidential
    materials in international protection cases.   Thus,  in  NA  v  United
    Kingdom [2008] ECHR 616 the Court had this to say about the use  to  be
    made of materials emanating from a Contracting State  and  from  "other
    reliable and objective sources", such as other States, UN agencies  and
    reputable NGOs:-

        120. In assessing such material, consideration must be given to its
        source,  in  particular  to  its  independence,   reliability   and
        objectivity. In respect of reports, the authority and reputation of
        the author, the seriousness of the investigations by means of which
        they were compiled, the consistency of their conclusions and  their
        corroboration by other sources are all relevant considerations ...


        121. The Court also recognises that consideration must be given  to
        the presence and reporting capacities of the author of the material
        in the country in question. In this  respect,  the  Court  observes
        that States (whether the respondent State in a particular  case  or
        any other  Contracting  or  non-Contracting  State)  through  their
        diplomatic missions and their ability to gather  information,  will
        often be able to provide material which may be highly  relevant  to
        the Court's assessment of the case before it.  It  finds  that  the
        same consideration must apply, a fortiori, in respect  of  agencies
        of the United Nations, particularly given their  direct  access  to
        authorities of the country of destination as well as their  ability
        to carry out on-site inspections and assessments in a manner  which
        States and non-governmental organisations may not be able to do".


111. We are also mindful of what the AIT said in TK (Tamils  -  LP  updated)
    Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049:-

        "... By virtue of the disagreement between the parties in NA as  to
        the relative value of particular sources, the December  2006  UNHCR
        Position paper in particular, the Court also felt it  necessary  to
        articulate in greater  detail  than  previously  its  view  of  the
        relevant criteria that decision makers should apply to  Country  of
        Origin Information (COI). In the latter respect,  it  seems  to  us
        that, at least within  the  context  of  Article  3  jurisprudence,
        judges should now be assessing COI by the standards set out by  the
        Court at paras. 132-135 of NA (which can be summarised as accuracy,
        independence, reliability,  objectivity,  reputation,  adequacy  of
        methodology, consistency and  corroboration).  Indeed,  within  the
        closely related  context  of  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
        claims, very much the same standards have now become, by virtue  of
        EU legislation, legal  standards:  see  the  Refugee  Qualification
        Directive (2004/83/EC), Article 4(1), 4(3)(a) and 4(5)(c)  and  the
        Procedures Directive (2005/85/EC),  Article  8(2)(a)  and  (b)  and
        8(3)." [5]


 112.  For our part, we do not think that the provisions of the  Directives
    cited by the AIT can be said  to  be  anything  like  as  detailed  and
    prescriptive as the ECtHR's guidance and  that,  if  that  guidance  is
    regarded as being part of that  Court's  settled  jurisprudence,  which
    domestic courts are supposed  to  follow,  there  is  no  corresponding
    requirement to do the same as regards the  Refugee  Convention  and  EU
    subsidiary protection.  Be that as it may, there  is  recent  Court  of
    Appeal authority  for  the  proposition  that  domestic  tribunals  are
    required to follow  the  guidance  in  NA.   This  authority,  however,
    clearly demarcates between the need  to  apply  the  guidance  and  the
    ultimate duty of the tribunal to reach its own view on the weight to be
    given to the totality of the evidence before it.


 113. In MD (Ivory Coast) [2011] EWCA Civ 989,  the  Court  had  to  decide
    whether the Upper Tribunal had erred in its  treatment  of  information
    contained in a letter from a  political  officer  in  the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office regarding checkpoints. Sullivan LJ said:

        "Although the tribunal in the present case did not refer to NA,  in
        my judgment it adopted the approach that is described in that case.
        It treated the political officer's letter not  as  expert  evidence
        but as akin to other kinds of country  information.  It  considered
        whether it should attach weight to the fact that  the  Embassy  had
        vouchsafed that one of its staff had furnished the evidence in good
        faith and concluded that it should. It  considered  the  provenance
        [of] the information and most importantly it concluded in the final
        sentence of paragraph 242:


         'In the end, however, it is a matter of judgment as to  the  weight
         that should be attached to the material'". [46]


114. Toulson LJ held that NA and TK provided "authoritative guidance on  the
    proper approach to country  information  in  the  form  of  reports  or
    letters provided by British Embassies" [50]. Pill  LJ  considered  that
    the "weight to be given to the information will be for the tribunal  to
    decide, as an expert fact finding tribunal, in the circumstances of the
    particular case" [53].

115. It is therefore evident that, whilst the  Strasbourg  Court's  guidance
    as to the general approach to evidence is part of its jurisprudence, to
    be followed by United  Kingdom  courts  and  tribunals  to  the  extent
    demanded by the House of  Lords  and  Supreme  Court  authorities,  the
    weighing of the evidence and the conclusions as to the relative  weight
    to be placed on the items of evidence are ultimately  matters  for  the
    tribunal. Whilst the factual finding the Strasbourg Court has made as a
    result of applying its own guidance is something to which the  domestic
    tribunal must have regard, the tribunal is not bound to reach the  same
    finding.

116.  It is the case that, as regards the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chambers
    of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal,  Practice  Direction
    12 of the Senior President of Tribunals' Directions of 10 February 2010
    requires both  chambers  to  treat  a  country  guidance  case  of  the
    Tribunals, and their predecessors, as authoritative, when  deciding  an
    appeal, so far as that appeal:-

         "(a)     relates to the country guidance issue in question; and


           (b)    depends upon the same or similar evidence."

117.  The effect of  Practice  Direction  12  is,  accordingly,  to  require
    judicial fact-finders  in  those  Chambers  in  effect  to  accept  the
    relative weight which the Tribunal giving the country guidance has seen
    fit to place upon the various pieces of evidence.  In  the  context  of
    domestic tribunals operating within the same jurisdiction, according to
    what are broadly the same principles and procedures, such a requirement
    makes sense.  It by no means follows, however, that we should apply the
    principle of Practice Direction 12, as some sort of "gloss" on  section
    2 of the 1998 Act, so as to place the ECtHR in the position of  supreme
    maker of country guidance for the purposes of our tribunals.

118.  Practice Direction 12.2 contains the exception that the  FTT  and  the
    UT are not to regard country guidance as authoritative if  the  country
    guidance case in question "is inconsistent with other authority that is
    binding on the Tribunal".  For the reasons we have  given,  we  do  not
    consider that, even if it becomes a final  judgment,  Sufi  &  Elmi  is
    binding on the relevant Chambers so far as it concerns an assessment of
    facts.

119.  So far, we have considered the  issue,  on  the  assumption  that  the
    evidence that has been placed before this Tribunal is the same  as  was
    put before the ECtHR.  A glance at Appendix 2 to this determination and
    at the synopsis of the Sufi & Elmi evidence mentioned above at [82]  to
    [95] shows this not to be the case.   Considerably  more  evidence  was
    placed before us than was available to the ECtHR,  including  the  oral
    expert evidence of two witnesses, whose views were tested under  cross-
    examination.

120.  In particular, we have evidence of the position at a later  date  than
    that considered by the ECtHR.  Exactly what the last date was  for  the
    ECtHR is a matter of some debate.  Paragraph 8 of the  judgment  refers
    to further observations being submitted in October 2010.  Ms Short, for
    appellant MW, however, ascertained that further  submissions  from  the
    United Kingdom Government were made on 12 January 2011.  At all events,
    the only material from 2011 which the Court appears to have  considered
    was the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  AM  (Evidence  -  route  of
    return), the judgment of the Swedish Migration  Court  of  Appeal,  the
    report of the UN Secretary General  of  28  April  2011  and  two  news
    reports from February 2011, concerning the recent drought.

121.  Mr Eicke submitted that if this Tribunal had seen fit to  justify  its
    factual findings by reference to evidence  that  we  had  seen  fit  to
    obtain for ourselves or which was, in  any  event,  not  drawn  to  the
    attention of each of the parties, so as to obtain their  reaction,  our
    determination would almost  certainly  be  successfully  challenged  on
    appeal.  That may be  so,  although  Ms  Short's  researches  indicate,
    amongst other things, that in Strasbourg the parties  have  a  duty  to
    assist the ECtHR in the gathering of relevant information,  up  to  the
    time the decision is made.  The point which emerges from  all  this  is
    not that the practices and procedures of a particular domestic tribunal
    are better or worse than those of the Strasbourg Court  or,  indeed  of
    the courts and tribunals of other States subject to  its  jurisdiction.
    Rather, the differences reinforce our conclusion  that,  ultimately,  a
    domestic fact-finding tribunal follows its domestic law, as regards the
    admissibility of  evidence,  the  testing  of  that  evidence  and  the
    ascribing of weight to it.

122. It is important to be clear that, so far in this  discussion,  we  have
    been talking about the attributing of weight  to  evidence,  so  as  to
    reach findings of fact. But, as will already have become apparent, even
    once the facts have been found, there will often be considerable  scope
    for argument  as  to  the  application  of  the  relevant  ECtHR  legal
    principles to those facts. The Batayav case was, perhaps, at  least  if
    not more concerned with applying a value judgment as to whether  prison
    conditions breached Article 3 as it was with the actual facts of  those
    conditions. In the case of a  United  Kingdom  country  guidance  case,
    Practice Direction 12  requires  judicial  fact-finders  to  regard  as
    authoritative,  not  only  the  primary  fact-finding  of  the  Country
    Guidance Tribunal but also that Tribunal's application of the  relevant
    legal principles or "tests": eg is the treatment of a particular  group
    such that members of that group  are,  in  general,  at  real  risk  of
    Article 3 ill-treatment?

123.  It could be said that what we have  found  to  be  the  position  will
    provide greater encouragement to claimants to make use of the  rule  39
    procedure in Strasbourg. Indeed, the appellants asserted  it  would  be
    undesirable for us  to  risk  "inconsistency  with  the  ECtHR  in  its
    response to patterns of country evidence  that  are  similar  to  those
    which confronted that Court" (closing submissions [39]).  The existence
    of  the  rule  39  procedure  (based,  as  it  often  is,  on   limited
    information, supplied on an ex parte basis) should not, however, in our
    view be seen as having had a legal effect on the  relationship  between
    domestic courts and tribunals and the Strasbourg Court, to  the  extent
    that would be entailed in adopting a different approach to the  one  we
    have just set out.  Even less should we adopt a different approach, not
    through  legal  obligation,  but  merely  in  order  to  eliminate  the
    practical problems that inconsistency in fact-finding  with  the  ECtHR
    might involve.  Indeed, in the context of country guidance, it seems to
    us that - quite apart from what we consider to be  our  domestic  legal
    obligations - the  concept  of  "valuable  dialogue"  between  domestic
    courts and tribunals and the ECtHR requires us to continue finding  the
    facts as we see them (albeit following any  relevant  general  guidance
    and taking account of Strasbourg's  actual  approach  to  the  same  or
    similar evidence) and embodying our conclusions  in  country  guidance,
    whilst applying the Court's clear  and  consistent  jurisprudence.  The
    solution to any practical problems that this may  cause,  in  terms  of
    rule 39, lies either with the ECtHR itself or in the political realm.


(b) Article 3 and humanitarian conditions

124.  We must now return to the matter highlighted earlier,  regarding  what
    might be described as the  correct  threshold  for  Article  3  in  the
    context of the humanitarian situation  which  exists  in  southern  and
    central Somalia, outside Mogadishu.

125.  For the respondent, Mr Eicke  took  great  issue  with  the  following
    paragraphs of the judgment in Sufi & Elmi:-

         "278.    In Salah Sheekh v. the Netherlands, cited above, the Court
             held that socio-economic  and  humanitarian  conditions  in  a
             country of return did not  necessarily  have  a  bearing,  and
             certainly not a decisive bearing, on the question whether  the
             persons concerned would face  a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment
             within the meaning of Article 3 in those areas...  However, in
             N. v. the United Kingdom ... the Court held that although  the
             Convention was essentially directed at the protection of civil
             and political rights, the fundamental importance of Article  3
             meant that it was necessary for the Court to retain  a  degree
             of flexibility to prevent expulsion in very exceptional cases.
              It therefore held that  humanitarian  conditions  would  give
             rise to a breach of  Article  3  of  the  Convention  in  very
             exceptional  cases  where  the  humanitarian  grounds  against
             removal were 'compelling' ...


         279.     In the recent case of M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece ... the
             Court stated that it had not excluded the possibility that the
             responsibility of the State under Article 3 might  be  engaged
             in respect of treatment where an  applicant,  who  was  wholly
             dependent on State support, found himself faced with  official
             indifference in a situation of  serious  deprivation  or  want
             incompatible with human dignity ( 253).  In  that  case,  the
             applicant had spent months living  in  a  state  of  the  most
             extreme poverty, unable to cater for  his  most  basic  needs:
             food, hygiene and a place to live.  Added to that,  the  Court
             noted the applicant's ever-present fear of being attacked  and
             robbed and the total lack of any likelihood of  his  situation
             improving ( 254).  It held that the conditions in  which  the
             applicant was living reached the Article 3 threshold and found
             Greece in breach of that Article as it was the State  directly
             responsible for the applicant's living conditions ( 264).  It
             also found Belgium to be in breach of Article 3 because, inter
             alia, it had transferred the  applicant  to  Greece  and  thus
             knowingly exposed him to living conditions which  amounted  to
             degrading treatment ( 367).


         280.     In the present case the Government submitted, albeit prior
             to the publication  of  the  Court's  decision  in  M.S.S.  v.
             Belgium and Greece, that the appropriate  test  for  assessing
             whether dire humanitarian conditions  reached  the  Article  3
             threshold was that set  out  in  N.  v.  the  United  Kingdom.
             Humanitarian conditions would therefore only reach the Article
             3 threshold  in  very  exceptional  cases  where  the  grounds
             against removal were 'compelling'.


         281.     The Court recalls that N. v. the United Kingdom  concerned
             the removal of an HIV-positive applicant to Uganda, where  her
             lifespan was likely to be reduced on account of the fact  that
             the  treatment  facilities  there  were  inferior   to   those
             available in the United Kingdom.  In reaching its conclusions,
             the Court noted that the alleged future harm would emanate not
             from the intentional acts or omission of public authorities or
             non-State bodies but from a naturally  occurring  illness  and
             the lack of sufficient  resources  to  deal  with  it  in  the
             receiving country.  The Court therefore  relied  on  the  fact
             that neither the applicant's illness nor the inferior  medical
             facilities were caused by any act or omission of the receiving
             State or of any non-State actors within the receiving State.


         282.     If the dire humanitarian conditions in Somalia were solely
             or even  predominantly  attributable  to  poverty  or  to  the
             State's lack of resources to deal with a  naturally  occurring
             phenomenon, such as a drought, the test in N.  v.  the  United
             Kingdom may well have been considered to  be  the  appropriate
             one.  However, it is clear that while drought has  contributed
             to the humanitarian crisis, that crisis is  predominantly  due
             to the direct and indirect  actions  of  the  parties  to  the
             conflict.  The  reports  indicate  that  all  parties  to  the
             conflict have employed indiscriminate methods  of  warfare  in
             densely populated urban areas with no regard to the safety  of
             the civilian population ...  This fact alone has  resulted  in
             widespread displacement and the breakdown of social, political
             and economic infrastructures.   Moreover,  the  situation  has
             been greatly exacerbated  by  al-Shabab's  refusal  to  permit
             international aid agencies to operate in the areas  under  its
             control, despite the fact that between a third and a  half  of
             all Somalis are living in a situation of  serious  deprivation
             ...


         283.     Consequently, the Court does  not  consider  the  approach
             adopted in N. v. the United Kingdom to be appropriate  in  the
             circumstances of the present case.   Rather,  it  prefers  the
             approach adopted  in  M.S.S.  v.  Belgium  and  Greece,  which
             requires it to have regard to an applicant's ability to  cater
             for his most basic needs, such as food, hygiene  and  shelter,
             his vulnerability to ill-treatment and  the  prospect  of  his
             situation improving within a reasonable time-frame (see M.S.S.
             v. Belgium and Greece, cited above,  254)."

126.  Mr Eicke pointed out that the United Kingdom Government had  not  been
    given an opportunity by the ECtHR in Sufi and Elmi to comment upon  the
    significance or otherwise of MSS v Belgium  and  Greece.   It  was,  he
    said, highly  significant  that  the  receiving  State,  in  which  the
    asserted ill-treatment had taken place, was Greece, a signatory to  the
    ECHR.  If one examined MSS, there was no consideration in that judgment
    of N v United Kingdom.  This omission was significant, given that in N,
    the Court had said:-

         "42.      ...   The  fact  that  the   applicant's   circumstances,
             including his life expectancy, would be significantly  reduced
             if he were to be removed from the  Contracting  State  is  not
             sufficient in itself to give rise to breach of Article 3.  The
             decision to remove an alien who is suffering  from  a  serious
             mental or physical illness to a country where  the  facilities
             for the treatment  of  that  illness  are  inferior  to  those
             available in the Contracting State may raise  an  issue  under
             Article 3, but only in a  very  exceptional  case,  where  the
             humanitarian grounds against the removal are  compelling.   In
             the D. case the very exceptional circumstances were  that  the
             applicant was critically ill  and  appeared  to  be  close  to
             death, could not be guaranteed any nursing or medical care  in
             his country of origin and had no family there willing or  able
             to care for him or provide him with  even  a  basic  level  of
             food, shelter or social support.


         43.      The Court does not exclude that there may  be  other  very
             exceptional cases where the  humanitarian  considerations  are
             equally compelling.  However,  it  considers  that  it  should
             maintain the high threshold set in  D  v  United  Kingdom  and
             apply them in subsequent case-law which it regards as  correct
             in principle, given that in such cases the alleged future harm
             would emanate not from the intentional acts  or  omissions  of
             public authorities or non-State bodies,  but  instead  from  a
             naturally  occurring  illness  and  the  lack  of   sufficient
             resources to deal with it in the receiving country."

127.  Whether or  not  due  to  its  failure  to  have  regard  to  its  own
    established case law, the Court in MSS failed, according to  Mr  Eicke,
    to explain how it was able to move as it did from paragraph 366 to  the
    conclusion in paragraph 367:-

         "366.    In the instant  case  the  Court  has  already  found  the
             applicant's conditions of detention and living  conditions  in
             Greece degrading...  It notes that these facts were well known
             before  the  transfer  of  the  applicant  and   were   freely
             ascertainable from a wide number of sources...  It also wishes
             to emphasise that it cannot be held against the applicant that
             he did not inform the Belgian  administrative  authorities  of
             the reasons why he did not wish to be transferred  to  Greece.
             It is established that the procedure before the Aliens  Office
             made no provision for such explanations and that  the  Belgian
             authorities applied the Dublin Regulation systematically...


         367.     Based on these conclusions and the  obligations  incumbent
             on the States under Article 3 of the Convention  in  terms  of
             expulsion,  the  Court  considers  that  by  transferring  the
             applicant to Greece the Belgian authorities knowingly  exposed
             him to conditions of  detention  and  living  conditions  that
             amounted to degrading treatment."

128.  When one probes the judgment in MSS, however,  the  situation  becomes
    somewhat clearer.  The reference to "detention" in [366] refers to  the
    conclusion the Court had reached, at  [233],  that  the  conditions  of
    detention in Greece in which the applicant found himself  had  violated
    Article 3.  When he  was  not  in  detention,  however,  the  applicant
    appears to have faced unacceptable living  conditions  in  Greece.   At
    [262] the Court was  "of  the  opinion  that,  had  they  examined  the
    applicant's asylum request promptly, the Greek authorities  could  have
    substantially alleviated his suffering" in this regard.  The conclusion
    the Court reached on this issue was as follows:-

         "264.    It follows that, through the fault of the authorities, the
             applicant has found himself in a situation incompatible  with
             Article 3 of the Convention.  Accordingly, there  has  been  a
             violation of that provision" (our emphasis).

129.  Viewed in this light, the finding at [282]  of  Sufi  and  Elmi  makes
    jurisprudential sense.  If the predominant cause  of  the  poor  living
    conditions faced by a person is due to human actions in  the  State  in
    question, rather than to naturally occurring phenomena, coupled with  a
    lack of resources to deal with those phenomena, then the high threshold
    set by N need not be reached.  As we understood Mr Eicke, however,  the
    respondent considers this jurisprudence to be novel, rather than "clear
    and consistent".  It would, he said, in  effect  be  possible  in  many
    cases to ascribe a  State's  inability  to  tackle  phenomena  such  as
    drought or HIV illness as due  to  the  inefficiency,  incompetence  or
    corruption  of  the  government  of  that  State.   To  introduce  such
    considerations  would,  therefore,  be   to   undermine   the   settled
    jurisprudence in N v United Kingdom.  It would, in any event, undermine
    the judgments of the House of Lords in N v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] 2 AC 296, which were binding on  this  Tribunal,
    irrespective of what the ECtHR might subsequently have held.

130.  Whilst we note Mr Eicke's criticisms  of  the  reasoning  process  and
    recognise that such an important issue might have benefited from fuller
    consideration than that given  at [278] to [283] of Sufi and  Elmi,  we
    conclude that there is nothing in that judgment on this point  that  is
    problematic from a jurisprudential point of view.  The  requirement  in
    [282] of predominant cause is such as at least substantially to reduce,
    if not eliminate, the dangers to which Mr Eicke  referred.   It  would,
    for example, be difficult to hold that the prevalence of a disease such
    as HIV/AIDS across sub-Saharan  Africa  is  predominantly  due  to  the
    corruption or other misfeasance of the governments of the countries  in
    that part of Africa. On the other hand, whilst  no  one  disputes  that
    cholera is a naturally occurring disease, there can be no doubt that  a
    government which imprisons people in conditions that are so  insanitary
    as to allow cholera to  flourish,  would  be  acting  in  violation  of
    Article 3. The test of "predominant cause", upon analysis, seems to  us
    to be part of the settled jurisprudence of the ECtHR and underlies  the
    approach in such cases as N vUK and Kalashnikov.

131.  The real problem with [282] of Sufi and Elmi,  as  we  see  it,  is  a
    factual one.  Even on the evidence available to the Court in that case,
    it is, with respect, difficult to see how the actions of  the  "parties
    to the conflict" (which must mean the TFG/AMISOM and Al-Shabab) can  be
    said, by their indiscriminate methods of warfare over  a  comparatively
    short period of time, to have caused a breakdown of "social,  political
    and  economic  infrastructures".   Anyone  with  experience  of  Somali
    international protection cases over the  past  two  decades  will  know
    that, long before the arrival of  these  parties,  there  was  precious
    little by way of social, political and economic infrastructure to speak
    of in Somalia.  Furthermore, the evidence points to the current drought
    being the most severe in the past 60 years, which would  in  any  event
    have been bound to have  brought  about  a  very  serious  humanitarian
    situation,  regardless  of  the  present  conflict,  for  those   whose
    existence depends directly on agriculture.  In any event, whilst having
    due regard to the conclusion of the ECtHR in Sufi & Elmi that,  on  the
    evidence before  that  Court,  the  humanitarian  crisis  of  2011  was
    predominantly due to the actions of the parties, we have concluded, for
    the reasons given above, that the issue of whether or not that is so on
    the evidence before us is a matter for this Tribunal to determine, as a
    matter of fact, by reference to that evidence, ascribing to  each  item
    of it such weight as we see fit.

132.  We shall examine that evidence in due  course  in  this  determination
    (paragraphs 376 - 384).  It may, however, be helpful at this  point  to
    state  that,  whilst  not  the  predominant  cause   of   the   present
    humanitarian crisis in  central  and  southern  Somalia,  the  conflict
    between TFG/AMISOM and Al-Shabab, and the behaviour of Al-Shabab in the
    areas which it controls, have been found by us to  be  significant  for
    two  reasons.   First,  the  fact  that  many  of  those  fleeing   the
    consequences of the drought have seen fit to seek refuge in  Mogadishu,
    at a time when that city was the subject of ongoing armed conflict,  is
    indicative of  the  exceptional  nature  of  the  humanitarian  crisis.
    Second, the nature and actions of Al-Shabab, in particular denying  aid
    from Western agencies (at  least,  until  very  recently),  has  had  a
    significant effect in aggravating an already problematic situation.  As
    a result, we have concluded that the humanitarian position in  southern
    and central Somalia is such that, as a  general  matter,  the  case  is
    properly to be viewed as an exceptional one,  which  reaches  the  very
    high standard required in N v United Kingdom.

133.  Sufi & Elmi touches on two other  issues  of  a  general  nature:  the
    weight to be given to the Fact-Finding Mission's report of 2010 and the
    correct approach to the issue of  internal  relocation.  The  first  of
    these we have touched on already, in the context  of  the  relationship
    between the Strasbourg Court and domestic tribunals,  but  it  will  be
    necessary in Part G to explain why we take a different  view  from  the
    ECtHR as to the weight to be attributed  to  that  report.  The  second
    issue we deal with in Part H.








                                   PART F

              THE UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES


Submissions and evidence

134.  The UNHCR exercised its right to intervene in the case of the  present
    appeals, as it had done in HM  (Iraq:  Article  15(c)).   The  Tribunal
    received written submissions from Tom Hickman, Counsel, and Adam Smith-
    Anthony (then Adam Smith) of Baker & McKenzie, each  acting  pro  bono;
    oral  submissions  from  Mr  Hickman,  written  evidence  from   Janice
    Marshall, Deputy Director in the Division of  International  Protection
    at the Office of the UNHCR  in  Geneva;  a  witness  statement  on  the
    subject of information gathering which, because of its nature,  was  by
    agreement made the subject of an order under rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008; the UNHCR's Guidelines  of  July
    2003  on  international  protection:  "Internal  Flight  or  Relocation
    Alternative";  the  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  for  Assessing  the
    International Protection Needs  of  Asylum-Seekers  from  Somalia  (May
    2010), with update to June 2011.

135.  The basic purpose of the UNHCR's intervention in the  present  appeals
    was to explain why it was considered that the UNHCR had submissions  of
    value to make on the  issue  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive and why the UNHCR was of the view that, at the present  time,
    no-one could be returned to Somalia from the United Kingdom, compatibly
    with Article 15(c).

136.  Having rehearsed the background to the  Qualification  Directive,  and
    Article 15(c) in particular, the  UNHCR's  submissions  noted  how  the
    Court of Appeal in QD (Iraq) [2009] EWCA Civ 620  considered  that  the
    Directive not only gave effect to the 1951 Refugee Convention and  non-
    refoulement obligations under the ECHR, but  that  Article  15(c)  gave
    legal force to:-

         "...the humanitarian practices adopted by many EU  states,  the  UK
         included, towards individuals who manifestly  need  protection  but
         who do not necessarily qualify under  either  Convention.   Amongst
         these are people whose lives or safety, if returned to  their  home
         area, would be imperilled by endemic violence".

137.  The UNHCR  submitted  that  the  "Qualification  Directive  itself  is
    poorly  drafted...and  should  not  be  given  an   overly   legalistic
    interpretation".  What  constituted  a  real  risk  of  a  serious  and
    individual  threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or  person  by  reason  of
    indiscriminate violence was not a question that was well-suited  "to  a
    problematic assessment of casualty  rates  based  on  past  events  and
    inevitably  incomplete  statistics  (although   such   information   is
    undoubtedly relevant), and the ambiguity in  the  wording  (e.g.  'real
    risk' of a 'serious...threat') reflects this".  In Elgafaji,  the  CJEU
    considered that there would be a sufficient individual threat where the
    indiscriminate violence "reaches such a  high  level  that  substantial
    grounds are shown for  believing  that  a  civilian,  returned  to  the
    relevant country, or as the case may be, to the relevant region"  would
    face a real risk of being subject to a serious threat" [35].

138.  The detailed submissions of the UNHCR in  relation  to  Article  15(c)
    are considered below (Part I(1)(b) and  (2)(b)).   At  this  point,  we
    shall concentrate on the UNHCR's submissions as to why the  Eligibility
    Guidelines of 5 May 2010, together with  their  update  of  June  2011,
    should be followed by this Tribunal.  The UNHCR accepted that there had
    been occasions when Tribunals had expressed  reservations  about  UNHCR
    Reports; for example, NM (Somalia) CG [2005] UKIAT 00076, on the  basis
    that the UNHCR referred generally to the situation in a country  or  to
    the need for international protection without  specifically  addressing
    governing international and domestic norms.  There was also thought  to
    be a lack of corroboration or evidential basis for some statements; and
    a number of cases where the thoroughness or cogency  of  UNHCR  Reports
    had been challenged by the parties (LP  (Sri  Lanka)  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    00076).

139.  As to its mandate and  functions,  UNHCR  submitted  that  it  had  no
    agenda other than the full exercise of its legal duty pursuant  to  the
    mandate given to it by the  international  community.   That  community
    charged  UNHCR  with  the  obligation   to   assist   states   in   the
    interpretation and application of the legal framework  established  for
    the protection  of  refugees.   UNHCR's  statute  envisaged  the  UNHCR
    fulfilling its mandate by "promoting the conclusion and ratification of
    international conventions for the protection of  refugees,  supervising
    their application and proposing amendments thereto" ( 8(a)).   Article
    35 of the Refugee Convention required contracting states to  "undertake
    to cooperate with the Office of the United  Nations  High  Commissioner
    for Refugees and to provide the UNHCR with information and  statistical
    data requested by the UNHCR, regarding the condition of  refugees,  the
    implementation of the Convention  and  laws,  regulations  and  decrees
    relating to refugees".  Thus, the 1951 Convention itself envisaged  the
    UNHCR "would become a central repository of knowledge  and  information
    on the condition of refugees" and that it would prepare reports to that
    effect.

140.  The fact  that  UNHCR  has  been  called  upon  by  the  international
    community to pronounce upon issues  of  humanitarian  protection  going
    beyond persons fleeing persecution could be seen from  calls  from  the
    General Assembly and the Economic and Social Committee of the UN,  over
    the years, to the UNHCR to provide assistance to  persons  in  need  of
    international protection.  This called into play  paragraph  9  of  the
    UNHCR Statute, whereby the High Commissioner is required to "engage  in
    such additional activities ... as the General Assembly  may  determine,
    within the limits  of  the  resources  placed  at  his  disposal".   In
    practical terms, Mr  Hickman  submitted  that  this  had  extended  the
    UNHCR's mandate to cover forced displacement resulting  from  conflict,
    indiscriminate violence or disorder, in relation to persons, whether or
    not they were refugees within the 1951 Convention.   UNHCR  accordingly
    considered "that serious (including indiscriminate)  threats  to  life,
    physical integrity or freedom resulting from  generalised  violence  or
    events  seriously  disturbing  public  order  are  valid  reasons   for
    international protection under its mandate".  The significance of  that
    mandate could be seen from the weight placed by the High Court and  the
    Court of Appeal upon the reports  of  the  UNHCR  in,  respectively,  R
    (Saedi) v SSHD [2010] EWHC 705 (Admin) and QD (Iraq).

141.  The reliance placed on UNHCR positions  had,  in  its  turn,  made  it
    incumbent on UNHCR "to articulate clear, concise and timely guidance on
    issues relating to eligibility for refugee status and associated issues
    of subsidiary protection".  This had led to adjustments being  made  to
    the content and format of UNHCR country-related papers.  UNHCR  Reports
    accordingly now  "routinely  and  where  appropriate  address  directly
    specific  international  and  regional  norms",  as  in   the   Somalia
    Eligibility Guidance.

142.  Since 2010, UNHCR has organised  its  country-related  papers  in  the
    following way, in order to distinguish between the  different  purposes
    of the information:-

    (i)     Eligibility  Guidelines  and  updates:  these  contain  factual
         descriptions  of   circumstances   in   individual   countries   as
         objectively assessed and corroborated by UNHCR, setting out UNHCR's
         legal analysis and recommendations.


    (ii)   Safe third country papers: these contain UNHCR positions on  the
         availability of protection in third countries.


    (iii)  Return advisories: these  provide  guidance  on  the  return  of
         people not  found  to  be  in  need  of  international  protection,
         following fair, efficient asylum procedures.


    (iv)   Country of origin papers: these summarise background country  of
         origin information and may be externally commissioned by UNHCR,  in
         which case that would be made clear.  Such papers  do  not  contain
         legal analysis or recommendation.

143.  In NA v United Kingdom [2008] ECHR  616,  the  ECtHR  recognised  that
    States' diplomatic missions would often be  able  to  provide  material
    that would be highly relevant to the Court's  assessment  in  the  case
    before it, as regards conditions in a particular country in which  that
    mission was situated.  But:-

         "It finds that the same consideration must apply,  a  fortiori,  in
         respect of agencies  of  the  United  Nations,  particularly  their
         direct access to the authorities of the countries of destination as
         well  as  their  ability  to  carry  out  on-site  inspections  and
         assessments  in  a  manner  which   States   and   non-governmental
         organisations may not be able to do" [121].

144.  Furthermore, greater importance would be attached  to  reports  "which
    consider the human rights situation in the country of  destination  and
    directly addressed the grounds  for  the  alleged  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment in the  case  before  the  Court".   Since  the  Court's  own
    assessment of the human rights situation in a country was  carried  out
    "only to determine whether there would be a violation of Article  3  if
    the applicant in the case  before  it  were  to  be  returned  to  that
    country",  weight  would  be  attached  to   independent   assessments,
    depending "on the extent to which  those  assessments  are  couched  in
    terms similar to Article 3.  Thus in respect of the UNHCR,  due  weight
    has been given by the  Court  to  the  UNHCR's  own  assessment  of  an
    applicant's  claims  when  the  Court  determined  the  merits  of  her
    complaint under Article 3 ....  Conversely, where the UNHCR's  concerns
    were focused on general socio-economic and humanitarian considerations,
    the Court has been inclined to accord less weight to them,  since  such
    considerations do not necessarily have a bearing on the question  of  a
    real risk for an  individual  applicant  of  ill-treatment  within  the
    meaning of Article 3 (Salah Sheekh)" [122].

145.  The UNHCR's submissions  then  turned  to  the  process  of  compiling
    Eligibility  Guidelines.   Ms  Marshall's   statement   explained   the
    methodology adopted in  producing  country  condition  material,  which
    included  ensuring  that  every  statement   in   the   Guidelines   is
    "corroborated by a process of 'triangulation'", which:-

         "means that all factual statements made in  Eligibility  Guidelines
         (whether a footnote reference appears or not) are  assessed  to  be
         reliable and are corroborated.  It also means that the  association
         of a factual statement in an Eligibility Guideline  with  a  public
         source by a footnote reference does not mean that this reference is
         the only basis of that statement; in many cases it will represent a
         form of corroboration for the statement."

146.  Quite apart from the process of triangulation, the UNHCR also  carried
    out an assessment of the  reliability  of  each  piece  of  information
    relied upon, having regard to the  experience  of  the  source  of  the
    information, their objectivity, observational capacity and methodology.
     Risk levels  were  assessed  by  means  of  a  process  "that  ensures
    consistency between different  countries  and  different  reports.   It
    draws on UNHCR's unrivalled global reach and experience as well as  its
    local experience."  Local and regional  UNHCR  offices  are  "not  only
    staffed by people who have direct and  long-standing  experience  of  a
    country, but also enable UNHCR to draw on information obtained directly
    from displaced persons and UNHCR partners in the country concerned".

147.  The Eligibility Guidelines of May 2010 were before the ECtHR  in  Sufi
    & Elmi, and were also before us.  They noted that over the  past  three
    years there had been a consistent failure by  all  parties  to  respect
    basic principles of basic international humanitarian  law,  as  regards
    the conflict in central and southern Somalia.  As a  result,  civilians
    were  regularly  caught  in  crossfire  as  well  as   suffering   from
    indiscriminate bombardments and  grenade  attacks  in  civilian  areas,
    together with roadside bombs.  Hospital records  indicated  that  there
    were over 900 civilian casualties in Mogadishu in March and April  2010
    and that between 20 and 50 civilians  were  killed  in  Mogadishu  each
    week.  In addition to all this, the report noted evidence that  Somalis
    were fleeing due to fear of persecution linked to the recent  political
    and human rights situation in Al-Shabab  areas.   As  a  result,  UNHCR
    concluded that "any person returned to  central  and  southern  Somalia
    would, solely on account of his or her presence there, face a real risk
    of serious harm".

148.  The June 2011 update report considered  that  developments  since  May
    2010 had been "largely negative in respect to the security of civilians
    in  central  and  southern  Somalia".   This  reiterated  the   earlier
    recommendations  that  "in  the  European  context  -  a  situation  of
    indiscriminate violence in a situation of internal  armed  conflict  in
    the meaning of Article 15(c) of the EU Qualification Directive" existed
    [2].  Amongst the "developments" were  the  continued  displacement  of
    people due to the conflict, with 85,000 displacements recorded  between
    July and September 2010, mainly from Mogadishu.  There  were  currently
    1.46 million IDPs in Somalia, displaced primarily  due  to  insecurity.
    In Mogadishu, regular exchanges of mortar and artillery fire were  made
    from,  within  and  into  civilian  districts,  resulting  in  civilian
    casualties.  TFG forces had "poor command and control",  which  led  to
    fighting within the TFG, resulting in civilian casualties.  In May 2011
    there was a dramatic increase in children under  the  age  of  5  being
    admitted  to  hospital  in  Mogadishu  with  weapons  related  injuries
    "representing 35% of all weapons related injuries in two hospitals".

149.  Outside Mogadishu  there  was  a  "regular  cycle  of  offensives  and
    counter offensives between Al-Shabab and pro-TFG militias in  Galgaduud
    and Hiran since the end of  2008".   Urban  areas  were  targeted.   In
    February 2011 the TFG launched a significant military offensive against
    Al-Shabab on several fronts, including Mogadishu, Gedo, Lower Juba  and
    the central regions.  Both these attacks and  Al-Shabab  counterattacks
    "share the same lack of  respect  for  international  humanitarian  law
    which typifies the fighting in Mogadishu".  For instance, an  offensive
    to capture Belet Hawo in Gedo involved the destruction  of  the  market
    area, with thousands of civilians displaced, whilst the town of  Dobley
    was shelled in  March  2011,  again  leading  to  significant  civilian
    displacement.

150.  Al-Shabab's already harsh treatment of civilians in  the  areas  under
    its  control  was  being  exacerbated  by  military  pressures  on  the
    organisation.   There  were  forced  recruitment  campaigns   and   the
    cessation in the movement of goods from Bay into Gedo.  Areas taken  by
    pro-TFG militias were "far from stable" and Al-Shabab had "reverted  to
    guerrilla style attacks in territory taken" by pro-TFG militias.

151.  In conclusion, the update report stated that it "cannot be  considered
    reasonable  for  any  Somali,  regardless  of  whether  the  individual
    originates from southern and central Somalia, Somaliland  or  Puntland,
    to relocate within or to southern or central Somalia".

152.  At paragraph 7 of the update, it was asserted that even  if  displaced
    persons were of the same clan as members  of  the  host  community,  it
    would still not be reasonable to expect  persons  with  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution  to  relocate  as  economic  collapse  and  massive
    displacement had saturated the capacity for clan, social  and  economic
    support in home clan areas.  Thus, persons from Mogadishu who had  gone
    to their clan areas in Galgaduud had chosen  to  return  to  Mogadishu,
    with interviewees reporting to UNHCR "that they had reached  the  level
    of desperation so severe that they preferred the misery and  insecurity
    in Mogadishu".  Furthermore, all major urban  centres  under  Al-Shabab
    control, including Merka and  Jowhar,  were  considered  likely  to  be
    affected by the TFG offensive if that offensive succeeded.


The Tribunal's assessment

153.   We  are  grateful  to  the  UNHCR  for  intervening  in  the  present
    proceedings  and  providing  evidence  as  to  the  way  in  which  the
    Eligibility Guidelines on  Somalia  have  been  prepared,  as  well  as
    explaining the background to  the  decision  to  concentrate  in  those
    Guidelines upon subsidiary forms of protection, including Article 15(c)
    of the Qualification Directive and the process whereby lawyers  on  the
    UNHCR's staff sift the  evidence,  in  preparing  the  Guidelines.   We
    accept  the  evidence  of  Ms  Marshall  regarding   the   process   of
    "triangulation" and the attempt to ensure that the evidence used is, in
    addition, assessed by reference to reliability.  An examination of  the
    footnotes to the May 2010 Guidelines reveals that many of  the  sources
    cited, such as Human Rights Watch, feature in the evidence before  this
    Tribunal.

154.   In his oral submissions, Mr Hickman  did  not  contend  that  we,  or
    other Tribunals in the same position, should automatically  follow  the
    UNHCR's  view,  which,  he  said,  was  that  Article  15(c)  currently
    precludes returns to central and southern Somalia.  His submission was,
    rather, that we should have careful regard to the  UNHCR's  Guidelines.
    We have indeed done so. In his written submissions, however, he said we
    should "accept the assessment" of the UNHCR in the Guidelines and their
    update.

155.   Both  the  evidence  cited  in   the   Guidelines   and   the   legal
    interpretation of that evidence, particularly as regards Article 15(c),
    are highly significant to our tasks.  At the end of the  day,  however,
    it is our job, on the basis of all the  evidence  and  submissions,  to
    reach a view as to whether the evidence, properly interpreted,  reaches
    the particular threshold, whether as regards  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution or a fear of indiscriminate  violence  in  the  context  of
    Article 15(c).  That is what Parliament  requires  us  to  do,  in  the
    context of  re-making  decisions  on  appeals  under  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The fact that UNHCR lawyers,  on  the
    basis  of  the  evidence  before  them,  have  reached   a   particular
    conclusion, whilst extremely helpful, cannot be determinative.

156.  The exercise undertaken by the UNHCR  lawyers  is  also  significantly
    different from the proceedings which have generated this determination.
     The parties have not only  respectively  sought  to  place  before  us
    evidence which  (compatibly  with  their  professional  duties)  points
    towards different legal outcomes; they have also probed and tested each
    other's evidence, not least that of the experts who gave oral evidence.
     It is no criticism  of  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  to  observe  that  the
    circumstances surrounding their compilation were very different.   This
    is not to trumpet the merits of an adversarial system of  adjudication;
    one can detect the same dialectic at work in the  judgment  in  Sufi  &
    Elmi. It is merely to be aware of the points of difference  between  an
    assessment  by  a  non-judicial  organisation  tasked   with   pursuing
    humanitarian objectives and the responsibilities of fact-finding courts
    and tribunals. Our more detailed assessment of the  Guidelines  etc  is
    set out in Part I of this determination (paragraphs 359 to 362).


                                   PART G

    THE UKBA'S SOMALIA - REPORT OF FACT-FINDING MISSION TO NAIROBI (8-15
   SEPTEMBER 2010 AND WILSON SOLICITORS' EVIDENCE FROM NAIROBI (14-21 MAY
                                    2011)

157.  Two sources of evidence from the parties call for special mention,  as
    the significance of each was  challenged  by  the  appellants  and  the
    respondent respectively.  The  UKBA's  Country  of  Origin  Information
    Service went on a Fact-Finding Mission to Nairobi  in  September  2010.
    The mission comprised Debbie Goodier, Senior Researcher  in  the  COIS,
    Eugenio Bosco, a Researcher in COIS,  and  Darren  Forbes-Batey,  First
    Secretary (Migration) at the British High Commission, Nairobi.  Fifteen
    persons were interviewed, all except  Captain  Bulhan  of  the  African
    Express Airways were described in  anonymous  terms  in  the  interview
    notes and report.  The stated purpose of the FFM was to obtain specific
    information on the then current security and humanitarian situation  in
    southern and central Somalia, seeking information in particular on what
    groups controlled each area in southern and central Somalia;  how  easy
    it was to travel between different areas there; the security situation;
    the human rights situation and conditions in IDP camps.

158.  Wilson Solicitors' Fact-Finding Mission took place  in  May  2011  and
    comprised James Elliott,  (a  Partner),  Joanna  Hunt  and  Anab  Nour,
    (Solicitors) with the firm, together with Mr Toal of Counsel  attending
    "in an advisory capacity".  According to Mr Elliot's letter of 15  June
    2011, the persons to whom the team spoke comprised  those  working  for
    international organisations, NGOs, charities,  journalists  and  recent
    arrivals from Somalia.  Some were known through previous trips;  others
    were identified through web-based research.  Eighteen  people  provided
    statements.  Except for Tanga Shumer of the Somalia NGO Consortium, the
    NGO representatives were anonymised, as were the representative of  the
    European Union and a businessman.  So too was the statement of a recent
    arrival from Mogadishu; but several other arrivals allowed their  names
    to be published, as did a journalist and  a  coordinator  of  the  Gedo
    Peace Consortium.

159.  The ECtHR at [230] to [234] of its judgment in Sufi & Elmi  considered
    the UKBA's fact-finding report.  It noted  that  states  through  their
    diplomatic missions would be able to gather information that  could  be
    highly  relevant.   It  also  appreciated   that   there   were   "many
    difficulties faced by governments and  NGOs  gathering  information  in
    dangerous and volatile situations" and  that  it  would  therefore  not
    always be  possible  to  carry  out  investigations  in  the  immediate
    vicinity of a conflict.  But:-

         "233.    That being said, where  a  report  is  wholly  reliant  on
             information provided by sources, the authority and  reputation
             of those sources and the  extent  of  their  presence  in  the
             relevant area will  be  relevant  factors  for  the  Court  in
             assessing the weight to be attributed to their evidence.   The
             Court recognises that  where  there  are  legitimate  security
             concerns, sources may wish to remain anonymous.   However,  in
             the absence  of  any  information  about  the  nature  of  the
             sources' operations in the relevant area, it will be virtually
             impossible  for  the  Court  to  assess   their   reliability.
             Consequently, the approach taken by the Court will  depend  on
             the consistency of the sources' conclusions with the remainder
             of the available information.  Where the sources'  conclusions
             are consistent with other country information, their  evidence
             may be of  corroborative  weight.   However,  the  Court  will
             generally  exercise  caution  when  considering  reports  from
             anonymous sources which are inconsistent with the remainder of
             the information before it.


         234.      In  the  present  case  the  Court  observes   that   the
             description of the  sources  relied  on  by  the  fact-finding
             mission  is  vague.   As  indicated  by  the  applicants,  the
             majority of sources have simply been described either  as  'an
             international NGO', 'a  diplomatic  source',  or  'a  security
             advisor'.   Such  descriptions  give  no  indication  of   the
             authority or reputation of the sources or  of  the  extent  of
             their presence in southern and central Somalia.   This  is  of
             particular concern in the present case, where it  is  accepted
             that  the  presence  of  international  NGOs  and   diplomatic
             missions in southern and central Somalia is  limited.   It  is
             therefore impossible for the Court to carry out any assessment
             of the sources' reliability and, as a consequence, where their
             information is unsupported  or  contradictory,  the  Court  is
             unable to attach substantial weight to it."

160.  In the present proceedings, the appellants sought to rely  upon  those
    observations of the ECtHR in order to  persuade  the  Tribunal  not  to
    place significant weight on the FFM Report.

161.  Conversely, the respondent urged us to treat  the  Wilson  Solicitors'
    FFM report with caution, since, unlike the COIS and the FCO who conduct
    the FFM exercises on behalf of UKBA, one of the  core  duties  owed  by
    solicitors engaged in the present proceedings is "to act  in  the  best
    interests of their clients; it was not clear whether or to what  extent
    the preparation of the witness statements followed a 'similarly  strict
    methodology to that (rightly) required and expected of an FFM conducted
    by  COIS  and  the  FCO";  and  as  regards  the  private   individuals
    interviewed it was 'impossible to ascertain whether they have or had  a
    direct interest in the evidence they gave to Wilson Solicitors in  that
    they may themselves have been seeking refugee status either in Kenya or
    been on their way to seeking refugee status elsewhere".

162.  In the light  of  the  criticisms  in  Sufi  &  Elmi,  the  respondent
    submitted the April 2008 Review of COI Fact-Finding Mission Reports and
    Guidelines by Dr Alan Ingram of  University  College  London,  together
    with UKBA's response to that Review.  She also provided the  EU  Common
    Guidelines on Joint Fact-Finding Missions of November 2010.  As regards
    the Ingram report, Mr Symes submitted that Ingram considered even 17 to
    42 meetings/interviews as not necessarily providing a comprehensive and
    adequate coverage of a particular matter, whereas in the  present  case
    only  15  interviews  were  held.   Ingram  had  also  recommended  the
    introduction of "triangulation", which had not been taken on board; nor
    was there any indication that follow-up interviews had been used  as  a
    manner of  improving  the  contribution  of  interviewees.  Mr  Schwenk
    submitted that the UKBA response had been "defensive" and attempted  to
    justify its methodology.  So far  as  the  EU  Common  Guidelines  were
    concerned, Mr Symes submitted that these indicated that  as  a  general
    rule  sources  should  be  named  in  order  to  give  credibility  and
    transparency to an FFM report although "the personal  security  of  the
    source should be of paramount" (sic) [5.1.8].  The EU  Guidelines  went
    on to say that if it is "not possible to quote a source by name, it may
    be possible to list only the organisation a person is representing.  If
    a source is to be listed anonymously this can be done in various  ways.
    For example 'a doctor', 'a lawyer', 'a police officer', 'a human rights
    defender', possibly providing some further indication where  they  were
    located or the city they were interviewed in.  Or it may be appropriate
    to refer to them just as an international NGO  ...  Alternatively  they
    could be listed as 'a source who did not wish  to  be  named'  or  even
    'source A'."

163.  In EM & Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]  UKUT  98  (IAC),  the
    Tribunal addressed criticisms of the UKBA's FFM report on Zimbabwe [74]
    to [113].  The Tribunal in EM found that the value of the Zimbabwe  FFM
    report lay not in any summary or analysis but solely in the  views  and
    opinions of the interviewees, as set out in  the  approved  records  of
    interview.  That is the approach we have adopted  in  relation  to  the
    present UKBA FFM report and, indeed, to the  Wilson  Solicitors  report
    (which does not contain any summary or similar "gloss").

164.  So far as anonymity is concerned, it does not appear  that  the  ECtHR
    in Sufi & Elmi was  referred  to  paragraph  5.1.8  of  the  EU  Common
    Guidelines.  Had this happened, it would  have  been  apparent  to  the
    Court that the way in which the  interviewees  were  described  in  the
    UKBA's  FFM  report  follows  the  recommendations  set  out   in   the
    Guidelines.  Furthermore, it appears to  us  to  be  axiomatic  that  a
    representative of "an international NGO", for instance, who  wished  to
    remain anonymous because of security concerns, would at least  be  very
    likely to be giving a first-hand account of conditions  encountered  in
    the course of the NGO's activities in Somalia.  As a result,  and  with
    respect to the ECtHR, we have concluded that its assertion, that in the
    absence of information about the nature of the source's  operations  in
    Somalia, it will be "virtually impossible" to  assess  reliability,  is
    too sweeping.  The important thing is not precisely what  a  particular
    NGO is doing in Somalia, but what they observe about the  situation  in
    that country whilst they are doing it. It is also  noteworthy  that  Dr
    Ingram's approach  to  anonymity  was  not  that  a  source  should  be
    discounted or downplayed for wishing to be anonymous in  the  resulting
    report, but that information obtained from people  whose  identity  and
    organisational affiliation could not be definitively ascertained by the
    researcher should not be included in reports.

165.  Mr Elliot's letter of 15 June 2011 is pertinent in this regard:-

         "A number of the statements [in the Wilson Solicitors' report]  are
         anonymised.  This is because the representatives of NGO's  that  we
         met were extremely concerned that  if  they  were  identified  then
         their staff working in Somalia could be at risk.  I would  ask  the
         Tribunal to note the UNHCR's similar concerns.


         I can say that most of the organisations that  we  saw  were  large
         NGO's the names of which will be known to  people  in  the  UK.   A
         number of people that we saw said that they had been  seen  by  the
         Home Office during previous Fact-Finding Missions.  A  number  also
         said that they  had  been  approached  by  representatives  of  the
         Foreign Office who had been making enquiries during the  same  week
         we were in Nairobi presumably to assist the respondent in preparing
         their evidence."

166.  This touches on a further criticism levelled by Mr Symes at  the  UKBA
    report; namely, that there was "no  sign  of  an  audit  trail  of  all
    contact with sources in the sense of a  scoping  enquiry  as  to  which
    sources were appropriate to present a comprehensive  picture".   It  is
    true that the Tribunal has not seen  any  specific  evidence  from  the
    respondent in the present case regarding the reasons behind the  choice
    of interviewees in the September 2010 mission.  Given the  professional
    responsibilities of those involved in the mission, however, and bearing
    in mind past practice, it is fanciful to assume that those  interviewed
    would have been chosen on any other basis than that they had  what  was
    considered to be genuinely important information and views to impart.

167.  Accordingly, both as regards the anonymous interviewees  in  the  UKBA
    report and those representing organisations in the  Wilson  Solicitors'
    report, there is no legitimate reason for limiting the weight placed on
    it, such as was done by the ECtHR at [234] of Sufi & Elmi.

168.  This leaves the respondent's submissions  on  the  statements  of  the
    individuals who  had  fled  Somalia  for  Kenya.   We  agree  with  the
    respondent that these statements need to be approached with some degree
    of caution.  The present and future intentions of the interviewees  are
    unclear.  Unlike the representative of an NGO, there is an issue as  to
    whether such persons are telling the truth  or  motivated  to  paint  a
    false picture of their circumstances in Somalia,  in  order  to  aid  a
    present or  future  claim  to  refugee  status.   We  have  borne  such
    considerations in mind when assessing the evidence  but,  nevertheless,
    consider that the degree of detail in at least some of  the  statements
    is such as to carry the ring of truth.







                                   PART H

                            FURTHER LEGAL ISSUES

169.  At this point, it is  probably  convenient  to  examine  a  number  of
    further general legal issues, raised by the appeals, although, as  will
    become clear, legal matters are by no means confined to  this  Part  of
    the determination.  Several of these issues  arise  from  the  evidence
    regarding the nature of Al-Shabab  rule  in  the  areas  of  south  and
    central Somalia that the organisation controls.  The issues  are  to  a
    substantial extent inter-related, as will be  seen  from  the  analysis
    which follows.


(1) Al-Shabab and religion

170.  It is common ground that, in some areas  at  least,  Al-Shabab  impose
    very significant restrictions on what the inhabitants  of  those  areas
    (and those passing through them) may or may  not  do,  and  that  these
    restrictions and requirements  are  driven  by  Al-Shabab's  particular
    interpretation of the Islamic faith.   Thus,  there  is  evidence  that
    people are required to undertake  prayers  at  mosques;  that  men  are
    prohibited from shaving and from wearing trousers longer than to  their
    ankles; that activities such as watching football,  TV  and  films  and
    listening to music are prohibited; that women may be required  to  wear
    the thick  and  bulky  abaya  and  socks;  and  that  there  is  social
    segregation of the sexes.

171.  As can be seen from Appendix 1 to this determination,  the  appellants
    asserted in evidence that, although Muslims, they  did  not  share  Al-
    Shabab's interpretation of that religion.  On  their  behalf,  Mr  Toal
    accordingly submitted that to return any of the appellants  to  an  Al-
    Shabab area would result in a real risk of  persecution  by  reason  of
    religion, proscribed by the Refugee Convention.

172.  Before going  any  further,  it  is  useful  to  remind  ourselves  of
    relevant provisions of the Qualification Directive:

         "Article 9


         Acts of persecution


         1.       Acts of persecution within the meaning of article 1 A  of
             the Geneva Convention must:


             (a)        be  sufficiently  serious  by   their   nature   or
                  repetition as to constitute a severe  violation  of  basic
                  human  rights,  in  particular  the  rights   from   which
                  derogation cannot be  made  under  Article 15(2)  of  the
                  European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
                  Fundamental Freedoms; or


             (b)       be an accumulation of  various  measures,  including
                  violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as
                  to affect an individual in a similar manner  as  mentioned
                  in (a).


         2.       Acts of persecution as  qualified  in  paragraph 1,  can,
             inter alia, take the form of:


             (a)       acts of physical or mental violence, including  acts
                  of sexual violence;


             (b)        legal,  administrative,  police,  and/or   judicial
                  measures which are in themselves discriminatory  or  which
                  are implemented in a discriminatory manner;


             (c)       prosecution or punishment, which is disproportionate
                  or discriminatory;


             (d)        denial  of  judicial   redress   resulting   in   a
                  disproportionate or discriminatory punishment;


             (e)       prosecution or punishment  for  refusal  to  perform
                  military service in a conflict, where performing  military
                  service would include crimes or  acts  falling  under  the
                  exclusion clauses as set out in Article 12(2);


             (f) acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature.


         3.        In  accordance  with  Article 2(c),  there  must  be  a
             connection between the reasons mentioned in Article 10 and the
             acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1.


         Article 10


         Reasons for persecution


         1.       Member States  shall  take  the  following  elements  into
             account when assessing the reasons for persecution:


             ...


             (b)       the concept of religion shall in particular  include
                  the  holding  of  theistic,  non-theistic  and   atheistic
                  beliefs, the participation in, or abstention from,  formal
                  worship in private  or  in  public,  either  alone  or  in
                  community with others, other religious acts or expressions
                  of view, or forms of personal or communal conduct based on
                  or mandated by any religious belief;


             ..."

173.  In relation to Article  9(1)(a),  the  rights  from  which  derogation
    cannot be made under Article 15(2) are those in Articles 3, 4(1) and 7.

174.  Mr Toal referred us to various international and domestic  instruments
    and authorities, in support of his submission that:-

         "Unless an asylum seeker's present religious beliefs and  practices
         accord with those of AS so that he or she has  to  adopt  practices
         that are not his or her own and would have to do  so  in  order  to
         avoid being subject to persecution, the asylum seeker has [a]  well
         founded fear of being persecuted for reason of religion."

175.  Article 18 of  the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political
    Rights provides that:-

         "1.      Everyone shall have  the  right  to  freedom  of  thought,
             conscience and religion.  This right shall include freedom  to
             have or to adopt a religion  or  belief  of  his  choice,  and
             freedom, either individually or in community with  others  and
             in public or private, to manifest his religion  or  belief  in
             worship, observance, practice and teaching.


         2. No-one shall be subject  to  coercion  which  would  impair  his
             freedom to have or to  adopt  a  religion  or  belief  of  his
             choice.


         3. Freedom to manifest one's religion or  beliefs  may  be  subject
             only to such limitations as are  prescribed  by  law  and  are
             necessary to protect public safety, order, health,  or  morals
             or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others.


         ..."

176.  The Constitutional Court of South Africa in S v Lawrence; S  v  Negal;
    S v Solberg [1997] (4) SA 1176 (CC) approved Dixon CJC in the case of R
    v Big Drug Mart Limited as stating that "the essence of the concept  of
    freedom of religion is the right to entertain such religious beliefs as
    a person chooses" but also that freedom of religion "implies an absence
    of coercion or constraint and that freedom of religion may be  impaired
    by measures that force people to act or refrain from acting in a manner
    contrary to their religious beliefs".

177.  In Kokkinakis v Greece (1994) 17 EHRR 397 the ECtHR held that  freedom
    of religion is "one of the most vital elements that go to make  up  the
    identity of believers and their conception of life" [31].  In  the  Law
    of Refugee Status, Professor  Hathaway  opines  that  "an  individual's
    right to religion implies the ability to  live  in  accordance  with  a
    chosen belief, including participation in  or  abstention  from  formal
    worship and other religious acts, expression of views, and the ordering
    of personal behaviour".

178.  In HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  UKSC
    31 the House of Lords held that a gay man had a well  founded  fear  of
    being persecuted for reason of his membership of  a  particular  social
    group, if the evidence demonstrated that he  would  suffer  persecution
    unless he concealed his sexuality and that he would in fact conceal his
    sexuality owing to that fear of persecution.  Dyson SCJ said:-

        "[110]   The Convention must be  construed  in  the  light  of  its
             object and purpose, which is to protect a person who 'owing to
             a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons  of  race,
             religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group
             or  political  opinion,  is  outside  the   country   of   his
             nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling
             to avail himself of the protection of that country'.   If  the
             price that a person must pay in order to avoid persecution  is
             that  he  must  conceal  his  race,   religion,   nationality,
             membership of a social group or political opinion, then he  is
             being required to  surrender  the  very  protection  that  the
             Convention intended to secure for him.  The  Convention  would
             be failing in its purpose if it were to mean that  a  gay  man
             does not have a well founded fear of  persecution  because  he
             would conceal the fact that he is a gay man in order to  avoid
             persecution on return to his own country" (original emphasis).

179.  Citing Asylum  Law  and  Practice  2nd  Edition,  para  4.9,  Mr  Toal
    submitted that the "religion" referred  to  in  Article  1A(2)  of  the
    Refugee Convention could be either that of the  persecutor  or  of  the
    persecuted.

180.  For the respondent, Mr Eicke  submitted  that  the  claimed  Al-Shabab
    requirements for all men to wear long beards and  wear  trousers  above
    their ankles, together  with  the  prohibitions  on  chewing  khat  and
    playing football, were social norms directed at all members of  society
    living in areas controlled  by  Al-Shabab  and  were  not  requirements
    targeted at particular social groups or  requirements  aimed  at  those
    holding  particular  political  or  religious  opinions.   Only  if   a
    particular  appellant  could  establish  that  his  or   her   religion
    prohibited them from wearing a beard, or trousers above the ankles,  or
    required  them  to  chew  khat  or  play  football,  would  Al-Shabab's
    requirements have an impact on the exercise of the  person's  religious
    rights.  Even then, however, it would not necessarily be the case  that
    such requirements or prohibitions amounted to persecution.   Not  every
    restriction of general application to the population at large, which in
    practice prevented a group from doing something in accordance with  its
    religious culture, would necessarily amount to a breach of human rights
    on grounds of religious discrimination.  Even if that were  not  so,  a
    breach would not necessarily amount to persecution within  the  meaning
    of the Refugee Convention.  The present appellants did  not  even  meet
    the first of  these  requirements,  since  the  mere  fact  that  their
    religion did not prohibit them from  watching  football,  for  example,
    could not be said to mean that  a  prohibition  on  watching  football,
    applicable to  the  general  population,  amounted  to  persecution  on
    grounds of religion.  All countries had laws prescribing  standards  of
    public decency.   Thus  the  fact  that  the  authorities  in  southern
    European countries required those entering churches and  cathedrals  to
    dress appropriately, covering shoulders and  possibly  heads,  did  not
    mean  that  a  north  European  tourist   was   being   persecuted   or
    discriminated against on the grounds of religion merely because  he  or
    she wanted to enter a church with head and shoulders uncovered.

181.  Likewise,  different  countries  had  different  standards  of  public
    decency and a visitor to such a country by  a  person  from  a  western
    country could not claim that the application of the public decency laws
    to them amounted to discrimination.  This was so even if  the  stricter
    laws  in  the  visited  country  ultimately  derived   from   religious
    requirements of the predominant religion in that country.

182.  By the same token, a law prohibiting blasphemy  against  a  particular
    religion, which applied generally to the whole population of a country,
    did not prevent persons from other religions (including atheists)  from
    practising their own religion, unless their own religion required  such
    persons to make the statements that were considered blasphemous to  the
    other religion.

183.  The appellants' objection to restrictions  on  watching  football  and
    shaving, did not put them in a comparable situation to  the  appellants
    in HJ (Iran), where the issue was whether it was appropriate to  expect
    of individuals a "long-term deliberate concealment"  of  an  "immutable
    characteristic".

184.  As for the appellants' asserted  abhorrence  of  Al-Shabab  practices,
    such as recruiting child soldiers  or  forcing  young  girls  to  marry
    soldiers, the mere fact that a "governing entity" engaged in  practices
    that were offensive to the religion of one  or  more  of  the  governed
    could not amount to persecution of  those  individuals  on  grounds  of
    religion, especially where the individuals themselves were not at  risk
    of being subjected to such treatment.  An example was given of a  State
    which indulges in capital punishment, which was offensive to a person's
    religion.  The fact that that person lived in the country  in  question
    did not mean that  he  or  she  was  being  persecuted  on  grounds  of
    religion.  That was so even if the person concerned were convicted of a
    capital crime and sentenced to death.

185.  As for Article 18 of the ICCPR or "perhaps more relevantly, Article  9
    ECHR", such rights were, of course, qualified  in  nature  (Article  15
    ECHR) and Mr Eicke relied on Mr Toal's oral statement,  disavowing  any
    suggestion that the appellants were submitting that return  to  Somalia
    would involve a "flagrant denial" of their rights under Article 9 ECHR.

186.  In reply, the appellants  emphasised  that  Article  10(1)(b)  of  the
    Qualification Directive was not limited to the applicant's  belief  but
    covered "any religious belief".  Al-Shabab's reason  for  imposing  its
    requirements and  restrictions  was  a  Salafist  or  Takfiri  jihadist
    version of Islam, as described in an International Crisis Group  report
    of 2010.  The Takfiri doctrine contended that modern  day  Muslims  had
    lapsed into a state of apostasy, building on the Salafi  doctrine  that
    such  persons  were  in  a  state  of  jahiliaah  (pre-Islamic  age  of
    ignorance).  Takfiri ideas were said to have a long pedigree in Somalia
    but beginning in 2009 a fanatic fringe had revived and instrumentalised
    such ideas in its ideological war.

187.  It was  thus,  in  the  appellants'  view,  incorrect  to  regard  the
    restrictions and requirements in question  as  merely  "social  norms",
    since they were dictated by Al-Shabab in accordance with its  religious
    beliefs.   Accordingly,  if  after  return  the  appellants  would   be
    reasonably likely to try to change their religion by  participating  in
    or abstaining from formal worship in private or public (for example, by
    praying at  times and places not of their choosing but  at  Al-Shabab's
    dictation) or by adopting forms of personal communal conduct  based  on
    or mandated by any religious belief, and  their  reason  for  so  doing
    would be a well-founded fear of being persecuted if they did not change
    their religion, then they should be entitled to refugee status.

188.  The appellants accepted that if the reason for the change in  religion
    was in response to an order or to  avoid  a  lawful  and  proportionate
    measure or penalty, rather than to  avoid  being  persecuted,  then  an
    appellant would not be entitled to refugee status.  Thus, returning  to
    a country of origin might require a girl  to  cease  wearing  a  Muslim
    headscarf in school in order to  avoid  being  expelled.   In  Aktas  v
    France (2009) (Appl No. 43568/08) the ECtHR had found that  the  French
    ban on wearing such a headscarf interfered with an applicant's  freedom
    to manifest her religion, protected by Article 9, but that the ban  and
    consequent  exclusions  from  school  in  order  to  enforce  it   were
    proportionate measures, "explained by the  requirements  of  protecting
    the rights and freedoms of others  and  public  order".   By  the  same
    token, having to comply with particular practices or customs regulating
    public decency, so long as these were lawful and  proportionate,  might
    not amount to persecution.

189.  However, the detailed and coercive regulation of everyday  life  by  a
    proscribed terrorist organisation in order to advance  its  version  of
    jihad was not, the appellants submitted, comparable with measures taken
    by  a  legitimate  democratic  State  neutrally   arbitrating   between
    different religions in the interests  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
    others and of public order.  It was submitted  that,  accordingly,  the
    interference with the right to freedom of religion  occasioned  by  the
    headscarf ban "would, no doubt, have been found to  have  breached  [an
    applicant's] Article 9 rights if they had  been  done  by  a  terrorist
    organisation  in  the  interests  of  jihad  rather  than  one  of  the
    legitimate interests identified in Article 9(2)".   Even  if  Al-Shabab
    prayer times were not inconsistent with the times that  the  appellants
    might wish to pray, nevertheless, it was  submitted,  to  pray  at  the
    times and in the places dictated by Al-Shabab because of  fear  of  Al-
    Shabab would be to  submit  to  their  will  rather  than  to  pray  in
    accordance with God's will.  The same was true of the  other  Al-Shabab
    requirements,  which  were  invested  with  religious  significance  or
    adopted through submission to Al-Shabab rather than to the will of God.


The Tribunal's assessment

190.  We are aware that the German Federal Administrative Court has  made  a
    preliminary reference to  the  CJEU  regarding  the  interpretation  of
    Article 9 of the  Qualification  Directive  in  relation  to  religious
    persecution. It is, however, clear from Article  10  of  the  Directive
    that the concept of religion requires  the  holding  of  some  sort  of
    belief comprising a coherent  and  genuinely  held  system  of  values,
    whether they  be  theistic,  non-theistic  or  atheistic,  and  is  not
    satisfied in the case of a  person  who  holds  no  such  belief.   The
    reference in Article 10(1)(b) to abstention from formal worship has  to
    be read in the light of the words  that  precede  it.   Notwithstanding
    that Article 10(1)(b) does not purport to be comprehensive as  to  what
    is meant by the concept  of  religion,  we  do  not  consider  that  it
    encompasses a person who does not, in reality, organise his or her life
    to any extent whatsoever upon any recognisable such system.

191.   We  accordingly  accept  the  respondent's  submissions  that  social
    restrictions per se, such as bans on watching football  or  television,
    do not comprise an interference with the right to  religion  under  the
    1951 Convention in the case of a person whose religious etc. beliefs do
    not require him to participate in those activities.  The  fact  that  a
    person may be permitted, according to his  or  her  religion  or  other
    relevant beliefs, to participate in those activities is immaterial.

192.  The question of what a person's religious etc.  beliefs  require  them
    to do or not to do is one of fact.  Accordingly, in  the  case  of  the
    appellants, we make relevant  findings  of  fact  in  Part  L  of  this
    determination.

193.  In the case  of  Aktas  v  France,  the  interference  with  what  was
    undoubtedly an aspect of  the  applicant's  religion  was  held  to  be
    proportionate.  That was in the context of the French authorities being
    motivated not by religious factors of their own but, rather, out  of  a
    desire to be a "neutral and impartial  organiser  of  the  exercise  of
    various religions, faiths and beliefs".  Even where the motivation  for
    a law is religious, such as with the laws of various states of the  USA
    concerning sexual behaviour, or even the United Kingdom's  restrictions
    on Sunday trading, the religious aspect plainly does not, without more,
    lay the basis of a claim to international  protection  in  relation  to
    anyone who might fall foul of the  law.   This  would  be  true  of  an
    internationally  recognised  State,  even  one  such  as  Iran,   whose
    democratic and human rights credentials are highly debatable.

194.   However,  the  more  such  religiously  motivated  or  inspired  laws
    interfere with the ability of a person to hold and practise his or  her
    religious or other beliefs, the more intense will be the  scrutiny  and
    the more important will become the issue of proportionality.

195.  It is important to  keep  in  mind  Article  9  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  This sets a high threshold for what constitutes an  act  of
    persecution.  A violation of a basic human right must be  "severe";  in
    particular where, as in Article 9 of the ECHR (right to religion),  the
    right is a qualified one  (QD,  Article  9(1)(a)).   However,  although
    religion is engaged  for  the  purposes  of  Article  1A  of  the  1951
    Convention, the violation under Article 9(1)(a) need not, of course, be
    a violation of the right to religion.  On the contrary, as the evidence
    regarding Al-Shabab tends to indicate, the issue  will  often  turn  on
    whether the punishment for the religiously motivated law  is  itself  a
    violation of Article 3 of the ECHR; for example, whether punishment for
    adultery is stoning, as opposed to the imposition of a fine,  or  where
    the punishment for violations of the dress code is a beating.

196.  We have to say that we are somewhat doubtful  whether  the  reason  of
    religion under Article 1(A) is necessarily engaged solely by  reference
    to the persecutor, rather than the persecuted, as  Mr  Toal  submitted,
    relying upon a passage in Asylum Law and Practice, 2nd  Edition  (Symes
    and Jorro).  One of the cases cited in support of  the  proposition  in
    the passage, Omoruyi v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2001] Imm AR 175, does not, upon analysis, appear to support  it.   In
    that case a so-called "devil cult", the Ogboni were said to have become
    furiously antagonistic towards  the  appellant,  as  a  result  of  his
    refusal to surrender to them the body  of  his  father,  for  a  ritual
    burial that, it appears, would have involved mutilation.  The Christian
    appellant chose to bury his father according to Christian  rites.   The
    Court of Appeal specifically refused to accept  that  the  Ogboni  were
    acting from religious purposes.  Furthermore, the Court also considered
    that the Ogboni's animosity towards the appellant was due  not  to  the
    latter's Christianity but rather "stemmed from his  refusal  to  comply
    with their demands".

197.  The idea that the necessary religious element can be found  merely  in
    the alleged persecutor, rather than in the persecutor's  perception  of
    the persecuted, appears to be at variance  with  the  other  Convention
    grounds in Article 1A, particularly political opinion.  It is trite law
    that the political opinion in question is that of the  alleged  victim,
    whether that opinion is actual or imputed.  If  that  ceased  to  be  a
    requirement, it is likely that the  scope  of  the  Refugee  Convention
    would be significantly enlarged.  The proposition  that  the  religious
    aspect need reside only in the alleged persecutor also seems to  us  to
    be inconsistent with the underlying nature of the Refugee Convention as
    an instrument designed to tackle serious forms of  discrimination.  The
    reason for the persecution must be religion. By analogy with  political
    opinion persecution, it is trite law that persecution can  be  for  the
    reason of political opinion if the victim holds an opinion  opposed  to
    the persecutor or is perceived by the latter to do so.  We  cannot  see
    why a different approach should apply to religious persecution. In both
    cases, it is not sufficient to constitute Convention  persecution  that
    the persecutor is motivated  by  his  or  her  religious  or  political
    beliefs, if the persecution inflicted is indifferent to the  actual  or
    perceived religious or political beliefs of the victim.

198.   We would observe  that  such  an  approach  is  consistent  with  the
    terminology of the prohibition on refoulement in Article 33(1):-

         "No Contracting State shall expel or return ("refouler") a  refugee
         in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where  his
         life or freedom  would  be  threatened  on  account  of  his  race,
         religion, nationality, membership of  particular  social  group  or
         political opinion" (our emphasis).

199.   Having  said  all  this,  we  consider  that,   in   the   particular
    circumstances of the cases before us, the punishments meted out by  Al-
    Shabab  against  transgressors  are  rooted  in   Al-Shabab's   Takfiri
    doctrine, whereby Muslims who do not follow its rules are  regarded  as
    apostates.  There  would,  accordingly,  be  the  required  element  of
    religion in relation to the victim, albeit an imputed element. We shall
    return to this issue in Part I, when assessing the general evidence.


(2) No Requirement to act illegally?

200.  In AM & AM the Tribunal considered to be "untenable"  the  "contention
    that taking account of the ability of returnees  to  pre-arrange  armed
    militia escorts would be contrary to [United Kingdom] orders in Council
    and UN law" [66].  That finding was not challenged by the appellants in
    the present appeals.  However, an issue arose as to the consequences of
    the evidence that, in the areas it controls, Al-Shabab demands from the
    civilian population payments in the form of "taxes".  Mr Toal contended
    that in the  light  of  the  addition  of  Al-Shabab  to  the  list  of
    proscribed organisations in Schedule 2 to the Terrorism  Act  2000  (by
    the Terrorism Act 2000 (Proscribed Organisations) Amendment Order  2010
    SI 2010/611), anyone who, short of a defence of duress, paid such money
    to Al-Shabab would be committing an offence under section 15(3) of  the
    2000 Act ("a person commits an offence if  he  provides  any  money  or
    other property and knows or has reasonable cause  to  suppose  that  it
    will or may be used for the  purposes  of  terrorism")  or  section  17
    (entering an arrangement as a result of which money or  other  property
    is made available, knowing or reasonably suspecting it will or  may  be
    used for the purposes of terrorism).  In addition, such payments  would
    be such as States are required by  international  law  to  prevent  (UN
    Security Council Resolution 1844 (2008) and Security Council SC/9904).

201.  It is plainly not the case that a person who  can  show  a  reasonable
    likelihood of having to pay such "taxes" to Al-Shabab, assuming this to
    be a breach of the criminal law of the  United  Kingdom  or  comparable
    international law norms, is thereby to be treated as a refugee for  the
    purposes of the 1951 Convention.  The issue  is,  rather,  whether  one
    must ignore the fact that a person in such a situation  may  choose  to
    pay taxes (and  thus  avoid  possible  ill-treatment),  in  determining
    whether that person has made out a claim to international protection.

202.  Even on this basis, we very much doubt whether all forms  of  activity
    which, if committed in the United Kingdom, would be illegal fall to  be
    so excluded.  Indeed, the appellants in the present appeals did not put
    their cases on this basis.  For example, in many  parts  of  the  world
    corrupt officials expect to be bribed.

203.  The payments with which we are concerned, however, are of a  different
    order.  Given that Al-Shabab  is  fighting  to  impose  its  rule  over
    Somalia, there must be a strong likelihood that any money it demands of
    civilians is likely, at least in part, to  be  used  to  fund  its  war
    against the internationally  recognised  government  of  that  country.
    Even here, however, we do not find that any likelihood a  person  would
    make such payments must automatically be excluded from consideration in
    assessing his or her international protection claim.  Despite the scope
    of section 63 of the 2000 Act, which provides that a  person  who  acts
    outside the United Kingdom in such a way as would have  constituted  an
    offence if done here, shall be guilty of an offence, a foreign national
    who commits such an act outside the United Kingdom and never submits to
    the jurisdiction of this country will never  be  subject  to  its  law.
    More particularly, as Mr Eicke submitted,  the  consequence  of  taking
    such a stance towards Al-Shabab "taxes" would suggest  that  (short  of
    duress) anyone who had paid such taxes before fleeing Somalia would  be
    excluded from any form of international protection by virtue of Article
    12(2)(c) and Article 17(1)(c) of the Qualification  Directive,  on  the
    basis that there were grounds to suspect that they had  committed  acts
    contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.

204.  Perhaps in the  light  of  these  problems,  the  appellants'  closing
    submissions adopted an approach  which  aimed  to  ground  itself  more
    firmly in established Refugee Convention jurisprudence.  Mr Toal relied
    on Sepet v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] 1 WLR 856,
    which concerned the issue of whether a conscientious objector might  be
    entitled to be recognised as a refugee.  At [33] Lord Hoffman said:-

         "While the demonstrator or objector cannot  be  morally  condemned,
         and may indeed  be  praised  for  following  the  dictates  of  his
         conscience, it is not necessarily unjust for the  State  to  punish
         him in the same way as any other person who  breaks  the  law.   It
         will of course be different if  the  law  itself  is  unjust.   The
         injustice of the law will carry over into its enforcement."

205.  In the context of Al-Shabab, Mr Toal submitted  that  the  refusal  to
    pay "tax" would not be "an objection to a legitimate and lawful  demand
    imposed by a legitimate state but a refusal to commit a criminal act on
    behalf of a terrorist organisation".  Thus, in  the  spirit  of  Sepet,
    little by way of evidence should be required to  satisfy  the  Tribunal
    that an appellant has a conscientious objection to paying such money to
    Al-Shabab where the payment would  be  contrary  to  law;  contrary  to
    considerations of  common  humanity  and  "contrary  to  the  religious
    beliefs of the overwhelming majority of Muslims".

206.  We agree with this approach.  A person who, on the facts,  shows  that
    they have a genuine conscientious objection, whether or not  rooted  in
    religion, to paying  such  taxes  (if  unjust)  may  well  be  able  to
    demonstrate  an  entitlement  to  subsidiary   protection   under   the
    Qualification Directive or, if a Refugee Convention  ground  is  shown,
    under the 1951 Convention.  Furthermore, as Mr Toal also submitted,  it
    may on the facts be shown that the objection to  paying  flows  from  a
    genuine religious conviction.  In such circumstances, the  approach  we
    have outlined earlier will apply. It will, however, be necessary for us
    to return to the issue of illegality, when considering the  submissions
    on Somaliland and whether Appellant ZF could be expected to produce  an
    "unofficial" or "old green" Somali passport (Part I, paragraphs 534  to
    544).


(3) "Playing the game" - RT (Zimbabwe)

207.  At [87] of Sufi & Elmi, the ECtHR noted the  evidence  of  the  UKBA's
    Fact-Finding Mission that "Al-Shabab checkpoints  normally  check  that
    people were obeying their code of behaviour and  would  therefore  stop
    women travelling alone.  Some individuals operating  these  checkpoints
    would punish those who were not acting according to Al-Shabab's rules."
     At [92] the Court noted that "a number of sources considered the areas
    controlled by Al-Shabab to be  stable  and  generally  safe  for  those
    Somalis who were able to 'play the  game'  and  avoid  the  unnecessary
    attention of Al-Shabab".

208.  At [273] the Court held that Al-Shabab was  enforcing  a  particularly
    draconian version of Sharia law that went far  beyond  the  traditional
    interpretation of Islam in Somalia, amounting to a repressive  form  of
    social control.  Al-Shabab were concerned with "every little detail  of
    daily life".  Al-Shabab's interest extended not only to its inhabitants
    but also to those travelling through its areas  [274].   At  [275]  the
    Court recalled the evidence of a number of sources  telling  the  Fact-
    Finding Mission that areas controlled by Al-Shabab were generally  safe
    for Somalis provided they were able to "play the game"  and  avoid  the
    attention of Al-Shabab by obeying their rules.  The Court, as  we  have
    seen, went on to hold that it was unlikely a  Somali  with  "no  recent
    experience of living in Somalia would be adequately equipped  to  'play
    the game', with the risk that he would come to  the  attention  of  Al-
    Shabab, either while travelling through or having  settled  in  an  Al-
    Shabab controlled area".  The risk was even greater to Somalis who  had
    been out of the country long  enough  to  become  "westernised".   What
    punishment transgressors would face was unpredictable but the  evidence
    indicated that it did not necessarily depend  on  the  gravity  of  the
    infringement.  The Court  accordingly  concluded  a  returnee  with  no
    recent experience of living in Somalia would be at real risk of Article
    3 harm in an Al-Shabab controlled area [277].

209.  At this stage, it is necessary to deal in  some  detail  with  a  case
    which featured in the appellants' submissions regarding  Al-Shabab  and
    religion: RT (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2010] EWCA Civ 1285.  Like TM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 916, RT concerned the  working  through
    of the consequences of the judgments of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran).
     At [25] and [27] the Court in RT appeared to have had no difficulty in
    accepting that the HJ (Iran) "point", that a gay person should  not  be
    refused refugee status  merely  because  he  was  likely  to  hide  his
    sexuality and/or act "discreetly" to avoid persecution, applied also to
    a person "found to have genuine  political  beliefs".   The  same  must
    plainly apply to someone who genuinely has religious beliefs,  who  (as
    we have explained above) would suffer a flagrant denial of his right to
    such beliefs, if they were required to be hidden.

210.  At [28], however, the Court of Appeal considered what it described  as
    "the extended HJ (Iran) point", which was that the same principle  must
    apply, even if the person  had  no  genuine  political  opinions.   The
    Zimbabwe appellants in RT contended that, provided  they  were  not  in
    truth supporters of the Mugabe regime, the fact that they might be able
    to profess loyalty, if challenged by ZANU-PF militias, was  immaterial,
    since they were not required, on HJ (Iran) principles, to lie in  order
    to avoid persecution.

211.  At [36] and [37] Carnwath LJ said:-

         "36.     It  may  be  said  that  there  is  marked  difference  in
             seriousness between the impact of having to  lie  on  isolated
             occasions about political opinions which one  does  not  have,
             and the 'long-term deliberate concealment'  of  an  'immutable
             characteristic', involving denial to the members of the  group
             their 'fundamental right to be what they are'  (see  per  Lord
             Hope para 11, 21).  We are not persuaded, however,  that  this
             is a material distinction in this context.   The  question  is
             not the seriousness of the prospective maltreatment (which  is
             not in issue) but  the  reason  for  it.   If  the  reason  is
             political opinion,  or  imputed  political  opinion,  that  is
             enough to bring it within the Convention.  In  this  case,  we
             are concerned with the 'imputed' political opinions  of  those
             concerned, not their  actual  opinions  (see  para  4  above).
             Accordingly, the degree of their political commitment in fact,
             and whether political  activity  is  of  central  or  marginal
             importance to their lives, are beside the point.   The  'core'
             of the protected right is the right not to be  persecuted  for
             holding political views which they  do  not  have.   There  is
             nothing 'marginal' about the risk of being stopped by  militia
             and persecuted because of that.  If they  are  forced  to  lie
             about their absence of political beliefs, solely in  order  to
             avoid persecution, that seems to  us  to  be  covered  by  the
             HJ(Iran) principle,  and  does  not  defeat  their  claims  to
             asylum.


         37.      Accordingly we accept the  thrust  of  Mr  Norton-Taylor's
             second submission, if not the precise wording.  It  is  not  a
             question of what the claimant is 'required' to  do.   However,
             if the Tribunal finds that he or she would be willing  to  lie
             about political beliefs, or about  the  absence  of  political
             beliefs,  but  that  the  reason  for  lying   is   to   avoid
             persecution, that does not defeat the claim."

212.  Relying on RT  (Zimbabwe),  the  appellants  in  the  present  appeals
    contended that in terms  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  as  opposed  to
    Article 3 of the ECHR (which was the form of  international  protection
    under consideration in Sufi & Elmi), the appellants had  no  obligation
    at all to "play the game" in Al-Shabab-controlled areas, regardless  of
    their political and/or religious beliefs, save only  if  those  beliefs
    happened to correspond precisely with  those  of  Al-Shabab  (in  which
    case, of course, there would be no element of obligation).

213.  In the light of our conclusions regarding the  nature  of  persecution
    by reason of religion, the appellants' submission is plainly a powerful
    one, provided that Al-Shabab would in practice (a) impose a  punishment
    serious enough (whether on its own or combined with other measures)  to
    satisfy Article 9(1) of the Qualification  Directive;  and  (b)  impose
    that punishment because of Al-Shabab's perception of  the  transgressor
    as a religious inferior.  We shall consider those factual questions  as
    part of our assessment in Part I of this determination.

214.  For the respondent, however, Mr Eicke endeavoured to persuade us  that
    the ratio of RT (Zimbabwe) was, in reality, much narrower and that  the
    case was one of an "extreme" category, unlike the present appeals.   He
    relied on [53] of the judgment:-

         "53.     The problems posed by these cases are  extreme.   None  of
             the appellants is a political refugee in the  ordinary  sense.
             In most contexts their claims to  asylum  would  be  hopeless.
             However, conditions in Zimbabwe, as they are described  in  RN
             are exceptional.  The legality  of  these  decisions  must  be
             decided by reference  to  the  guidance  in  that  case.   Any
             changes since the period covered  by  that  decision  will  be
             considered by the tribunal  as  part  of  its  review  of  the
             country guidance.  Applying  RN  we  are  satisfied  that  the
             appeals, except  DM,  should  be  allowed.   Mr  Norton-Taylor
             invited us to substitute our own decision in all or  at  least
             some of them.  For  the  reasons  given  above,  we  agree  in
             respect of RT, in which the claim to asylum will  be  allowed.
             We are not persuaded that course is open to us in the cases of
             SM and AM, where there were adverse findings  of  credibility.
             We shall accordingly remit those cases to the Upper Tribunal."

215.   The  extreme  nature  of  the  RT  (Zimbabwe)  cases  was,  Mr  Eicke
    submitted, explained in [8] and [9] of the judgments, where the  Court,
    adopting for this purpose the judgment of Elias LJ in   TM  (Zimbabwe),
    took account of the country guidance in  RN  "that  those  at  risk  on
    return to Zimbabwe on account  of  imputed  political  opinion  are  no
    longer  restricted  to  those  who  are  perceived  to  be  members  or
    supporters of the MDC but include anyone who is unable  to  demonstrate
    support for or loyalty to the regime or ZANU-PF".  Thus "a  person  who
    was unable to produce a ZANU-PF card might be asked to sing the  latest
    ZANU-PF campaign songs.  An inability  to  do  so  would  be  taken  as
    evidence of  disloyalty  to  the  party  and  so  as  support  for  the
    opposition.  Clearly, a person returning to Zimbabwe after  some  years
    living in the United Kingdom would be unlikely to be able to pass  such
    a test."

216.  In his  closing  submissions,  Mr  Toal  contended  that  the  present
    appeals were equally "extreme", bearing in mind (i) what an  individual
    would be required to do in order  to  "play  the  game"  and  (ii)  the
    gravity of the consequences if he or she failed to do so.

217.  There is a factual issue about the extent to which  Al-Shabab  imposes
    and  enforces  by  disproportionate   means,   its   requirements   and
    restrictions over those within the areas it controls.  Again, we  shall
    examine this in due  course.   But,  assuming  the  facts  are  as  the
    appellants contend, then the position would, we consider, be every  bit
    as "extreme" as in  RT  (Zimbabwe).   The  consequences  will  also  be
    significant.  Every person living under Al-Shabab  control  in  central
    and southern Somalia, who could show that they do not genuinely  adhere
    to that organisation's ethos,  would  have  a  good  claim  to  Refugee
    Convention  protection,  once  outside  Somalia  (subject  to  internal
    relocation and exclusion clause issues).  The effect of RT  (Zimbabwe),
    in comparison with Sufi & Elmi, is to take the Refugee Convention  well
    beyond the comparable ambit of Article 3 ECHR protection (and, we might
    add, of subsidiary protection under the Qualification  Directive).   We
    understand that RT (Zimbabwe) is under appeal to the Supreme Court.  It
    is possible that that Court will prefer the more restricted application
    of HJ (Iran), as found  in  the  obiter  remarks  of  Elias  LJ  in  TM
    (Zimbabwe).  But, be that as it may, RT (Zimbabwe) represents  the  law
    and is binding on this Tribunal.


(4) Internal relocation and the burden of proof

218.  The appellants, in their opening skeleton argument on  common  issues,
    took issue with the finding at [183] of AM  &  AM  that  "in  order  to
    succeed [the appellant]  need  only  show  that  they  have  no  viable
    internal  relocation  alternative,  if  at  risk  in  Mogadishu".   The
    appellants contended that "insofar as  the  Tribunal  there  imposed  a
    burden on the appellants to show that they had no  internal  relocation
    alternative, the  Tribunal  erred  in  law".   In  so  submitting,  the
    appellants cited Article 8 of the Qualification Directive:-

         "Article 8


         Internal protection


         1.        As  part  of  the  assessment  of  the  application   for
             international protection, Member States may determine that  an
             applicant is not in need of international protection if  in  a
             part of the country of origin there is no well-founded fear of
             being persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm and
             the applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part
             of the country.


         2.       In examining whether a part of the country of origin is in
             accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall at  the  time
             of taking the decision on the application have regard  to  the
             general circumstances prevailing in that part of  the  country
             and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.


         3.       Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical obstacles
             to return to the country of origin."

219.  The appellants submitted that in view of Article 8 "it is not for  the
    asylum seeker to establish that he or she has  no  internal  relocation
    alternative.  A claim must succeed if the asylum seeker establishes the
    relevant risk unless the Tribunal is satisfied by the  evidence  before
    it (a) that there is a part of the country where there is  no  relevant
    risk and (b) that the asylum seeker can reasonably be expected to  stay
    there."

220.  Mr Eicke submitted that Article 8 of the Qualification Directive  does
    not make any statement as to the procedural  mechanisms  by  which  the
    Member State "may determine"  that  there  is  an  internal  relocation
    alternative.  Procedural rules are separately provided  for  under  the
    Procedures Directive (2005/85) but  no  provision  in  support  of  the
    appellants'  contention  has  been  identified   in   that   Directive.
    Furthermore, it was a general principle of  European  Union  law  that,
    subject to the principles  of  effectiveness  and  equivalence,  Member
    States enjoy procedural autonomy enabling them to lay down the detailed
    procedural rules applicable to the enforcement of any EU law right.

221.  That submission seems to  us  to  be  plainly  right.   It  does  not,
    however, dispose of the appellants' submissions on  this  issue,  since
    they also relied upon domestic authority.

222.  In Jasim v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ
    342 Sedley LJ said:-

         "[16]    The possibility of  internal  relocation  is  relevant  to
             refugee and human rights claims  because  it  may  demonstrate
             that a fear of persecution or harm, though  warranted  by  the
             applicant's experience in his place of origin,  is  not  well-
             founded in relation to other parts of the state whose duty  it
             is to protect him.  But  while  the  two  issues  -  fear  and
             relocation - go ultimately to the single question  of  safety,
             they cannot be decided in the same breath.  Once the judge  of
             fact is satisfied that the applicant has a justified  fear  of
             persecution or harm if returned to his home  area,  the  claim
             will ordinarily be made out unless the judge is satisfied that
             he can nevertheless be safely returned to another part of  his
             country of origin.  Provided the second issue has been flagged
             up, there may be  no  formal  burden  of  proof  on  the  Home
             Secretary (see GH [2004] UKIAT 00248); but this does not  mean
             that the judge of fact can reject  an  otherwise  well-founded
             claim  unless  the  evidence  satisfies  him   that   internal
             relocation is a safe and reasonable option.


         [17]     It is necessary to  stress  both  adjectives  -  safe  and
             reasonable.  It is well established that relocation to a  safe
             area is not an answer to a claim  if  it  is  unreasonable  to
             expect the applicant to settle there.  There may be no work or
             housing.   He  may  not  speak   the   language.    Similarly,
             relocation to an area may be  perfectly  reasonable  by  these
             standards but unsafe, for  example  because  of  the  risk  of
             continued official harassment or - as in this case -  revenge-
             seeking."

223.  In AH (Sudan) v Secretary  of  State  [2007]  UKHL  49,  Lord  Bingham
    referred to what he had said in Januzi v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2006] UKHL 5:-

         "The decision-maker, taking account of all  relevant  circumstances
         pertaining to the claimant and his country of origin,  must  decide
         whether it is reasonable to expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
         whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do  so...   There
         is, as Simon Brown LJ aptly observed in Svazas v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2001] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a  spectrum  of
         cases.  The decision-maker must do his  best  to  decide,  on  such
         material as is available, where on the spectrum the particular case
         falls ... or must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts
         [5]."

224.  In AA (Uganda) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2008]
    EWCA Civ 579 an Immigration Judge, on the reconsideration of an  appeal
    following an earlier Immigration Judge's determination,  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal because, although she had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in  a  particular  area  of  Uganda,  she  had  attended  a
    particular church in the United Kingdom and the Immigration  Judge  saw
    "no reason why she could not also turn to  the  church  in  Uganda  for
    similar support if the need arises".  That finding was  categorised  as
    perverse, not being based on relevant (indeed) any evidence [12],  [40]
    and [54].

225.  We do not consider that the case law relied  upon  by  the  appellants
    comes close to establishing that the respondent bears the legal  burden
    of proving that there is a part of the country  of  nationality  of  an
    appellant, who has established a well-founded fear in one area thereof,
    to which the appellant could reasonably be expected  to  go  and  live.
    The person who claims international protection bears the  legal  burden
    of proving that he or she is entitled to it.  What that burden  entails
    will,  however,  very  much  depend  upon  the  circumstances  of   the
    particular case.  In practice, the  issue  of  an  internal  relocation
    alternative needs to be raised by the Secretary of State, either in the
    letter of refusal or (subject to issues of procedural fairness)  during
    the appellate proceedings.  In many cases, the respondent will point to
    evidence regarding the general conditions  in  the  proposed  place  of
    relocation.  It will  then  be  for  the  appellant  to  make  good  an
    assertion that, notwithstanding  those  conditions,  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to relocate there.  Those reasons may often  be  ones  about
    which only the appellant could know; for  example,  whether  there  are
    people living in the area of proposed relocation who might identify the
    appellant to those in his home area whom he  fears.  The  Secretary  of
    State clearly cannot be expected to lead evidence on such an issue.

226.  Article 8 of the Qualification Directive relates both to  the  Refugee
    Convention and subsidiary protection under the Directive itself.  What,
    though, is the position under Article 3 of the ECHR?  At  para  266  of
    Sufi & Elmi, the ECtHR had this to say:-

         "266.    In the United Kingdom an application  for  asylum  or  for
             subsidiary  protection  will  fail  if  the   decision   maker
             considers that it would be reasonable - and not unduly harsh -
             to expect the applicant to relocate (Januzi, Hamid, Gaafar and
             Mohammed v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]
             UKHL 5 and AH (Sudan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2007] UKHL 49).  The Court recalls that Article  3
             does not, as such, preclude Contracting  States  from  placing
             reliance on the existence of an internal flight alternative in
             their assessment of an individual's claim that a return to his
             country of origin would expose him to a  real  risk  of  being
             subjected to treatment proscribed  by  that  provision  (Salah
             Sheekh v. the Netherlands, no. 1948/04,   141,  ECHR  2007  I
             (extracts), Chahal v. the United Kingdom, 15 November 1996,  
             98, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1996 V and Hilal v. the
             United Kingdom, no. 45276/99,  67  -  68,  ECHR  2001 II).
             However, the Court has  held  that  reliance  on  an  internal
             flight alternative does not affect the responsibility  of  the
             expelling Contracting State to ensure that  the  applicant  is
             not, as  a  result  of  its  decision  to  expel,  exposed  to
             treatment contrary to  Article  3  of  the  Convention  (Salah
             Sheekh ...).  Therefore, as a precondition of  relying  on  an
             internal flight alternative, certain guarantees have to be  in
             place: the person to be expelled must be able to travel to the
             area concerned, gain  admittance  and  settle  there,  failing
             which an issue under Article 3 may arise, the more  so  if  in
             the absence of such guarantees there is a possibility  of  his
             ending up in a part of the country of origin where he  may  be
             subjected to ill-treatment ...."

227.  Although the language of "guarantees" might  at  first  sight  suggest
    otherwise, we do not consider that, as regards an Article 3  claim,  an
    applicant in the United Kingdom has to do any more or  less  than  show
    that there is a real risk of suffering Article 3 harm  if  returned  to
    the country of nationality etc.  In this regard, what we have just said
    about the role of the Secretary of  State  equally  applies;  in  other
    words, the issue of relocation needs to be put "in  play"  between  the
    parties.  On the other hand, we  do  not  consider  that  the  test  of
    unreasonableness or undue harshness applies, when assessing  conditions
    in the place of proposed relocation.  In Sufi & Elmi, the ECtHR made no
    express reference to reasonableness or undue  harshness.   However,  it
    may well be that unreasonableness/undue harshness has a part  to  play,
    even in a pure Article 3 assessment, in that, say, unduly harsh  living
    conditions - albeit not themselves amounting to a violation of  Article
    3 - may nevertheless  be  reasonably  likely  to  lead  to  the  person
    concerned ending up back  in  his  or  her  home  area,  where  such  a
    violation is a real possibility.



(5) Legal issues regarding appellant MW's appeal

(a)  Effect of Beoku-Betts

228.  Although affecting only appellant MW, there are further legal  issues,
    which fall most conveniently to be dealt  with  in  this  Part  of  the
    determination.  The first concerns the effect on the re-making  of  the
    decision in appellant MW's  appeal  of  the  recent  grant  to  her  of
    discretionary leave and of the daughter of the  appellant  MW  being  a
    British citizen (see Part D above).

229.  As is recorded in Appendix 1, when Appellant MW  was  asked  what  she
    would do if she had to choose between having her daughter subjected  to
    FGM and "being called names", she  replied  that  she  would  have  her
    daughter circumcised.

230.  In his closing submissions, Mr Eicke asserted that, even  if  it  were
    possible  to  establish  that  the  daughter  would  be   entitled   to
    international protection on the basis of  the  risk  to  her  of  being
    subjected to FGM, that did not inevitably or necessarily translate into
    refugee status for  appellant  MW  where,  by  virtue  of  her  British
    citizenship, the daughter was not required to accompany her  mother  to
    Somalia, so as to be exposed to risk, but could remain with the  father
    in the  United  Kingdom  particularly  since,  on  appellant  MW's  own
    evidence, the latter was likely to be the perpetrator of the very  harm
    against which protection was sought.

231.   The  respondent  submitted  that  the  appeal  of  appellant  MW  was
    materially different from the position in  FM  (FGM)  Sudan  CG  [2007]
    UKAIT 00060, as in that  case  the  appellant  and  her  children  were
    citizens of Sudan who would all inevitably have been returned to  Sudan
    together and the risk of FGM to the daughters arose not from the mother
    herself but from members of the extended family taking advantage of any
    temporary absence of the mother to subject the daughters  to  FGM.   It
    was submitted that the case law "understandably relied on by [appellant
    MW] in relation to Article 8 ECHR can have no bearing on this  question
    which, by definition, now arises solely in the context of the  [status]
    claim  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or   Article   15(b)   of   the
    Qualification Directive".

232.  We remind ourselves that that last submission relates  to  the  giving
    of notice by appellant FM under rule  17A  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, that she wished to pursue her appeal under
    section 82 of the 2002 Act on Refugee Convention grounds, as  permitted
    by section 104(4D) of that Act.  The respondent's acknowledgement that,
    in addition, appellant MW can pursue her appeal  by  reference  to  the
    Qualification Directive (subsidiary protection) is in response  to  the
    Court of Appeal judgments in FA  (Iraq)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  696,  which
    concerned the directly comparable situation under  section  83  of  the
    2002 Act.

233.  For appellant MW, Ms Short relied  upon  Beoku-Betts  v  Secretary  of
    State for the  Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  39  in  support  of  her
    submission that, regardless of the daughter's citizenship and the grant
    of leave to appellant MW, the daughter's own human rights  (Article  3)
    were directly engaged in MW's continuing appeal.  In  Beoku-Betts,  the
    House of Lords found that, in an Article 8 appeal, the  rights  of  the
    appellant's family members  under  that  Article  were  justiciable  in
    determining the outcome of the appellant's appeal.

234.  We  do  not  consider  that  Beoku-Betts  has  any  relevance  in  the
    circumstances in which appellant MW finds herself.  It is common ground
    that her appeal does not now encompass any human  rights  ground  under
    section 84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act.  The ratio of Beoku-Betts is  clearly
    confined to Article 8 cases.  In an Article 8 case, family members  who
    could not be removed with the appellant would nevertheless be  regarded
    as victims who, if the appellant were  removed,  could  bring  separate
    proceedings under section 7 of the Human Rights Act  1998,  alleging  a
    breach of their Article 8 rights because of  the  appellant's  removal.
    In the present case, however,  there  can  be  no  possibility  of  the
    daughter of appellant MW bringing any proceedings based on Article 3 of
    the ECHR, regardless of whether appellant MW is removed.

235.  Ms Short was, however, on much  stronger  ground  in  relying  on  the
    Court of Appeal judgment in Saad & Others v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2001] EWCA Civ 2008.  In that case, the Court stressed
    the fact that "all asylum appeals under section 69 of the 1999 Act  ...
    are hypothetical in the sense that they involve the consideration of  a
    hypothesis or assumption, which is reflected in the wording of each  of
    the subsections of section 8, namely that the  applicant's  removal  or
    requirement to leave (as the case may be) 'would  be  contrary  to  the
    United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Convention'  [our  emphasis]"
    [58].

236.  The same hypothetical element as was contained in section  69  can  be
    found in section 84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act, which states  that  "removal
    of the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  in  consequence  of  the
    immigration decision would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention ..."  The  same  hypothetical  element  is
    also present in Article 15(b) of  the  Qualification  Directive,  which
    refers to "torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment  of
    an  applicant  in  the  country  of  origin"   (our   emphasis).    The
    hypothetical presence  of  the  person  concerned  in  the  country  in
    question is, admittedly, no more than implicit  in  Article  15(a)  and
    (c).

237.  The hypothesis which a tribunal is required to  make,  in  determining
    the entitlement of a person to refugee status  or  other  international
    protection, is, however, not limited to  assuming  the  return  to  the
    country of origin only of the appellant.  On the contrary, on  a  daily
    basis, judicial fact-finders determine  appeals  by  reference  to  the
    hypothetical return along with the appellant of other persons,  whether
    or  not  these  are  British  citizens.   There  is,  accordingly,   no
    impediment to appellant MW pursuing her claim to be entitled to refugee
    status or subsidiary protection, on the basis  that,  if  compelled  to
    return to Somalia, it is reasonably likely  that  she  would  take  her
    children, including her daughter, and that  she  would  suffer  serious
    harm in the form of  anguish,  in  the  event  that  her  daughter  was
    subjected to FGM.
(b) Refugee protection for the persecutor?

238.  Whether appellant MW would, in reality, take the daughter and  whether
    appellant MW would, in fact, suffer such anguish are questions of fact,
    to which we shall turn in due course.  But there is a final legal issue
    to address at this stage; namely, whether appellant MW is  entitled  to
    international protection if, as the evidence to which we  have  earlier
    referred suggests, she would be the person who mutilates her daughter.

239.  There is a range of  possibilities  involved  here.   At  one  end,  a
    person might be under imminent threat of death or serious harm, if  she
    does not carry out the  procedure.   At  the  other,  the  decision  to
    inflict FGM may be entirely voluntary.  In  between  are  societal  and
    familial pressures, of varying intensities.

240.  We  doubt  very  much  whether  the  States  Parties  to  the  Refugee
    Convention  or  the  Member  states  of  the  EU  intended  to   create
    international protection regimes which confer protection  on  potential
    persecutors or agents of  serious  harm  on  the  very  basis  of  that
    potentiality, save in exceptional cases involving duress or  which  are
    otherwise at the top end of the range we have just described.   On  the
    contrary, the existence of exclusion  provisions  in  both  instruments
    strongly suggests they did not.  This is the basis upon which we shall,
    in due course, assess the evidence of appellant MW, when we shall  also
    need to expand upon our conclusion that appellant MW is not entitled to
    refugee protection on this basis.


                                   PART I

                     ASSESSMENT OF THE GENERAL EVIDENCE

Introduction

241.  The recent history of Somalia is a catalogue  of  misery;  a  striking
    example of the human cost of a failed State.  The warlordism and  clan-
    related violence that followed the fall of  the  Barre  regime  in  the
    early 1990s proved to be immune to international intervention  and  was
    curbed only by the emergence of  other  forms  of  conflict  involving,
    variously, the Union of Islamic Courts and the Ethiopians, and, now, Al-
    Shabab and AMISOM, with the Transitional Federal Government making  its
    (often ineffectual) mark.  On top of all this, the climate in the  Horn
    of Africa turned cruel, with what is now recognised as the most serious
    drought for 60 years, leading to  the  present  famine  conditions  and
    resulting humanitarian crisis.   One  thing  that  has  apparently  not
    changed in all this time is the keenness of Somalis to inflict  FGM  on
    their daughters, with estimates of the prevalence of the practice being
    well over 90%.

242.  And yet, in the light of all this, we have  heard  and  read  evidence
    that might be thought  somewhat  surprising.   Both  international  and
    domestic air travel continues using Mogadishu Airport on a daily basis,
    without significant disruptions.  Minibuses travel across southern  and
    central Somalia, including to  Kenya.   All  kinds  of  electrical  and
    technological goods are available in  Bakara  Market,  Mogadishu.   The
    mobile telephone system not only continues to function but provides  an
    instantaneous means of conveying money  internationally,  even  to  the
    remotest areas.  Businesspeople continue to  operate  in  southern  and
    central Somalia, in some cases with a degree of financial success which
    would be impressive anywhere.  As well as businesspeople flying in  and
    out of Mogadishu International Airport, there are  visitors,  including
    Somalis from the Diaspora, coming for a variety of purposes,  including
    - grotesquely - for the purpose of having FGM inflicted on their female
    children.  Much  of  this  evidence  comes  from  the  appellants'  own
    witnesses, Laura Hammond and Tony Burns.

243.  We should, at this point, say something about our overall approach  to
    the evidence of these two experts, who gave oral evidence,  and  of  Dr
    Mullen, whose family circumstances made him unavailable to  attend  the
    hearing.  Mr Eicke, relying on Practice Direction 10 (expert  evidence)
    submitted that the evidence of Drs Mullen and Hammond "fell well  short
    of the standards anticipated both in the  Practice  Direction  and  the
    guidance given by the Tribunal".  Dr Mullen was said,  in  his  report,
    frequently to use language appropriate for  an  advocate,  rather  than
    expert.  Dr Hammond was said to have criticised the  UKBA  Fact-Finding
    Mission for not following certain methodologies yet,  as  was  apparent
    from  cross-examination,  failed  to  follow  those  methodologies   in
    relation to her own evidence.  She criticised the value of some  United
    Nations sources, claiming they had a "political agenda" whilst refusing
    to acknowledge the position might be likewise in the  case  of  various
    NGOs, upon whose views she  relied.   She  also  failed  to  take  into
    account, as required by the Practice Direction, evidence tending to the
    opposite of the views expressed in her report.

244.  Mr Burns, who leads a major NGO in  Somalia  and,  although  based  in
    Australia, frequently visits Mogadishu, was said by Mr Eicke to be  the
    provider of "raw data" rather than analysis.  In some cases  that  data
    was based on anecdotes he heard from staff members.

245.  The respondent's criticisms of Dr Mullen's evidence  are  of  marginal
    significance.  Dr Mullen has given oral evidence to the AIT on previous
    occasions (HH [301]), when the Tribunal formed  a  "generally  positive
    impression" of his evidence.  The fact that his  expertise  on  Somalia
    has given him a certain viewpoint is apparent but, we find, not such as
    seriously to affect the value of his evidence to us.

246.  We agree with the criticisms made of  Dr  Hammond  and  also  consider
    that it would have been helpful had her report drawn  upon  the  recent
    publication of the report "Cash and Compassion: The Role of the  Somali
    Diaspora in Relief, Development and Peace-Building"  (2011),  of  which
    she was the lead author and which painted a somewhat different  picture
    of Diaspora Somalis, both in relation to providing aid and returning to
    Somalia to assist in that regard, than  was  evident  from  her  report
    prepared for these proceedings.  We nevertheless  have  concluded  that
    significant weight can still be attached to her evidence.

247.  As for Mr Burns, in this jurisdiction  there  is  long  experience  of
    hearing from persons in his position, who are  the  providers  of  "raw
    data" and eyewitness observation, rather  than  the  kind  of  academic
    experts that Drs Mullen and Hammond are.  We have,  accordingly,  taken
    Mr Burns's evidence for what it is.

248. In early August 2011,  after  the  conclusion  of  the  eight  days  of
    hearing the appeals, the BBC and other news organisations reported that
    Al-Shabab had withdrawn from its military positions in  Mogadishu.  The
    Tribunal issued directions to the parties to  liaise  with  a  view  to
    placing before the Tribunal agreed  proposals  for  the  production  of
    written evidence regarding this issue and written submissions as to the
    conclusions which the Tribunal was invited to draw from that  evidence.
    The parties have done so, although  the  timescale  has  proved  to  be
    slightly more protracted than was originally envisaged. In  the  event,
    both the appellants and the respondent have submitted evidence not just
    on the position  in  Mogadishu  but  on  other  issues,  including  the
    military and humanitarian situations in central and  southern  Somalia,
    up to late September 2011. We have taken account of  all  of  the  most
    recent admitted evidence and the accompanying submissions.

249.  With these introductory remarks, we turn  to  our  assessment  of  the
    general  evidence.   Although  we  have  for  this  purpose   separated
    Mogadishu from the rest of southern and central Somalia, there  is,  as
    will be seen, some overlap in the issues regarding each.


(1) Mogadishu

Evidence and submissions

250.  The starting point for our assessment is the country guidance set  out
    in AM & AM, which was:-

         "There is now an internal armed  conflict  within  the  meaning  of
         international humanitarian law  (IHL)  and  Article  15(c)  of  the
         Refugee Qualification Directive  throughout  central  and  southern
         Somalia, not just in  and  around  Mogadishu.  The  armed  conflict
         taking place  in  Mogadishu  currently  amounts  to  indiscriminate
         violence at such a level of severity as to place the great majority
         of the population at risk of a consistent pattern of indiscriminate
         violence. On the present evidence Mogadishu is no longer safe as  a
         place to live in for the great majority  of  returnees  whose  home
         area is Mogadishu".

251.  It is common ground that  the  identification  of  an  internal  armed
    conflict by reference to IHL  law,  though  subsequently  found  to  be
    legally incorrect, did not vitiate the Tribunal's findings that such  a
    conflict did exist at the relevant time.  What has happened since?

252.  The UKBA Fact-Finding Mission interviewees reported  civilians  as  at
    risk of being caught in the crossfire of  the  conflict  in  Mogadishu,
    rather than being targeted.  Some of the civilian  deaths  are  due  to
    improvised explosive devices (IEDs) (United Nations,  September  2010),
    together with suicide bombings and other bombings (such as an attack on
    a hotel in August 2010 and  a  vehicle  bomb  outside  the  TFG  police
    training facility in February  2010).   There  were  also  accounts  of
    civilians killed by landmine  explosions  (COIS  8.23).   The  Landinfo
    report of August 2010 suggests that the accuracy of reporting  casualty
    figures in Mogadishu has been quite good.  This contrasts with Mr Burns
    evidence, that casualty figures tend to be  underestimated,  a  finding
    also contained in AM & AM [143].  What is certainly the  case  is  that
    many reports do not distinguish  (or  accurately  distinguish)  between
    combatant  casualties  and  civilian  casualties   (OCHA   Humanitarian
    Overview September 2010).

253.   The  respondent  submitted  that  the  evidence  indicated  that  the
    situation was no worse at the present time than it was at the  time  of
    AM & AM; if anything, the evidence, as reflected in a  number  of  maps
    prepared  by  well-informed  observers,  made  it  clear  that  it  was
    inappropriate to consider Mogadishu as a single and homogeneous  entity
    when considering the security situation there.

254.  According to the UNHCR (British High Commission, Nairobi letter  of  1
    June 2011, figures for the whole of Somalia indicated 1,286 killings in
    2009 and 1,396 in 2010, with rapes rising to 709  from  463  and  other
    physical assaults rising to 2,046 from 1,597.  The COIS  Report  refers
    (again across Somalia) to 5,000 fatalities in 2010, of  whom  20%  were
    children.  Congressional Research  Service  estimated  22,000  civilian
    deaths in the two years prior to December 2010,  whilst  the  US  State
    Department estimated 2,000 civilians killed across Somalia in 2010,  of
    which 918 were in Mogadishu, together with 5,184 civilian  injuries  in
    Mogadishu  alone.   A  Landinfo  report  of  August  2010  referred  to
    approximately 600 people killed in Mogadishu in the first seven  months
    of 2010 in fighting, suicide attacks, roadside bombs and stray bullets,
    of which 250 were explicitly  described  as  civilians.   Interpolating
    from the US State Department figure of 2,000 civilians killed and 6,000
    injured in 2010, the respondent submitted that  this  equated  to  only
    some 2.7% of all deaths in Somalia being civilian casualties caused  by
    the armed conflict.  Moving to the first two months of 2011, and taking
    figures of the International Institute  for  Strategic  Studies,  Armed
    Conflict Database that at least 224 people were killed and another  227
    wounded,  with  more  than  half  those  killed  being  civilians,  the
    respondent submitted that even if all the casualties were assumed to be
    civilians this would amount to an annualised figure of 1,120 killed and
    1,135 wounded, which was lower than the figures referred  to  for  2010
    or, indeed, the figures referred to in AM & AM for 2008.  Additionally,
    two major hospitals in Mogadishu had recorded  1,756  conflict  related
    injuries since January 2011 (OCHA Humanitarian  Overview  April  2011),
    which would give an annual figure of 5,258 injuries  in  Mogadishu  and
    not confined to civilians.

255.  It was the respondent's case that all these figures  showed  a  trend,
    which was downwards.  Although Dr Hammond ascribed the decline  to  the
    reduction  in  the  population  of  Mogadishu  since  2008,  the  Elman
    Institute sought to explain them by reference to a change of tactics by
    Al-Shabab.   In  addition,  Dr  Mullen  asserted  that   80%   of   the
    deaths/injuries in Mogadishu were in Bakara Market.  It was, therefore,
    according to the respondent a "very significant development that AMISOM
    have recently declared Bakara Market a no fire  zone"  (Agence  France-
    Presse, 20 May 2011).   The  indiscriminate  retaliatory  shelling  and
    mortar fire carried out by AMISOM in the market area, in response to Al-
    Shabab attacks, could be regarded as at  an  end,  which  must  have  a
    significant  effect  upon  the  level  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    Mogadishu.  In addition, there was evidence from COIS that  AMISOM  was
    exercising a greater degree of control over its soldiery.

256.  On occasion Al-Shabab  distributed  leaflets  warning  of  attacks  on
    specific  areas,  so  that  civilians  could  leave  in  advance  (UNSC
    September 2010).  Since a suicide bombing at the university in 2009, Al-
    Shabab was thought to have become  more  sensitive  to  the  effect  of
    civilian casualties on its public support.   There  was  also  evidence
    that fighting in Mogadishu was indeed generally occurring in  districts
    where there were few civilians (Landinfo, August 2010).   Although  the
    UN had stated in  April  2011  that  Mogadishu  "remains  unstable  and
    hostile", it had  recently  increased  the  numbers  of  its  personnel
    operating on the ground, due to increased security in  the  city  (UNSC
    April 2011).  A UKBA Fact-Finding Mission  interviewee  said  that  one
    needs "to understand 'normal life' in a Mogadishu sense, where there is
    an acceptance of a mobile type of life created by displacement".

257.  The respondent also relied on evidence to the  effect  that  Mogadishu
    had recently  experienced  an  increased  influx  of  "drought-affected
    pastoralists" (COIS 21.15), in order to access  cheaper  cereal  prices
    and aid (Humanitarian Overview OCHA  February  2011).   By  April  2011
    UNHCR could report that  Mogadishu  sheltered  some  372,000  displaced
    persons and of the 33,000 displaced by conflict since February,  around
    half were in Mogadishu (COIS 27.14).  The greatest influx, according to
    the PMT Mogadishu Dashboard, had been to areas which  appeared  at  the
    time to be the most disputed districts of Mogadishu, and which had been
    under Al-Shabab control in February  2011  but,  at  the  time  of  the
    report, were wholly  or  partly  under  AMISOM/TFG  control:  Deynille,
    Hodan, Hawalwadag and Wardhigley.

258.  Even those who left Mogadishu as IDPs returned  regularly  "to  engage
    in petty trade, load trucks, drive taxis or do  whatever  they  can  to
    bring in some income in order to survive" (International Federation  of
    Red Cross and Red Crescent, October 2010).  Mr Burns confirmed in  oral
    evidence that men and women travelled from  the  Afgoye  Corridor  into
    Mogadishu to buy food or to look for  work  and  that  businesses  were
    relocating to the Afgoye Corridor,  following  the  closure  of  Bakara
    Market.  Indeed, there  was  evidence  that  the  Afgoye  Corridor  was
    increasingly urbanised and that recent  IDPs  there  were  experiencing
    difficulties caused by an increase in land prices in the Corridor.

259.  The respondent submitted that a consistent strand of the evidence  was
    to the effect that TFG/AMISOM had for some time held in  their  control
    districts of Mogadishu in the south of the city, such as Hamar  JaabJab
    and Hamar Weyne, as well as the district  of  Waaberi,  which  contains
    Mogadishu International Airport.  Although Bakara  Market  was  at  the
    time located in an Al-Shabab  controlled  district,  the  OCHA  map  of
    Mogadishu identified some sixteen other markets around the city and  Mr
    Burns' evidence was that some 30 markets existed there, albeit  serving
    local, largely food-based needs, rather  than  catering  for  the  wide
    range of goods found in Bakara Market.

260.  According to  COIS  2.44,  Somalia  was  said  to  have  maintained  a
    "healthy informal economy, largely based on livestock, remittance/money
    transfer companies, and telecommunications" with agriculture being  the
    most important sector.  Hotels continued to operate,  albeit  supported
    with private security militia.  A mobile  phone  company  had  invested
    US$10 million since 2000 and Somalia had better  internet  connectivity
    than several other African countries (COIS 2.07).   This  evidence  was
    supported by Mr Burns, who said that any IT found in the UK could  also
    be found  in  Mogadishu.   Dr  Hammond's  Cash  and  Compassion  report
    described the significant contributions made by the Somali Diaspora  in
    terms of cross-clan support for IDPs, investment in  schools,  clinics,
    hospitals etc.  Mr Burns admitted  in  oral  evidence  that  businesses
    continued to operate in Mogadishu, some moving from  Bakara  Market  to
    the Afgoye Corridor and other  parts  of  the  capital.   He  said  the
    biggest businessmen in Somalia operated from out of the  country  (that
    is to say, those with turnover of US$50  million  to  US$100  million),
    those with a turnover of US$1 million to US$10 million apparently  made
    visits to  Somalia,  whilst  those  worth  US$50,000  to  US$1  million
    continued to be present in the country, paying taxes both  to  the  TFG
    and, where necessary, Al-Shabab.  Dr Hammond confirmed that  employment
    opportunities in the informal sector existed in Mogadishu, such  as  at
    the port directly accessible from Hamar JaabJab.  Mr  Burns  considered
    that appellant FM could work in some way, for example by selling  fruit
    in that district.  In general, according to the British High Commission
    letter, many people in Somalia in one way or another "do get by",  with
    many relying on small scale petty trade and  casual  employment.   Only
    children from the poorest households worked.

261.  Dr Hammond's "Cash and Compassion" report described the excellence  of
    telecoms in Somalia,  which  facilitated  the  Hawala  system,  whereby
    Somali Diaspora could send money to family  members  displaced  by  war
    within a day or two of their dislocation, even to IDP camps.  This  had
    led Al-Shabab to ban mobile phones receiving such  remittances  because
    Al-Shabab could  not  get  hold  of  the  money  themselves  (Cash  and
    Compassion, page 42).

262.  There was a good deal of evidence to  the  effect  that  organisations
    were  able  to  operate  in  Mogadishu,  providing   food   and   other
    humanitarian assistance (e.g. OCHA Somalia Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin
    March/April 2011; Nairobi  Evidence:  Representatives  of  INGO).   The
    British High  Commission  letter  set  out  a  non-exhaustive  list  of
    organisations providing such help.   Thus,  COIS  27.17  reported  food
    assistance continuing to sustain 250,000 people a month in Mogadishu.

263.  However, SAACID - Drought in Somalia  (May  2011)  reported  that  the
    city of Mogadishu had "little  capacity  to  cope  with"  new  families
    arriving from the drought-stricken countryside.  A  sample  in  January
    2011 conducted in Mogadishu found that more than 70% of the  population
    have been displaced at least once in the past two years, primarily from
    conflict.  "Yet, communities in Mogadishu have opened their  hearts  to
    the new rural families, who are perceived as being even more  desperate
    than families residing in Mogadishu."  Mr Burns  confirmed  that  other
    TFG-controlled districts had agreed to assist IDPs arriving  "once  the
    numbers of new arrivals had grown too high in  Hamar  Weyne  and  Hamar
    JaabJab".

264.  SAACID's reports indicated that its project, which involved  employing
    1,100 people in ten districts of Mogadishu to clear tonnes  of  rubbish
    from the area, ran in  all  districts  without  security  incidents  in
    2010/2011.  The project was not targeted  by  anyone.   The  respondent
    relied on this as an indication of the current  security  situation  in
    Mogadishu and the ability of people to move around the city.

265.  The UN continued to support the  development  of  a  professional  and
    accountable Somali police force (COIS  7.02),  although  the  US  State
    Department Report of 2010 described the police as  being  "ineffective,
    underpaid and corrupt".  AMISOM troop strength rose at the end of  2010
    to 8,000 and was now 12,000.   There  were  several  reports  that  TFG
    agents had committed arbitrary or unlawful killings (COIS  9.23),  with
    the US State Department Report  referring  to  "rogue  TFG  troops  and
    militia".  According to the  USSD,  however,  there  were  in  2010  no
    reports of TFG forces engaging in torture or of  police  raping  women.
    This was to some extent contradicted by the human  rights  organisation
    Coalition for Grassroots Women Organisations.

266.  Dr Hammond suggested in oral  evidence  that  areas  under  TFG/AMISOM
    control in Mogadishu were not genuinely under such control and that Al-
    Shabab and  other  militias  moved  into  some  areas  at  night.   The
    respondent questioned this evidence.  An ORBS  poll  of  November  2010
    indicated that, of women in Mogadishu, just under half were  housewives
    and  the  other  half  comprised  2%  business  owners,   9%   informal
    employment, 9% working part-time, 6% working  full-time,  13%  students
    and 13% unemployment.  The majority of  those  working  for  Mr  Burns'
    SAACID organisation were women and a thousand women  were  employed  by
    the UN (UNSC April 2011).  In Mogadishu and elsewhere,  women  who  had
    lost male breadwinners as a result of the  armed  conflict  assumed  an
    economically active role, which included setting  up  small  businesses
    (ICRC - Annual Report 2010 -  Africa).   According  to  Joakim  Gundel,
    based on working and interviews in Somalia and studies of  the  country
    from outside it, there had been changes in the clan system in Mogadishu
    over the past eight years, whereby the  Reer  Hamar  community  was  no
    longer subject to the kind of targeted violence by major warring clans,
    albeit that they were still subject to some discrimination.   Mr  Burns
    did not suggest  that  members  of  minorities  encountered  particular
    problems when migrating  to  Mogadishu.   He  said  that  rural  people
    travelled to Hamar  Weyne  and  Hamar  JaabJab,  where  most  had  clan
    connections.  Mr Burns used the minority/majority  terminology  in  the
    sense of whether particular clans were numerically in the  majority  or
    minority, rather than by  reference  to  noble  clans  and  traditional
    minorities.  Dr Hammond's evidence was to the effect that  persons  who
    had once been powerful might not be powerful at the present time as the
    situation was "evolving".  The respondent submitted, however, that this
    did not support  a  conclusion  that  clan  relations  were  no  longer
    relevant.

267.  The respondent submitted  that  Mogadishu  International  Airport  was
    safe.  It catered for an average of 2,000 a  month  (incoming)  with  a
    similar number leaving.  The airport was secured by AMISOM  troops  and
    Somali police and no flights have been cancelled for  security  reasons
    since 1990.

268.  Reintegration support was available  for  failed  asylum  seekers  who
    returned  to  Somalia  from  the  United  Kingdom   voluntarily.    The
    respondent relied on the finding at [178] of TK  (Tamils,  LP  updated)
    Sri Lanka (REV1) CG [2009] UKAIT 00049, where it was  held  that  there
    was "no basis for  suggesting  ...  that  if  required  to  return  the
    appellant would not seek to avail herself  of  such  a  package".   The
    expression "voluntary" ought, therefore, to be read in that light and a
    finding made that, if returned, the appellants would  avail  themselves
    of financial assistance, including up to 1,500 in order  to  help  the
    person concerned settle  back  in  their  country,  including  -  where
    appropriate - setting up a business.   Caseworkers  were  available  to
    assist in contacting friends and family in the country  of  return  and
    planning onward travel (R/3/14/1520-1525).

269.  Mr Toal submitted that the Tribunal in AM & AM  had  decided  to  make
    findings on the risk to civilians in the city of Mogadishu as a  whole,
    even though it recognised that there were "safer districts  within  the
    city", which actually received IDPs, that the affluent  northern  parts
    of the city had been relatively unaffected by  the  fighting  and  that
    that fighting was mostly concentrated in only two particular  districts
    [173] to [178].  By the same token,  the  ECtHR  in  Sufi  &  Elmi  had
    declined to adopt a district by district approach to the Article 3 risk
    faced by civilians in Mogadishu, despite evidence from the  UKBA  Fact-
    Finding Mission and elsewhere, that it was supposedly possible to  live
    in non-conflict areas of the city, which were considered  to  be  safe.
    The ECtHR took this view because it considered that "the power  balance
    in districts in urban areas could change almost from day to day and, as
    a consequence, information on area control could  become  out  of  date
    very quickly" [247].

270.   So  far  as  civilian  casualties  were  concerned,  the   appellants
    submitted that  the  evidence  as  to  casualties,  relied  on  by  the
    respondent to show an alleged decline since the time of AM & AM, varied
    very considerably.  The ECtHR in Sufi & Elmi, in the face  of  evidence
    from the Elman  Peace  and  Human  Rights  Organisation,  indicating  a
    decline in civilian deaths between 2008  and  2009,  and  acknowledging
    that the situation in Mogadishu appeared  to  have  improved  in  2009,
    nevertheless found that the parties to the conflict continue to  engage
    in  indiscriminate  violence  and  that,  in  fact,  the  situation  in
    Mogadishu had deteriorated in 2010 (Elman, citing  918  civilians  dead
    and 255 injured in January to July  2010,  as  a  result  of  increased
    fighting and shelling).

271.  The ECtHR concluded at [246] that "whatever the  precise  figures,  it
    is clear that since the beginning  of  2010  the  ongoing  fighting  in
    Mogadishu has resulted  in  thousands  of  civilian  casualties  and  a
    displacement of hundreds of thousands of people".   We  were  urged  to
    adopt the same approach and  to  continue  to  recognise,  as  did  the
    Tribunal in AM & AM,  that  there  was  a  likelihood  of  considerable
    underreporting.  This was because the UN Office for the Coordination of
    Humanitarian Affairs  (August  2010)  had  stated  that  there  was  no
    systematic gathering of data about conflict related deaths and injuries
    in Somalia; the reporting by  individuals  and  institutions,  such  as
    hospitals and the Mogadishu Ambulance Service, upon which the data were
    based, necessarily had a limited impartial reporting capacity, as could
    be seen from the evidence  from  Lifeline  Africa  Ambulance  Service's
    spokesman that "many people are buried where they die and many  injured
    are looked after by relatives unable to get  them  to  hospital"  (IRIN
    Report, December 2010); but in the nine  months  January  to  September
    2010, three Mogadishu hospitals reported 5,485 weapons-related injuries
    (UN, September 2010); that any downward trend in casualty  figures  was
    indeed due to the depopulation of Mogadishu, such that the  figures  by
    themselves were not a reliable basis for  assessing  the  intensity  of
    violence and the extent to which it gave rise to a risk of serious harm
    to people still in the city; that a press statement of 31 May 2011 from
    the World Health Organisation indicated that the main causes  of  death
    among under 5's were burns, chest injuries and  internal  haemorrhaging
    caused by blast injuries, shrapnel  and  bullets;  that  of  the  1,590
    reported weapons-related injuries in May 2011, 46% related to  children
    under the age of 5; and that a spokesman for Peaceline told  IRIN  that
    numbers would be even higher, if one took into consideration that  many
    families were unable to access hospitals and therefore treated children
    at home as best they could.

272.  Mr Toal submitted that the displacement of people from Mogadishu  was,
    as well as casualty figures, an important indicator  of  the  level  of
    risk posed by indiscriminate violence.  That was the approach taken  in
    AM & AM [172, 178] and it should  likewise  be  the  approach  that  we
    should take.  Mr  Toal  submitted  that  [248]  of  Sufi  &  Elmi  also
    indicated that this was the approach adopted by the ECtHR.

273.  UNHCR Population Movement  Tracking  Monthly  Reports  of  January  to
    September  2010  disclosed  that,  in  the  months  respectively  under
    consideration in those reports,  tens  of  thousands  of  displacements
    occurred, in the form either of people leaving Mogadishu or  moving  to
    another area within it.  Looking at the  period  October  2010  to  May
    2011, the figures dipped below 10,000 in November, December and January
    2011 but rose in February  2011  to  just  under  10,000,  with  17,960
    displacements in March, 6,100 in April and 16,500 in May.

274.  The appellants described  these  figures  as  indicating  "continuous,
    mass displacement from and within Mogadishu as a result of the violence
    and insecurity there".  They were an indicator of the nature and  level
    of violence in Mogadishu.  The  UNHCR,  concerned  about  the  possible
    exaggeration of IDP figures,  utilised  satellite  imagery  and  remote
    sensing techniques to reassess the  IDP  population  of  the  Mogadishu
    periphery, as a result of which reassessment the figures were  in  fact
    revised upwards, so far as those in the Afgoye Corridor were concerned.

275.  The appellants contended that, if anything,  the  evidence  before  us
    showed the risk to civilians in Mogadishu had increased, compared  with
    the evidence that was before the ECtHR in Sufi & Elmi.  The  respondent
    acknowledged that fighting in Mogadishu had intensified in 2011, with a
    major offensive by TFG/AMISOM beginning  in  February.   Moreover,  the
    COIS Report of 27 May 2011 quoted sources stating that all  parties  in
    the conflict  had  engaged  in  indiscriminate  attacks,  resulting  in
    civilian casualties.  This includes Al-Shabab launching mortar  attacks
    from hidden sites, using civilians as human shields,  which  frequently
    destroyed civilian homes but rarely struck military targets; TFG/AMISOM
    responses that sometimes  resulted  in  shelling  civilian  areas;  and
    suicide bombings, landmines and IEDs.

276.  The UKBA Fact-Finding Mission  recorded  informants  as  stating  that
    most civilian casualties were attributed to AMISOM shelling residential
    areas, including Hodan, Hawlwadag, Wardhigley,  Al-Ashabya,  K-13,  Bar
    Huba and Bakara Market [170f].

277.  The appellants strongly challenged  the  respondent's  assertion  that
    there had been any significant "change of tactics" by Al-Shabab,  which
    might have reduced the casualty figures.  On the contrary, the evidence
    indicated that Al-Shabab continued to use tactics that occasioned  very
    significant civilian casualties,  including  launching  attacks  behind
    civilian human shields, roadside bombs, IEDs and suicide bombings.  The
    ECtHR had noted in Sufi & Elmi that "although there were  reports  that
    Al-Shabab's  tactics  had  become  more  sophisticated  following   the
    recruitment of foreign fighters, none of the reports suggested that the
    use of new tactics had in any way reduced the risk to civilians" [246].
     In fact, according to the Nigerian Directorate report,  these  changes
    had resulted in Al-Shabab acting with "greater brutality".

278.  The closure of Bakara Market, also relied on by  the  respondent,  was
    not, according to the appellants, of any material  significance,  since
    neither the TFG/AMISOM nor Al-Shabab had defeated  the  other.   Bakara
    Market remained an Al-Shabab-controlled part of Mogadishu at  the  time
    of the hearings.  There was also "a real risk that the relocated market
    will be a new locus of conflict".

279.  As for the declaration  by  AMISOM  of  a  "no-fire"  zone  in  Bakara
    Market, the appellants submitted that such declarations had  been  made
    in the past and plainly had  no  material  effect  (report,  bundle  C,
    P266).  The declaration of 2  December  2010  had  not  stopped  Bakara
    Market being targeted by  AMISOM  artillery,  with  resulting  civilian
    deaths since that time.

280.  The supposed distinction,  sought  to  be  drawn  by  the  respondent,
    between  Al-Shabab  targeted  and  indiscriminate  violence  was,   the
    appellants contended, unjustifiable in the light of HM (Iraq) CG [2010]
    UKUT 331 (IAC), where the Upper  Tribunal  rejected  as  unhelpful  the
    proposal that a distinction should be drawn  between  a  real  risk  of
    targeted and  of  incidental  killing  of  civilians  during  an  armed
    conflict.  In any event, the appellants submitted,  Al-Shabab  had,  in
    fact, often used what were plainly indiscriminate methods in  order  to
    kill their enemies, such as  could  be  seen  from  the  roadside  bomb
    intended for a minister's car,  which  killed  five  other  people  (21
    December 2009), the attack on the Muna Hotel in Mogadishu on 24 October
    2010 when, as well as those targeted, an 11 year old shoeshine boy  and
    a woman selling tea were also  killed;  eight  civilians  killed  by  a
    roadside bomb intended for AMISOM troops on 31 August 2010; at least 70
    killed following a botched suicide bomb attack on government facilities
    on 5 March 2011; and the bombing of the house of a  police  officer  in
    Wadajir district, which caused five deaths on 6 April 2011.

281.  The  appellant  submitted  that  there  were,  in  fact,  no  properly
    identifiable safe areas in Mogadishu.  As the ECtHR had held in Sufi  &
    Elmi, the situation could change from day to day and Dr Hammond in  her
    evidence had reiterated that point.  Furthermore,  even  the  so-called
    safer districts were, according to Mr  Burns,  the  subject  of  weekly
    mortar attacks.  Examples of civilian casualties in areas identified as
    "relatively untouched by the major conflict" included:-

    (a)    Daynile - civilians killed and wounded on  16  and  24  November
         2009, 21 July 2010, 67 wounded in districts including Daynile on 26
         March 2011 and 'massive shelling'  of  Daynile  on  9  April  2011,
         killing nine civilians and injuring 26;


    (b)    Hamar JaabJab - woman and two children killed by a mortar on  20
         December 2009; four civilians killed and ten wounded on 13  January
         2010; ten civilians wounded by heavy artillery  on  14  June  2010;
         eleven people, including civilians killed and 40 injured by suicide
         bombing on 21 February 2011; two boys killed after explosive device
         with which they were playing blew up, 23 April 2011;  one  civilian
         killed by crossfire on  31  May  2011;  ten  civilians  wounded  by
         fighting between TFG and police on 13 June 2011;


    (c)    Waaberi - three civilians killed by landmine on 18  April  2010;
         several civilians wounded by retaliatory fire on 11 September 2010;
         civilians wounded during clash between rival  TFG  soldiers  on  13
         March 2011; five killed and six wounded by similar fighting  on  26
         April 2011; seventeen civilians killed  and  seventeen  wounded  by
         mortar attack on 25 May 2011;


    (d)    Hamar Weyne - mortar attack killing two civilians  and  injuring
         three on 20 May 2010; eleven people including three children killed
         by a mortar attack on a hospital on  11  September  2010;  roadside
         bomb intended for Finance Ministry official killing five people,  4
         July 2010; ten schoolchildren injured by mortar  landing  on  their
         school on 19 July 2010; Al-Shabab suicide  bombing  at  Muna  Hotel
         killing 31, 24 August 2010;


    (e)    Yaaqshid - three civilians killed by  artillery  barrage  on  27
         March 2011; four civilians killed by  bombardments  on  residential
         areas on 2 June 2011;


    (f)    Karaan - 22 killed and 37 wounded in clashes on 24 October 2010;
         three killed and two injured on 28  October  2010  (it  is  unclear
         whether all or any of these were civilians);


    (g)    Wadajir/Medina (the so-called 'green  zone')  -  four  civilians
         wounded by AMISOM firing on 25 January 2011; sixteen killed and  56
         injured (mostly civilians) shopping at Benadir Market as  a  result
         of fighting between TFG police and soldiers  on  3  February  2011;
         five injured when a police officer's house was bombed  on  6  April
         2011; Medina Hospital hit by  mortar  rounds  in  April  2011;  two
         civilians wounded when TFG soldiers clashed among themselves on  26
         June 2011.

282.  The appellants took issue with the submission that  areas  within  TFG
    control were safe, from the TFG forces themselves, despite the evidence
    regarding attempts  to  improve  discipline.   Reference  was  made  to
    various of the incidents just described, involving fighting between TFG
    elements.  In addition, two people were killed and six injured when TFG
    soldiers  turned  on  each  other  in  Dharkanley  in  a  dispute  over
    possession of a car on  7  March  2011;  five  were  killed,  including
    civilians, when TFG soldiers clashed over money robbed or extorted from
    passengers on civilian buses on 26 April 2011; two civilians killed  by
    TFG soldiers when they refused to pay "taxes" to soldiers in Dharkanley
    on 14 May 2011; ten civilians wounded by fighting  between  TFG  police
    and troops in Hamar JaabJab on 13 June 2011; and one woman  killed  and
    one injured when TFG soldiers  clashed  over  control  of  the  central
    Mogadishu IDP camps on 28 June 2011.  On the same day businessmen  were
    reported as complaining that they had been ordered to pay money by  TFG
    soldiers, or leave the area.

283.  In addition, the appellants relied on the evidence of  Mr  Burns  that
    criminal violence was pervasive, even in areas where the  conflict  was
    said to be relatively low, as a result of the  operation  of  freelance
    criminal militias.  Mogadishu was, in fact, incapable of supporting its
    current population, with unemployment  according  to  a  recent  SAACID
    survey standing at 70%, since the closure of  Bakara  Market.   At  the
    same time there was increasing demand, as a result of  the  arrival  of
    large numbers displaced by the drought.

284.  The appellants denied that the increased number of AMISOM  troops  was
    indicative of a change for the better in the security  situation.   The
    UN staff in the city were accommodated in secure accommodation  "within
    the AMISOM protected area at  the  Aden  Adde  International  Airport",
    according to the UN Secretary General  on  24  April  2011.   This  was
    consistent with Dr Hammond's evidence of a "bunkerised presence" on the
    part of TFG/AMISOM in Mogadishu.  The airport base was in  fact  unique
    in terms of security and it would be wrong to draw inferences about the
    security position elsewhere in  the  city  from  the  position  at  the
    airport.

285.  In early August 2011, most, if not all,  of  Al-Shabab's  conventional
    fighting forces left Mogadishu.  The details are unclear; and there  is
    debate as to the motivation behind the withdrawal.  What  is,  however,
    apparent is that there  is  no  longer  a  "front-line"  in  Mogadishu,
    separating the areas  respectively  controlled  by  Al-Shabab  and  the
    TFG/AMISOM.  Agence  France  Presse  quoted  the  Somali  President  as
    stating that "Mogadishu has  been  fully  liberated  from  the  enemy",
    whereas Al-Shabab were reported as describing the measure as  a  change
    in military tactics.  A dead Al-Shabab leader was said to have  had  on
    his person documents advising Al-Shabab to "go back to their  old  ways
    of hit and run insurgency and underground operations and to disband the
    areas that they control" (The Nation, 7 September 2011).

286.  The UN Secretary General's Special Representative  said  on  6  August
    that, whilst Al-Shabab's departure was a positive development,  it  was
    "important that we acknowledge that real security risks, including from
    terrorist attacks, remain and must not be underestimated".  There was a
    need "to avoid a vacuum in the areas vacated by the insurgents" and law
    enforcement measures needed to be put in place as a matter  of  urgency
    to avoid "warlords and their militias  from  taking  advantage  of  the
    situation".   The  likelihood  was   that   Al-Shabab   would   "employ
    asymmetrical, hit-and-run terrorist tactics, such as suicide  bombings.
    Indications are that some of the insurgents  simply  'melted  away'  by
    mingling with the  residents  of  Mogadishu.   These  remnants  of  the
    insurgency, therefore, present a continuous challenge."

287.  The appellants' evidence included the following instances of what  was
    asserted to be continuing armed conflict in  the  city,  following  the
    withdrawal of Al-Shabab.  On 7 August 2011 five civilians  were  killed
    and eleven civilians wounded by heavy  shelling  as  government  forces
    attempted to enter the district of Daynille.  On 9  August  there  were
    armed clashes between Al-Shabab and the TFG/AMISOM involving light  and
    heavy weaponry in northern parts of Mogadishu, involving at least three
    civilians killed  and  five  injured.   Al-Shabab  were  said  to  have
    launched hit-and-run attacks on bases that had been seized  earlier  in
    the day by the TFG/AMISOM.  On 16 August there were "heavy battles"  in
    Yaqshid and Qaran, involving four killed and  dozens  wounded  and  the
    following day AMISOM said Al-Shabab were shelling populated areas.   In
    return, AMISOM shelled Daynille and Huriwa, killing three civilians and
    injuring seven.  On 21 August in Dharkanley, six people including three
    children were injured by grenades thought to have been  thrown  by  Al-
    Shabab.  On 21 August 2011 it was reported  by  Emergency  Humanitarian
    Action, in  its  weekly  highlights  of  20  to  26  August,  that  455
    casualties from weapon related  injuries  had  been  treated  in  three
    Mogadishu hospitals.

288.  Further reports from late August described  heavy  fighting  involving
    an exchange of shelling on Industrial Street after an Al-Shabab  attack
    on an AMISOM base; further deaths after Al-Shabab attacks on  bases  in
    Afgoye, Huriwaa and Daynille districts  of  Mogadishu,  with  residents
    fleeing or lying on floors in  fear  of  stray  bullets;  two  children
    killed after a bomb they were playing with exploded; a woman killed  by
    an Al-Shabab bomb near an IDP feeding centre, involving an attack on an
    AMISOM convoy; and ten deaths and fifteen injuries involving attacks on
    bases of AMISOM in Dharkanley, Karan, Fageh, Gubta, Towfik,  Hamarweyne
    and Waaberi districts.  Six of the dead and ten  of  the  wounded  were
    civilians.

289.  On 7 September, at least six civilians were reported to have  died  as
    a result of mortar attacks in the Karan  district,  with  three  people
    killed by shelling.  Two days later four people  were  killed  and  ten
    injured by an explosion in Yaqshid.   On  17  September  at  least  two
    civilians were killed by an IED in Dharkanley.  On  17  September,  two
    civilians were killed and  four  wounded  when  a  mortar  hit  an  IDP
    settlement in the same district during fighting between  Al-Shabab  and
    the TFG/AMISOM.  On the same day a civilian was killed and two  injured
    following a mortar attack in Daynille.

290.  According to Somalia Report of 31 August, Al-Shabab are maintaining  a
    covert presence in Mogadishu, where they seek to rely on fear instilled
    by a policy of executing "collaborators" in order  to  deter  civilians
    from informing on them.  The organisation was attempting to  compensate
    for reduced military and political capacity by terrorising the civilian
    population.  Thus, on 21 August, an Al-Shabab  leader  issued  a  fatwa
    ordering the killing of anyone opposed to  Al-Shabab,  including  those
    loyal to the TFG.  According to Somalia Report, the  leader  said  that
    anyone who asserted Al-Shabab was defeated would be "silenced (will  be
    shot in the head)" and that, whilst Al-Shabab used to protect civilians
    "from now on we  shall  not  spare  them,  whoever  is  supporting  the
    infidels have the right  to  die".   On  23  August  three  males  were
    executed  in  Mogadishu,  one  being  accused  of  working  for  Kenyan
    intelligence and the others of working and spying  for  the  TFG.   Two
    days later, a report on Shabelle.net described the decapitated body  of
    a Somali boy who had been abducted being left at the pasta  factory  in
    north Mogadishu.  The same day, there was a report that  Al-Shabab  had
    kidnapped two men in Garasbaley and that the beheaded body  of  one  of
    them was found in what was described as the Al-Shabab  controlled  area
    of Suqaholaha, where five other  headless  bodies  had  been  found  in
    recent days.

291.  On 2 September 2011 it was reported that Al-Shabab  had  beheaded  ten
    people in Huriwa  and  Daynille  districts  over  the  past  few  days,
    including  a  woman  accused  of  spying.   Those  two  districts  were
    described by the District Commissioner as having been transformed "into
    butcheries" by Al-Shabab.  On 6 September two decapitated  bodies  were
    found in Hiliwaa.

292.  The appellants' most recent evidence contained a  number  of  reports,
    said to relate to fighting between different  armed  groups  within  or
    associated with the TFG.  On 5 August 2011 at least four civilians were
    killed in Hamarweyne when forces clashed and on  the  same  day  eleven
    were said to have been killed and twenty  wounded  as  Somali  soldiers
    looted food at Badbado Camp for IDPs.  On 20 August three  were  killed
    and  six  were  wounded  as  soldiers  in  Dharkanley  fought   amongst
    themselves and the following day there was further  fighting  involving
    TFG military and police in Wadajar.  There were also reports of rape by
    TFG soldiers in IDP camps in Mogadishu, as well as further  reports  of
    looting.  A Somalia Report of 29 August described an  increase  in  the
    number of  checkpoints  and  roadblocks  in  Mogadishu,  following  the
    withdrawal of Al-Shabab.

293.  As for the humanitarian situation in Mogadishu, on 20 July famine  was
    declared in a number of further areas of central and southern  Somalia,
    including in  the  IDP  camps  of  Mogadishu  (UN  Secretary  General's
    Report).  During July and August 100,000 IDPs fleeing from drought  and
    famine  arrived  in  Mogadishu,  joining  the  370,000  people  already
    displaced to the city.

294.   The  respondent's  latest  evidence  sought  to  emphasise  what  the
    appellants conceded had been a decrease in levels of violence since the
    withdrawal of Al-Shabab.  In  particular,  Bakara  Market  was  now  in
    control of the TFG/AMISOM.  As previously noted, fighting in and around
    this market had been the cause of the highest civilian casualties.

295.  Even before the  August  2011  withdrawal,  the  respondent  contended
    that, as indicated in the earlier  evidence,  the  TFG/AMISOM  had,  in
    effect, gained the upper hand in Mogadishu and that Al-Shabab had  been
    militarily defeated, rather than deciding deliberately  on  a  tactical
    withdrawal.   Some  300  Al-Shabab  reinforcements  had  been  sent  to
    Mogadishu in the days before 28 July  2011,  to  no  avail.   The  IASC
    Protection Cluster Update of 1 July 2011  had  already  indicated  that
    clashes between the two sides had subsided "to be replaced by  sporadic
    incidents of mortar shelling".

296.  By  20  August  2011  TFG/AMISOM  had  fourteen-fifteen  districts  of
    Mogadishu firmly under control and Al-Shabab resistance  remained  only
    in pockets near the pasta factory in the north of Yaqshid district  and
    Dharkanley.  According to  the  UN  Security  Council,  TFG/AMISOM  had
    established control of 90% of Mogadishu by 15 August.  By 13 September,
    they controlled every district except Daynille and Huriwa.  AMISOM  was
    also securing  the  international  airport  and  the  seaport.   On  23
    September, the UN Special Representative said the TFG were  in  control
    of  96%  of  the  capital.   The  situation  was,  according   to   the
    representative, "something that has never happened before in  the  past
    20 years.  Mogadishu was  either  in  the  hands  of  warlords  or  the
    insurgents, the Al-Shabab" (Relief Web).

297.  In an IASC update of 9 September,  Sheikh  Godane,  described  as  the
    leader of Al-Shabab, was  cited  as  vowing  that  his  fighters  "will
    continue launching new attacks against the  TFG/AMISOM  in  Mogadishu".
    The  Protection  Monitoring  Partners  Report   suggested   that   "The
    protection environment faced by residents of the  capital  has  changed
    little despite the Al-Shabab withdrawal in August.  Insecurity  remains
    a major protection concern due to the high number of explosive  devices
    planted in vacated areas by  Al-Shabab,  including  continued  fighting
    between pockets of Al-Shabab insurgents and the TFG/AMISOM troops."

298.   Professor  Menkhaus  in  August  2011  considered  that  "Shabab   is
    splintering now.  The famine has been a source of  tension  within  the
    organisation and the hope is that we'll see some breakaway wings  again
    that would say 'Our people are starving and we welcome aid'.  It  would
    be very risky for those splinter groups, but desperate times  call  for
    desperate measures." Menkhaus speculated  that  Al-Shabab's  withdrawal
    was linked with social pressure on the organisation  from  clans  which
    were "rebelling".  Famine had been disastrous for Al-Shabab in that  by
    blocking food aid and blocking people from getting out of the  affected
    areas "they have just shredded what little credibility they had left".

299.  Landinfo reported in  August  2011  that,  apart  from  the  fighting,
    civilians had enjoyed greater safety in areas  of  Mogadishu  that  had
    been controlled by Al-Shabab, compared with the TFG.  The higher  crime
    experienced in TFG areas "is partly due to undisciplined  soldiers  who
    commit robberies, rapes of women of all ages and from  all  clans,  and
    extortion.  However it is difficult to say anything about the extent of
    such abuses, and whether they are systematic."

300.  The respondent contended that, whilst  challenges  still  existed  for
    TFG/AMISOM in terms of providing security in the newly taken  areas  of
    Mogadishu, numerous sources indicated that there had  been  an  overall
    improvement since Al-Shabab's withdrawal.  Thus, according to SMN on  2
    September 2011, residents reportedly said that "The security crackdowns
    in the capital could help restore peace after more than two decades  of
    civil war and conflict".  A  government  minister  said  the  TFG  were
    slowly regaining control of the city, although  he  accepted  that  the
    government might not have moved as quickly as many people  had  wanted.
    Nevertheless, the fact that people were returning to re-taken areas was
    indicative that the transitional government was doing  something  about
    the security situation.  The minister said the TFG "are well aware that
    the job is not yet done until we can comfortably say that Mogadishu  is
    totally safe from [Al-Shabab] and from opportunistic criminals".

301.  As regards that matter, there were  reports  of  militias  dressed  in
    government military uniforms causing problems in Mogadishu.

302.  The UNHCR visit to Mogadishu on 14 September was described as  passing
    buildings destroyed by warfare or  damaged  by  weaponry.   There  was,
    however, "a lot of life on the streets and many  shops  doing  a  brisk
    business - encouraging signs of a  city  attempting  to  recover  after
    years of conflict and chaos".  The UNHCR was concerned about the spread
    of diseases such as  cholera  in  the  IDP  settlements.   The  meeting
    "expressed its deep sympathy to Somalia  in  the  face  of  the  severe
    drought and famine afflicting the country".

303.  A Somalia Report of  25  September  described  life  in  Mogadishu  as
    "slowly returning to normal following the withdrawal  of  the  militant
    group Al-Shabab".  TFG/AMISOM had "seemingly succeeded in  keeping  the
    Islamist fighters at  bay,  at  least  for  now".   A  kiosk  owner  in
    Mogadishu said that he was "receiving a good  number  of  customers  as
    people can walk any time of the day through into the night.  I can  say
    this is my new life after eight years of living  in  agony."   Landinfo
    reported that electricity worked in cities for those who could pay  and
    that "23% of the residents of Mogadishu are online  or  worked  daily".
    The same organisation  reported  that  although  random  detention  and
    harassment of civilians occurred in government controlled  areas,  this
    was more limited than in 2007-2008.  Amnesty  International's  briefing
    acknowledged that indiscriminate artillery attacks had reduced.  It was
    unclear whether AI's figures for those treated in  Mogadishu  hospitals
    in August 2011 for weapons related injuries included combatants.

304.  Mr Mahiga of the UN commented on 24 September 2011  that  front  lines
    were no  longer  visible  in  Mogadishu  and  the  situation  was  more
    complicated.   What  had  been  happening  was  conventional   warfare,
    interspersed with guerrilla  and  urban  warfare:  "but  now  that  the
    conventional part of it has  been  receding  into  the  background,  we
    believe, and already there are signs that [Al-Shabab] will be resorting
    to bombs, improvised explosive devices.  There have been many  examples
    since their withdrawal on 6 August, many cases of such.   And  some  of
    the Shabab elements have melted into the civilian population, they have
    been carrying out rear-guard actions."

305.  Nevertheless, the respondent submitted that since post-withdrawal  Al-
    Shabab attacks had been centred on TFG/AMISOM positions,  this  reduced
    the indiscriminate nature of the violence, so  far  as  civilians  were
    concerned.

306.  An African Union  report  of  13  September  described  the  remaining
    pockets of insurgents in Mogadishu as having "resorted to  asymmetrical
    warfare, including grenade, IED and other forms  of  attacks  targeting
    AMISOM positions and government  installations.   In  August,  over  20
    incidents  involving  grenade  and  IED  attacks  were  registered   in
    Mogadishu and the surrounding areas.  The insurgents also  carried  out
    beheadings in some  parts  of  Mogadishu  to  intimidate  a  population
    suspected of supporting the TFG."

307.  The respondent submitted that post-withdrawal evidence  regarding  IED
    etc. attacks did not suggest any significant change in the situation as
    it had been up to July 2011.  The evidence as to  asymmetrical  warfare
    did not contradict the general conclusion that, overall, the  situation
    had  improved.   It  was  certainly  not  any  worse.   The  respondent
    emphasised the  evidence  as  to  AMISOM's  internationally  recognised
    commitment  to  the  application  of  international  humanitarian   law
    principles to reduce civilian casualties and the real  significance  of
    the capture of Bakara Market.  There had been no shift in  emphasis  by
    Al-Shabab to kidnappings, since there  had  been  indications  of  such
    things in the earlier evidence.

308.  The  loss  to  Al-Shabab  of  Bakara  Market  was,  according  to  the
    respondent, significant in that it had been the "financial hub  of  the
    movement" ([48] of later submissions).  The second  largest  market  in
    Mogadishu, Sukh Ba'ad in Yaqshid district, held for the last two  years
    by Al-Shabab, had been captured by AMISOM and was  officially  reopened
    for business in  early  September.   This  market  also  had  been  "an
    important revenue stream" for Al-Shabab (Somalia Report).

309.  The UNOCHA PMT Monthly Report for August  2011  stated  that  in  July
    2011 alone there had been 730 reported deportations from  Saudi  Arabia
    to Mogadishu "with no reports of difficulties for those returnees".

310.  A report of 30 August described a large number of  infrastructure  and
    other engineering projects underway in Mogadishu and its environs, with
    "men and women clearing  the  rubble  and  cleaning  up  the  pathways.
    People now talk freely, as they hold public debates  on  open  grounds.
    This, analysts say, would be unheard of in the recent past."

311.  The respondent stated that there had been a dramatic increase  in  the
    number of IDP camps in districts of Mogadishu between 28  July  and  22
    August 2011 "suggesting an increasing perception in Mogadishu as a safe
    place of refuge" [59].  There were, for example, 12 new  IDP  camps  in
    Hodan, 10 in Hamarjaabjab and five each in Hawl-Wadag  and  Wardhigley.
    A UNOSAT Report of 22 August stated that, as at that date, "there  were
    a total of 226 spatially distinct IDP  shelter  concentrations  located
    within the urban extent of Mogadishu".  There was also an  increase  in
    the number of IDP camps in the north-east of Mogadishu,  following  Al-
    Shabab's retreat from those areas.  According to IRIN  on  9  September
    2011, the UNHCR was "scaling up its presence in the capital and in  the
    border regions".  The UAE had food kitchens in  and  around  Mogadishu,
    according to the Emirates News Agency.  There was no evidence that  the
    TFG had deliberately tried to restrict aid in  Mogadishu,  or  anywhere
    else.  Nor was there evidence that the TFG had been  taking  "excessive
    cuts from aid deliveries at Mogadishu Airport".  TFG had denied charges
    that it was diverting food aid, according to a  report  of  15  August.
    TFG had, in fact, set up committees based on civil  society  groups  in
    order to deal with the  humanitarian  disaster.   Although  there  were
    limitations on the provision of aid in the capital and elsewhere,  this
    was in part due to limitations on the amount of  international  funding
    that had  been  made  available.   Infrastructure  problems  were  also
    hampering the delivery of aid to affected areas.  A  report  in  August
    2011 indicated that a lack of fuel at Mogadishu Airport was  having  an
    effect on aid distribution.  According to a report in Allafrica.com, as
    at 31 August 2011, some 23,000 IDP  shelters  had  been  identified  in
    Mogadishu, mostly in the city's western districts, following  satellite
    surveillance on behalf of the UN Institute for Training and Research.

312.  Whilst noting the evidence regarding  checkpoints  and  roadblocks  in
    Mogadishu, following Al-Shabab's withdrawal, the  respondent  submitted
    that this did not indicate the kinds of freelance criminal  checkpoints
    referred to in the previous country guidance decisions.  There  was  no
    extortion, etc. by TFG groups on anything amounting  to  a  significant
    scale.  The UNOCHA Mogadishu influx maps of 22 August 2011 demonstrated
    significant internal movement throughout the capital for IDPs, with one
    resident being reported on 29 November as  saying  that  "I  leave  for
    Hawlwadaag district early in the morning to work and I am able to  come
    back home in the afternoon.  That would have been  a  nightmare  during
    the time of Al-Shabab."

313.  Laura Hammond provided an addendum of 26 September 2011  to  her  main
    report, to which she had spoken in evidence  in  July.   Commenting  on
    evidence to which we have earlier referred, Dr  Hammond  speculated  in
    her Addendum as to the reason for Al-Shabab's withdrawal but  concluded
    that,  whatever  the  reason,  there  had  been  a   shift   "to   more
    indiscriminate, less predictable bouts of violence", including  attacks
    on civilians in areas under TFG control.  The  Globe  and  Mail  of  16
    September 2011, in  an  article  entitled  "Fear  of  Al-Shabab  brings
    Mogadishu to a standstill", stated that  "hardly  anyone  is  declaring
    victory over the militia" and that many Somalis feared  the  civil  war
    had entered "a new phase in which an  urban  conflict  with  demarcated
    frontlines  was  turned  into  one  with  none,  filled  by   Al-Shabab
    sympathisers who easily blend into the population".

314.  As at 26 September, according to Dr Hammond,  Bakara  Market  remained
    closed to civilians, even after Al-Shabab's withdrawal  "reportedly  so
    that AMISOM/TFG forces can ensure that those traders  remaining  behind
    do not have any ties to Al-Shabab"  (Washington  Post,  19  September).
    The Mayor of Mogadishu said Bakara would open once all shopkeepers  had
    been checked for weapons and for sympathies towards  Al-Shabab.   "They
    don't need to infiltrate.  They are there in Bakara," the  Mayor  said.
    Dr Hammond confirmed that the second largest market, Sukh Ba'ad, had re-
    opened, although the price of most staple foods there was significantly
    higher than they had been during Al-Shabab's control of Bakara.

315.  Dr Hammond's conclusion, that the risk of indiscriminate violence  "is
    as great, if not greater because of their unpredictability, than it was
    before Al-Shabab's pullout" was challenged by  the  respondent  in  her
    latest submissions.  Citing the Globe  and  Mail  article,  Dr  Hammond
    submitted that Islamist militants were still active  in  the  city  and
    that there had been "occasional car  bombs  and  grenade  attacks,  and
    there have been a series of nearly a  dozen  mysterious  beheadings  of
    ordinary civilians".   The  beheadings  had  "terrified  people  here",
    according to the article.  Many Somali exiles were  holding  back  from
    returning, fearing that the insurgents simply blended into the civilian
    population "spying on the streets, identifying  enemies  and  preparing
    for more attacks".

316.  According to the Henry Jackson Society (accessed 26  September  2011),
    Al-Shabab still controlled certain neighbourhoods in Mogadishu and  the
    retreat "was not unanimous and pockets of fighters stayed in areas such
    as Huriwa and Suuqa Hoolaaha.

317.  The  clashes  between  the  TFG  and  persons  dressed  in  government
    military uniforms, already referred to, were said by Dr Hammond  to  be
    seen by some as involving Al-Shabab's having obtained access  to  these
    disguises, so as to get closer to key TFG targets, as well as  to  give
    the impression of divisions within the TFG.  Alternatively, TFG support
    was "splintering" and the uniformed militia were loyal to a  particular
    TFG leader.  Whatever the reason "the result has been that no  area  is
    considered safe, since even those areas supposedly  under  TFG  control
    may be infiltrated at any time".

318.  Dr Hammond also thought there were indications that Al-Shabab "may  be
    changing some of its tactics to include kidnapping".  She  referred  to
    an article in Shabelle News of 25 August where a businessman on his way
    to Mogadishu disappeared after he had failed to give  Al-Shabab  money.
    Reference was also made to the murder and kidnap of British tourists in
    a Kenyan resort near the Somali border.

319.  Dr Hammond concluded that it was "too soon to know for sure  what  the
    significance of Al-Shabab's withdrawal from  parts  of  Mogadishu  will
    mean in the long term" and that there have been "many  false  dawns  in
    the past, occasions when analysts and  policy  makers  have  had  their
    hopes that the tide may finally be turning in Somalia only  to  ...  be
    bitterly disappointed when the violence grew more,  rather  than  less,
    destructive.  However, for the moment, the situation in Somalia remains
    precarious and from my perspective  unsafe  for  those  who  return  to
    Somalia, particularly if they lack armed protection."

320.  On 26 September 2011 Amnesty International released a  briefing  paper
    entitled "Somalia: The Humanitarian and Human Rights Catastrophe".  The
    first part of the Briefing concerns what AI describe as the  "desperate
    humanitarian situation.  In July  and  August  this  year,  the  United
    Nations declared famine in six areas of southern and  central  Somalia:
    Bakool, Bay, Lower  Shabelle,  Middle  Shabelle,  the  Afgoye  Corridor
    displaced persons settlement and the Mogadishu displaced community."

321.  As regards the humanitarian situation in  Mogadishu,  AI  stated  that
    since the beginning of 2011 civilians' lives  in  Mogadishu  have  been
    threatened by a combination of fighting, obstacles to the  delivery  of
    humanitarian aid and the deterioration of the  humanitarian  situation.
    Although the "much publicised withdrawal of  Al-Shabab  armed  factions
    from Mogadishu on 6 August 2011 has raised hopes",  AI  considered  the
    humanitarian situation in  the  city  to  remain  "dire.   Humanitarian
    operations are being scaled up in Mogadishu but aid does not reach  all
    those in need."  During August 2011, 3092 out  of  the  7109  cases  of
    acute watery diarrhoea in south and central  Somalia  occurred  in  the
    Banadir region  of  Mogadishu.   In  September,  the  Banadir  Hospital
    reported 296 cases, 60% of which concerned children under 5 years.  The
    following  week,  the  same  hospital  reported  274  cases,  with  72%
    involving such children.

322.  Humanitarian access in Mogadishu was said to be  hampered  by  several
    factors "including insecurity, which hampers aid  operations,  concerns
    for the safety of international humanitarian workers who are  not  able
    to move freely within the capital, the sheer number of people  in  need
    of assistance; and regular movement of populations in need  within  the
    city".  Both humanitarian aid workers and the recipients  of  such  aid
    "also remain at risk of being targeted in Mogadishu.  There  have  been
    several incidents of violence  and  looting  in  camps  for  internally
    displaced persons in Mogadishu, and in food distribution sites, causing
    civilian casualties, in TFG held areas of Mogadishu."  Various specific
    instances were given.

323.  So far as concerns violence in Mogadishu between  armed  factions,  AI
    noted the UN Special Representative of the Secretary-General as  having
    "pointed out to the likelihood that Al-Shabab would increasingly resort
    to  asymmetrical  warfare,  including  hit-and-run   attacks,   suicide
    bombings and the detonation of explosives in  civilian-populated  areas
    of Mogadishu".  On 13 August the President of the TFG imposed  a  state
    of emergency on all areas of Mogadishu that had  been  vacated  by  Al-
    Shabab.  "Both sides  to  the  conflict  have  made  declarations  that
    fighting will restart further underscoring the extreme  volatility  and
    unpredictability of the situation."  Despite the announced  withdrawal,
    insecurity  remained  high  for  civilians  with   the   World   Health
    Organisation recording 570 casualties from weapon-related  injuries  in
    three hospitals in Mogadishu during August 2011.  AI  considered  these
    statistics to be "only indicative, as the number of deaths on  site  is
    not known".  Although indiscriminate artillery  attacks  were  said  to
    have reduced, "pockets of fighting between Al-Shabab fighters  and  the
    TFG and its allies still remain, notably in the  Darkhenley  and  Karan
    districts".  Various specific instances were described, taken from  the
    Protection Cluster Update of the Interagency Standing Committee.  On  4
    September, mortars were fired near the Presidential Palace,  where  the
    consultative  meeting  between  Somali   political   actors   and   the
    international community was taking  place.   Further  mortar  fire  was
    reported on 7 September.  Hand grenade incidents occurred on 22  August
    and on 27 August a child was killed and two others injured when an  IED
    detonated in Karan Market.  IEDs have been found by TFG forces in areas
    vacated by Al-Shabab.

324.  Fighting between rival TFG units was  said  to  have  occurred  on  30
    August, when seven people at least were killed, including  a  civilian,
    and on 4 September,  as  TFG  forces  and  militias  clashed  over  the
    dismantlement of checkpoints (Protection Cluster Update).

325.  AI noted the reports of Al-Shabab executions in  Mogadishu,  including
    decapitations, as well as the killing in Karan of a man and his mother.

326.  A TFG military court established in 2009 was said increasingly  to  be
    handing down  death  sentences,  with  two  TFG  soldiers  executed  in
    Mogadishu on 22 August.  AI was  concerned  that  the  trials  did  not
    respect basic fair trial standards.


The Tribunal's findings

327.    Although  it  is  conventional,   in   assessing   an   individual's
    entitlement to international protection,  to  begin  with  the  Refugee
    Convention, moving on  to  consider  subsidiary  protection  under  the
    Qualification Directive only if entitlement to  refugee  protection  is
    not found, we have decided that this would not be the most  appropriate
    method of presenting our findings on the general evidence. The  way  in
    which the appeals were argued, the  weight  of  the  evidence  and  the
    significance of Sufi & Elmi all pointed, as regards Mogadishu,  towards
    an analysis that concentrated upon Article 15(c) and Article 3  of  the
    ECHR. So far as the position is concerned  elsewhere  in  southern  and
    central Somalia, the Refugee Convention  loomed  much  larger,  and  is
    engaged in the case of several of the appellants; but we  have  decided
    to adopt the same order of analysis of the general evidence, partly for
    consistency, but mainly because the significance of  RT  (Zimbabwe)  in
    the case of those at risk of living under Al-Shabab is best appreciated
    once one has examined the position in terms of Article 3.


(a) Article 15(c)

328.  One might have thought that, in the light of Elgafaji  and  QD  (Iraq)
    the law on Article 15(c) was now reasonably  settled,  so  far  as  the
    United Kingdom was concerned.  That law was conveniently summarised  at
    [67] of HM (Iraq):

         "a.      The Article seeks to elevate the  state  practice  of  not
             returning  unsuccessful  asylum  seekers  to  war   zones   or
             situations of armed anarchy for  reasons  of  common  humanity
             into a minimum standard (QD at [21]).


         b. The scope of protection is an autonomous concept  distinct  from
             and broader than Art 3 protection even as interpreted  by  the
             European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in NA v United  Kingdom
             (Elgafaji at [33]-[36]; QD at [20], [35]); HH and  Others)  at
             [31]).


         c. It is concerned with '"threat .. to a civilian's life or person"
             rather than to specific acts of  violence  ..  the  threat  is
             inherent in a general situation of   ..  armed  conflict...The
             violence that  gives  rise  to  the  threat  is  described  as
             indiscriminate, a term which implies that  it  may  extend  to
             people irrespective of their personal circumstances' (Elgafaji
             [34]).


         d. The Article is intended  to  cover  the  'real  risks  and  real
             threats  presented  by  the   kinds   of   endemic   acts   of
             indiscriminate violence - the placing of car bombs  in  market
             places; snipers firing methodically at people in  the  streets
             - which have come  to  disfigure  the  modern  world'.  It  is
             concerned with 'serious threats of real harm' (QD at [27]  and
             [31]).


         e. 'Individual' must be understood as covering  harm  to  civilians
             irrespective  of  their   identity   where   the   degree   of
             indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  armed  conflict
             taking place  reaches  such  a  high  level  that  substantial
             grounds are shown  for  believing  that  a  civilian  ...would
             solely on account of his presence on the territory...  face  a
             real risk of being subjected to the serious threat'  (Elgafaji
             [35]).


         f. 'The more the applicant is able to show that he is  specifically
             affected by reason of  factors   particular  to  his  personal
             circumstances, the lower the level of indiscriminate  violence
             required' (Elgafaji [39]).


         g.  A  consistent  pattern  of  mistreatment  is  not  a  necessary
             requirement to meet the  real  harm  standard.  'The  risk  of
             random injury or death which indiscriminate  violence  carries
             is the converse of consistency' (QD at [32]).


         h. There is no requirement that the armed conflict itself  must  be
             exceptional but there must be 'an intensity of  indiscriminate
             violence great enough to meet the test spelt out by  the  ECJ'
             and this will  self  evidently  not  characterise  every  such
             situation (QD at [36]).


         i. 'The overriding purpose of Article 15(c) is  to  give  temporary
             refuge to people whose safety is placed in serious jeopardy by
             indiscriminate violence, it cannot matter whether  the  source
             of the violence is two or more warring factions (which is what
             conflict would ordinarily  suggest)  or  a  single  entity  or
             faction' (QD at [35]).


         j. 'Civilian' means all genuine non-combatants at the time when the
             serious threat of real harm may materialise (QD [37])."

329.  The ECtHR's judgment in Sufi & Elmi  has,  however,  cast  some  doubt
    over the proposition summarised at [67b] of HM.  In order to understand
    the issue it is necessary to remind ourselves of what the CJEU said  in
    Elgafaji:-

         "31.     ... it is  appropriate  to  compare  the  three  types  of
             'serious harm' defined in Article 15 of the  Directive,  which
             constitute the qualification for subsidiary protection, where,
             in accordance with Article 2(e) of the Directive,  substantial
             grounds have been shown for believing that the applicant faces
             'a real risk of [such]  harm'  if  returned  to  the  relevant
             country.


         32.      In that regard, it must be noted  that  the  terms  'death
             penalty', 'execution' and 'torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading
             treatment or punishment of an  applicant  in  the  country  of
             origin', used in Article 15(a) and (b) of the Directive, cover
             situations in which the applicant for subsidiary protection is
             specifically exposed to the risk of a particular type of harm.




         33.      By contrast, the harm defined  in  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Directive as consisting of a 'serious and individual threat to
             [the applicant's] life or person' covers a more  general  risk
             of harm.


         34.      Reference is made, more generally, to a 'threat ...  to  a
             civilian's life or person' rather than  to  specific  acts  of
             violence.  Furthermore, that threat is inherent in  a  general
             situation  of  'international  or  internal  armed  conflict'.
             Lastly, the violence in question  which  gives  rise  to  that
             threat is described as 'indiscriminate', a term which  implies
             that it may extend to people irrespective  of  their  personal
             circumstances.


         35.      In that context, the word 'individual' must be  understood
             as covering harm to civilians irrespective of their  identity,
             where the degree of indiscriminate violence characterising the
             armed conflict taking place assessed by the competent national
             authorities  before  which  an  application   for   subsidiary
             protection is made, or by the courts  of  a  Member  State  to
             which a decision refusing  such  an  application  is  referred
             reaches such a high level that substantial grounds  are  shown
             for believing  that  a  civilian,  returned  to  the  relevant
             country or, as the case may be, to the relevant region, would,
             solely on account of his presence on  the  territory  of  that
             country or region, face a real risk of being  subject  to  the
             serious threat referred in Article 15(c) of the Directive.


         36.      That  interpretation,  which  is  likely  to  ensure  that
             Article  15(c)  of  the  Directive  has  its  own   field   of
             application, is not invalidated by the wording of  recital  26
             in the preamble to the Directive, according to which  '[r]isks
             to which a population  of  a  country  or  a  section  of  the
             population is generally exposed  do  normally  not  create  in
             themselves an individual threat which would qualify as serious
             harm'.


         37.      While that recital  implies  that  the  objective  finding
             alone of a risk linked to the general situation in  a  country
             is not, as a rule, sufficient to establish that the conditions
             set out in Article 15(c) of the Directive  have  been  met  in
             respect of a specific person, its wording nevertheless  allows
             by the use of the word 'normally' for the  possibility  of  an
             exceptional situation which would be characterised by  such  a
             high degree of risk that substantial grounds  would  be  shown
             for believing that that person would be  subject  individually
             to the risk in question.


         38.      The exceptional nature of that situation is also confirmed
             by the fact that the relevant protection is subsidiary, and by
             the broad logic of Article 15 of the Directive,  as  the  harm
             defined in paragraphs (a) and (b) of that article  requires  a
             clear degree of individualisation.   While  it  is  admittedly
             true that collective factors play a significant  role  in  the
             application of Article 15(c) of the  Directive,  in  that  the
             person concerned belongs, like other people, to  a  circle  of
             potential victims of indiscriminate violence in situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict, it  is  nevertheless
             the case that that provision must be  subject  to  a  coherent
             interpretation  in  relation  to  the  other  two   situations
             referred  to  in  Article  15  of  the  Directive  and   must,
             therefore,  be  interpreted  by  close   reference   to   that
             individualisation.


         39.      In that regard, the more the applicant  is  able  to  show
             that  he  is  specifically  affected  by  reason  of   factors
             particular to his personal circumstances, the lower the  level
             of indiscriminate violence required for him to be eligible for
             subsidiary protection."

330.  In Sufi & Elmi, the ECtHR said:-

         "225.    In Elgafaji the ECJ  held  that  article  15(c)  would  be
             violated where substantial grounds were  shown  for  believing
             that a civilian, returned  to  the  relevant  country,  would,
             solely on account of his presence on  the  territory  of  that
             country or region, face a real risk of being  subjected  to  a
             threat of serious harm.  In order to demonstrate such  a  risk
             he was not required  to  adduce  evidence  that  he  would  be
             specifically targeted by reason of factors particular  to  his
             personal  circumstances  (Elgafaji,   cited   above      35).
             Nevertheless, the ECJ considered that such a  situation  would
             be 'exceptional' and the more the applicant could show that he
             was specifically affected by reason of factors  particular  to
             his  personal  circumstances,   the   lower   the   level   of
             indiscriminate violence required for him to  be  eligible  for
             subsidiary protection (Elgafaji, cited above,  39).


         226.      The  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  is  limited  to   the
             interpretation of the Convention and it would not,  therefore,
             be appropriate for it to express any views  on  the  ambit  or
             scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Direction  [sic].
             However, based on the ECJ's interpretation  in  Elgafaji,  the
             Court is not persuaded that Article 3 of  the  Convention,  as
             interpreted in NA, does not  offer  comparable  protection  to
             that afforded under the Directive.  In  particular,  it  notes
             that the threshold set by both provisions may, in  exceptional
             circumstances, be attained in consequence of  a  situation  of
             general violence of  such  intensity  that  any  person  being
             returned to the region in question would be at risk simply  on
             account of their presence there."

331.   Article 3 of the ECHR provides that "no-one  shall  be  subjected  to
    torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment".   Article
    15(b)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  provides  that  serious  harm
    consists of "torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of
    an applicant in the country of origin".  Given the  identical  wording,
    so far as concerns treatment etc in  the  country  of  origin,  we  are
    apparently left in the position that the CJEU has held that there is  a
    difference between Article 15(b) and (c), whereas the ECtHR, in effect,
    does not consider there to be a difference between the ambit of Article
    3 ECHR and Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive.   That,  at
    least, seems to be so, if one reads "under the Directive" in  [226]  as
    referring to Article 15(c) rather than Article 15(b), as it  seems  one
    must.

332.  As the ECtHR acknowledges at [226], it  is  not  the  jurisdiction  of
    that Court to interpret the Qualification Directive.  That is  the  job
    of the CJEU, which they have discharged (for the present at  least)  in
    Elgafaji.  However, the difficulty remains, that the ECtHR  appears  in
    Sufi & Elmi to be giving Article 3 ECHR a wider "field of  application"
    than the CJEU is prepared to give Article 15(b)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive (even making allowances for the different wording designed to
    prevent Article 15(b) being used in "ill-health" cases where  the  risk
    is said in part to arise from the lack of host State treatment).

333.  Having said this, it is, as  the  ECtHR  states,  established  that  a
    general situation of violence in a place of destination can  cross  the
    Article 3 threshold.  In NA v United Kingdom, the  Court  reviewed  its
    case law, concluding that it had "rarely found a violation of Article 3
    on that ground alone" [114].  Having surveyed its case  law  the  Court
    held that it  "has  never  excluded  the  possibility  that  a  general
    situation of violence  in  a  country  of  destination  will  be  of  a
    sufficient level of intensity as to entail that any removal to it would
    necessarily breach Article 3  of  the  Convention.   Nevertheless,  the
    Court would adopt such approach only  in  the  most  extreme  cases  of
    general violence, where there was a real risk of  ill-treatment  simply
    by virtue of an individual being exposed to such  violence  on  return"
    [115].

334.  The position appears, therefore, to be that, on a  particular  set  of
    the facts, general violence in a place is so serious and intense as  to
    cross the Article 3/Article 15(b) threshold and, in so doing, it  would
    also necessarily cross the threshold required for Article  15(c).   The
    binding case law of Elgafaji, however, makes it plain that the converse
    is not true; in other words, Article 15(c)  can  be  satisfied  without
    there being such a level of intensity of violence as  is  required  for
    Article 3 to apply as a general matter. How this  is  achieved  is  not
    precisely articulated by the CJEU, but seems to involve the fact  that,
    as the Luxembourg Court found at [33] of Elgafaji, Article 15(c) covers
    "a more general risk of harm" than does Article 3 of the ECHR. To  this
    may be added the observation that the nature of  the  harm  in  Article
    15(c)  includes  matters  less  severe  than  encompassed  by   Article
    15(b)/Article 3 ECHR.

335. At first sight, the use of the test of exceptionality, inherent in  the
    ECtHR's language in [115] of NA v United Kingdom and explicit  in  [38]
    of Elgafaji might seem to confine the application of Article 15(c)  and
    Article 3 in situations of generalised  violence  to  the  same  narrow
    ambit. But that this is not, in reality, the case can be seen, not only
    from what we have just observed about the nature of the risk and of the
    harm, but also from what Sedley LJ held in QD (Iraq):


    "Nor, however, has the judgment [in Elgafaji] introduced an  additional
    test  of  exceptionality.  By  using  the   words   "exceptional"   and
    "exceptionally" it is simply stressing  that  it  is  not  every  armed
    conflict or violent situation which will attract the protection of  art
    15(c), but only one where the level of violence is such  that,  without
    anything to render them a particular target, civilians face real  risks
    to their life or personal safety" [25].

336.   The  appellants  contended  that  the  AIT  in  GS  (Article   15(c):
    indiscriminate violence) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00044  were  wrong
    to hold at [71] that  relevant  forms  of  harm  protected  against  by
    Article 15(c) should not extend to questions  of  "dignity".   Reliance
    was placed on Recital (10) to the Qualification Directive:-

         "(10)     This  Directive  respects  the  fundamental  rights   and
             observes  the  principles  recognised  in  particular  by  the
             Charter of Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union.   In
             particular this Directive seeks to  ensure  full  respect  for
             human dignity and the right to asylum of applicants for asylum
             and their accompanying family members."

337.  Also relied on by the appellants was Article 61  of  the  consolidated
    version of the EU Treaty, which mandates the progressive  establishment
    of  "an  area  of  freedom,  security  and  justice"   which   includes
    "safeguarding the rights of nationals of third countries".  As we  have
    already indicated, the law as expounded  in  Elgafaji,  which  we  must
    follow, together with QD (Iraq), which we must also  follow,  makes  it
    apparent that Article 15(c) has a  wider  sphere  of  application  than
    Article 15(b).  That sphere or "field of application"  was  articulated
    by the CJEU in its judgment.  In doing so, the CJEU made  no  reference
    to Recital (10) and concepts  of  "dignity",  whether  in  relation  to
    Article 15(c) or more generally.  Nor did it refer to  the  EU  Treaty.
    We agree with Mr Eicke that Recital (10)  does  more  than  acknowledge
    that the substantive  provisions  of  the  Directive  are  regarded  as
    meeting this aim.  Still less do we find that Article 61 of the  Treaty
    has any relevance.

338.  We have carefully considered  all  the  evidence,  in  particular  the
    statistics relating to civilian deaths and injuries  in  Mogadishu,  in
    the period since that considered in AM &  AM.  We  have  not,  however,
    excluded from our consideration  statistics  regarding  combatants  and
    those statistics which do not make plain whether  the  casualties  were
    combatants. Whilst combatants are of course not "civilians" within  the
    ambit of Article 15(c), combatant casualties in an urban area in  which
    many civilians are present can help in assessing the risk to  civilians
    of indiscriminate violence. They are part of the holistic assessment of
    all the relevant evidence, which must lead to the  value  judgement  of
    whether there exists a sufficiently serious risk of Article 15(c) harm.

339. On the state of the evidence  as  it  was  in  July  2011,  before  Al-
    Shabab's withdrawal from Mogadishu, we have concluded  that,  for  most
    returnees from the United  Kingdom,  having  to  live  or  stay  for  a
    significant period of time in Mogadishu  would  have  exposed  them  to
    Article 15(c) risk.  Whilst we accept the  respondent's  evidence  that
    the CIA World Fact Book gives a "crude death rate" for Somalia at  June
    2011 as 14.87  per  thousand,  which  is  lower  than  various  African
    countries including Nigeria and  South  Africa,  and  also  lower  than
    Russia, the statistical evidence regarding Mogadishu, together with the
    evidence regarding the behaviour of the combatants,  indicated  plainly
    that the armed conflict was one which affected the lives  of  civilians
    in the way encompassed by Article 15(c).  That was so,  notwithstanding
    the evidence which indicated that most civilian casualties arose in and
    around Bakara Market and that the TFG had recently announced  it  would
    no longer shell that area whenever it came under attack from  Al-Shabab
    elements situated there.

340.  Although we accept the  respondent's  evidence  regarding  the  battle
    lines that had formed in Mogadishu, prior to Al-Shabab's withdrawal, as
    a result of which TFG-controlled areas in the south of  the  city  were
    not part of the main conflict zone, the appellants' evidence, which  we
    have cited above, indicated not only that  -  immediately  before  that
    withdrawal - such areas were not "safe" (a standard far lower than that
    required for  Article  15(c))  but  that  they  remained  places  where
    civilians could properly be said to run Article 15(c) risks, both  from
    the asymmetrical warfare which Al-Shabab was even then tending  to  use
    in those areas but  also  from  undisciplined  elements  of  the  TFG's
    forces.

341.  We agree with the appellants that it is not  possible  to  derive  any
    positive conclusion, so far as Article 15(c) risk  is  concerned,  from
    recent influxes of IDPs into Mogadishu.  The fact that Mogadishu  might
    have been perceived by a starving person  from  the  countryside  as  a
    better option than remaining at home to suffer and possibly die in  the
    current famine was more indicative of the extremely serious  nature  of
    the humanitarian position in  southern  and  central  Somalia,  outside
    Mogadishu, than it was evidence of any  improvement  in  Article  15(c)
    risk, prior to the Al-Shabab withdrawal.

342. It is common ground  between  the  parties  that  Al-Shabab's  military
    withdrawal  from  Mogadishu  is  of  significance;   but   both   sides
    nevertheless contended that it made no difference to  the  stance  they
    had respectively adopted at the hearing and in  their  closing  written
    submissions. The appellants submitted that there were still  Article  3
    ECHR and QD Article 15(c) risks in the city; the  respondent  submitted
    that there were still no such risks.

343. So far as Article 15(c) is  concerned,  the  main  consequence  of  the
    withdrawal is that there are currently no longer  any  military  "front
    lines" cutting across Mogadishu, with resultant risk  to  civilians  of
    being caught in  crossfire  between  contending  conventional  fighting
    forces. In particular, there is no longer any need for  the  TFG/AMISOM
    to shell Bakara Market (or any temptation to do so), since there is  no
    longer any (or any significant) Al-Shabab  military  presence  in  that
    part of the capital.

344. Given the preponderance of  civilian  casualties  were  in  the  Bakara
    area, this development clearly has  a  bearing  on  the  assessment  of
    Article 15(c) risk, of more significance than  the  previous  evidence,
    which depended on taking a view as  to  whether  the  TFG/AMISOM  would
    honour their word not to shell the Market, if attacked from  there.  We
    have, however, concluded that an Article 15(c) risk continues to  exist
    for the majority of those returning to Mogadishu after any  significant
    period of time spent abroad. Our reasons are as follows.

345. Despite our rejection of the  appellants'  submissions  to  the  effect
    that the respondent bears a  legal  burden  of  showing  that  a  place
    previously unsafe has become safe, it is the case, as the Tribunal said
    in EM and others, that any assessment that material circumstances  have
    changed,  will  need  to  demonstrate  that  "such  changes  are   well
    established evidentially and durable". The durability of the  situation
    brought about by Al-Shabab's withdrawal is clearly problematic,  viewed
    as at October 2011, which is no doubt why the respondent contended that
    the position had essentially changed earlier, with the announcement  of
    the TFG/AMISOM "no retaliation" policy regarding Bakara Market, coupled
    with the relatively  stable  position  of  the  Southern  districts  of
    Mogadishu, which  were  already  in  the  control  of  the  TFG/AMISOM.
    However, we have serious doubts whether  the  policy  would  have  been
    maintained, or would be maintained if Al-Shabab were to  return,  given
    the clear evidence as to past promises being broken.  We  have  already
    explained  why,  for  the  ordinary  inhabitant,  there  is   still   a
    significant  risk  of  harm  from  conflict-related  incidents  in  the
    southern districts. Thus, the only factor to which  it  is  at  present
    appropriate to have regard is the recent withdrawal of  Al-Shabab;  and
    that cannot yet be said to be durable, however much one might  hope  it
    will be.

346. In fact, the  latest  evidence  indicates  that  conventional  fighting
    between Al-Shabab and the TFG/AMISOM may not have  entirely  ceased  in
    Mogadishu, in that there are reports of clashes, involving mortars,  in
    certain northern districts of the city. Elsewhere,  there  are  plainly
    significant and disturbing reports of the kind of asymmetrical  warfare
    which Al-Shabab was using to an extent, behind the  government  forces'
    lines, even before the withdrawal, and to which there is good reason to
    fear they  may  make  greater  resort,  following  the  withdrawal.  We
    entirely understand the respondent's criticisms of Dr Hammond's updated
    report, insofar as it might be interpreted as being based on  assertion
    instead of hard evidence. But, given the recent  history  of  Mogadishu
    and the starting point provided by the conclusions in AM & AM, it would
    be wrong to rush to the conclusion that there is no real  risk  of  Al-
    Shabab adopting and being able to implement such a tactic.

347.  As part of the holistic assessment we must make,  regard  clearly  has
    to be had to the current humanitarian crisis  in  Mogadishu.  The  most
    recent evidence includes the declaration of famine  in  the  IDP  camps
    located in the city. Although the distribution of food is proceeding in
    a commendable fashion,  there  are  still  serious  problems  regarding
    malnutrition and disease, as well as gross overcrowding. These  factors
    bear on Article 15(c) risk in two ways. First, they make it  impossible
    to find, as a general matter, that someone  involuntarily  returned  to
    Mogadishu is not at risk of ending up in one  of  the  districts  where
    conventional (in any event, significant) fighting is  still  occurring.
    Second, as regards all but the better-off or  best-protected  citizens,
    the direct and indirect effects of the humanitarian crisis  are  likely
    to be such as to diminish their capacity for vigilance, as regards such
    things as  IEDs,  unexploded  ordinance,  opportunistic  criminals  and
    continuing Al-Shabab elements intent on spreading fear by intimidation,
    kidnapping and beheading.

348.  We are conscious of the evidence, disputed  by  the  appellants,  that
    returnees from the United Kingdom may be given  up  to  1,500  by  the
    United Kingdom in order to assist resettlement  and  reintegration.  We
    are, however, unable to find that a person who stands to get such funds
    will thereby be able, as a general matter, to surmount the problems  we
    have just mentioned, at least in all but the immediate term.

349. As well as the latest evidence of such behaviour on  the  part  of  Al-
    Shabab, there is evidence of a far smaller, but  nonetheless  material,
    risk from rogue elements of the TFG, operating in  Mogadishu,  who  may
    seek directly to harm ordinary people, such as by robbery, or else  may
    pose an indirect risk, by fighting amongst themselves or with  official
    elements.

350.  Putting all this together, we conclude that, as at the  present  time,
    an Article 15(c) risk exists, as a general matter, in  respect  of  the
    majority of those in Mogadishu and, as a general matter,  as  to  those
    returning there from the United Kingdom.

351.  Who might fall within an exception  to  that  finding?  Reference  has
    already been made to the  evidence  regarding  voluntary  returnees  to
    Mogadishu, such as businessmen.  The appellants urged us  not  to  draw
    from this  evidence  any  conclusion  favourable  to  the  respondent's
    position, contending  that  the  fact  that  certain  individuals  were
    prepared to run a high degree of risk, for example to  make  a  profit,
    was not evidence that the risk did not exist.  That risk should not  be
    borne by those, such as the appellants, who were not willing to run it.

352.  We also note the appellants' criticism of the finding  in  AM  and  AM
    that those connected with extremely powerful actors would  not  run  an
    Article 15(c) risk by returning to Mogadishu.  The ECtHR in Sufi & Elmi
    decided, in any event, to circumscribe that category  by  reference  to
    powerful actors at the "highest level".

353.  Whilst we fully accept that some  returnees,  whether  businessmen  or
    those Somalis from the Diaspora returning to engage in  NGO  work,  may
    well do so in the teeth of a real risk of serious  harm,  the  evidence
    regarding returnees is, we consider, such as to make  it  inconceivable
    that it is only those risk-takers who choose to return to Mogadishu.

354.  The evidence regarding the  busy  nature  of  Mogadishu  International
    Airport has already been  mentioned.   In  her  "Care  and  Compassion"
    report,  Dr  Hammond  described  a  survey  of  private  investors   in
    Somaliland (40) Puntland (29) and south/central Somalia (18):-

         "One of the most interesting findings from  this  survey  was  that
         88.9% of the respondents in south/central Somalia had lived  abroad
         at some time.  The main countries that they had lived in  were  the
         United  Arab  Emirates  and  United   Kingdom   (each   with   four
         respondents) as well as Canada (two respondents)."

      The report continues:-

         "Respondents  from  the  private  sector  included  hotel   owners,
         cosmetics importers, sales companies, electricity  providers,  care
         organisations, fuel providers, medical and drug vendors,  furniture
         importers,   barbers,   sweet   sellers,    transport    operators,
         telecommunications companies,  export  agents,  fishing  companies,
         media representatives, a cell phone repairer, a banking company, an
         electronics importer, a remittance company, agricultural investors,
         a  goldsmith,  stationers,  importers  of  construction  materials,
         educational providers,  restaurant  owners,  water  providers,  and
         other trades and businesses.  Organisations in Somaliland tended to
         be older (37.5% had been operating for at least ten years), whereas
         in Puntland and south central they were younger (68.9% in  Puntland
         and 70.6% in south central had been operating  for  less  than  ten
         years)."

      Earlier in the same report we find:-

         "Interviewees who are involved in the private sector stressed  that
         some space for business can be negotiated for business  in  Somalia
         despite the threats  from  militias,  Al-Shabab,  and  corrupt  TFG
         officials.  Businesses are generally able to rely on  clan  support
         to deter criminal attacks on  their  holdings,  and  can  work  out
         arrangements to  move  goods  across  insecure  zones.   Remittance
         companies, for instance, are able to work with very large  sums  of
         cash and rarely experience armed robbery.   However,  as  discussed
         below  some  people  in  the  Diaspora  said  that  the  insecurity
         dissuaded them from becoming involved in business."

355.  We have already referred to Mr Burns' evidence  regarding  businessmen
    and also other travellers.  Mr Burns said  in  oral  evidence  that  he
    travelled to Mogadishu once every  eight  weeks.   He  "confirmed  that
    people did return to join  their  families  for  holidays  and  younger
    Somalis who had never been to Somalia wanted to come and  see  what  it
    was like.  Others came for marriage and some brought their daughters to
    be circumcised."  When it was put to him that  there  was  no  evidence
    that those returning for family visits were  badly  treated,  Mr  Burns
    "agreed that he had not seen any such evidence  but  stated  that  such
    returnees did not travel around, would remain in  the  family  compound
    and then leave.  He stated that when he visited Somalia he  never  left
    the compound."

356.  It is simply not possible to conclude from this evidence that all  who
    choose to return to Mogadishu at the present time  do  so  against  the
    background of a real risk to life or person.  We accept  that  many  of
    those who come  would  be  prepared  to  tolerate  living  in  confined
    circumstances, such as a residential compound, for a limited period  of
    time, but that to expect a person  to  return  permanently  to  such  a
    situation is a different matter (a point noted at [173] of AM and AM).

357.  Nevertheless, the evidence before us points to there being a  category
    of middle class or professional persons in Mogadishu who can live to  a
    reasonable standard, in circumstances where  the  Article  15(c)  risk,
    which exists for the great majority of the population, does not  apply.
    A returnee from  the  United  Kingdom  to  such  a  milieu  would  not,
    therefore, run an Article 15(c) risk, even if forcibly  returned.  Into
    this category we place those who by reason  of  their  connection  with
    "powerful actors", such as the TFG/AMISOM, will be able  to  avoid  the
    generalised risk. The appellants argued that no such  category  exists;
    but we reject that submission. Indeed, the category that  emerges  from
    the evidence is wider than the "powerful actors" exception, and  covers
    those whose socio-economic position provides them  with  the  requisite
    protection, without running the risk of assassination faced by those in
    or associated with the TFG.

358. The significance  of  the  category  we  have  identified  should  not,
    however, be overstated.  For most people in Mogadishu the Article 15(c)
    risk persists, at the present time.  In the  case  of  a  claimant  for
    international protection, a fact-finder would need to be satisfied that
    there were cogent grounds for finding that  the  claimant  fell  within
    such a category.

359.  We have had close regard to the views of  the  UNHCR  which  are  that
    Article 15(c) conditions pertain across the entirety  of  southern  and
    central Somalia, including Mogadishu, such that all  civilians  are  at
    risk of indiscriminate violence,  by  reason  only  of  their  presence
    there.  We note that, in areas taken by pro-TFG  militias,  whether  in
    Mogadishu or outside, there is evidence that Al-Shabab  "have  reverted
    to guerrilla-style attacks ... including roadside bombs, which is again
    reminiscent of the  insurgency  against  the  TFG  and  Ethiopian  army
    between 2007 and 2009" (June 2011 update to the Eligibility Guidelines,
    para 3.5).

360.  Although we accept, per Mr Hickman, that UNHCR holds the view it  does
    about Article 15(c), it is not the case that the Eligibility Guidelines
    themselves specifically state that such an Article 15(c) risk  pertains
    in  southern  and  central  Somalia.  At  Part  IVA  of  the  May  2010
    Guidelines, which sets out the "General Approach"  to  eligibility  for
    international protection, the only  specific  international  Convention
    cited is the OAU Convention of 1969.   Article  1(1)  of  that  defines
    "refugee" in terms replicating Article 1(A) of the Refugee  Convention.
    For those not meeting these criteria,  the  Guidelines  recommend  that
    they "should be granted international  protection  under  the  extended
    refugee definition in Article 1(2) of the OAU Convention.  In States in
    which the OAU Convention does  not  apply,  a  complementary/subsidiary
    form of protection  should  be  granted  under  relevant  national  and
    regional frameworks."

361.  Article 1(2) of the  OAU  Convention  is,  upon  inspection,  in  very
    different terms from that of Article 15(c):-

         "2.      The term 'refugee' shall also apply to every  person  who,
             owing to external aggression, occupation,  foreign  domination
             and events seriously disturbing public order in either part or
             the  whole  of  his  country  of  origin  or  nationality,  is
             compelled to leave his place of habitual residence in order to
             seek refugee in another place outside his country of origin or
             nationality."

362.  In Part I (Armed conflict in Southern and Central Somalia),  there  is
    a specific reference to  Article  15(c),  in  the  context  of  UNHCR's
    conclusion that an Article 15(c) risk extends across the whole of  that
    part of the country. But the source cited in the footnote in support of
    this proposition is AM & AM, which, as we have seen, found that it  was
    only in Mogadishu that the level of severity of  the  conflict  was  so
    grave as to place the great majority of the population at risk  of  the
    harm described in Article 15(c). Be that as it may, we do not  consider
    that we should go beyond having very  careful  regard  to  the  UNHCR's
    views, and "accept the assessment set out in the Eligibility Guidelines
    on Somalia update", as Mr Hickman contended  at  [35]  of  his  written
    submissions.  Nor do we accept the  submission  that  those  Guidelines
    represent "the most comprehensive analysis of the security situation in
    Somalia".  Their methodology is sound, the range  of  external  sources
    wide and the organisation itself well placed to give  its  own  highly-
    informed view.  The Guidelines nevertheless form only  a  part  of  the
    evidential matrix which the parties to  the  present  proceedings  have
    assembled.

363.  Before leaving  the  issue  of  Article  15(c)  in  Mogadishu,  it  is
    necessary to say something with an eye to the use that will be made  of
    our country guidance findings in the next  few  weeks  and  months.  In
    assessing cases before them, judicial fact-finders will have to  decide
    whether the evidence is the same or similar to that before us (Practice
    Direction 12). To the extent it is not, they are not required to regard
    our findings as authoritative. As we have emphasised, it is simply  not
    possible on the evidence before us to state that the changes  resulting
    from Al-Shabab's withdrawal from Mogadishu  are  sufficiently  durable.
    Far too much is presently contingent. As time passes, however,  it  may
    well be that judicial  fact-finders  are  able  to  conclude  that  the
    necessary element of durability has been satisfied.  How,  if  at  all,
    that impacts on the assessment of  risk  on  return  will,  of  course,
    depend on all the other evidence.


(b) Article 3

Armed conflict

364.  Even before the recent withdrawal of Al-Shabab forces from  Mogadishu,
    we consider that the evidence we have been given as to the position  in
    that city, up to July 2011, is such that we  are  entitled  to  make  a
    different finding regarding Article 3 and Mogadishu, than that  of  the
    ECtHR in Sufi & Elmi.  Before that withdrawal, the evidence before  us,
    in particular the oral and written evidence of  the  expert  witnesses,
    was not such as to show that anyone in the city was  at  real  risk  of
    Article 3 harm by reason only of their presence  there.   Although  the
    ECtHR  had  before  it  evidence   regarding   returns   to   Mogadishu
    International Airport, this was largely contained  in  the  UKBA  Fact-
    Finding Mission report, which, as we have seen, the ECtHR  regarded  as
    carrying  less  weight  than  we  have  seen  fit  to  give  it.   More
    particularly, however, it does not appear that the ECtHR was  aware  of
    the extent and  scale  of  businesses  operating  in  Mogadishu  or  of
    voluntary returns from the Somali Diaspora, including the  reasons  for
    such returns.

365. We are mindful that [178] and [179] of AM & AM suggested that,  in  the
    period examined in that case, an Article 3 risk existed in Mogadishu by
    reason of the armed conflict then prevailing in that city. However, the
    evidence before us makes it  sufficiently  clear  that,  before  August
    2011, the position had for some time been materially different. A front
    line  across  Mogadishu  had  emerged,   with   conventional   fighting
    increasingly being confined to certain areas.  In  more  recent  times,
    there had been an absence of the large-scale displacement of  civilians
    out of Mogadishu,  about  which  the  Tribunal  in  AM  &  AM  received
    evidence, and which it regarded as significant indicators of  the  high
    level of risk faced by civilians in the capital at that time.

366.  In any event, the Al-Shabab withdrawal in  August  2011  in  our  view
    constitutes evidence which means that it can no longer be said that any
    person in Mogadishu, regardless of his  or  her  circumstances,  is  at
    Article 3 risk from the armed  conflict  there.   As  we  have  already
    explained, we do not consider  that  the  evidence  of  the  withdrawal
    means, as at the present date, that it can  safely  be  said  that  the
    generality of the population no longer faces  an  Article  15(c)  risk.
    Those reasons, however, do not apply in relation to Article 3. This  is
    so despite the issue of the "durability" of the new situation being, at
    first sight, the same for both provisions. It is plain from NA v United
    Kingdom that the circumstances  required  in  order  to  make  good  an
    Article 3 claim purely by reference to a general situation of  violence
    need to be exceptionally grave.   There  is  on  any  rational  view  a
    significant  and  immediately  apparent  difference  between  an  armed
    conflict between opposing forces, contending for a  city  (albeit  with
    attendant asymmetrical attacks by one of the parties) and  the  absence
    (or relative absence) of  overt  conventional  conflict.  There  is  no
    evidence we have seen to indicate that Al-Shabab's conventional  forces
    remain poised outside Mogadishu, ready to  re-enter  the  city  at  any
    time. The situation is, thus, sufficiently "durable" to  compel  us  to
    find that - even if (contrary to paragraph 364 above) an Article 3 risk
    had existed immediately before Al-Shabab's withdrawal  -  it  does  not
    exist at present.

367.  The consequence of the latest turn of events seems to us to be a  good
    illustration of the different "field of operation" for  Article  15(c),
    identified by the CJEU in Elgafaji, as examined by us at paragraphs 328
    to 335 above. The availability of Article 15(c)  enables  international
    protection to be afforded in circumstances where the truly  exceptional
    circumstances required by NA v United Kingdom do not pertain. There  is
    thus no justification for succumbing to the temptation of diluting  the
    test for finding an Article 3 risk by reason  of  generalised  violence
    (or, we might add, of the corresponding test for Article 15(b) harm).


Humanitarian situation

368.  The humanitarian situation in Mogadishu, though very serious,  is  not
    so grave as in the  countryside,  despite  the  declaration  of  famine
    conditions in the city's IDP camps. Aid is being delivered to those  in
    such camps much more easily than in  other  areas,  particularly  those
    where difficulties are still being experienced with  Al-Shabab.  It  is
    rural refugees, rather than established residents of Mogadishu, who are
    having to live in such camps. A returnee from the United Kingdom may be
    able to avoid having to go to an IDP camp,  even  though,  as  we  have
    earlier found, the overcrowding in the safer districts of the city  may
    well cause him or her to live in  some  other  district.  Someone  with
    family connections in Mogadishu or who is fit for work could avoid  the
    camps, where, as a general matter, risk of  Article  3  harm  currently
    pertains.

369.   Conversely, a returnee  could  face  real  risk  of  a  violation  of
    Article 3, by reason of his or her vulnerability.  For example, a woman
    with children returned without any family and without family support in
    Mogadishu  from  those  already  there,  may  well   suffer   treatment
    proscribed  by  Article  3,  regardless  of  any  financial  assistance
    provided  by  the  United  Kingdom  Government,  given  her   increased
    susceptibility to opportunistic attack.


(c) Refugee Convention

370.  A striking feature of the present  appeals  was  the  absence  in  the
    evidence before us of anything to suggest that, certainly in comparison
    with the time before the  rise  of  the  Union  of  Islamic  Courts,  a
    returnee to Mogadishu, of whatever clan, would  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution by reason of his or her clan.  The Gundel reports indicated
    that a community such as the Reer Hamar was no longer  the  subject  of
    targeted violence, albeit that they  might  still  be  the  subject  of
    discrimination.  Mr Burns spoke  in  his  evidence  of  majorities  and
    minorities, not by reference to powerful or impotent clans but, rather,
    by reference to who was numerically in the  majority  in  a  particular
    area of  the  city.   Dr  Hammond's  evidence  regarding  Diaspora  aid
    suggested that, in many cases, such aid was provided without regard  to
    the clan of the recipient.   The  continuing  importance  of  clans  in
    Mogadishu, accordingly, appears at present to lie primarily in the clan
    as possible means of support for a returnee.

371.  Accordingly, except as regards the issue of FGM, it is  unlikely  that
    a proposed return to Mogadishu at the present time will  raise  Refugee
    Convention issues. Fact-finders will, nevertheless, need to be alive to
    the possibility of such issues emerging in the future if, for  example,
    the city were (as in the  past)  to  become  prey  to  powerful  clans,
    enforcing their rule over weaker clans by means of armed militias.
(2) Southern and central Somalia, outside Mogadishu

Evidence and submissions

372.  So far as conflict outside Mogadishu is  concerned,  Mr  Hickman,  for
    the UNHCR,  submitted  that  Article  15(c)  protection  should  extend
    throughout southern and central Somalia, on the basis  of  the  UNHCR's
    conclusion in the Eligibility Guidelines of May 2010 that:-

         "The widespread disregard of their obligations under  international
         humanitarian law by all parties to the conflict  and  the  reported
         scale of human rights violations make  it  clear  that  any  person
         returned to southern and central Somalia would, solely  on  account
         of his/her presence in southern and central Somalia,  face  a  real
         risk of serious harm."

373.  We have already examined this issue  in  relation  to  Mogadishu  (see
    above). As regards the position outside the  capital  in  southern  and
    central Somalia, the ECtHR in Sufi & Elmi did not  accept  the  UNHCR's
    proposition.  At [270] the Court held that "it would appear that it  is
    the conflict in Mogadishu which is  primarily  responsible  for  Somali
    civilian casualties and  widespread  displacement"  and  that  "reports
    describe the fighting  outside  Mogadishu  as  sporadic  and  localised
    around key strategic towns ... consequently, while there is fighting in
    some  areas,  other  areas   have   remained   comparatively   stable".
    Accordingly, at [271] the Court was:-

         "...prepared to accept that it might be possible for a returnee  to
         travel from Mogadishu International  Airport  to  another  part  of
         southern and central Somalia without being exposed to a  real  risk
         of treatment proscribed by Article  3  solely  on  account  of  the
         situation of general violence.  However, this will very much depend
         upon where a returnee's home area is.  It is not possible  for  the
         court to assess the level of general  violence  in  every  part  of
         southern and central Somalia and, even if it were to undertake such
         an exercise, it is likely that its conclusions will become outdated
         very quickly.  Consequently, if the applicant's home is  one  which
         has been affected by the conflict, the conditions there  will  have
         to be assessed against the requirements of Article 3 at the time of
         removal."

374.  In the present proceedings, the respondent  likewise  pointed  to  the
    UKBA Fact-Finding Mission as indicating  that  the  level  of  conflict
    outside Mogadishu was much reduced in most areas and  most  areas  were
    described as stable.  This was supported by the written statement of Mr
    Burns and confirmed in his oral evidence.  The OCHA Protection  Cluster
    Update suggested fighting in Lower Juba and Gedo, with the COIS  Report
    referring to clashes on the  Ethiopia-Kenya-Somalia  border  and  armed
    conflict in Bula Hawa and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  the  vicinity  of
    Beletweyne and Dolo.  In April 2011 the UN Security Council referred to
    fighting in Doolow, Bulo Hawa, Lwq, Elwaaq, Dhoobley, Diif and Taabdo.

375.  Conversely, there was little evidence of fighting  in  Kismayo  or  in
    Lower Shabelle, including Merka/Marka.  According to Mr Burns,  in  May
    2011 there was acute armed conflict in Gedo, moderate armed conflict in
    Hiraan and Galgaduud regions and low armed  conflict  in  the  rest  of
    southern/central  Somalia.   There  was  no  evidence,  the  respondent
    contended, of conflict in the Afgoye Corridor (e.g. Nairobi evidence: R
    M  Ali).  The  most  recent  evidence  points  to  a  continuation   of
    significant fighting in Gedo, some in Hiran and problems  beginning  to
    appear in parts of Puntland.

376.  Not all territorial gains and losses  involved  combatant  casualties.
    Thus, the TFG captured one town after Al-Shabab pulled out (COIS  8.37)
    whilst conversely Al-Shabab retook a TFG town after the latter's forces
    vacated it, owing to a dispute over salaries (8.40 - 8.41).

377.  As will already have become very apparent, the  appellants  sought  to
    advance their claims to international protection by  reference  to  the
    evidence regarding the actions of Al-Shabab  towards  those  living  or
    coming within areas of its control in  southern  and  central  Somalia.
    Although such areas included those  in  the  north  of  Mogadishu,  the
    subsequent withdrawal of Al-Shabab from the capital means  that  it  is
    necessary to consider this aspect of the  cases  by  reference  to  Al-
    Shabab areas outside Mogadishu.   Mr  Eicke  submitted  that  Al-Shabab
    should not be regarded as a monolithic force, acting in the same manner
    in all the places  it  held.   Furthermore,  the  evidence  (e.g.  UNSC
    monitoring December 2008/December 2009; Landinfo August 2010) suggested
    that there were not enough Al-Shabab fighters to  run  their  areas  on
    their own, so that it was necessary for  Al-Shabab  to  form  alliances
    with local clans and councils of elders.  This fitted with the evidence
    from the Nairobi informants, that Al-Shabab would come to a village and
    then move on, leaving two or three people to control it.

378.  Although Al-Shabab's core leadership was  ideologically  aligned  with
    Al-Qaeda and global jihad,  there  was  evidence  that  rank  and  file
    fighters had not shown a strong affinity for jihad (COIS  10.05).   The
    same  report  suggested  that  Al-Shabab  was  losing  support  by  its
    alienation of fellow Islamists  and  harsh  interpretation  of  Sharia,
    based on the radical Wahabi strand of Islam.  Dr Hammond, it was  said,
    had apparently accepted the view in the British High Commission  letter
    that different and sometimes contradictory Sharia  based  decrees  were
    given, which may or may not be enforced.

379.  Human  Rights  Watch  World  Report  2011,  whilst  referring  to  the
    grinding depression that characterised daily life  and  the  harsh  and
    intolerant measures taken in  the  name  of  Sharia  law,  nevertheless
    indicated that Al-Shabab rule in many areas brought relative  stability
    and order, a fact not lost on residents.  The UKBA Fact-Finding Mission
    also contained evidence to the effect that there  could  well  be  over
    reporting of human rights abuses in Al-Shabab-controlled areas by NGOs.
     The appellants' suggestion that the contrary  was  likely  to  be  the
    case, owing to the difficulties in reporting, was not, according to  Mr
    Eicke, born out by the many reports coming from the  like  of  Shabelle
    Media News.  Furthermore, Dr Hammond had given evidence of an  instance
    where Al-Shabab had allowed men and women to be  educated  together  in
    school, when this was a condition of a funding organisation.

380.  Nor, according to  the  respondent,  did  the  evidence  suggest  that
    Islamic groups had restricted people's ability to carry out business in
    such a severe way  as  to  prevent  them  from  supporting  themselves.
    Furthermore, there was evidence that Al-Shabab itself provided  certain
    services to the people under its control (Accord - Issue 21).

381.  It was an important part of the appellants' case  that  a  Somali  who
    had spent even a relatively short period  outside  that  country  would
    immediately stand out as such by reason of changed  language,  clothing
    and gait, as well as the fact that they would be better fed,  and  that
    this would cause them, if in one of Al-Shabab's areas, to  be  regarded
    by Al-Shabab as being a spy for TFG/AMISOM or for Ethiopian or  Western
    powers, or at least of having un-Islamic  sympathies.   The  respondent
    contended that it was inherently improbable that the way persons  spoke
    their own language would change perceptibly after an absence of only  a
    few years, let alone a period of  a  few  months,  as  Dr  Hammond  had
    asserted.  An  inability  to  understand  the  latest  slang  was  more
    credible, but likely to be  temporary.   Also  temporary  were  wearing
    different clothes and weighing more than others in the area.  Mr  Burns
    could provide no examples of a Diaspora person having difficulties with
    Al-Shabab and  the  evidence  indicated  that  68%  of  social  service
    providers were from the Somali Diaspora.  Furthermore, Mr Burns had  no
    reasonable explanation for why there were  no  reports  of  the  16,000
    persons who, it was common ground, had been returned from Saudi Arabia,
    being subjected to mistreatment  by  Al-Shabab.   Bearing  in  mind  Dr
    Hammond's evidence regarding remittances, the respondent submitted that
    there must be many  Somalis  in  Al-Shabab-controlled  areas  receiving
    remittances from relatives in the West and,  although  Al-Shabab  might
    wish to "tax" such remittances,  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that
    people receiving them had come to the adverse  attention  of  Al-Shabab
    due to their connections with Western countries.  The  expert  evidence
    to the contrary was, according to Mr Eicke, based  on  speculation  and
    interpolation  from  the  fact  that   Al-Shabab   was   said   to   be
    "hypervigilant" of espionage by foreign forces.

382.   Although  the  respondent  accepted  reports  in  the   evidence   of
    individuals being  mistreated  by  Al-Shabab  after  being  accused  of
    spying, no details were given of these incidents;  nor  was  there  was
    anything to suggest they were connected with a person being  away  from
    Somalia.  The same was true of the evidence regarding punishments meted
    out for violations of Al-Shabab's code of  dress  and  behaviour.   Any
    temporary differences occasioned by being away from  Somalia  could  be
    addressed with the aid of the large UK Diaspora population, before  the
    returnee went back to Somalia.

383.   The  respondent  accepted  that  a  returnee  from  abroad  might  be
    suspected of having money but there was  no  real  evidence  that  this
    would lead to an increased risk of extortion  of  kidnapping.   Indeed,
    there was no reason why a returnee, as  opposed  to  someone  receiving
    remittances from abroad, would be treated differently in  this  regard.
    This was particularly so, given the absence of evidence that the 16,000
    Saudi Arabian returnees had suffered any problems.

384.  Despite possible suggestions to  the  contrary,  the  respondent  said
    there  was  no  clear  evidence  that  Al-Shabab  immediately   imposed
    requirements as to dress, beards, etc. on every person who  was  merely
    passing through one of its checkpoints.  There was evidence of commuter
    traffic between the Afgoye Corridor and Mogadishu, with persons passing
    from the Corridor to the capital in order to work or transact business.
     The Bakara Market was also said to be in the process of relocating  to
    the Afgoye  Corridor,  suggesting  further  visits  to  the  Al-Shabab-
    controlled area that included the Afgoye Corridor.  Nor was  there  any
    direct evidence to suggest a person who came to live in  an  Al-Shabab-
    controlled area was not allowed the required time to  adjust  to  local
    requirements.  Having family connections in the  Al-Shabab  area  would
    also, according to the respondent, tend to negate any adverse  interest
    that there might be in the returnee as a result of having lived abroad.

385.  As for the  position  of  women  in  Al-Shabab-controlled  areas,  the
    evidence of Dr Hammond and Mr Burns was both to the effect  that  women
    did, in fact, work  in  such  areas  and  were  also  able  to  set  up
    businesses there.  Indeed, since as a  result  of  the  conflict,  many
    women were now the breadwinner for  their  household,  working  was  an
    imperative.  There was also  material  in  the  Nairobi  evidence  that
    confirmed that Al-Shabab permitted women  to  work,  although  INGO  in
    Somalia indicated that this varied from place to place.   A  report  of
    January 2011 relating to Kismayo, which  asserted  that  Al-Shabab  had
    banned women from working completely, went on to state that they had in
    fact been "banned from working cafeteria" (sic) and  "selling  khat  in
    the centre of town".  A ban on selling khat, which also appears to have
    occurred in Bardhere, was disproportionately affecting women  who  were
    the main khat sellers, but was not, Mr Eicke submitted, evidence  of  a
    total prohibition on women being able to work.

386.  Although some evidence indicated that  women  in  Al-Shabab-controlled
    areas had to be veiled, there was no clear evidence, according  to  the
    respondent, of  the  degree  of  veil  required  and  a  photograph  in
    appellants' bundle A, comprising an FSNAU Quarterly document, showed  a
    woman in Shabelle in April 2011 who was clearly not veiled.   The  area
    was then Al-Shabab-controlled.

387.  Nor was  there  evidence  that  suggested  women  generally  had  been
    stopped from travelling in Al-Shabab  areas  or  restricted  to  Muhrem
    (having to stay home unless with an adult male).  There was one  report
    (allheadlinenews.com) from the Afgoye Corridor  suggesting  that  there
    were such restrictions and a report also stated that women's ability to
    access  markets  was  constrained   by   limitations   on   access   to
    transportation because of rules regarding sex segregation.  The problem
    appeared, rather, to involve women  not  accompanied  by  adult  males,
    which, Mr Eicke submitted, could be solved by a clan member or  friend,
    or by the driver of a minibus being likely to be male.  In  any  event,
    evidence such as the SAACID report on the drought in  Somalia  made  it
    plain that there were large-scale movements of women and children  from
    Bay/Bakool to Mogadishu, which was  inconsistent  with  the  suggestion
    that women could not  travel  unless  accompanied  by  an  adult  male.
    According to UNSC November 2010, although less  than  5%  of  cases  of
    sexual violence were said to have been carried out by  parties  to  the
    conflict, the continued fighting had rendered women and  children  more
    vulnerable to sexual violence because of displacement, destitution, the
    breakdown of the rule of law and the re-emergence of armed  groups  and
    freelance militias.  Nevertheless, the respondent contended that  there
    was no clear evidence the situation had deteriorated since AM &  AM  or
    that there was any greater risk in this regard to women  in  Al-Shabab-
    controlled areas.  A conclusion that a real risk existed in the case of
    a woman said to be prone to  sexual  violence  was  actually  based  on
    factors personal to her.  A woman returning to an area  where  she  had
    clan support or  other  resources  would  plainly  be  in  a  different
    position to a lone woman in  some  IDP  camps  with  no  protectors  or
    resources.  There was, furthermore, evidence that rape was not  an  Al-
    Shabab policy and not condoned.

388.  Dr Hammond's evidence confirmed that divorce is a  practice  known  in
    Somalia and, due to the deaths of husbands or otherwise, the respondent
    contended that it was plainly not  uncommon  for  women  to  be  single
    parents.  Indeed,  one  of  the  present  appellants  claimed  in  oral
    evidence he had left his wife and children in  Somalia.   Appellant  ZF
    said she did not leave Somalia after her husband's  death  because  she
    was looking after her sister's two children.

389.  As for forced recruitment, there was some evidence of this,  including
    in the UKBA fact-finding report,  also  involving  the  recruitment  of
    children  (COIS  22.26)  but  the  prevalence  of  the   practice   was
    questionable.  Mr Burns's report acknowledged  forced  recruitment  was
    not common and that the tactics  for  recruitment  appeared  to  favour
    indoctrination and wages.  This was supported by the Landinfo report of
    June 2009.  Mr Burns said  it  was  not  current  Al-Shabab  policy  to
    recruit forcibly at gunpoint and the main risk at checkpoints  was,  he
    conceded, the payment of tolls.  In fact, Mr Burns' description of  Al-
    Shabab checkpoints suggested, according to the respondent, a structured
    and disciplined behaviour.  Dr Hammond stopped  short  of  saying  that
    there would be forced recruitment at gunpoint although there  might  be
    "pressure".

390.  Mr Eicke submitted that not all IDPs in southern and  central  Somalia
    lived in IDP settlements.  According to the UKBA  fact-finding  report,
    IDPs tended to live with family members and the British High Commission
    letter quoted a source as saying that IDPs who had  "higher  levels  of
    assets do not live in IDP camps".

391.  UNOCHA indicators reproduced in the COIS Report showed  that  compared
    with 2010, there had been an increase in GDP per capita in Somalia  and
    improvements in life expectancy, measles  immunisation  and  population
    using  improved  drinking  water.    There   had,   however,   been   a
    deterioration  in  some  indicators,  including   adult   and   under-5
    mortality, as well as numbers of IDPs and refugees.  In  2010,  43%  of
    the population earned less than US$1 a day and inflation and continuing
    insecurity led  to  a  decreased  standard  of  living  in  all  areas.
    Nevertheless, Somalia maintained a healthy informal economy said to  be
    "partially based on livestock, remittance/money transfer companies  and
    telecommunications".   Dr  Hammond's  "Cash  and   Compassion"   report
    described the powerful effect of the Diaspora in  terms  of  cross-clan
    support for IDPs and investment in infrastructure such as  schools  and
    hospitals.  The Landinfo report of 22 August 2010 suggested that "most"
    Somalis were dependent on remittances from relatives abroad.   Hawilaad
    (remittance) companies were able to count on the  entire  community  to
    protect them  from  theft.   The  "Cash  and  Compassion"  report  also
    indicated that Diaspora could send money to family members displaced by
    war within a day or two of their dislocation, anywhere in Somalia, even
    to IDP camps.  The use  of  electronic  communications  technology  was
    confirmed by Mr Burns.

392.  In AM & AM,  the  Tribunal  noted  that  the  humanitarian  crisis  in
    southern and central Somalia  was  widely  said  to  be  the  worst  in
    seventeen years, with  3.2  million  people  (43%  of  the  population)
    dependent on assistance.  The respondent submitted that, following AM &
    AM, the figure had reduced to about 2 million, and  although  this  had
    risen, numbers were said still to be below those of AM &  AM.   At  the
    end of 2010 the figure was 2.4 million, according  to  a  COIS  Report.
    Malnutrition rates had increased from 17.9 to 25% in Gedo and 25 to 30%
    in Juba region in less than six months.

393.  The main reason for the rise in  those  needing  food  assistance  had
    been the  poor  rains.   This  was  a  temporary  phenomenon,  although
    rainfall in 2011 was expected to be less than average  (reliefweb.int).
    Shortfalls in funding had meant that the World Food Programme was  only
    feeding 66% of the 1 million people who needed it, according to  a  BBC
    report.   Many  organisations  undertaking  humanitarian  services   in
    southern Somalia had ceased or reduced activities due to  the  security
    situation or problems in dealing with Al-Shabab  (COIS/High  Commission
    letter).  The evidence still indicated that  there  were  organisations
    providing food and  humanitarian  assistance,  both  in  Mogadishu  and
    elsewhere.  The appellants' own expert evidence  provided  confirmation
    of NGOs operating in the  Afgoye  Corridor,  notwithstanding  Al-Shabab
    control.

394.  In AM & AM the Tribunal found at [156] to [161] that the  humanitarian
    crisis had not "reached the threshold where civilians per se or  Somali
    civilian IDPs per se can be said to face a real risk of persecution  or
    serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article  3  ECHR".   Whether  a
    person could be returned would need to be  assessed  on  an  individual
    basis.  The respondent contended that there was no need to revise  this
    assessment.  Evidence of NGO's working  in  Al-Shabab  areas  could  be
    found in many places in the Nairobi evidence and  Dr  Hammond  accepted
    that NGOs were operating in the Afgoye  Corridor.   Assistance  in  Al-
    Shabab-controlled areas was also provided by  Islamic,  charitable  and
    other  organisations  (Landinfo  -  16  June  2009).   The  "Cash   and
    Compassion" report instanced Diaspora using clan elders  to  make  room
    for aid in Al-Shabab areas and the Daynille Hospital, in  an  Al-Shabab
    area, was built by North American Somali Diaspora.

395.  At [186] to [190] the Tribunal in AM  &  AM  considered  that,  whilst
    many residents had been displaced from Mogadishu and  become  IDPs,  an
    equally sizeable number appeared to have made their  way  to  areas  of
    southern Somalia where they had  traditional  clan  connections.   IDPs
    from more influential clans or sub-clans  appeared  to  have  a  better
    chance of being tolerated in the area to which they had fled  and  IDPs
    who had a traditional clan area,  especially  if  they  had  family  or
    friends there, had better prospects  of  finding  safety  and  support,
    although not if the area was already  saturated  with  other  displaced
    people.  Those who  lacked  recent  experience  of  living  in  Somalia
    appeared  likely  to  have  difficulty   dealing   with   the   changed
    environment, and those returning to their home area from the  UK  might
    be perceived as having relative  wealth  and  be  more  susceptible  to
    extortion.  Whether the IDP was female was a significant factor,  given
    the evidence of additional risks women and  girls  face  of  abduction,
    rape and  harassment.   Also  relevant  would  be  the  evidence  about
    prevailing economic conditions [160].

396.  The respondent submitted  that  the  evidence  of  Mr  Burns  strongly
    suggested that clan protection was still relevant, even  in  Al-Shabab-
    controlled areas.  Landinfo were told (June 2009) that  "great  efforts
    are still made to help relatives and neighbours".   It  was  common  to
    find families consisting of six to eight members opening their homes to
    a further six to eight relatives and  sharing  what  little  they  had;
    although without money transfers from abroad the very difficult  living
    conditions would be significantly worse for  most  of  the  population.
    More recent population movement tracking reports  confirmed,  according
    to the respondent, that people did  look  for  clan/social  support  in
    times of difficulty.

397.  The appellants supported and adopted the submissions made by UNHCR  in
    relation to the whole of southern and central Somalia being within  the
    ambit of Article 15(c) at the present time.

398.  As for the behaviour of Al-Shabab towards  those  it  controlled,  the
    appellants submitted that the only evidence relied on by the respondent
    for saying that enforcement of requirements and  restrictions  was  not
    uniform was the Human Rights Watch Report  "Harsh  War,  Harsh  Peace",
    which merely referred to rules being imposed "in  many  areas".   There
    was, however, no positive evidence about  particular  areas  where  the
    rules were not enforced.  By the same token,  the  assertion  that  Al-
    Shabab was not a monolithic entity was undermined by  the  respondent's
    acceptance that Al-Shabab shared a common agenda - of defeating AMISOM-
    TFG - and sought justification in Sharia for its  system  of  laws  and
    conduct.  The Human Rights Watch Report had been  quoted  at  [165]  of
    Sufi & Elmi, where the Court noted  that  Al-Shabab  exerted  "enormous
    control over personal lives and devotes remarkable energy  to  policing
    and penalising conduct that it deems idle  or  immoral"  and  that  "no
    detail is too minute to escape the group's scrutiny".   In  many  areas
    administrators  have  banned   public   gatherings,   dances,   musical
    ringtones, western music and moves, khat chewing and cigarette smoking.
     Men were prohibited from shaving beards and moustaches or wearing long
    hair or long trousers.  Sometimes being "idle" involved playing  soccer
    or talking among friends.

399.  The Human  Rights  Watch  Report  also  made  reference  to  Al-Shabab
    leaders in many areas having "embraced amputations  and  executions  as
    punishment and turned them into public spectacle.

400.  Amongst the evidence relied upon by the appellants to demonstrate  the
    harshness of Al-Shabab and, in particular, its paranoid fear of "spies"
    was the following.  In July 2009, Al-Shabab beheaded several people  in
    Baidoa who were accused of spying for the TFG.  On 28 September 2009 Al-
    Shabab publicly executed two young men in Masla, having accused them of
    spying  for  the  US,  TFG  and  AMISOM  (Amnesty  International).    A
    traditional elder in the Bakool region was beheaded on 7 September 2009
    for allegedly making telephone contact with  a  TFG  official  (USDOS).
    The same USDOS report described Al-Shabab torture of  TFG  members  and
    individuals suspected to be sympathetic to the TFG.   In  October  2009
    people in Kismayo were forced by Al-Shabab to  watch  amputations.   In
    Merka on 25 October 2009 people were forced to watch the executions  of
    two people accused of spying.  It was said of this  incident  that  the
    executions were in retaliation for a  reported  US  helicopter  attack.
    Amnesty International in November 2009 described  Al-Shabab  as  almost
    invariably carrying out its executions, floggings  and  amputations  in
    public, thereby asserting their control through displays of cruelty and
    violence aimed at intimidating and instilling fear.  In March 2010  Al-
    Shabab beheaded two employees of a telecommunications company, accusing
    them of spying for the TFG by helping direct  TFG  shells  towards  Al-
    Shabab positions.  In April 2010 Al-Shabab was suspected  of  beheading
    five builders for having worked on the construction of  the  Parliament
    building in Mogadishu.  In June 2010 there was a description of an  Al-
    Shabab officer beheading an alleged spy.   In  October  2010  Al-Shabab
    executed two girls in Beletweyne having decided that they  were  spies.
    Residents were forced to watch.  On 24 October  2010  Al-Shabab  killed
    four men accused of spying  for  AMISOM/TFG.   Two  teenage  boys  were
    executed in Benadir in November 2010, one having been accused of sexual
    assault, the  other  of  spying.   Two  teenagers  in  Beletweyne  were
    executed on 22 March 2011, whilst on 10 April in Kismayo four men  were
    beheaded, having been  accused  of  espionage.   23  others  were  also
    accused of espionage and "crimes  against  Islam".   Also  in  Kismayo,
    twelve days later, a mentally handicapped man accused of espionage  was
    detained and tortured by Al-Shabab.  On 3 May 2011  Al-Shabab  arrested
    seven people accused of collaborating with humanitarian agencies.   Six
    were killed.  In Baidoa on 4 May 2011 Al-Shabab publicly  executed  two
    men accused of spying for the TFG near Baidoa.  On 8 May 2011 Al-Shabab
    arrested at least ten people, including women, in Beletweyne,  accusing
    them of having loyalty to TFG forces.  On 4 May 2011 Al-Shabab executed
    two men in Baidoa for allegedly spying on behalf of Ethiopia, Kenya and
    the TFG.  A Baidoa resident speaking anonymously said  that  "Al-Shabab
    has no evidence for what they did this afternoon.  It is an awful crime
    against humanity to kill innocent people."

401.  As for Al-Shabab religious rules, in October 2009 in  Merka  Al-Shabab
    ordered men not to shave beards, or  they  would  be  punished.   Using
    unsterile tools, Al-Shabab in the same town began removing the gold and
    silver teeth of residents, alleging they were a sign of vanity  (August
    2009).  In October 2009 Al-Shabab sent men with whips to Bakara  Market
    (in Mogadishu) to flog  women  found  not  wearing  socks.   They  also
    detained women not wearing the Al-Shabab  prescribed  veil.   In  April
    2010 in Jowhar Al-Shabab banned the use of  bells  in  schools  "saying
    they sounded like Christian church bells".  In June 2010 30 people were
    detained in Afgoye for watching the World Cup on television.  In August
    2010 hundreds of men were arrested by Hisbul Islam  for  having  shaved
    their beards and grown moustaches.  In August Al-Shabab  were  reported
    to be checking people's mobile phones  at  a  checkpoint  and  forcibly
    shaving heads.  In October 2010 in Jowhar more  than  twenty  men  were
    arrested for refusing to grow beards or having trousers longer than  to
    their ankles.  The arrests were said to be "part of a  wider  operation
    in the regions".  In January 2011 in Jowhar Al-Shabab  banned  men  and
    women shaking hands and walking and talking together in public, this to
    be enforced by floggings.  On 10 May 2011 a pregnant woman  was  beaten
    nearly to death in Kismayo by Al-Shabab for wearing a  headscarf  which
    was not the Al-Shabab decreed dress.

402.  The Human Rights Watch Report, "Harsh War, Harsh Peace" (April  2010),
    has already been mentioned.  It is also noteworthy, however, that  that
    report spoke of  a  "climate  of  fear"  preventing  most  people  from
    speaking out against abuses of power and that the Al-Shabab  rules  and
    their enforcement "often seem to depend partly  on  the  whims  of  the
    militiamen who enforce them".  It could be beatings and  detention  for
    having an appearance disapproved of by  Al-Shabab  or  because  of  the
    contents of one's telephone.  No excuse was acceptable to Al-Shabab for
    appearing in public other than going to  the  mosque  during  the  five
    daily prayer times.  Thus, an old woman was whipped for  being  on  the
    street at this time, as was a man in Medina.  The same report described
    Al-Shabab as  often  threatening  to  kill  people  they  suspected  of
    harbouring sympathies for their opponents or  who  resist  recruitment.
    Women were said to "bear  the  brunt  of  the  group's  repression  and
    abuse".  Women were said to need to be fully veiled  and  to  wear  the
    "particularly thick and bulky abaya that touches the ground  and  hides
    all  physical  contours".   A  former   Al-Shabab   fighter   described
    patrolling in order to enforce women's dress codes and  whipping  those
    who were not dressed properly.  One woman was detained and whipped  for
    rushing out of her house, uncovered, to grab her young son.

403.  The same report also referred  to  Al-Shabab  having  issued  numerous
    death threats and carrying out many other killings that  have  received
    "scant  publicity".   Testimony  gathered  from  refugees  included   a
    description of two brothers having their throats slit  for  carrying  a
    camera in Ras Kamboni and of a woman seeing her husband and  other  men
    taken from a bus by Al-Shabab, being accused  of  supporting  the  TFG.
    They were never seen again.

404.  There were numerous recorded incidents of Al-Shabab exacting  "taxes",
    often by means that plainly amounted  to  extortion.   A  report  on  5
    August 2010 described those who refused to pay as being  "harassed  and
    often killed" with armed  Al-Shabab  personnel  "demanding  money  from
    traders and jewellery from women".   On  9  August  2010  Al-Shabab  in
    Jowhar were said to be collecting farm products and  goods  from  local
    farmers by force.  Al-Shabab claimed the money would be used to finance
    their war against TFG/AMISOM.

405.  On 18 October 2010 Al-Shabab were reported as  having  banned  "mobile
    phone banking" which was thought to  be  intended  to  block  what  was
    perceived as a rival to traditional money transfer  schemes,  known  as
    Hawala, which Al-Shabab could influence - that is, tax - more easily.

406.  On 7 January 2011 a camel herder was killed by Al-Shabab for  refusing
    to hand over five camels.  On 27 February 2011 the  TFG's  Minister  of
    Agriculture and Livestock condemned the extremists for stealing animals
    from pastoralists under the pretext of collecting zakat.  On  24  April
    2011 Al-Shabab imposed "fees" on pupils and teachers in Jowhar, stating
    that students must select one of two options to pay the money  or  else
    to contribute personally to jihad and anyone who did not do  either  of
    these  "will  be  seen  as  anti-Islam",  according  to  the  Al-Shabab
    commander in charge of finance.  In Afgoye in May  2011  many  business
    owners were said to have closed their shops because they were unable to
    pay the "fees" imposed by Al-Shabab.  In the same month, 40 traders  in
    Baidoa were said to have been arrested after they refused to pay tax.

407.  According to  Dr  Hammond,  an  individual  stopped  at  an  Al-Shabab
    checkpoint could expect to be asked where they were going to  or  from,
    the nature of their business and how much money they had with them.  Mr
    Burns considered that travellers "acting  out  of  the  ordinary"  were
    detained at such roadblocks for questioning.  Dr Mullen described to us
    trivial personal items  such  as  dental  fillings  and  sunglasses  as
    determining passage or interrogation at Al-Shabab checkpoints.

408.  The appellants relied on the evidence of  Mr  Burns  that  a  returnee
    from the West would easily be  identified  by  Al-Shabab  security  and
    political structures and viewed with  significant  suspicion.   If  the
    returnee could  not  provide  satisfactory  responses  to  questioning,
    indefinite imprisonment would be the  normal  course  or  execution  if
    thought to be a spy.  Dr Hammond also spoke of executions by  Al-Shabab
    of those suspected of spying for Western governments or the TFG/AMISOM.

409.   The  appellants  contended  that  there  was,  in  fact,  significant
    evidence of forced recruitment by Al-Shabab.   Human  Rights  Watch  in
    April 2010 reported that Al-Shabab had kidnapped and killed  young  men
    for refusing offers to join the group as fighters.   Several  of  those
    interviewed by Al-Shabab for the purposes of recruitment  had  fled  to
    Kenya after being threatened.   In  May  2010  UNICEF  and  the  UNSG's
    Special Representative on Children and Armed Conflict were "appalled to
    learn that the recruitment and use of children  as  soldiers  by  armed
    groups in Somalia is  rising".   In  November  2010  the  UN  Secretary
    General confirmed a "considerable increase" in the scale of recruitment
    and use of children during  the  previous  two  years,  describing  the
    practice as having become "more systematic".  On 12  May  2011  an  Al-
    Shabab official, learning that  the  TFG  was  recruiting  fighters  in
    recently seized towns, stated that the best way to deal with  this  was
    to prevent youth from travelling from Al-Shabab areas.

410.  There was evidence of forced marriage and the  killing  of  those  who
    refused to comply.  In  October  2010  Amnesty  International  received
    reports of girls being forced to marry Al-Shabab members, whilst in the
    same month it was reported that  a  woman  had  "attempted  suicide  by
    drinking rat poison" after Al-Shabab had tried to force her  to  marry.
    They dismissed her claim that she was already married "saying that  her
    husband was a TFG spy".

411.  All this, according to the  appellants,  underscored  the  finding  at
    [159] of AM & AM, where the Tribunal acknowledged as "significant"  the
    evidence of Alex Tyler, the UNHCR's Protection Officer, that "Al-Shabab
    cells are  likely  to  investigate  any  newcomer  to  their  areas  to
    determine whether the individual is connected with the TFG or otherwise
    opposed to them".  At [160] the Tribunal also  noted  that  "those  who
    lack recent experience of living in Somalia appear more likely to  have
    difficulty dealing with the change in environment".

412.  The appellants urged us to accept the evidence of Dr  Hammond  and  Mr
    Burns, that a variety of clues, such as gait, speech, clothes  worn,  a
    healthy and well-fed appearance, and so forth, would show a  person  to
    be a returnee.  Even if some of these were  temporary  characteristics,
    the risk as a returnee would  be  immediately  present.   Although  the
    respondent had stressed the absence of evidence regarding  harm  coming
    to the 16,000  Somalis  returned  there  from  Saudi  Arabia,  she  had
    produced no evidence about the numbers of Somalis removed  from  Europe
    or the West generally and no evidence about what had happened to  them.
    This suggested no significant numbers  of  Somalis  had  in  fact  been
    removed.  There was, simply, a lacuna regarding the evidence as to  the
    fate of the Saudi returnees.  Furthermore,  Dr  Hammond  stressed  that
    there was a difference between the perception on the part of  Al-Shabab
    of someone coming from an Islamic country and someone coming  from  the
    West.

413.  It was likely, according to the appellants, that if  a  returnee  from
    the United Kingdom received money from the United Kingdom Government to
    assist in return, Al-Shabab would learn about this, bearing in mind the
    evidence that they monitor remittances.  Al-Shabab's finding  that  the
    person had received money  from  the  UK  Government  would  create  or
    compound suspicion that the person  was  working  for  that  government
    against Al-Shabab.

414.  The appellants submitted that the humanitarian  situation  in  central
    and southern Somalia had deteriorated  significantly  since  the  ECtHR
    received submissions and evidence in Sufi & Elmi.   For  instance,  the
    Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit on 30 June 2011  updated  the
    number of people in crisis from 2.4 to 2.85 million (January to  June).
    The overwhelming majority of the 2.85 million were in the  south  where
    there was "extremely limited food assistance due to  insecurity".   The
    1.75 million people in crisis in the south included  rural,  urban  and
    IDPs, an increase from 1.4 million in January.  Poor farmers  in  lower
    Shabelle and Bay regions were joining the numbers of people  in  crisis
    due to the very poor Gu harvest outlook.  On 30 June Oxfam GB,  writing
    of lower Juba, described the "devastating drought and ongoing conflict"
    as having left people "facing starvation".  One elderly  man  told  the
    Oxfam official of a Somali proverb: "You use your feet to escape during
    war and drought".  Many were fleeing to Kenya but parts of that country
    had had as little rain as Somalia.  On 1 July 2011 the  Danish  Refugee
    Council described Somalia as being on the brink of disaster,  with  war
    and drought forcing more than  30,000  people  to  flee  Somalia  every
    month.  On 20 June 2011 FSNAU estimated that the total number of people
    in need of humanitarian assistance would increase in the second half of
    2011, with the main driving factors being the worsening  food  security
    situation, including unfavourable prospects for the Gu season  harvest.
    The UNHCR on 5 July 2011 noted that the "devastating drought has forced
    more than 135,000 Somalis to flee so far this  year.   In  June  alone,
    54,000 people fled across the two borders [Kenya and  Ethiopia],  three
    times the number of people who fled in May".  UNHCR  estimated  that  a
    quarter of Somalia's 7.5 million population was now  either  internally
    displaced or living outside the country as refugees.  The  organisation
    was "particularly concerned by unprecedented levels  of  malnutrition",
    especially among refugee children.  On 5 July  2011  the  Famine  Early
    Warning Systems Network was reported as stating that  localised  famine
    could be witnessed in some  of  the  worst  drought-affected  areas  in
    southern Somalia in September.

415.  At this point it is convenient to refer to some  of  the  more  recent
    documentary evidence adduced  by  the  respondent.   On  30  June  2011
    allafrica.com reported information given to IRIN that  relief  agencies
    were looking at the option of cash transfers, saying  that  the  system
    helped beneficiaries by giving them freedom  of  choice.   In  February
    2011 a family in  Baran  started  receiving  cash,  rather  than  food,
    thereby enabling the head of the family (a mother of seven)  to  decide
    how to spend the aid.  The protection cluster update weekly report of 1
    July 2011  reported  the  UN  as  recently  stating  that  Somalia  was
    experiencing "the worst drought in over 60 years", with over a  million
    Somalis located in "nearly unreachable areas ... for humanitarian aid".
     Save the Children reported an average number of 1,300 Somali  refugees
    arriving everyday at Kenya's Dadaab Camp, many of them children, having
    travelled weeks on foot to reach the camp.  On 6 July,  a  news  report
    described how the Somali Diaspora were helping the nation  through  its
    crisis.  Interviewed in London, the CEO of Dahabshiil, a  global  money
    transfer company which "sends more than US$1 billion to  Somalia  every
    year" described how, when there was a  crisis,  individual  people  who
    were in the Diaspora wanted to send money back home.  The CEO said that
    remittances were an important way for people to make  sure  those  they
    love get through hard times.

416.  On 6 July 2011 Al-Shabab was reported, from Mogadishu, to  be  calling
    upon  "both  Muslims  and  non-Muslims  to  act  quickly   to   deliver
    humanitarian assistance to the drought-infected  Somali  people".   The
    spokesman, Sheikh Ali Mohamed Rage, said that those wanting to help the
    starving should contact Al-Shabab officials.  Shortly after,  Reliefweb
    referred to the suspension in 2009 of US$50 million of US  humanitarian
    assistance for Somalia "out of concern that it might benefit Al-Shabab,
    designated as a terrorist organisation".   Humanitarian  assistance  to
    populations under the control of Al-Shabab was "under close scrutiny by
    the United Nations Security Council since its Resolution 1916 of  March
    2010, as the group represents a threat to peace  and  security  and  is
    suspected of diverting humanitarian aid to fuel its own  war  efforts".
    On 6 July, BBC News also reported the lifting of the ban on foreign aid
    agencies by Al-Shabab; however, an article accessed  on  13  July  2011
    described Al-Shabab fighters as having  detained  in  Baidoa  personnel
    working for international relief organisations, namely, UNICEF and  the
    Red Cross.  The aid personnel were taken to an unknown location and  at
    the time of writing the reason for the incident was  not  known.   This
    "comes as Al-Shabab said last week  it  was  lifting  the  ban  on  aid
    agencies to help the starving people".

417.  BBC News Online July reported the  accounts  of  individuals  who  had
    reached the Kenyan border from south Somalia.  Weheleey  Haji  and  her
    five children trekked for several weeks from their homeland in Somalia,
    walking for 22 days, drinking only water.  Her baby had been born under
    a tree in the Dadaab Refugee Camp, just after  arriving.   Rukiyo  Noor
    had been travelling for twenty days with a  1  month  old  baby.   Told
    about the Al-Shabab ban on foreign aid agencies being  lifted,  Mohamed
    Abdi, walking with his wife and children towards Dadaab, was sceptical.
     He said that Al-Shabab militiamen had told the family  to  turn  back,
    saying "it was better to die in our motherland.  They wanted us to pray
    for the rains."  Mr Abdi, however, said he had no choice and set out on
    the journey.  Although there was "relative peace  in  Somalia  where  I
    live", the family had still decided to flee because of the drought.

418.  On 11  July  it  was  reported  in  Washington  DC  that  USAID  would
    contribute approximately 19,000 metric tons of food to  assist  Somalis
    in need.  On 13 July, the BBC reported that UK charities were poised to
    boost aid to Somalia and that the Organisation of  Islamic  Cooperation
    Aid Agency had started distributing aid  in  Mogadishu,  following  the
    lifting of the ban by Al-Shabab.

419.  The appellants submitted that the ECtHR's finding at [292] of  Sufi  &
    Elmi, that having to seek  refuge  in  an  IDP  camp  would  constitute
    Article 3 ill-treatment, was made in spite of  the  evidence  regarding
    the supposed "urbanisation" of the Afgoye Corridor:-

         "The Government submitted  that  there  is  evidence  of  increased
         urbanisation of the Afgoye Corridor.  Although  this  assertion  is
         supported by a number of the country reports, it is  not  clear  to
         the Court whether or not urbanisation has improved  conditions  for
         the majority of IDPs.  In fact, some reports suggest that IDPs  are
         experiencing increasing difficulties  in  finding  shelter  in  the
         Afgoye Corridor as landlords are either selling land that IDPs live
         on or are charging rent that they cannot afford."

420.  As for domestic authority, in NM, the Tribunal found that "any  person
    at real risk on return of being compelled to live in [an IDP  camp]  as
    having little difficulty in making out a claim under Article 3, if  not
    under the Refugee Convention also" [102].  In  HH,  the  Tribunal  said
    that a person who had been displaced from his or her home in  Mogadishu
    "without being able to find a place elsewhere ... with clan members  or
    friends, and who,  as  a  result,  is  likely  to  have  to  spend  any
    significant period of time in a makeshift shelter  along  the  road  to
    Afgoye, for example, or in an IDP camp, may well  experience  treatment
    that would be proscribed by Article 3 of the ECHR".  In  AM  &  AM  the
    Tribunal considered that  having  to  live  in  the  dire  humanitarian
    conditions of an IDP camp  could  amount  to  treatment  in  breach  of
    Article 3 and, in doing so, according to  the  appellants,  rejected  a
    submission from the respondent, similar to that now advanced, that  "of
    and by itself, poor humanitarian conditions in Somalia, even if  in  an
    IDP camp, would not establish an Article 3 breach" [87].

421.  The appellants submitted (citing Limbuela v  Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2005] UKHL 66 and Moldovan v Romania  No  2  (2005
    App. 41138/98) that whilst a mere failure to provide a basic  level  of
    support which  resulted  in  destitution  and  degradation  would  not,
    without more, engage Article 3, the positive institution  of  a  regime
    which resulted in such destitution  and  degradation  could  amount  to
    "treatment"  within  Article  3.   Thus,  dealing  with  the   evidence
    regarding displacement from Mogadishu as a result of the armed conflict
    there, the predicament of those displaced  was  not  a  consequence  of
    naturally occurring phenomena or lack of resources  in  Somalia  but  a
    consequence of the treatment by agents of serious harm.   The  conflict
    was also  responsible  for  the  destruction  of  physical  and  social
    infrastructure, indispensible for people in such a position to  sustain
    themselves  adequately.   That  breakdown   had   diminished   if   not
    extinguished  the  capacity  of  state  and   non-state   institutions,
    including traditional systems such as elders,  clan  leaders  etc.,  to
    provide protection to IDPs, thereby  leaving  the  latter  particularly
    vulnerable to criminal violence.  The actors were also responsible  for
    denying  or  substantially  restricting  humanitarian  access  to   the
    displaced.

422.  Looking at  humanitarian  circumstances  in  the  context  of  Article
    15(c), the appellants referred to [94] of AM & AM  where  the  Tribunal
    found that "within the context of Article 15(c) ...  the  serious  harm
    involved did not have to be  a  direct  effect  of  the  indiscriminate
    violence; it was sufficient that there was causal nexus of some  kind",
    not including, however, the situation where the consequences were  only
    remotely connected with the violence.

423.  As we have already indicated,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  events  in
    Mogadishu of August 2011,  the appellants and the respondent  chose  to
    put in updated evidence regarding the position outside  Mogadishu.   So
    far as armed conflict was concerned, both sides pointed to instances of
    fighting between the TFG and Al-Shabab, in various places  outside  the
    capital.  The appellants noted that there was now fighting in the  Gedo
    region, an  area  previously  perceived  to  be  relatively  free  from
    conflict.  According to the appellants, this underlined the  volatility
    of the situation and pointed to there still being  a  risk  of  serious
    harm by reason of indiscriminate violence.  Amongst other things, on 27
    August 2011 Al-Shabab were reported to have set  fire  to  two  engines
    used  to  draw  water  from  wells  in   Garbaharrey,   Gedo,   thereby
    exacerbating the situation for residents  who  were  already  suffering
    from the effects of famine.  On 29 August, pro-government forces seized
    four villages in Gedo, previously held by Al-Shabab.

424.  In August 2011 there were reports of Al-Shabab fighters who  had  left
    Mogadishu arriving in Kismayo and Baidoa in Lower Juba.   Fighting  was
    taking place with government forces near Afmadow.  On 21 August,  plans
    to launch "a massive offensive" against Al-Shabab in Lower  and  Middle
    Juba regions were said to be at their last stage of preparation.  On  6
    September, US drone attacks in Kismayo were followed by reports of  Al-
    Shabab suspecting people near their bases there of spying,  leading  to
    the arrests of many.

425.  There was a report on 21 August  of  fighting  between  Al-Shabab  and
    another faction in Hiran, whilst in both late July  and  August,  there
    were reports of targeted killings and roadside bombs in Puntland,  with
    the Puntland Minister of Security expressing  concern  that  Al-Shabab,
    having withdrawn from Mogadishu, would relocate to his  region.   On  3
    September 2011 in Galkayo, 60 people were killed and 75 wounded (mostly
    civilians)  following  two  days  of  fighting  between  Al-Shabab  and
    security forces.

426.  Analysing  the  latest  positions  regarding  armed  conflict  outside
    Mogadishu, the respondent considered that it  remained  the  case  that
    fighting was confined to certain areas.  That finding had led  to  four
    of the six districts of Gedo  coming  under  the  TFG's  control,  with
    Garbaharey and Bardere remaining with  Al-Shabab.   Elsewhere,  pro-TFG
    militias were said to have gained further ground in  Hiran,  Galgaduud,
    Bay and Bakool, and Lower Juba (African Union, 13 September).  The same
    report considered that the security situation in Puntland and  Galmudud
    had deteriorated.  In Puntland, there was fighting between the region's
    security forces and pro-Al-Shabab militias, whilst in  Galmudud,  rival
    clans had been fighting each other.  On the other hand, the  respondent
    contended that the evidence showed  security  had  improved  in  border
    areas between Somalia and Ethiopia/Kenya.

427.  The AI Briefing  described  fighting  outside  Mogadishu  in  southern
    Somalia as "sporadic".  There were suggestions that Al-Shabab  fighters
    from Mogadishu had mobilised in the  Gedo  region,  whilst  there  were
    tensions reported amongst the TFG militia controlling areas of southern
    Somalia.  In the Mudug region of central Somalia, fighting had  erupted
    at the end of August in  Galkayo,  causing  massive  displacement  from
    Galkayo Town to nearby villages (Protection Cluster Update).

428.  In the latest evidence served by the  appellants,  there  are  various
    reports of Al-Shabab ill-treatment of those under its control.   On  23
    July Al-Shabab were said to have beheaded two animal herders in  Afgoye
    and announced that a further three would suffer  the  same  fate.   The
    herders had refused to surrender their animals to  Al-Shabab.   On  the
    same day Al-Shabab arrested four teenagers in Lower Shabelle,  accusing
    them of activities against  Islamic  religion  because  they  had  been
    watching films on  their  mobile  telephones.   On  25  July  Al-Shabab
    imposed a ban in Afgoye on the slaughter and sale of domestic  animals,
    whilst a day later Al-Shabab arrested 30 women in the  Afgoye  Corridor
    because they had allegedly broken a rule relating  to  the  wearing  of
    thick and broad veils.  On 15 August Al-Shabab executed a  man  accused
    of collaborating with the TFG in Hiran and on 16 August  they  arrested
    and tortured a 72 year old man accused of supporting the  TFG.   On  18
    August there was a further report  of  women  being  charged  with  not
    wearing appropriate veils in public in Afgoye.  On 24 August there were
    said to be increased threats and harassment  of  civilians  in  Kismayo
    from Al-Shabab and that anyone coming to the city would be interrogated
    because the  organisation  wished  to  know  the  motive  behind  their
    movements.   On  29  August  Al-Shabab  were  said  to  be  maintaining
    checkpoints   on   the   outskirts   of   Mogadishu,    and    behaving
    antagonistically towards  those  who  say  they  knew  nothing  of  the
    situation in Al-Shabab's former strongholds.  On 27 August there was  a
    report of young men fleeing the Afgoye Corridor, following  the  kidnap
    and beheading of a young person by Al-Shabab.

429.  The  respondent  maintained  her  submission  that  there  was  not  a
    reasonable likelihood of ill-treatment at Al-Shabab checkpoints for the
    majority of Somalis using them.  Support for this was identified in the
    August 2011 Landinfo report which concluded that  people  could  travel
    relatively freely, both in government controlled  areas  and  in  areas
    controlled by other groups  including  Al-Shabab.   This  was  so  even
    though both sides had reintroduced  some  checkpoints,  mainly  at  the
    entrance to Mogadishu.  Some Al-Shabab  checkpoints  were  said  to  be
    manned by children as young as 12 years old.  Refugees arriving at  the
    Dadaab camps in Kenya told Landinfo  that  they  had  not  suffered  an
    excess of attention from the Al-Shabab checkpoints in Lower  Juba.   In
    March 2011, however, several interviewees said there could be some risk
    in travelling to the south but that people travelled in spite of  this.
    The main challenges related to the crossing of  frontlines  "not  least
    entry into Shabab areas where newcomers risk accusations of  espionage.
    People who are most at risk in Shabab-controlled areas  are  young  men
    and to some extent young women.  But given Shabab's need  for  revenue,
    people are generally quite safe, as long as they can pay for themselves
    at checkpoints.  Women usually  travel  with  a  male  relative  or  in
    groups."

430.  The respondent also relied on a Landinfo  report  in  support  of  the
    proposition that those living in Al-Shabab areas who had relevant  clan
    links could be in a better position. Al- Shabab administration was said
    to be able to grant "some influence to local people  and  clan  elders,
    but only to a certain extent and only to the extent that  it  does  not
    threaten Shabab's political goals on the local level or otherwise.  The
    influence of the  council  of  elders  remains  restricted  even  here.
    According to various international sources and Somali  representatives,
    the expulsion of international aid organisations is a good  example  of
    this lack of influence."  Later in the same report there was  reference
    to examples "indicating that the authority of the elders is  undermined
    and eroding in areas controlled by  Al-Shabab".   Some  detected  that,
    behind the religious  rhetoric  of  Al-Shabab,  there  were  "also  the
    expression of social inequalities and desires for political power among
    rival clans and groups".

431.  A Landinfo report of July 2011 indicated that some  families  saw  the
    benefit of having a son-in-law affiliated with Al-Shabab "as  this  can
    provide  protection  and  opportunities,  especially  amongst  minority
    groups and minor clans".  However, this category of  marriage  differed
    little from the so-called "black cat" marriages  of  the  days  of  the
    warlords.  Many Al-Shabab soldiers belonged  to  marginalised  minority
    groups.  Those who escaped Al-Shabab areas for having transgressed  the
    organisation's rules were unlikely to find Al-Shabab devoting resources
    to look for them.  The figure of 3,570 IDP movements from Mogadishu  to
    Afgoye  in  June  to  September  2011  undermined,  according  to   the
    respondent, the contention that there were high risk  and  difficulties
    at checkpoints for the ordinary Somali.

432.  As for the position of women, the  Protection  Cluster  Update  of  26
    August  2011  reported  that  130  women   in   Jowhar   had   received
    scholarships,  including  accommodation  in  the  vocational   training
    centre.  The respondent contended that the situation in Al-Shabab areas
    was in practice far more flexible than  suggested  by  the  appellants.
    Women did work, since they needed to do so to support  their  families.
    The Landinfo report of July 2011 described women  who  did  not  comply
    with the  organisation's  strict  dress  code  as  being  "at  risk  of
    harassment".  Nevertheless, Shabab was said to have to some  extent  to
    tolerate women being visible in public.  There was some  evidence  that
    Al-Shabab dress codes for females were related to revenue  raising,  in
    that women were forced to buy new  clothes  or  fabric.   Much  of  the
    evidence related to forced marriages was anecdotal  and  needed  to  be
    treated with caution.

433.   The  latest  evidence  on  forced  recruitment  disclosed  a  complex
    picture.  Religious arguments were "consistently used in the context of
    recruitment, while threats and  violence,  according  to  well-informed
    sources, are currently not usual or necessary yet no-one has ruled  out
    cases involving the use of force".  Although there  were  instances  of
    older men being approached, "the most important target group  is  still
    young boys aged 12-16 years.  The children are lured and instructed  to
    fulfil their duty as devout Muslims."

434.  The AI Briefing stated that, although  the  large  scale  movement  of
    Somalis across the Ethiopian  and  Kenyan  borders  had  reduced  since
    June/July 2011, many people  continued  to  seek  refuge  in  countries
    neighbouring Somalia and that  there  were  "many  instances  of  human
    rights abuses against people in flight, such as looting, extortion, and
    sexual violence".  Those, particularly men,  fleeing  towards  Puntland
    had  been  refused  passage  at  checkpoints  and  either  deported  or
    arrested.

435.  Turning to the wider humanitarian  situation  outside  Mogadishu,  the
    appellants pointed to the further declarations by the UN of famine,  so
    as to cover most regions of southern Somalia.  The  appellants  pointed
    to recent evidence that, despite earlier announcements to the contrary,
    Al-Shabab continued to prevent or restrict aid agencies from  operating
    in areas they controlled.  This had resulted in agencies  being  unable
    to reach an estimated  2.2  million  Somalis  (US  Secretary  General's
    Report of 30  August).   Thus,  for  example,  on  21  July,  Al-Shabab
    allegedly refuted the UN's declaration of  famine  in  Somalia,  saying
    that Somalis had no need of assistance from non-Muslims.   The  lifting
    of the ban on aid agencies did not, according to  the  report,  include
    those who had been banned earlier, because Al-Shabab regarded  them  as
    "spies" (Somalia Report).   The  appellants  also  pointed  to  various
    pieces of evidence regarding Al-Shabab preventing people  from  fleeing
    its areas, to escape the consequences of the famine.

436.  For those who, nevertheless,  managed  to  travel,  the  UN  Secretary
    General's Special Representative on sexual violence in conflict  stated
    on 11 August that, during the journey from Somalia to the Kenyan camps,
    "women and girls are subjected to attacks,  including  rape,  by  armed
    militants and bandits" and that Al-Shabab militants  were  said  to  be
    abducting girls for forced marriage to fighters.  On  23  August,  a  6
    year old girl was taken by hyenas, whilst travelling.  On  3  September
    five people were killed and five injured when bandits opened fire on  a
    minibus travelling from Bal'ad to Jowhar.

437.  On 20 July, famine was declared in southern Bakool and Lower  Shabelle
    and on 3 August famine was declared in parts of middle Shabelle and the
    Afgoye corridor.  The criteria for a  declaration  of  famine  required
    acute  malnutrition  exceeding  30%  in  a  given  area  -  the  actual
    malnutrition rates were as high as 58% in some  areas;  a  crude  death
    rate exceeding two in 10,000 per day -  in  some  parts  the  rate  was
    fifteen per day; and food access below 2,100 calories per  day  for  at
    least 20% of the population.  Malnutrition rates in the Somali  famine-
    declared areas were "the highest in  the  world,  with  peaks  of  50%.
    Nearly half of the Somali population, 3.7 million, is now in crisis and
    an estimated 2.8 million of those people reside in the south" (Somalia:
    Famine and Drought Situation Report 23 August).

438.  Although the appellants acknowledged that the evidence clearly  showed
    that some people were being  provided  with  some  assistance,  it  was
    submitted that it would be wrong for the Tribunal to conclude that this
    sufficiently ameliorated the situation in which the appellants  in  the
    present appeals would find themselves if returned.

439.  The appellants reiterated their submission that it would be  wrong  to
    treat humanitarian considerations as  analogous  to  another  naturally
    occurring phenomenon, notwithstanding that climate conditions played  a
    significant part in the current crisis.   The  human  conduct  involved
    could, the appellants contended, be described as "treatment" within the
    meaning of Article 3 of the ECHR.

440.   According  to  Professor  Menkhaus  (8  August)  all  of  Africa  was
    relatively used  to  droughts  and  floods  and  the  local  population
    historically had developed "pretty elaborate  coping  mechanisms.   But
    those coping mechanisms have been overloaded in  recent  decades  by  a
    wide range of factors".   The  coping  mechanisms  had  become  broken;
    "particularly in Somalia".  According to Menkhaus "a big  part  of  the
    crisis in Somalia is not just that people used to be able to  farm  for
    subsistence and now can't; there are lots of  people  whose  purchasing
    power has been badly eroded".   The  Professor  identified  a  "perfect
    storm" in Somalia, involving the worst drought for 60 years and  people
    displaced by years of warfare.  He attributed the fact that  Somaliland
    had not seen famine to that region's reasonable level of  security  and
    stability,  in  contrast  to  Somalia.   That  view  was  supported  by
    Professor Samatar, who noted that neither the drought of the mid  1970s
    nor that of 1984 produced famine in Somalia "because the  Somali  state
    was able to mobilise the population and to seek the assistance  of  the
    international community to deliver aid to the needy".   The  last  time
    Somalis suffered major famine was in 1992 which, according to  Samatar,
    was not caused by drought, but  by  marauding  warlords.   As  for  the
    present position, Professor Samatar considered that the  Somali  people
    had been "made vulnerable to ecological disturbances" because of the US
    war on terror, and consequent backing of the  Ethiopian  invasion;  the
    TFG, which was "known for its  corruption,  incompetence  and  internal
    strife"; and Al-Shabab, who obstructed the provision  of  international
    assistance and whose existence led to the US blocking aid  to  what  is
    identified as a terrorist group.

441.  The TFG prime  minister  acknowledged  that  the  insurgency  and  the
    violence that Al-Shabab imposed were "a fundamental cause of the famine
    we are suffering".  However,  the  UN  Secretary  General's  report  on
    Somalia noted that "deforestation  and  land  degradation  in  southern
    areas of Somalia have  increased  exposure  and  vulnerability  to  the
    effects of natural hazards and climate  change,  such  as  drought  and
    floods.  Much of the deforestation can be attributed  to  the  charcoal
    trade as the land where the acacia  forests  have  been  cut  down  for
    charcoal, such as between the Juba and Shabelle rivers,  often  becomes
    unsuitable for grazing, leading to increased  conflict  over  land  and
    water and the displacement of local population".

442.  The respondent pointed to recent  evidence  that,  it  was  submitted,
    showed improved aid access in southern Somalia.  This extended not only
    to Mogadishu but to the Afgoye corridor.  OCAJ's Humanitarian  Overview
    of  August  2011  stated  that  food  assistance  had  been  scaled  up
    significantly, from 730,000 people in July to 1.3  million  in  August.
    In the south, 648,000 people had benefited from food  distributions  in
    August, which  was  double  the  number  of  people  reached  in  July.
    Emergency water services for each 1.7 million  people  in  August,  and
    140,000 in July.  Coverage of areas facing famine was, however, still a
    major challenge for the humanitarian community.   Operations  had  been
    scaled up substantially in Gedo and parts of Lower Juba.  According  to
    a UNSC Report of 30 August, during the  past  two  months  over  23,300
    severely malnourished children in central and southern Somalia had been
    provided with ready-to-use therapeutic foods.   Continued  support  for
    the drinking water systems,  including  in  Mogadishu  and  the  Afgoye
    corridor, was providing safe drinking water to more  than  1.9  million
    people.  Thirteen hospitals across  southern  Somalia  received  enough
    emergency health kits to assist a catchment area of 130,000  for  three
    months.  Over 24,500 farmers and pastoralists  had,  according  to  the
    United Nations, refused agriculture  and  livelihood  interventions  to
    prepare for the coming rains in October to December.

443.  According to Relief Web, the ICRC had been able to  provide  food  aid
    in Al-Shabab areas outside Mogadishu.  A Relief Web map showed that all
    470,000 of those targeted in Mogadishu for aid had  been  reached.   In
    the central regions, of a target of 320,000, 313,488 had been  reached;
    in southern regions the figures were 440,000 and 415,326.

444.  Al-Shabab had recently allowed  Turkey  to  distribute  assistance  to
    people living under the organisation's control.   Turkish  humanitarian
    organisations were providing relief  in  Bay  and  Bakool  regions,  in
    cities like Baidoa and Kismayo.  Constraints on the  provision  of  aid
    included  limitations  on  international  funding  and   infrastructure
    problems.  Professor Menkhaus was quoted as saying that the  "challenge
    right now is just to get food aid in" but that the second challenge was
    towards rebuilding livelihoods.  The question of governance of  Somalia
    remained outstanding.  Although Al-Shabab "may  be  crumbling,  ....the
    TFG remains irrelevant and is just the source of  massive  corruption".
    The Professor reported in August that there had  been  a  shift  in  US
    policy, which now involved protecting NGOs from being prosecuted  under
    the Patriot Act for doing business with Al-Shabab.   Nevertheless,  Al-
    Shabab continued blocking food aid.

445.  The respondent submitted that problems of  access  for  the  UN  World
    Food Programme had  not  been  experienced  by  all  international  aid
    agencies.  Thus, the ICRC was able to operate in Al-Shabab areas.

446.  AI's briefing  described  the  humanitarian  crisis  in  southern  and
    central Somalia as having already claimed tens of thousands  of  lives,
    of which the majority were children.  The crisis has now affected  some
    four million people including three million living in south and central
    Somalia "and is predicted to  worsen,  with  the  onset  of  the  rainy
    season.  Aid agencies are concerned that contagious diseases, including
    cholera and measles, will spread further".

447.  AI noted Mdicins Sans  Frontires  as  stating  that  many  areas  in
    southern and central Somalia remained without  access  to  humanitarian
    aid and that Al-Shabab, " already suspicious of  western  agendas,  has
    placed bans on foreign staff, on the supply of medicines and  materials
    by air, and on vaccination activities" (5 September).  There  continued
    to  be  reports  of  humanitarian  workers  being  abducted  and   held
    temporarily by Al-Shabab,  as  well  as  temporary  arrests  of  relief
    workers in areas controlled by the TFG militia.  In Mogadishu,  Turkish
    relief workers had  been  held  by  TFG  forces  after  returning  from
    delivering aid to Al-Shabab controlled areas.  Al-Shabab  was  reported
    to be preventing populations in need of assistance from moving to areas
    controlled by the TFG, both in Bay and Bakool and  in  lower  Shabelle.
    Persons who had fled from  famine  stricken  villages  to  Baidoa  were
    reportedly turned back by Al-Shabab in late September.






The Tribunal's findings

(a) Article 15(c)

448.  On the evidence before us, we do not consider that the internal  armed
    conflict  which  obtains  in  southern  and  central  Somalia  (outside
    Mogadishu) is at present at such a level as to place everyone there who
    is a civilian at real risk of the harm described in Article  15(c).  We
    acknowledge that the starting point in AM & AM in effect requires us to
    identify a material change. The  evidence  of  the  intervening  years,
    including large Al-Shabab territorial gains, constitutes such a change,
    albeit that there are areas where  the  organisation's  rule  is  being
    challenged. The current fighting, as that of the recent past,  is  both
    sporadic and localised. Like the ECtHR, our assessment of the  evidence
    does not accord with what  appears  to  be  the  thrust  of  the  UNHCR
    Eligibility Guidelines and there is nothing  in  the  update  to  those
    Guidelines which suggests a different stance is called for.   There  is
    copious evidence to the effect that large parts of southern and central
    Somalia are relatively peaceful, in the sense that there is no conflict
    taking place there.  In Al-Shabab areas there is a dark  side  to  that
    peace, as we have seen and will shortly have to address.

449.  Also like the ECtHR, we stress that, in individual cases, it  will  be
    necessary  to  establish  where  a  person  comes  from  and  what  the
    background information says is the position in that place.  If fighting
    is going on, whether symmetrically or asymmetrically, that will have to
    be taken into account in deciding whether Article 15(c) is  applicable.
    Although an armed conflict may exist  across  an  area,  without  there
    having to be actual fighting in every part of that area, the assessment
    is ultimately a fact-sensitive one; and we consider the present reality
    to be as we have found.

450.  Like the Tribunal in AM & AM, we take the view that indirect forms  of
    harm, such as may be encountered by an IDP in an IDP camp, fall  to  be
    taken into account for the purposes of Article 15(c), provided that the
    person's circumstances (such as finding themselves in such a camp)  can
    properly be said to have as an  operative  cause  the  armed  conflict.
    This would be the position for those who have to flee a  real  risk  to
    life and person in Mogadishu, by moving into the countryside.   As  can
    be seen from the evidence, however, the more recent picture in 2011  is
    of people fleeing the drought by moving into Mogadishu.


(b) Article 3

451.  As is apparent from Sufi & Elmi, there are three elements  to  Article
    3 risk in southern and central Somalia: the armed conflict,  the  risks
    inherent in living under Al-Shabab rule; and the humanitarian position,
    consequent upon the prolonged drought. We address each in turn.


Armed conflict

452.  In view of our finding  regarding  Article  15(c),  there  can  be  no
    question of a returnee being at real risk of Article 3 harm in southern
    and central Somalia  solely  on  account  of  the  situation  of  armed
    conflict or "general violence" (Sufi & Elmi [271]).  An  individualised
    assessment is required, depending on the location concerned.


Living under Al-Shabab

453.  At [277] the ECtHR in Sufi & Elmi concluded that "a returnee  with  no
    recent experience of living in Somalia would be at real risk  of  being
    subjected to  treatment  proscribed  by  Article  3  in  an  Al-Shabab-
    controlled area".  It did so on the basis of  the  evidence  before  it
    regarding Al-Shabab's enforcement of "a particularly draconian  version
    of Sharia law" [273] and the impossibility of predicting the fate of  a
    returnee who came to the attention of Al-Shabab for failing  to  comply
    with that organisation's rules, having regard to reports that  "Somalis
    have been beaten or flogged for relatively minor infringements" [276].

454.  In these proceedings,  the  respondent  urged  the  Tribunal  to  draw
    somewhat different conclusions from the evidence that  was  before  us.
    It was submitted that this evidence disclosed that Al-Shabab  was  not,
    in fact, a monolithic organisation and that its practices  varied  from
    place  to  place.   There  was  evidence  of  Al-Shabab  tempering  its
    behaviour, as for example in  Dr  Hammond's  evidence  regarding  mixed
    education being permitted.   Furthermore,  the  nature  of  Al-Shabab's
    organisation and its relative lack of manpower resulted,  at  least  in
    various places, in  it  having  to  forge  working  relationships  with
    existing governing structures, such as elders, which had the result  of
    tempering the harshness of its social controls.

455.  All this is true; but  we  do  not  find  that  it  much  assists  the
    respondent's case.  It is, in practice, extremely difficult  indeed  to
    identify with any degree of precision the places where a more  moderate
    Al-Shabab rule pertains.  Furthermore,  there  was  evidence  that  Al-
    Shabab  leaders  rotate  from  place  to  place  on  a  regular  basis,
    presumably in part to ensure that that leadership remains unsullied  by
    what is perceived as un-Islamic ways of life.  It may,  of  course,  be
    the case that, as matters unfold, evidence regarding a particular  area
    will, indeed, show the requisite  stability  created  by  a  permanent,
    "moderate" Al-Shabab governance.  However, that is not the position  at
    present.

456.  Both the appellants and the respondent contended that the  picture  of
    what goes on in Al-Shabab areas was not an entire or true picture.  The
    respondent submitted that, based on certain  evidence,  it  was  likely
    that Al-Shabab atrocities were over-reported.  It is certainly the case
    that, looking at the various bundles of evidence before  us,  the  same
    incident occurs in more than one news report.  The fact  that  that  is
    clear to us suggests that information gatherers, such as  Human  Rights
    Watch, are likewise  able  to  identify  such  cases  and  ensure  that
    anything they say on the matter is not thereby exaggerated.

457.  The appellants, again on the basis of a certain  amount  of  evidence,
    submitted that it was likely there  was  under-reporting  of  Al-Shabab
    atrocities and other bad behaviour.  As a matter of common  sense,  one
    might imagine that an individual  beating  of  a  person  in  a  remote
    village in Somalia is less likely to be reported than the beating of  a
    person in a city, town or village in the United Kingdom.  But, be  that
    as it may, we do not need to have recourse to  any  supposition  as  to
    under-reporting.  It is abundantly plain from the evidence  before  us,
    only a part of which we have specifically  mentioned  above,  that  Al-
    Shabab regularly behaves in a way which seriously violates  fundamental
    human rights.

458.  This does not mean that everyone present in an Al-Shabab area faces  a
    real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.  The ECtHR did not so  find;  and
    nor do we, on the evidence before us.  Plainly, those who  are  of  the
    same ideological persuasion as Al-Shabab are not at the  same  risk  as
    those who are not.  In so saying, we are mindful of the evidence  which
    suggests that  a  majority  of  the  population  falls  in  the  latter
    category.

459.  The ECtHR considered that persons who were able  to  "play  the  game"
    (to use a phrase borrowed from the UKBA FFM report) would also  not  be
    at real risk; but that a person without recent experience of living  in
    Somalia would be unlikely to be able to do this.  We  will  examine  in
    due course the significance of "playing the game" in the context of the
    Refugee Convention.  First, however, we must assess  the  evidence,  in
    order to determine whether it can be said returning after a significant
    absence from Somalia would, indeed, preclude a person  from  conforming
    with Al-Shabab's requirements.

460.  Mr Eicke submitted that the extremely strong links that exist  between
    the Somali  Diaspora  and  people  in  southern  and  central  Somalia,
    particularly assisted by modern means of telecommunications, meant that
    it would be perfectly possible for a Somali in the  United  Kingdom  to
    enquire, either directly or through Diaspora organisations  or  groups,
    as  to  what  was  necessary,  by  way  of  compliance  with  Al-Shabab
    requirements, in the area  to  which  the  person  concerned  would  be
    returning.  To some extent, this is so, however, there are two  reasons
    why it does not materially carry matters forward for the respondent.

461.  First, there is the problem of  Al-Shabab's  rotating  leadership,  to
    which we have just referred.  It  is,  accordingly,  reasonably  likely
    that - despite the potential returnees' best efforts - any  information
    gleaned would be out of date before he or  she  was  actually  able  to
    return.  Secondly,  there  is  the  issue  of  the  alleged  heightened
    vulnerability to adverse Al-Shabab interest of a person returning  from
    the United Kingdom or other countries of the West.

462.  It was in relation to this issue that the appellants  drew  particular
    attention to the  evidence  regarding  Al-Shabab's  generally  paranoid
    behaviour and, in particular, its apparent fear  of  spies.   There  is
    sufficient of this evidence, often of a harrowing  nature,  to  support
    the appellants' contention that one of the ways in which a  person  may
    most seriously fall foul of Al-Shabab is by being suspected of being  a
    spy, whether for TFG/AMISOM, the Ethiopians, the USA or  other  western
    interests.

463.  The key question, however, is whether  this  risk,  which  appears  to
    exist to some extent for everyone living in Al-Shabab areas, becomes  a
    real risk of harm  in  respect  of  those  returning  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  Mr Eicke submitted that there was no evidence to suggest that
    it did.  He pointed to the  absence  in  the  news  and  other  reports
    regarding execution etc. for "spying" of anything to suggest  that  the
    victims were chosen because they had recently arrived in the area.   He
    also drew particular attention to the 16,000 Somalis whom Saudi  Arabia
    had last year returned to Somalia and the absence of any evidence  that
    they had been harmed (the most recent evidence indicates thousands more
    were returned this summer).  For their part, the  appellants  submitted
    that there was, in fact, no evidence one way or the other  as  to  what
    had happened to the returnees from Saudi Arabia and that the absence of
    any  evidence  that  those  returned  from  the   West   had   suffered
    difficulties in this regard could well be due to the fact that  few  if
    any such persons were being returned.

464.  It is true that there is no specific evidence one way  or  the  other.
    However, given the fact of Al-Shabab's paranoia,  its  violently  anti-
    Western stance and its (perhaps justified)  feeling  of  insecurity  in
    recent times,  as  funding  has  become  more  difficult  and  military
    reverses more common (including what appears  to  have  been  a  forced
    withdrawal from positions in Mogadishu), we do not consider that it  is
    engaging in speculation to conclude that the fact of having  come  from
    the United Kingdom is, as a general matter, likely to elevate the  risk
    to a person of being branded a spy, which carries the very real risk of
    serious ill-treatment or death.  The only exception we  would  make  is
    where the returnee is seeking out Al-Shabab in order to join its  ranks
    as a fighter for international jihad.  There  was  evidence  before  us
    that, regrettably, some of  those  joining  Al-Shabab  come  from  this
    country.

465.  Would a returnee from the United Kingdom be identifiable as such?   Mr
    Eicke said, in effect, that there was no hard evidence  to  indicate  a
    positive answer; the experts' testimony was anecdotal and  speculative.
    In  any  event,  the  matters  the  experts  had  identified,  such  as
    linguistic differences, gait and physical appearance, would be of  only
    temporary duration.

466.  We very much doubt whether persons who have  been  away  from  Somalia
    for only a short period of time, and certainly only since the emergence
    of Al-Shabab as a major actor in southern and  central  Somalia,  would
    have undergone linguistic changes and changes in his or her deportment,
    such as to draw  Al-Shabab's  attention  to  them.   We  are,  however,
    prepared to accept, having regard to the lower standard of proof,  that
    a person who has been outside Somalia for a longer  period  could  have
    undergone such changes.  It is also plainly the case that an overweight
    or even well-nourished man or woman is likely in the present sad  state
    of affairs to be noticeable in southern and central Somalia.

467.  As for these characteristics being only temporary, we  agree  with  Mr
    Toal that the adverse attention is likely to come to  pass  immediately
    or  soon  after  return,  before  the   individual   can   lose   those
    characteristics.  Mr Eicke did not seek to suggest that, as  a  general
    matter, there might be some place in Somalia where returnees could "re-
    acclimatise" before venturing into an Al-Shabab area.

468.  The position of women  in  such  areas  calls  for  specific  mention.
    Although there was some evidence that a woman's ability to  work  might
    be restricted by Al-Shabab, the stronger evidence indicated that  women
    are, in fact, allowed  to  undertake  employment  in  Al-Shabab  areas,
    particularly where they are the breadwinners and  the  consequences  of
    any other attitude would be to make the woman and  her  family  utterly
    destitute.  The evidence on forced marriages was too exiguous  to  draw
    any meaningful  conclusion.   There  was,  however,  evidence  that  in
    certain Al-Shabab areas at least women were compelled to dress in a way
    that involved them wearing hoods  and  extremely  heavy  clothing  such
    that, as Ms Short submitted, it would be in itself inhuman treatment to
    expect a woman to do any kind of activity during a Somali summer.

469.  The evidence that this is what women are, in fact, required to  do  by
    Al-Shabab was, however, somewhat sparse and contradicted, both  by  the
    photographic evidence to which Mr Eicke drew our attention as  well  as
    by the evidence of women being  able  to  work  and  look  after  their
    families, and the evidence regarding the significant journeys  made  on
    foot by women seeking respite from  the  drought.   None  of  the  news
    reports to which our attention has  been  drawn  mentioned  such  women
    claiming to have been compelled to dress in the way just described.  We
    accordingly conclude that a female returnee to an Al-Shabab  area  from
    the United Kingdom is not reasonably likely to face treatment  that  is
    materially different from that faced by a man.

470.  We do not find the evidence shows that  a  returnee  from  the  United
    Kingdom runs any significant risk of forced recruitment into the  ranks
    of  Al-Shabab.  Mr  Burns'  evidence  was  to  the  effect  that   such
    recruitment was not common and the latest evidence tends to support his
    view. Nor do we consider that a returnee from the United Kingdom  would
    be at any greater material risk as a result of a perception that he  or
    she would have money, whether or not  from  United  Kingdom  Government
    sources.  Indeed, we are not persuaded at all by the  expert  evidence,
    which sought to suggest that there was  some  degree  of  animosity  as
    between  current  residents  in  Somalia  and  the  Diaspora.   On  the
    contrary,  the  evidence  points  to  an  extremely  strong  degree  of
    connection between the two groups, not  least  financially.   There  is
    only very limited evidence  that  Al-Shabab  has  successfully  stopped
    people from using mobile telephones etc. in order to get funds, and  we
    do not consider it can be said that there is a reasonable likelihood of
    a person returning to an Al-Shabab area being identified as a  returnee
    on the basis of his or her use of a mobile telephone.

471.  Our conclusions on this issue  are,  accordingly,  with  some  nuances
    very much like those of the  ECtHR  in  Sufi  &  Elmi:  in  general,  a
    returnee with no recent experience of living in  Somalia  would  be  at
    real risk of being subjected to treatment proscribed by Article 3 in an
    Al-Shabab controlled area.  We consider that "no recent experience"  in
    this context means that the person concerned left  Somalia  before  the
    recent rise of Al-Shabab, and its  territorial  gains  in  the  region,
    which occurred in 2008.  This does not, however,  mean  that  a  person
    with such recent experience will be unable to  make  good  a  claim  to
    international protection.  Even in such a case,  the  person  concerned
    will, of course, be returning from the United Kingdom,  with  all  that
    that may entail.  However, in general it will be less likely that  such
    a person would be readily identifiable as a returnee.  Even  if  he  or
    she were, the evidence may point to him or her having  struck  up  some
    form of accommodation with Al-Shabab, whilst  previously  living  under
    their rule

472.  Although having family in the Al-Shabab area of return may,  depending
    on the circumstances, alleviate the risk, the rotating  nature  of  Al-
    Shabab leadership and the  fact  that  punishments  are  meted  out  in
    apparent disregard of local sensibilities mean  that,  in  general,  it
    cannot be said that the presence of family is likely to mean  the  risk
    ceases to be a real one.

473.  We consider that the general findings  we  have  just  made  encompass
    those who are reasonably likely  to  have  to  pass  through  Al-Shabab
    areas.  Although the evidence regarding behaviour  at  checkpoints  was
    mixed, and we accept that in some areas, such as the  Afgoye  Corridor,
    there has been (at least until very recently) considerable  traffic  to
    and from the Al-Shabab-controlled area,  the  unpredictability  of  Al-
    Shabab behaviour, the extremely grave and immediate likely consequences
    of being categorised as a spy  and  the  assumption  that  one  of  the
    functions of checkpoints is to serve  what  Al-Shabab  regards  as  its
    security concerns, point clearly towards  including  travellers  within
    the general finding, just as the ECtHR did at [277] of Sufi & Elmi.


Humanitarian situation

474.  We have considered in Part H of this  determination  the  judgment  of
    the ECtHR at [278] to [283] of Sufi and Elmi  and  its  use  of  MSS  v
    Belgium and Greece.  In essence, the use which the ECtHR made  of  that
    case was  that  because  Greece  was  responsible  for  the  Article  3
    infringement on its own territory, (not least because it  had  detained
    the applicant but  also  because  of  the  way  of  life  to  which  it
    effectively condemned him after  release),  there  was  no  need,  when
    assessing whether Belgium  had  breached  Article  3  by  removing  the
    applicant to Greece, to apply the "very exceptional" test  or  standard
    found in the case of N v United Kingdom.

475.  At  [282]  of  Sufi  &  Elmi,  the  Court  found  that  if  "the  dire
    humanitarian conditions in Somalia were solely  or  even  predominantly
    attributable to poverty or to the state's lack  of  resources  to  deal
    with a naturally occurring phenomenon, such as drought, the test in N v
    United Kingdom may well have been  considered  to  be  the  appropriate
    one".   The  Court,  however,  found  that  the  drought  was  only   a
    contributory factor to the humanitarian crisis,  which  was  "primarily
    due to the direct and indirect actions of the parties to the conflict".

476.  As we have already held, whilst we consider it  right  to  have  close
    regard to the Court's findings of fact, to which it  then  applied  its
    jurisprudence, we are in no sense bound by section 2 of the 1998 Act or
    its attendant domestic jurisprudence to make the same findings of fact.

477.  On the evidence before us, we conclude that it is not the  actions  of
    the parties to the conflict which have caused the state  of  famine  in
    southern and central Somalia and the present international humanitarian
    crisis but, rather, the worst drought there  has  been  for  60  years.
    Although the effects of the drought have been noticeable for some time,
    and discussed in  previous  country  guidance  cases,  the  predominant
    factor behind the decision of families to leave their  homes  and  trek
    long distances, in often appalling conditions, either to  Mogadishu  or
    to neighbouring  countries,  has  been  because  their  livestock  have
    perished, and their subsistence farming  is  no  longer  sufficient  to
    support them.  It is impossible  to  accept  the  suggestion  that  the
    parties to the conflict have  caused  a  breakdown  in  infrastructure,
    which has led these families to leave.

478.  There is no  suggestion  that,  even  before  the  Somalia  civil  war
    started in the  1990s,  there  was  much  in  these  areas  by  way  of
    infrastructure.  There is more force in the point that systems of  clan
    support have broken down as a result of the  fighting  and  still  more
    force in the submission that the activities of Al-Shabab, not least  in
    prohibiting foreign non-Muslim aid,  have  made  the  situation  worse.
    But, the fact remains in our assessment that it is the drought that  is
    the predominant cause of what the world was witnessing  in  Somalia  in
    the summer of 2011.

479. In so  finding  we  have  had  regard  to  the  very  latest  evidence,
    including the observations of Professor Menkhaus,  that  Somaliland  is
    also affected by the drought but has  avoided  famine  because  it  has
    social peace and governance. But the requirement of "predominant cause"
    cannot be so easily satisfied; and the evidence points  to  that  cause
    being a natural one, albeit  helped  on  by  human  beings.  Thus,  for
    example, the UN Secretary General's report  referred  to  deforestation
    exacerbating peoples' vulnerability to drought and flood.

480.  This does not, however, mean that, because they are not a  predominant
    cause, the direct and indirect actions of the parties to  the  conflict
    fall to be left out of account in  deciding  whether  the  humanitarian
    conditions in southern and central Somalia are such as to bring Article
    3 into play.  On the contrary, as we have already indicated,  it  seems
    to us that those actions have a very real role  in  the  assessment  of
    whether, in terms of the law as set out in  N  v  United  Kingdom,  the
    present situation is one of those "very  exceptional  cases"  in  which
    humanitarian conditions trigger Article 3.  Looking at the evidence  in
    this holistic way, we find that the present situation in  southern  and
    central Somalia is, indeed, one of those "very exceptional cases".

481.  In so finding we have reminded ourselves of  Mr  Eicke's  submissions,
    as recorded in  Part  H,  which  were  effectively  reiterated  in  the
    respondent's October written submissions, to the effect that  one  must
    beware of diluting the N test by bringing into account such  things  as
    the incompetence or corruption of a government of a State, as a  factor
    in making its inhabitants more prone to  the  effects  of  climate  and
    disease,  than  are  those  in  the  developed   world.    There   are,
    regrettably, very many countries whose system of  government  could  be
    said to aggravate the adverse effects of natural phenomena.  But it  is
    the very prevalence of such cases that, we consider, answers Mr Eicke's
    objection: they are not capable of underpinning a finding that a  "very
    exceptional" situation exists.

482.  The contrast between such cases  and  that  of  southern  and  central
    Somalia  is  stark,  as  the  evidence  shows.  A   test   founded   on
    exceptionality must still be capable of  being  met;  otherwise  it  is
    bogus. We consider that the widespread famine, unique to our planet  at
    the present  time,  coupled  with  the  exacerbating  factors  we  have
    described, discloses a situation of sufficient exceptionality to  cross
    the threshold set in N. It is  this  mix  of  factors  that  makes  the
    situation exceptional, not the predominance  of  the  parties'  actions
    that causes the threshold to be lowered.

483.  We need to say something about the position of  IDPs  and  IDP  camps.
    In Sufi & Elmi, the ECtHR regarded the Afgoye Corridor as,  in  effect,
    one large IDP camp, in which conditions for the majority of  IDPs  were
    such as to engage Article 3.  The Court reached that conclusion in part
    by a comparison with the Dadaab Camps in Kenya, about which  there  was
    more background evidence [291].

484.  In their closing submissions of July, the  appellants  drew  attention
    to what our predecessor tribunals have said about the likely  situation
    of a person, displaced by fighting, having to subsist in a  Somali  IDP
    camp.  We agree  with  what  was  there  said.   It  is,  nevertheless,
    important to observe that the ECtHR appears, on the evidence before it,
    impliedly to have accepted that the Afgoye Corridor settlement is not a
    place where every inhabitant, or even everyone who might be  designated
    an IDP, is at real risk of Article 3 violations.  At  [286]  the  Court
    relied  upon  evidence  that   IDPs   were   "experiencing   increasing
    difficulties in finding shelter in the Afgoye Corridor as landlords are
    either selling land that IDPs live on or are charging  rent  that  they
    cannot afford".  There was similar evidence before us.

485. The inexorable conclusion from this is,  of  course,  that  the  Afgoye
    Corridor,  the  satellite  photographs  of  which  do  indeed  indicate
    significant recent expansion and ordering, is a place where persons  of
    varying economic means live.  The evidence regarding commuting  between
    the Afgoye Corridor  and  Mogadishu,  for  the  purpose  of  conducting
    business in the city, is not compatible with  a  blanket  finding  that
    everyone in the Afgoye Corridor settlement  is  effectively  destitute.
    That is so, notwithstanding the recent designation of  famine  in  such
    camps. These are places where the appellants'  own  evidence  indicates
    that there is food to be had, albeit at a high price.  We find that, as
    with the Dadaab Camps, there are various kinds of persons  who  may  be
    labelled IDPs.  Some of these - indeed, it  would  seem  a  significant
    number - have achieved some form of socio-economic  security,  enabling
    them to buy land and undertake  businesses.   It  is,  however,  highly
    likely that, for many more, life remains  highly  precarious,  and  the
    famine conditions have made matters worse than they were before.

486.  Our conclusion on the humanitarian position in  southern  and  central
    Somalia (excluding Mogadishu) is as follows.  Like the ECtHR  at  [296]
    of Sufi & Elmi (but by a different route) we have concluded that  as  a
    general matter a returnee who would find themselves  in  an  IDP  camp,
    following a return to southern and central Somalia at the present time,
    would be at real risk of exposure to treatment contrary to Article 3 on
    account of the humanitarian conditions there.

487. However, we go further. Given the severe  nature  of  the  humanitarian
    crisis, worse even than when  the  ECtHR  considered  the  position,  a
    person who would in normal conditions have had the ability to go to his
    or her home village, which is unaffected by the fighting but  which  is
    within an area in which there has been a declaration of famine,  should
    at present and as a general matter be assumed to face in  that  village
    the kind of desperate situation  as  is  disclosed  in  the  background
    evidence, with the result that, lacking means of sustenance, he or  she
    would have to try to take refuge somewhere else, such as many thousands
    of others are doing.  Leaving aside for this purpose the issue  of  Al-
    Shabab, we do not consider that even the possible availability  of  the
    United Kingdom Government money for return (as to  which  there  is  an
    evidential dispute) is likely materially to affect the position in this
    regard. In areas where  there  simply  is  no  food,  having  money  is
    unlikely to put a person in a better position; everyone in  such  areas
    is reasonably likely to be  reliant  on  international  aid.  (We  note
    Professor Menkhaus' comment that "there is food on the market  in  much
    of Somalia", but we are here considering a rural person, where the only
    food was from the land and that land is now barren.)  Thus, although we
    have, like the Strasbourg Court, used the likelihood of ending up in an
    IDP camp as a general touchstone for Article 3 harm, the basic position
    is, rather, that the generality  of  those  hypothetically  removed  to
    southern and central Somalia at the present time will  face  Article  3
    violations by reason of the humanitarian conditions prevailing  in  the
    region.

488.  It is necessary to emphasise that these are general  findings.   There
    may be  cases where the evidence indicates that a person is from,  say,
    a town in southern and central Somalia (other than Mogadishu) where the
    drought is having less of an impact than in the countryside, and  where
    a person has family or clan support.  If the town in question is  under
    Al-Shabab control, there are likely to be other problems,  as  we  have
    indicated  above.   But,  purely  by  reference  to  the   humanitarian
    position, such a person  would,  nevertheless,  be  returnable  without
    Article 3 breach.  Judicial fact-finders will need to be satisfied that
    the evidence supports such a conclusion (see further paragraphs 503  to
    507 below).

489. The likelihood of going to an IDP camp in the Afgoye Corridor  may  not
    involve  an  Article  3  risk,  even  given  the  present  humanitarian
    position, where the person concerned is not reasonably likely  to  find
    themselves at the bottom of the socio-economic ladder but,  rather,  is
    someone who owns property and has a business. That is  highly  unlikely
    to be the case, however, with a person  who  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for any significant length  of  time.  Indeed,  absent  special
    factors, such a person is highly likely to be in a vulnerable  position
    in  such  a  camp,  notwithstanding  money  from  the  United   Kingdom
    government.

490.  Finally, it is  necessary  to  make  it  clear  that  the  generalised
    Article 3 risk, which exists by reason of the famine, is likely  to  be
    temporary in duration. The international effort seen in the past months
    has undoubtedly begun to make an impact; and it  is  to  be  hoped  and
    expected that, once the dangers of the rainy  season  are  passed,  the
    humanitarian position will reach the point  where  the  exceptional  "N
    situation" is over. As we have said in  relation  to  the  conflict  in
    Mogadishu, judicial fact-finders will need  to  have  close  regard  to
    whether the evidence shows a  sufficient  change  to  depart  from  our
    findings on this particular issue. Even then, however, absent some more
    fundamental change in the picture, there are still likely to be Article
    3 issues if, notwithstanding the  end  of  the  famine,  the  potential
    returnee is still reasonably likely to end up  at  the  bottom  of  the
    socio-economic ladder in an IDP camp.


(c) Refugee Convention

491.  As can be seen from Part H  of  this  determination,  the  subject  of
    living  under  Al-Shabab  control  gave  rise  to  a  number  of  legal
    submissions from the  parties.   The  appellants  were  keen,  in  oral
    evidence, to assert they had genuine  religious  differences  with  Al-
    Shabab, stemming from their  different  interpretation  of  the  Muslim
    faith.  The submission made  in  consequence  was  that,  even  if  the
    appellants, following return to an Al-Shabab area, were able  to  "play
    the game" demanded by  Al-Shabab,  they  would  nevertheless  suffer  a
    violation of their right to freedom of religion.   They  also  asserted
    that they had a conscientious, if not religious, objection to paying Al-
    Shabab "taxes".

492.  At Part M of this determination, we set out our  findings  as  to  the
    credibility of the evidence  of  the  appellants  on  these  and  other
    issues.

493.  Whilst we do not rule out the possibility  of  a  person  suffering  a
    flagrant breach of his or her right to freedom of religion, as a result
    of finding themselves having to obey the norms  imposed  by  those  who
    follow a far stricter (indeed, in the view  of  the  person  concerned,
    abhorrent)  version  of  the  same  basic  religion,   the   kinds   of
    requirements imposed by  Al-Shabab,  about  which  we  heard  evidence,
    objectionable as many of them are, do not readily  lend  themselves  to
    such a conclusion.  However, as  we  have  indicated  in  Part  H,  the
    question of whether the Refugee Convention is engaged  in  practice  is
    unlikely to turn on such matters, and does  not  in  the  case  of  the
    present appellants.  It is abundantly plain from the evidence, that Al-
    Shabab's reasons for imposing its  requirements  and  restrictions  are
    religious.   It  is  also  plain  from  the  evidence  that  those  who
    transgress and are punished are regarded by Al-Shabab,  not  merely  as
    people who have transgressed what it sees as its  laws,  but  who  have
    thereby demonstrated that they remain in a state of kufr (apostasy), as
    described in the International Crisis Group report.  This is not to say
    that every such punishment by every Al-Shabab  member  in  every  place
    will be so motivated; but it is, on  the  evidence,  likely  enough  to
    constitute a real risk.

494.  There is, accordingly, the required religious  element  under  Article
    1(A) of the Refugee Convention,  existing  in  the  potential  refugee;
    namely, imputed religious opinion.

495.  The remaining issue, therefore, is whether there is a real  risk  that
    the punishment  inflicted  will  be  sufficiently  serious  to  satisfy
    Article 9 of the Qualification Directive.  On the basis of the evidence
    we have seen, we are fully satisfied there is a real risk that it would
    be.

496.  At this point, the principle in RT (Zimbabwe) locks  firmly  onto  the
    factual/legal matrix and provides the answer to the question of whether
    those returnees who, for whatever reason, would be able  to  "play  the
    game" and who are reasonably likely to do so, nevertheless fall  to  be
    treated as refugees.  On the basis  of  RT  (Zimbabwe),  they  do.   We
    remind ourselves of what the Court said at [36]:-

         "36.     It  may  be  said  that  there  is  marked  difference  in
             seriousness between the impact of having to  lie  on  isolated
             occasions about political opinions which one  does  not  have,
             and the 'long-term deliberate concealment'  of  an  'immutable
             characteristic', involving denial to the members of the  group
             their 'fundamental right to be what they are'  (see  per  Lord
             Hope para 11, 21).  We are not persuaded, however,  that  this
             is a material distinction in this context.   The  question  is
             not the seriousness of the prospective maltreatment (which  is
             not in issue) but  the  reason  for  it.   If  the  reason  is
             political opinion,  or  imputed  political  opinion,  that  is
             enough to bring it within the Convention.  In  this  case,  we
             are concerned with the 'imputed' political opinions  of  those
             concerned, not their  actual  opinions  (see  para  4  above).
             Accordingly, the degree of their political commitment in fact,
             and whether political  activity  is  of  central  or  marginal
             importance to their lives, are beside the point.   The  'core'
             of the protected right is the right not to be  persecuted  for
             holding political views which they  do  not  have.   There  is
             nothing 'marginal' about the risk of being stopped by  militia
             and persecuted because of that.  If they  are  forced  to  lie
             about their absence of political beliefs, solely in  order  to
             avoid persecution, that seems to  us  to  be  covered  by  the
             HJ(Iran) principle,  and  does  not  defeat  their  claims  to
             asylum."

497.  As for the issue of Al-Shabab "taxes", we have already indicated  that
    we agree with Mr Toal's submission that, whilst a genuine conscientious
    objection to such payment is a prerequisite for  the  purposes  of  the
    Refugee Convention, in practice it would  take  little  to  persuade  a
    judicial fact-finder that someone did indeed find it genuinely  against
    their conscience to make financial contributions, however  unwillingly,
    to a proscribed terrorist organisation, such as Al-Shabab. Having  said
    that, however, we do not believe that the present appellants  have  any
    such genuine objections (see Part M below).


(3) Internal relocation

498.  As we have explained in Part H(4) of this  determination,  we  do  not
    find that any formal burden of proof rests on the  respondent  to  show
    that internal relocation  is  reasonably  available  to  an  appellant.
    Depending on the nature  of  the  case,  however,  the  respondent  may
    (indeed, usually will) be required to raise the issue, so as to put  it
    "in play" in  any  appellate  proceedings,  but  it  is  then  for  the
    appellant to discharge the burden, as part of the requirement to prove,
    to the lower standard, that he or  she  is  entitled  to  international
    protection.  What sort of evidence will be required to demonstrate that
    it would not be reasonable to expect the person to  relocate  will,  of
    course, depend on all the circumstances.


(a)  To Mogadishu

499.  In the  light  of  our  earlier  findings  regarding  Mogadishu,  that
    persons currently there are, as a general matter,  running  an  Article
    15(c) risk, it would plainly be unreasonable to expect a  person  whose
    home is elsewhere in  southern  and  central  Somalia  to  relocate  to
    Mogadishu.  The limited qualification we have made to the assessment of
    Article 15(c) risk is highly unlikely to have application to  a  person
    whose home area is not Mogadishu because  the  necessary  accommodation
    and social support to alleviate the risk of indiscriminate violence are
    unlikely to be available.

500.  Another factor  in  assessing  the  reasonableness  of  relocation  to
    Mogadishu is the present humanitarian situation in the city,  including
    the state of famine that has been declared in the IDP camps.  A  person
    with significant contacts may be able (absent Article 15(c) issues)  to
    avoid having to live in such a camp and thus have a  viable  relocation
    alternative.


(b)  To an IDP camp in the Afgoye Corridor

501.  On the basis of our earlier findings, it would, as a  general  matter,
    be unreasonable/unduly harsh to expect a returnee to  live  in  an  IDP
    camp, unless there was evidence that he or she would be able to achieve
    the lifestyle of those better-off inhabitants of  the  Afgoye  Corridor
    settlements.  That would depend, we consider, on  the  returnee  having
    family or other significant connections with such better-off  elements.
    In the absence of these, we do not consider that even the likelihood of
    United Kingdom money for the returnee would be enough to eliminate  the
    risks inherent in IDP camps,  including  threats  against  the  person.
    This is, of course, particularly relevant  in  the  case  of  a  female
    returnee.

(c)  To an area controlled by Al-Shabab

502.  For the reasons we have already given,  a  returnee  from  the  United
    Kingdom to an Al-Shabab area, certainly if he or she had no history  of
    having lived under Al-Shabab in that area, faces at the present time  a
    real risk of serious harm.  Internal relocation to  such  an  area  is,
    accordingly, out of the question.  Although  Al-Shabab  appears  to  be
    losing ground outside Mogadishu to the TFG, it still  remains  dominant
    in large parts of southern and central Somalia.


(d)  To an area not controlled by Al-Shabab

503.  As we have found, the current  humanitarian  crisis  in  southern  and
    central Somalia is, at present, in general  sufficiently  grave  as  to
    engage Article 3.  It therefore follows that internal relocation  to  a
    place stricken by famine or near-famine would not be possible, even  if
    that place is not under the control  of  Al-Shabab.   Nevertheless,  we
    have found that there are certain exceptions to the Article 3 risk,  as
    regards a person's home area in central and southern Somalia (paragraph
    468 above).

504.  Although a person returning to a place that  was  his  or  her  former
    home is likely to be in a better position  than  someone  who  has  not
    previously lived there, the importance of clan connections remains,  as
    it did in AM & AM, notwithstanding the enormous strains placed  on  the
    clan system.  Landinfo (June 2009) suggested that clan  protection  "is
    still relevant, albeit primarily in relation  to  ordinary  crime"  and
    that clans continue to be important  in  relation  to  where  a  person
    flees.  The evidence of Tony Burns suggested this was true even in  Al-
    Shabab-controlled areas.  The Landinfo  report  quoted  one  source  as
    follows:-

         "Scarce resources and natural disasters such as floods and droughts
         limit the possibility for and willingness to support  new  arrivals
         in an area, even where they belong  to  the  same  clan.   However,
         great efforts are still made  to  help  relatives  and  neighbours.
         ...it is common  to  find  families  consisting  of  six  to  eight
         members, opening their homes to a further six to  eight  relatives.
         They share the little they have, but without  the  money  transfers
         from abroad, the  already  difficult  living  conditions  would  be
         significantly worse for the large majority of the population."

505.  Population movement tracking reports from UNOCHA estimate the  numbers
    of journeys carried out on the basis of  seeking  clan/social  support.
    Monthly figures range between 11,000 and  22,000  but  with  69,000  in
    January 2010 and 48,000 in March 2010.  Albeit looking  at  a  slightly
    earlier time, the  Danish  Immigration  Service  in  2007  recorded  an
    international  organisation  as  saying  that  "any  Somali   has   the
    opportunity to attain security within his or her clan.   This  is  even
    applicable if a person  does  not  have  any  close  relatives  in  the
    country.  As long as a person is living inside the traditional area  of
    the clan he or she enjoys the protection of that clan."

506.  A senior researcher in the Institute for Security  Studies,  reporting
    on 11 July 2011, stated that, following the failure of the Somali state
    "over the years, a variety of local and smaller  government  structures
    have emerged in that country - as opposed to large-scale actors - which
    are often to a considerable extent effective in governing smaller parts
    of the country.  In recent times, what  has  emerged  along  the  coast
    could be likened to a loose bunch of city states."

507.  A person who has a clan or strong family connection with a  particular
    area  in  south  or  central  Somalia,  not  controlled  by  Al-Shabab,
    particularly a town, may, in the light of all this,  have  an  internal
    relocation alternative to that place.  In  the  light  of  the  present
    humanitarian crisis, the cogency of the indicators pointing to  such  a
    position would need to be powerful.  However, as  the  nature  of  that
    crisis diminishes, as we all hope it must, the importance  of  such  an
    internal relocation alternative is likely to grow.  The same is true if
    Al-Shabab continues to lose territory to the  TFG/AMISOM  and/or  those
    aligned with them.


(4) Travelling home or to another place of safety

508.  In AM & AM, the Tribunal considered  that  the  method  and  route  of
    return of the appellants  to  their  respective  home  areas  were  not
    legally  relevant  to  the  Tribunal's  task   of   determining   their
    entitlement to international protection.  That approach was  questioned
    in HH & Others and we have concluded that, in the present appeals,  the
    issue of risk whilst travelling home or to another place of  safety  is
    one which we need to address in order to decide the appellants'  claims
    to international protection.

509.  To this end, we received a  good  deal  of  evidence  and  submissions
    regarding methods and routes of return, including from Mogadishu to the
    appellants' home areas (in those cases where that was  different).   In
    all five cases, the respondent's intention is that the appellant should
    be returned to Mogadishu.  Precisely the same stance was taken  by  the
    respondent  in  Sufi  &  Elmi,  notwithstanding  that  Sufi  came  from
    Qoryoley, a town under Al-Shabab  control,  and  Elmi  from  Somaliland
    [302] [311].  The ECtHR at [311] was clearly  puzzled  as  to  why  the
    respondent was not proposing to return Elmi to Hargeisa, the main  town
    of Somaliland.  The Court thought  that  her  decision  not  to  do  so
    appeared to contradict the assertion  that  Elmi  would,  in  fact,  be
    admitted to  that  self-governing  area.   As  we  have  already  seen,
    appellant ZF,  despite  her  protestations  to  the  contrary,  has  in
    practice been held to come from Somaliland.   The  respondent's  stance
    was, in effect, that it was up to appellant ZF, if she saw fit, to  get
    from Mogadishu to Somaliland.  It is,  however,  for  the  Tribunal  to
    decide whether it is reasonably likely that  she  will  suffer  serious
    harm getting there.  If she would, appellant ZF would  be  entitled  to
    international protection, subject to the issue of being  able  to  live
    elsewhere in Somalia. In this regard, Article 8  of  the  Qualification
    Directive is not apt to exclude an assessment of  "risks  to  life  and
    limb", as opposed to mere "technical obstacles to return" (QD [83]).

510.  The same is  true  of  appellant  AMM  (who  comes  from  Jowhar)  and
    appellant  MW  (who  comes  from  Merka)  and,  indeed,  of  the  other
    appellants, who need to get from Mogadishu International  Airport,  the
    point of return, to the city of Mogadishu.

511.  We have already made findings  regarding  the  risk  to  a  person  of
    having to traverse an Al-Shabab area.  It  is,  however,  necessary  at
    this point to say a little more on the issue.  Mr Eicke submitted  that
    there was no evidence that every person passing  through  an  Al-Shabab
    checkpoint, even on a temporary basis, would be stopped and  mistreated
    if they were, for example, a man without a beard.  He  also  emphasised
    the evidence of Mr Burns that the main  risk  at  checkpoints  was  the
    payment of tolls.  Dealing with travel from Mogadishu to Somaliland, Mr
    Eicke submitted that the evidence from the UNOCHA  and  the  UKBA  fact
    finding report indicated that many IDPs travelled to Somaliland,  where
    they were referred to as "refugees"; and that overland routes  included
    travelling via  Afgoye,  Beled  Weyne,  Galkayo,  Las  Anod  and  Burao
    (Microcon - June 2009 - Anna Lindley).  The Anna  Lindley  report  also
    indicated that the evidence did not show  a  risk  for  southerners  at
    checkpoints in Somaliland. The Nairobi evidence contained  a  statement
    by an individual, who had escaped from Al-Shabab and yet  was  able  to
    travel through areas where there must have been Al-Shabab checkpoints.

512.  Mr Burns considered that taking an overland route  from  Mogadishu  to
    Somaliland would be  unimaginable,  or,  as  recorded  by  Mr  Schwenk,
    "insane".  Those comments were, however, according to  the  respondent,
    from people who had no first-hand knowledge of conditions en route.  We
    deal below with how one might gain entry to  Somaliland,  once  at  its
    borders, including the issue of the type of passport a  person  who  is
    not actually being returned by the respondent to Hargeisa  might  need,
    in order to get him to Somaliland.

513.  Mr  Schwenk  criticised  the  respondent's  reliance  on  the  Lindley
    report.  He said it was concerned with those fleeing the  then  present
    Ethiopian forces and that the majority of those covered by  the  report
    were  travelling  in  family/clan  groups.   Even  then,   the   report
    demonstrated that there were serious  problems  for  those  travelling.
    Many of the poorest people found themselves walking large  segments  of
    the journey and many described it as "the worst time  in  their  life".
    Some had to endure considerable hardship, walking for days with  little
    or no food or water, as well as being prey  -  if  women  -  to  sexual
    violence which appeared to be "very common".

514.  The respondent also relied on AM (Evidence - route of return)  Somalia
    [2011] UKUT 54 (IAC) which held,  relying  on  the  UKBA  fact  finding
    report, that Al-Shabab checkpoints "are generally well disciplined  and
    their concern is whether travellers comply with the rules and norms  of
    behaviour required".

515.  We do not consider that the Lindley report has a material  bearing  on
    the issue.  It was compiled before the full emergence of  Al-Shabab  in
    its present form.  It is clear that the main informants were  parts  of
    what appear to have been significant groups of people, moving north  in
    order to find refuge.   There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that,  if
    appellant ZF were to embark on the journey, she would be able  to  move
    in such a group.  In any event, it is evident that such group movements
    run the real risk of enduring considerable vicissitudes.

516.  So far as Al-Shabab is concerned,  as  is  already  evident  from  our
    findings, a distinction  needs  to  be  drawn  between  people  passing
    through checkpoints, who are long-term residents of Somalia, and  those
    who have been living in the West for any significant  period  of  time.
    The evidence that we have had the benefit of considering is far greater
    than that available to the Tribunal in AM [2011].

517.  We do not consider that the risks to travellers,  particularly  women,
    are likely to be materially alleviated by travelling in  a  minibus  or
    other form of transport, operated by a person who has never  been  away
    and "knows the ropes".  Using such a form of transport may, we  accept,
    be of assistance; but the combination of the  unpredictability  of  Al-
    Shabab behaviour and the evidence of their brutality,  when  they  take
    against an individual, is such as to constitute a real risk.

518.  Whilst being in the presence of a male  minibus  driver,  or  similar,
    might facilitate travel by a single woman, it  does  not  significantly
    alter either the general risk we have just described  or  the  specific
    risk of sexual violence towards women.

519.  Although we have concentrated on appellant ZF, the  findings  we  have
    made regarding travel also apply to those, such as  appellant  MW,  who
    might be travelling from Mogadishu to destinations  within  central  or
    southern Somalia.  A judicial fact- finder would need to  be  satisfied
    that the person concerned could, in fact, travel home or to  the  other
    proposed place of safety, without going  into  an  Al-Shabab-controlled
    area.  Even then, the position for unaccompanied women is likely to  be
    severely problematic, compared with, say, a young, able-bodied man.

520.  The overwhelming message from the evidence before us  is  that  it  is
    sufficiently safe to travel from Mogadishu International  Airport  into
    the city.  TFG/AMISOM  control  the  road.   Although  there  was  some
    evidence of problems, including IEDs, the risk run in travelling  along
    the road, in any form of transport, does not constitute a real risk  of
    serious harm, including Article 15(c) risk.  The latter risk arises  by
    reason of being in the city.

521.  So far we have dealt with overland travel.  A striking feature of  the
    evidence before us, however, and one which may well  have  implications
    for future Somali appeals, was the availability and relative safety  of
    air travel within Somalia (including, for this purpose, Somaliland).

522.  Flying into Mogadishu  International  Airport  is  sufficiently  safe.
    This was the clear import of the evidence, both written and  oral.   Dr
    Hammond's description of  problems  at  the  airport  and  of  aircraft
    adopting a certain trajectory in order  to  avoid  arms  fire,  was  at
    variance not only with the evidence we heard but also the  findings  in
    HH and AM & AM.  The airport area itself is, and long has  been,  under
    the control of TFG/AMISOM. We were not provided with  any  evidence  to
    suggest that commercial aircraft are at real  risk  of  being  shot  at
    whilst en route to other airports in Somalia.

523.  Informants told  the  UKBA's  Fact-Finding  Mission  that  air  travel
    within Somalia was common.  We were presented with no evidence from the
    appellants to indicate the contrary.  The FFM team were told  that,  as
    well as regular flights  between  Mogadishu  and  Nairobi,  there  were
    flights to Hargeisa from Nairobi and flights from Djibouti  to  Berbera
    (Somaliland).  African Express, Puntair, Juba and  Dalow  all  operated
    flights in Somalia.   A  security  adviser  said  that  "people  travel
    regularly within Somalia  by  land  and  by  air.   Most  airports  are
    operational, mainly with charter flights and it is possible to  fly  to
    Mogadishu, Hargeisa, Garowe, Galcayo and Bossasso."

524.  If, in a hypothetical  case,  the  respondent  is  able  to  point  to
    evidence that the returnee can fly from Mogadishu International Airport
    to a town in central and southern Somalia, the focus of the appeal  may
    well be upon the person's hypothetical situation in that  town,  rather
    than on any problems accessing it by an overland route.  This was  not,
    however, the position  in  the  present  appeals,  where  there  is  no
    suggestion that appellant AMM could fly to Jowhar or  appellant  MW  to
    Merka (both of which are, in any event,  currently  controlled  by  Al-
    Shabab).  Nor was it suggested that either they or appellants FM and AF
    (who come from Mogadishu) could fly to some other place in  central  or
    southern Somalia.


(5) Somaliland and Puntland

525.  These appeals were not earmarked  as  potential  vehicles  for  giving
    country  guidance  on  the  position  within  Somaliland  or  Puntland.
    However, subject to what we will say in a  moment,  it  appears  to  be
    accepted by the respondent that "the authorities  in  Somaliland,  like
    the authorities in Puntland, would only admit those who originated from
    the territory or those who  had  close  affiliation  to  the  territory
    through clan membership.  In Somaliland,  the  majority  clan  was  the
    Isaaq" (Sufi & Elmi  [103]).   The  ECtHR  was  there  citing  what  it
    regarded as evidence from the respondent's Operational Guidance Note on
    Somalia of 1 July 2010.  Whilst we take the view (as the  Tribunal  did
    in EM & Others) that Operational  Guidance  Notes  are  not,  as  such,
    evidence, it is nevertheless possible to have  regard  to  them  as  an
    indication of the respondent's view of the available evidence.  Indeed,
    an examination of the OGN of March 2009, included in  the  evidence  of
    the appellants, makes it plain that  the  respondent's  views  in  this
    regard are rooted in the COIS Report on Somalia. There is, accordingly,
    no evidential basis for departing from the conclusion at  [101]  of  NM
    and others, that Somaliland and Puntland

                 in  general  only  accept  back  persons  who  were  former
       residents of those regions and were members of locally  based  clans
       or sub clans. The Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs report  of
       November 2004 notes at paragraph 4.6 that UNHCR is  encouraging  the
       return  of  Somalis  originating  from   Somaliland   and   Puntland
       'Originating from' is interpreted here to  mean  'having  previously
       lived there for some time (more than a year)'" (original emphasis).

526.  In closing written submissions, the  respondent  appeared  to  suggest
    that appellants FM and AF, neither of whom had been found to  have  any
    link with Somaliland or Puntland, could nevertheless find refuge in one
    of those areas, on the basis that "once a person is not believed on the
    question of their clan there remains  a  hypothetical  case  that  they
    could in fact find assistance (either clan-based or any other) in those
    other regions".  As far as we are aware, this suggestion was not put to
    either of the appellants by the respondent,  when  they  gave  evidence
    (either in the current proceedings or in previous ones).  In Part J  of
    this determination, we shall have more to say  about  the  relationship
    between our country guidance and a Somali appellant who is found not to
    be credible.  In the present appeals, however, the submissions at [395]
    and [400] of the respondent's closing submissions came far too late  in
    the day to have any material part to play.

527.  Nevertheless, as a general matter it is  interesting  to  observe  the
    close connection between the area known as Somaliland  and  the  United
    Kingdom, in the context of Somali immigration to this country.  In  the
    "Cash and Compassion" report, we find the following:-

         "3.2     United Kingdom


         Current estimates of the number of Somalis living in the  UK  range
         from 95-250,000.  The official 2001 census reported a population of
         43,000 (Casciani, 2006).  The 2006 Annual Population  Survey  (APS)
         gives a figure  of  82,300.   However,  neither  of  these  figures
         include Somalis born in the UK or in any country  outside  Somalia.
         The census figures from 2001 suggested  89%  of  all  Somalis  were
         living in London, but this percentage is almost certainly lower now
         as a result of the dispersal policy.  Large Somali communities have
         developed in Bristol, Manchester, Birmingham, and Leicester,  among
         other places.


         The UK's Somali population is older and better established than  in
         many other European countries.  The first Somalis to settle in  the
         UK were seamen from Somaliland who [were] in the  British  merchant
         navy, and settled in coastal areas such  as  Cardiff,  Bristol  and
         Liverpool during  the  early  1890's  (Change  Institute  2009:24).
         During World War 2, Somalis served with the British navy, and  some
         took up residency in the UK to obtain employment,  particularly  in
         Sheffield and South Yorkshire (Ibid, citing Halliday 1992:1B).  The
         post-war  economic  boom  in  the  UK  also   drew   Somalis;   the
         Somalilander community in London's East End (one of the areas  with
         the largest concentrations  of  Somalilanders  in  the  UK)  formed
         during this period (Bradbury 2008:175).  Only since  the  weakening
         and eventual collapse of the government of Somalia at  the  end  of
         the 1980's - early 1990s has the population included large  numbers
         of refugees and asylum seekers.   Today  Somalis  are  consistently
         among the top ten countries generating asylum seekers to the UK."

528.   In  the  light  of  this  connection,  it  is  not  unreasonable   to
    hypothesise that some of those who arrive in the United Kingdom seeking
    international protection from alleged  harm  in  southern  and  central
    Somalia are, in reality, persons from, or  otherwise  having  a  strong
    connection with, Somaliland.  Indeed, that is  precisely  the  position
    with appellant ZF.  Where the respondent has reason to believe that  an
    asylum seeker may come from Somaliland (or Puntland) it is open to  the
    respondent to test that assumption, for example, by means of linguistic
    analysis.  Once the  issue  has  been  put  in  play,  usually  in  the
    respondent's letter of refusal, the claimant will need to  address  the
    issue in any subsequent appellate proceedings.

529.  Where the respondent contends  that  a  claimant  is,  in  fact,  from
    Somaliland or Puntland, the issue as to how that person is supposed  to
    get  there  safely  becomes  highly  material.   As  we  have   already
    explained, the  whole  nature  of  Somali  cases  involving  claims  to
    international protection is such that issues of safety  on  return  are
    integral  to  the  Tribunal's  determination  of  entitlement  to  such
    protection.  The form of international protection, for these  purposes,
    may include that under the Refugee Convention, even  where  the  person
    concerned would not have a well-founded fear in his or  her  home  area
    ([26] and [27] of AM & AM, approved in [59] of HH & Others).

530.  We have to say that we are at something of a loss  to  understand  the
    respondent's position regarding a person such as appellant ZF  or  Elmi
    in Sufi & Elmi.  Although  the  evidence  points  firmly  towards  them
    having the requisite degree of connection with Somaliland and facing no
    real risk of serious harm, if returned to that region,  the  respondent
    has chosen to put her  case  on  the  basis  that  return  will  be  to
    Mogadishu International Airport.  The ECtHR in Sufi & Elmi thought that
    this decision might, in fact, point towards Elmi not being able to  get
    into Somaliland.  That certainly does not appear to be  the  case  with
    appellant ZF, where the respondent has argued forcefully that appellant
    ZF could travel to Somaliland by land or  air.   In  either  case,  she
    would have to do so on her  own,  in  the  sense  that  the  respondent
    presumably considers that her obligations regarding return  cease  when
    appellant ZF has left Mogadishu International Airport.  Given, however,
    that there are flights from Nairobi  to  Hargeisa,  Somaliland  (albeit
    stopping at Mogadishu), it is at  first  sight  hard  to  see  why  the
    respondent could not propose to return appellant ZF  to  Hargeisa.   Mr
    Burns appeared to accept  that  the  Somaliland  authorities  would  be
    prepared to accept a person travelling on an EU travel  document;  but,
    because of the respondent's stance, we did not hear sufficient evidence
    or submissions on the matter to make any proper findings on this issue.
     In any event, once a case  reaches  this  point,  it  is  likely  that
    Article 8(3) of the Qualification  Directive  becomes  relevant.   This
    provides that the power of Member States in Article 8(1), to  determine
    that a person is not in need of international protection "if in a  part
    of the country of  origin  there  is  no  well-founded  fear  of  being
    persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm and the  applicant
    can reasonably have been expected to stay in that part of the country",
    may apply "notwithstanding technical obstacles to return to the country
    of origin".  In HH & Others the Court of Appeal found at [83] that  the
    ambit  of  Article  8(3)  was  "probably  confined  to   administrative
    difficulties such as documentation", as opposed to risks  to  life  and
    limb, in getting to the place in question.  Thus, it  would  seem  that
    difficulties  regarding  the  documentation  required  to  satisfy  the
    Somaliland authorities  would  not,  in  such  a  scenario,  entitle  a
    claimant to succeed.

531.   For  the  appellants,  it  was  submitted  that  Article  8  of   the
    Qualification  Directive  was  confined  to  the  issue   of   internal
    relocation; that is to say, where a  person  has  established  a  well-
    founded fear in one part of a country and the issue is  whether  he  or
    she could find safety in another part.  The wording of Article 8(1) is,
    however, plainly wide enough to encompass the case of a person who  has
    no well-founded fear in the home  area  but  whose  case  depends  upon
    establishing a real risk of harm en route.  In HH & Others,  the  Court
    of Appeal, whilst considering that Article 8  was  "to  do  principally
    with internal relocation" made no finding that it was confined to  such
    a situation. Nor is  there  anything  in  the  Qualification  Directive
    itself to suggest that  Article  8  is  so  restricted.  Article  8  is
    entitled "Internal protection", not "Internal relocation" or  "Internal
    flight". It is difficult to see how, as a matter of logic or principle,
    a person should have a greater entitlement to international  protection
    if their home area is not the place  where  they  have  a  well-founded
    fear, compared with where the home area is the  place  of  well-founded
    fear.

532.  It may be that the respondent's  stance,  both  as  regards  Elmi  and
    appellant ZF, is driven by the difficulty  of  getting  the  Somaliland
    authorities to accept the return of anyone from the United  Kingdom  to
    their area.  An insight into the somewhat fraught relationship  between
    those authorities  and  the  respondent  is  provided  by  reading  the
    judgments in R (on the application of) MH v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ  1112,
    concerning a claim of unlawful  detention  brought  by  a  person  from
    Somaliland, whom the respondent had not  been  able  to  return  there.
    But, as we have indicated, from the point of view of an entitlement  to
    international  protection  under  the   Refugee   Convention   or   the
    Qualification Directive,  such  problems  could  well  be  said  to  be
    "technical obstacles" within Article 8.

533.  In the case of appellant ZF, as we have seen, the respondent's  stance
    is that appellant ZF will  be  returned  to  Mogadishu.   There  is  no
    suggestion on the respondent's part that appellant ZF will land  there,
    in possession of an EU travel  document.   In  order  to  persuade  the
    Somaliland authorities to let her in to  their  self-proclaimed  state,
    she will, accordingly, need to procure something called an  "old  green
    passport".

534.  We heard a great deal of evidence  and  submissions  about  old  green
    Somali passports.  Before the collapse of the Siad  Barre  regime,  the
    Somali government of that time issued passports, which  were  bound  in
    green covers.  The TFG does not recognise such passports  and  has  its
    own  forms  of  official  international  travel   documentation.    The
    authorities of Somaliland, however, do  not  recognise  TFG  passports;
    instead, they continue to recognise the old green Somali versions.

535.  This,  of  course,  presents  a  difficulty  for  a  person,  such  as
    appellant ZF, who does not (or does not any longer) have an  old  green
    passport.  The solution, according to  the  respondent,  is  to  go  to
    Bakara Market (or, perhaps, a market in the Afgoye Corridor,  following
    the recent closure of Bakara) and buy such a  passport  on  the  "black
    market".  Although not a  legitimate  international  document,  such  a
    passport will be good enough to secure admission to Somaliland.

536.  The appellants do  not  contend  that  this  hypothesis  is  factually
    wrong.  On the contrary, Mr Burns confirmed that  it  was  possible  to
    purchase such a passport in the manner described.  What the  appellants
    contended was that the procurement and use of such a passport would  be
    a criminal offence in the United Kingdom and that neither appellant  ZF
    nor anyone in the same position should be expected to  have  to  obtain
    such a passport in order to gain entrance to Somaliland.

537.  In R v Horseferry Road Magistrates Court ex-parte Bennett [1993]  UKHL
    10, the House of  Lords  was  concerned  with  whether  the  trial  for
    criminal offences of Mr Bennett should be halted on the basis  that  he
    had been unlawfully abducted from a third country (South Africa).   The
    House of Lords allowed Mr  Bennett's  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    judiciary had a responsibility for the maintenance of the rule  of  law
    that embraced the willingness to oversee executive action and to refuse
    to countenance behaviour that threatened either basic human  rights  or
    the rule of law, such as did a criminal trial where the  defendant  was
    only present because he had been illegally abducted, with the  apparent
    collusion of United Kingdom police.  Appellant ZF  submitted  that,  by
    the same token,  any  removal  which  relied  upon  her  committing  an
    unlawful act could not itself be lawful.  The  Identity  Documents  Act
    2010, section 4, created a criminal offence of possession  of  a  false
    identity document with improper  intention.   A  person  guilty  of  an
    offence under the section was liable to imprisonment  for  a  term  not
    exceeding ten years or to a fine (or both).  This reflected the serious
    way in which Parliament viewed offences regarding  such  documentation.
    R v Singh [1999] 1 CR APP R (S) 490 reinforced the fact that a passport
    was an important document and that it was necessary for  the  integrity
    of passports to be maintained.  It was, accordingly, a serious  offence
    knowingly to use a false passport, whatever the precise nature  of  the
    offence charged in relation to that activity.  A similar point was made
    in R v Adekunle Adebayo [2007] EWCA Crim 878.

538.  The appellants also relied upon R  v  Uxbridge  Magistrates,  ex-parte
    Adimi [1999] EWHC Admin 765, which concerned the operation  of  Article
    31 of the Refugee Convention  in  the  context  of  prosecutions  under
    United Kingdom law for using false travel  documentation.   Article  31
    provides that  Contracting  States  "shall  not  impose  penalties,  on
    account of their illegal entry or presence,  on  refugees  who,  coming
    directly from a territory where their life or  freedom  was  threatened
    ... enter or are present  in  their  territory  without  authorisation,
    provided they present themselves without delay to the  authorities  and
    show good cause for their illegal entry or presence".

539.  We are not persuaded that  the  use  by  a  person  of  an  unofficial
    document, of the kind with which we are concerned, in order  to  access
    Somaliland, falls to be discounted, as the appellants  assert,  on  the
    basis of illegality.  The  Bennett  case  involved  a  quite  different
    factual matrix.  There were  plainly  serious  public  policy  concerns
    about allowing a person to  be  tried  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    criminal  offence,  when  the  United  Kingdom  authorities  had   been
    complicit in his illegal removal from a  third  country  to  this  one.
    Likewise, Adimi involved Article 31 of the Refugee Convention, which is
    not in issue in the present proceedings.  So far as the  Serious  Crime
    Act 2007 is concerned, we did not hear  anything  approaching  adequate
    submissions on this issue.  In  particular,  we  did  not  receive  any
    submissions regarding the extraterritorial reach  of  the  Act  (as  to
    which Schedule 2 is  relevant);  nor  as  to  relevant  defences.   The
    assertion that the respondent would be committing  a  criminal  offence
    under section 44 of the 2007 Act in removing an appellant to Mogadishu,
    where the respondent intends  the  appellant  to  obtain  false  travel
    documentation, is an issue that might need to  be  fully  addressed  in
    some other appeal.  For the reasons we will shortly come  to,  however,
    the matter does not arise in the present proceedings; and  we  in  fact
    doubt whether it will prove a key issue in other cases.

540.  We do, however, feel that we should say the following.  We  very  much
    doubt that entitlement to international protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention or the Qualification Directive will often turn upon  whether
    the claimant, if returned to the country of his or her origin, would be
    reasonably likely to do something which, if done in the United Kingdom,
    might constitute a criminal offence.  In very many parts of the  world,
    what would be regarded in this country as criminal  bribery  (and  what
    may well be regarded as such in the country in question) is in practice
    an accepted part of everyday life.  It is, of course, properly arguable
    that a society where bribery is likely to be determinative  of  whether
    someone will avoid serious harm is a place where  the  actions  of  the
    State are so arbitrary or otherwise extreme as to give rise to  a  real
    risk, in any event.  But  in  other  cases  the  picture  may  be  more
    complex; and the fact that a person  would,  if  in  this  country,  be
    committing  an  offence  under  our  criminal  law  is   not   per   se
    determinative of the issue of international protection.  Thus, a person
    in a developing country who is working in the  informal  sector,  as  a
    street trader, may on occasion have to bribe local officials  in  order
    to remain in business.  If judicial  fact-  finders  were  required  to
    exclude from their deliberations the possibility of a person  returning
    home to work in the informal sector, on the basis that he or she cannot
    be expected to pay a  bribe,  then  the  ambits  of  both  the  Refugee
    Convention and the Directive will, at a stroke, have been substantially
    enlarged.  We doubt  whether  those  who  brought  those  international
    instruments into being did so on the  basis  that  this  would  be  the
    result.

541. Mr Schwenk sought to pray in aid RT (Zimbabwe); but we do not  consider
    that the ratio of that case has any relevance in answering the question
    whether a person can be expected to act illegally. There is no  Refugee
    Convention reason (such as actual or imputed political opinion),  which
    provides a nexus between the refusal to do an illegal act and the  harm
    which may ensue. The street trader, who  refuses  to  bribe  the  local
    official and, as a  result,  loses  his  market  pitch,  is  not  being
    persecuted for a Refugee Convention reason; he is  being  punished  for
    not paying a bribe. The same would be true if the  official's  response
    was to inflict ill-treatment on the trader.

542.   So  far  as  the  old  green  passports  themselves  are   concerned,
    regardless of the fact that appellant ZF might, if she was  within  the
    jurisdiction of the United Kingdom, be committing a  criminal  offence,
    there is no evidence before us to lead to the  conclusion  that  buying
    such a passport in a market in southern Somalia is a  criminal  offence
    under the rule of the TFG or  that,  even  if  it  is,  the  matter  is
    regarded by them as in any way serious.  So far as the  authorities  in
    Somaliland are concerned, plainly old green passports are  regarded  as
    legitimate.

543.  There is a somewhat spurious element to  the  appellants'  submissions
    on the "legality" issue of the old green passport,  given  the  current
    circumstances in Somalia.  In short, the Tribunal concludes that  these
    "legal" objections are unfounded.

544.  But, once we turn from the law to the facts, it is frankly surreal  of
    the respondent to expect appellant ZF, a 67  year  old  woman  with  no
    recent experience of living in the Horn  of  Africa,  to  disembark  at
    Mogadishu International Airport, travel into the city of  Mogadishu  to
    Bakara Market (assuming it is open), look for  an  old  green  passport
    there, or  travel  to  a  market  in  the  Al-Shabab-controlled  Afgoye
    Corridor, if, as might be the case, the vendors of such passports  have
    relocated there, and then  either  return  to  Mogadishu  International
    Airport in order to fly to Hargeisa, or else  undertake  a  journey  by
    land to Somaliland.  The respondent did  not,  in  fact,  energetically
    advance the option of going back to the airport, preferring instead  to
    look in detail at the evidence regarding land journeys, including those
    undertaken by refugees, moving in groups  to  Somaliland,  and  to  the
    evidence of minibuses, which Mr Burns contradicted.  We shall have more
    to say on this when we look in detail at appellant ZF's appeal in  Part
    L of this determination.  As a general  matter,  however,  we  conclude
    that, at the present time, it will in most cases be  impracticable  for
    returnees to  obtain  old  green  passports  in  southern  and  central
    Somalia, in order to make the journey to  Somaliland,  because  of  the
    dangers involved in acquiring such documentation.

545.  This is so, whether or not there  are  in  Mogadishu  members  of  the
    Isaaq clan, which is the majority clan or ethnic group  in  Somaliland.
    Having noted what Mr Burns and Dr Hammond said, and  having  regard  to
    the written evidence, we find that it is highly likely that there  are,
    in fact, members of the Isaaq clan present in Mogadishu, albeit not  in
    great numbers.  We accept, however, the appellants' evidence that,  any
    such Isaaq are unlikely to be favourably  disposed  to  the  Somaliland
    authorities and, for that reason, to have  much  to  offer  by  way  of
    assistance to a person arriving  in  Mogadishu  who  wishes  to  go  to
    Somaliland.

546.  We have already considered the position of  those  who,  according  to
    the more recent evidence, have been seeking to move from the south into
    Somaliland and Puntland, as refugees.  We do  not  consider  that  this
    evidence casts any doubt on the general position we  described  at  the
    beginning of this section, regarding the  sorts  of  persons  whom  the
    authorities  in  Somaliland  and  Puntland  would  be  willing  to  see
    admitted, particularly in the context of those coming from  the  United
    Kingdom.  Insofar as those from the south are concerned,  without  clan
    or family connections, they will be treated as IDPs and  be  likely  to
    find themselves in IDP camps, the conditions of which have in the  past
    been categorised as very poor and which there is no evidence before  us
    to indicate have subsequently  improved.   Thus,  if  appellant  ZF  or
    others in her position were to  succeed  in  reaching  the  borders  of
    Somaliland or Puntland, without  the  likes  of  an  old  green  Somali
    passport, they are likely to be treated as another IDP.  However, it is
    also  clear  that  Somaliland  "is  less  susceptible   to   widespread
    humanitarian  emergencies  than  the   rest   of   Somalia"   (Rightnet
    Independent  Analysis:  Somalia:  A  Situation   Analysis   and   Trend
    Assessment, August 2003), as, indeed, the map showing  the  degrees  of
    problem occasioned by the 2011 emergency attest, as does  the  evidence
    of  desperate  pastoralists  from  the  south  making  their   way   to
    Somaliland.


(6) Female genital mutilation

547.  According to  the  Population  Reference  Bureau  (2010),  drawing  on
    figures from 2006, the incidence of FGM in Somalia  is  97.9%.   Broken
    down by region, urban regions stand at 97.1% and rural at  98.4%.   The
    lowest region is 94.4% and the highest 99.2%.   Other  similar  studies
    show a fractionally lower rate but it is universally agreed to be  over
    90%.  96.7% of women are cut before the age of  19,  according  to  the
    PRB.  66% of those not cut by then will be by the age of 39.  Thus,  Ms
    Short submitted, a female in Somalia was not safe even if  she  reached
    adulthood uncut.  Cutting can take place at any time from the age of 3.

548.  The background evidence indicates that the predominant type of FGM  in
    Somalia is "pharoanic", categorised by the World Health Organisation as
    Type III, narrowing the vaginal  opening  through  the  creation  of  a
    covering seal by cutting and repositioning the labia minora and/or  the
    labia majora, with or without removal of the  clitoris  (infibulation).
    Mr Burns, however, gave evidence that, whilst outside the main  cities,
    FGM was almost 100% pharoanic, into which category he would place  MW's
    home of Merka, in the cities he considered it was now 90% "sunna.  When
    I say "sunna", I mean anything from partial infibulation to small cuts,
    depending  on  the  family's  preference."   Al-Shabab  were   opposed,
    according to Mr Burns, to the pharoanic form but  did  say  that  women
    should practise the "sunna" form.

549.  Not surprisingly, in a country  with  such  high  rates  of  FGM,  the
    societal requirement for any girl or woman to undergo it is strong.  Dr
    Hammond gave evidence that in some cases the extended family could take
    the girl to be circumcised without the  knowledge  of  consent  of  the
    mother if it was suspected the mother might object.  Appellant  MW,  if
    returned, would have to seek to survive within her "clan matrix"  where
    she "would come under  heavy  pressure  to  have  any  female  daughter
    circumcised.  She would have a say in the  decision  to  circumcise  or
    not, but if she was relying on a female  or  clan  member  that  had  a
    strong predilection to circumcise, then [appellant MW] would  find  the
    daughter circumcised - even without her consent."  Mr Burns  considered
    that if a woman opposed circumcision it would "still  almost  certainly
    happen at the hands of female family members who would put pressure  on
    the mother and even resort to having  the  girl  circumcised  when  the
    mother is temporarily absent.  Even the daughter of some of the  nurses
    working  in  our  clinic  and  who  oppose  FGM  have  been  taken  and
    circumcised by female relative[s] while their mothers  were  at  work."
    According to another witness statement "What happens all  the  time  is
    that cutting is arranged by  a  child's  grandmother,  aunt,  or  other
    family members regardless of the attitude of  the  mother.   This  even
    happened in my own family."  There was other written evidence before us
    to similar effect.

550.  In the conditions pertaining in Somalia, Ms Short  submitted  that  it
    would be impossible for a mother to conceal the fact that her  daughter
    had not undergone FGM.  Mr Burns'  evidence  was  that  family  members
    would know "almost straightaway.  Her female family members would  ask,
    other girls would ask her daughter."  Other statements from those  with
    experience in Somalia were to  similar  effect,  including  those  from
    Sahra Moallim: "Girls will find out whether other girls have been  cut.
    It is something they talk about among themselves  a  lot.   Girls  show
    their cut genitalia to one another when they go to the  toilet.   If  a
    girl does not show herself or if she refuses to show  herself  then  it
    will be known that she has not been cut."

551.  Ms Short relied upon the US State Department Somali Report on  FGM  or
    FGC, together with  the  evidence  of  Mr  Burns  and  Ms  Moallim,  as
    indicating that there had been no abatement in  the  risk  to  females,
    despite the actions of civil society.  Thus, the USSD concluded that  a
    campaign launched within Somalia prior to the overthrow of  Siad  Barre
    fell away with the collapse of the Somali state.  Ms Moallim,  for  her
    part,  was  currently  campaigning  to  have  FGM  included  among  the
    violations of human rights based on the agenda of a Somali  version  of
    the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which was  being
    talked about in Somalia.  She had, however, met  with  much  resistance
    from Somali human rights organisations, which indicated the depth of  a
    Somali's attachment to the practice of FGM.

552.  As in other countries where the practice  is  widespread,  in  Somalia
    FGM is regarded as a rite  of  passage,  upon  which  a  girl's  future
    marriage prospects depend (Almroth 2005:14).  The USSD Report  recorded
    that many Somalis  mistakenly  viewed  the  procedure  as  a  religious
    obligation; but the concept of "family honour" was also involved,  with
    FGM being intertwined with notions of virginity.   A  woman  active  in
    Somali human rights work opined that "a lot of Somali people mistakenly
    believe that it is un-Islamic for girls not to undergo FGM".  There was
    thus, according to Dr Mullen, "tremendous social pressure for  families
    to conform to this practice both in Europe and in Somalia.  Dr  Hammond
    agreed that "social pressure  to  have  the  procedure  done  to  one's
    daughters is very strong in Somalia, as an uncircumcised woman is often
    not considered to be marriageable and to bring shame  on  her  family".
    According to Ms Moallim a woman who resisted having  her  daughter  cut
    would be seen as rejecting Somali tradition and  as  importing  "gaallo
    (non-believer) ideas into Somalia, as having abandoned her religion and
    as preventing her daughter from following her religion".

553.  The respondent submitted that the evidence  did  not,  in  fact,  show
    that in  general  a  mother  opposed  to  FGM  would  be  incapable  of
    withstanding societal pressures  to  have  it  done  to  her  daughter.
    Reliance was placed on para 2.19 of the COIS Report on Somalia, where a
    Somali woman was recorded as stating that she  was  able  to  withstand
    pressure from her  mother-in-law  to  have  her  daughter  circumcised,
    albeit that the informant's refusal led to her  husband  divorcing  her
    and cutting off contact with his daughters.  Despite this  making  life
    "hard in the camp" for the informant, she stated that she  would  never
    go back on it, despite the fact that the girls were "often  bullied  in
    school".  The informant's biggest fear was that "someone from my family
    will take my daughters one night and try to circumcise them.  I have no
    protection and no man in my life to protect us."

554.  Perhaps more helpful to the respondent's case was the Landinfo  report
    on female genital mutilation  of  December  2008  which  recorded  that
    "certain trends indicate  a  positive  shift  with  regard  to  general
    mutilation in Somalia".  According to this,  the  custom  is  mainly  a
    female affair and the young generation of men between 15 and 26 do  not
    regard FGM to be a prerequisite for marriage.  Somali sources  referred
    to "a claim that given the fact that  men  comply  with  the  decisions
    women make, it should be possible  for  mothers  to  oppose  FGM".   By
    contrast, however, the World Bank and other sources emphasise that  men
    "carry major responsibility for the continuation of the practice".  For
    a majority of the population, FGM remained a prerequisite for marriage,
    with prospective husbands demanding a circumcised wife.  Since  payment
    of a dowry is still common, the fathers of daughters played a key  role
    in encouraging FGM, in order to get the dowry.

555.  The same report asserted that  girls  who  had  not  been  circumcised
    could in fact hide the fact that they were uncircumcised until they got
    married.  Girls who were not infibulated "might  experience  harassment
    and teasing and might encounter difficulties in becoming married".

556.  The respondent noted the evidence of  Mr  Burns  in  cross-examination
    that if the woman's sub-clan was indifferent to FGM,  a  mother's  wish
    would be respected.  Nor was  there  any  evidence,  according  to  the
    respondent, of Al-Shabab  enforcing  FGM,  albeit  that  they  did  not
    actively prohibit it.

557.  It is, of course, established  law  that  FGM  "constitutes  treatment
    which  would  amount  to  persecution  within  the   meaning   of   the
    Convention", whatever form of it is practised and that,  having  regard
    to the sexually discriminatory nature of the practice,  its  infliction
    upon a woman  engages  the  Refugee  Convention  by  reference  to  the
    "particular social group" category (K and Fornah v Secretary  of  State
    for  the  Home  Department  [2006]  UKHL  46).    Notwithstanding   the
    interesting evidence about Somali men complying with the decisions that
    women make, we can see no reason to refuse to find the relevant PSG  in
    Somalia, when it has been found in all the other African  countries  in
    which the Tribunal or the higher courts have had  occasion  to  examine
    the matter.

558.  Likewise, we have no difficulty in finding that a  Somali  mother  may
    suffer persecution and treatment in breach of her own  Article  3/15(b)
    rights if her daughter is subjected to FGM against the mother's wishes.
     As the AIT found in FM (FGM) Sudan CG [2007] UKAIT 00060:-

         "Given the first appellant's abhorrence of FGM, any  infliction  of
         it upon either of her daughters is, we find, reasonably  likely  to
         have so profound an effect upon the first appellant as to amount to
         the infliction on her of persecutory harm.  In  the  light  of  our
         finding as to the nature of the  particular  social  group  in  the
         present case, it follows that the first appellant is at  real  risk
         of  persecution  for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason  (Katrinak   v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2001]  EWCA  Civ  832:
         Recital 27 to Council Directive 2004/83/EC)."

559.  This point is also borne out in the UNHCR's Guidance Note  on  Refugee
    Claims Relating to Female Genital Mutilation (May 2009):-

         "11.     The parent could nevertheless be  considered  a  principal
             applicant where he or she is found to have a claim in  his  or
             her own right.  This includes cases where the parent  will  be
             forced to witness the pain and suffering of the child, or risk
             persecution for being opposed to the practice.


         12.      Even where the parents have been in the country of  asylum
             for some time, a well-founded fear on behalf of the  child  or
             because of the parents' own opposition to FGM can  arise  upon
             the birth of  a  daughter  post-flight.   The  fact  that  the
             applicant did not demonstrate this conviction  or  opinion  in
             the country of origin, nor act upon it, does not  itself  mean
             that a fear of persecution is unfounded, as  the  issue  would
             not necessarily have  arisen  until  then.   The  birth  of  a
             daughter may, in these circumstances, give rise to a sur place
             claim.  If it is held that the opposition or fear of FGM is  a
             mere  artifice  for  the  purpose  of  creating  grounds   for
             asserting a fear of persecution, a stringent evaluation of the
             well-foundedness of the fear is warranted.  In the event  that
             the claim is  found  to  be  self-serving,  but  the  claimant
             nonetheless  has   a   well-founded   fear   of   persecution,
             international protection is required."

560.  The prevalence of FGM in  Somalia  is,  we  find,  so  great  that  an
    uncircumcised, unmarried Somali woman, up to age 39, will in general be
    at real risk of suffering FGM.  The  risk  will  obviously  be  at  its
    greatest where both parents are in favour of  FGM.   Conversely,  where
    both parents are opposed to it, the question of whether the  risk  will
    reach the requisite level will need to be determined  by  reference  to
    the extent to which the parents are likely to be able to withstand what
    are, as a general matter, strong societal pressures (from both men  and
    women) in Somalia  for  the  procedure  to  be  carried  out  on  their
    daughter. Unless the parents are from a socio-economic background  that
    is likely to distance them from mainstream social attitudes,  or  there
    is some other particular feature of their case (such  as  living  in  a
    place where - exceptionally - an anti-FGM stance has  taken  hold)  the
    fact of parental opposition may well as a general matter  be  incapable
    of eliminating the real risk to the daughter that others  (particularly
    relatives) will at some point inflict FGM on her.

561.  At this point, it is necessary to say something more about  the  issue
    discussed in Part H of this determination, regarding the entitlement to
    international protection of a mother whose claim to be opposed  to  FGM
    has been disbelieved.  Ms Short submitted that, even  if  the  Tribunal
    were not to believe her client's account of  objection  to  having  her
    daughter subjected to FGM, and even where appellant FM  might  "consent
    to" or "promote" her daughter being  cut  this  "may  still  amount  to
    persecution as it is discriminatory social and  cultural  determinants,
    rather than true free will that determine a girl being  cut.   In  that
    context, the purported wishes of the mother do not support  a  lack  of
    persecutory anguish since she can be harmed even by submitting  to  the
    torture of her daughter."

562.  As we stated in Part H, we do not consider that,  notwithstanding  its
    status  as  a  "living  instrument",  the  Refugee  Convention  can  be
    construed as affording refugee protection to a person who is in  favour
    of inflicting  harm  on  another,  whether  or  not  the  societal  and
    religious background of that person might be responsible for her having
    that wish, and whether the harm is  inflicted  by  that  person  or  by
    someone else, with her approval.

563. In her closing submissions, Ms Short urged us to  find  that,  even  in
    the case of Somali women who acquiesce  in  or  promote  FGM  on  their
    daughters, this merely "reinforces their powerlessness in a persecutory
    patriarchal male-dominated society.  It is telling that support for FGM
    is negatively correlated to education, reaffirming the intersection  of
    all forms of discrimination, disempowerment and violence against women"
    ([82] of written closing submissions).

564.  In this regard, Ms Short sought to rely on Shah and Islam v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [1999] UKHL  20,  where  Lord  Hoffman
    found that the causal  requirement  in  Article  1(A)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention could be satisfied either by the persecution or the lack  of
    protection being "for reasons of" a Convention  ground.   That  is,  of
    course, so; but it does not meet the issue with which we are concerned,
    where the person who will be immediately responsible for  the  harm  is
    seeking refugee protection by reference to that very harm.

565.  Ms Short also relied on HJ (Iran).  However, to rely on this  judgment
    is, we consider, to seek to invert the findings that the Supreme  Court
    made.  Appellant MW's social and cultural background  may  explain  why
    she would cause her daughter to be circumcised.  But  appellant  MW  is
    still the person causing the serious harm to a member of  a  particular
    social group by reason of that membership and, thus, committing an  act
    of persecution for the purposes of the  Refugee  Convention.   What  Ms
    Short was in effect asking us to do was to adopt a degree  of  cultural
    relativism that is not to be found in the Refugee Convention, let alone
    in  HJ  (Iran).   For  example,  Article  1(F),  which  excludes   from
    protection those who have committed various serious crimes, contains no
    reference to exculpatory factors stemming from the perpetrator's social
    or other background. It is also difficult to see how  Ms  Short's  case
    could be brought within Article 1(A) of the Refugee  Convention,  since
    the applicant who wishes to inflict the harm does not have a "fear"  of
    persecution, whether or not that fear - if it existed - would be  well-
    founded.

566.  We spoke in Part H of a spectrum of cases, of which true  willingness,
    albeit stemming from social conditioning, stands at one  extreme,  just
    as the case of duress stands at the other.  In the context of  Somalia,
    the evidence, as we have indicated, suggests in general that there will
    be a very  high  degree  of  societal  pressure.   In  particular,  the
    evidence of Mr Burns and others that mothers who refuse to  have  their
    daughters circumcised could well fall outwith the  ambit  of  any  clan
    protection strikes us, in the present circumstances, as  likely  to  be
    highly significant for the mother, raising the spectre of  destitution,
    at least in some cases.  Furthermore, although there is some indication
    that, amongst younger Somali men, the position might be  changing,  the
    preponderance of the evidence still  points  towards  an  uncircumcised
    woman having poor prospects of marriage.  The socio-economic fears that
    that may engender in the mother are also, as a general  matter,  likely
    to be great.

567.  Accordingly, we consider that it would be open  to  a  judicial  fact-
    finder, in such circumstances, to find the Refugee  Convention  engaged
    in the  case  of  a  mother  who  was  genuinely  strongly  opposed  to
    inflicting or procuring FGM on her daughter but who, on  the  evidence,
    was reasonably likely, sooner or  later,  to  countenance  it,  as  the
    lesser of two evils.



                                   Part J

              ASSESSING THE NEGATIVE PULL OF LIES: MA (SOMALIA)

568.  In his submissions on behalf of the UNHCR, Mr Hickman  dealt  in  some
    detail with the judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  MA  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 49.   MA  was  a
    citizen of Somalia, a member of the Isaaq clan who came here  illegally
    in 1995 and in 1998 was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment for rape
    and indecency with a child.  The ensuing legal  proceedings  concerning
    the respondent's attempt to deport MA were protracted, but  on  1  July
    2009 the AIT dismissed MA's appeal.  That decision was reversed by  the
    Court of Appeal in HH & Others (MA  being  one  of  the  "Others")  but
    restored by the Supreme Court.

569.  MA (Somalia) is of general importance, dealing as  it  does  with  the
    frequently-encountered question of to what extent an appellant who  has
    been found to have told lies should have that finding held against  him
    or her, in determining entitlement to international protection:-

         "21.     ...  The task of sorting out truth from lies is  indeed  a
             daunting one.  It is all too common for the AIT to  find  that
             an appellant's account is incredible.  And yet  there  may  be
             objective general undisputed evidence about the conditions  in
             the country to which the Secretary of State wishes to send the
             appellant which shows that most of the persons  who  have  the
             characteristics of, or fall into the category claimed by,  the
             appellant will be  at  real  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
             Article 3 of the ECHR or persecution for a Refugee  Convention
             reason (as the case may be), but that  a  minority  of  these,
             because of special circumstances,  are  not  subject  to  such
             risk."

570.  In GM (Eritrea) and Others [2008] EWCA Civ 833  the  Court  of  Appeal
    addressed the case of an Eritrean asylum seeker, who had not been found
    credible as to her claim to have left Eritrea illegally, but where  the
    background evidence indicated that only limited classes of person  were
    allowed to leave that country legally.  At  [53]  Laws  LJ  (with  whom
    Dyson LJ agreed) held that the fact that it was reasonably likely  that
    any 17 year old girl from Eritrea, about whom nothing else relevant was
    known, left the country illegally "does not entail the conclusion  that
    this particular 17 year old girl  did  so.   The  reason  is  that  the
    probability that a particular person has or has not left illegally must
    depend upon the particular facts of her case...  There may indeed be  a
    general probability of illegal exit by members  of  a  class;  but  the
    particular facts may make all the difference."

571.  At [54] Laws LJ held that the "position would  only  be  otherwise  if
    the general evidence  was  so  solid  as  to  admit  of  only  fanciful
    exceptions".  At [31] of MA (Somalia), Sir John Dyson  considered  that
    what "Laws LJ was saying at para 54 was that, where  a  claimant  tells
    lies on a central issue, his or her case will not be saved  by  general
    evidence unless that evidence is extremely strong.  It is only evidence
    of that kind which will be sufficient to counteract the  negative  pull
    of the lie."  Much, however, depended on the bearing that the  lie  had
    on the case.  It was for the Tribunal to decide what weight to give  to
    the lie, as well as to all the other evidence in  the  case,  including
    the general evidence [32].   As  was  made  plain  in  the  context  of
    criminal law in R v Lucas [1981] QB 720, the judicial  fact-finder  had
    to be alive to the fact that "people lie for many reasons" [32].  Thus,
    "the significance of lies will vary from case to case" [33].

572.  The Supreme Court found that the Court of Appeal  was  wrong  to  find
    that the AIT had not, in fact, followed the approach articulated,  that
    dismissing an appeal because a person had lied, without more, would  be
    wrong.  The Supreme Court further held that the AIT had not  overlooked
    the fact that MA  had  spent  the  last  twelve  years  in  prison  and
    administrative detention in the United Kingdom, which  was  a  relevant
    factor in deciding whether he could now avail himself of clan  contacts
    in Mogadishu.

573.  Mr Hickman submitted that MA (Somalia) made it clear that  a  Tribunal
    should adopt the following approach:-

         "First, it should decide on the evidence  and  circumstances  other
         than the evidence  given  by  the  individual  concerned  what  the
         likelihood is of him or her being without sufficient protection  if
         returned to Place A (evidence A);


         Secondly, the Tribunal should  consider  whether  the  individual's
         evidence establishes a reasonable possibility that he or she has no
         protection on return to Place A (evidence B); and


          If the individual has told a lie about his or her  connections  to
         Place A, this may be of 'no great consequence' or  it  may  suggest
         (to a greater or lesser extent) that he or she does benefit  [from]
         protection in Place A and is trying to conceal it.  In this  latter
         situation the lie will have a 'negative pull' as evidence that such
         protection exists ... and the Tribunal must consider whether it  is
         sufficient  to  undermine  the  other   evidence   (including   the
         statistical likelihood), i.e. Evidence A, that  the  individual  is
         not able to benefit from  protection  on  return."   (Mr  Hickman's
         emphases)

574.  Thus, the UNHCR contended, it is clear that the  mere  fact  a  person
    has told a lie about their connections in Mogadishu is not a sufficient
    reason for holding that they would benefit from protection if  returned
    as the Tribunal must (1) consider the other evidence and (2) assess the
    significance of the lie, including  the  precise  nature  to  which  it
    relates and the possible motives for it.

575.  We do not, for our part, consider that there is much to be  gained  by
    seeking to construct a prescribed  set  of  steps  from  MA  (Somalia),
    particularly if they might  lead  to  a  "mechanistic"  rather  than  a
    holistic approach.  Fact-finders in this jurisdiction are well aware of
    the potential dangers involved in approaching the evidence before  them
    in a particular sequence, notwithstanding the fact that one "must start
    somewhere".

576.  It is, of  course,  axiomatic  that  the  Tribunal  will  need  to  be
    satisfied that the appellant has, in fact, told lies, whether to it  or
    to the respondent.  As the Supreme Court indicates at [31] to [33], the
    significance or "negative pull" of the lie  will  possibly  depend  not
    only on the strength of the background evidence but on whether the  lie
    - looked at in its own terms - is about an issue that is central to the
    disposition of the appeal.  Thus, the Supreme Court approved  what  the
    Court of Appeal at [104] of GM had  said  about  the  case  of  another
    Eritrean appellant, namely, that it  "might  understandably  carry  far
    less weight" because the lie was in fact against the interests  of  the
    appellant.  It should also be observed, however, that those who sit  in
    this jurisdiction are familiar with cases where  a  person  tells  lies
    about issues which that person thinks are important for his claim when,
    whether because of the passage of time or otherwise, they are not.   In
    such a circumstance, it will be open to the Tribunal, given the earlier
    lies, to approach with  caution,  the  appellant's  evidence  regarding
    matters which are central to his current claim.

577.  It will be for judicial fact-finders to decide, on the  basis  of  the
    totality of the evidence before them, whether, to the extent that  this
    country guidance remains authoritative (in terms of Practice  Direction
    12), the case before them is one where, notwithstanding an  appellant's
    lies, it would be "fanciful"  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  falls
    within one of the various exceptions we have identified in the  country
    guidance in the preceding  Part  of  this  determination.   We  should,
    however, refer  back  to  what  we  have  said  earlier  regarding  the
    respondent's closing submissions, which were to the effect that someone
    who is found to have told lies about his or her experiences in southern
    or central Somalia has failed to discharge the burden of  showing  that
    they are not, in reality, from Somaliland or Puntland.  In  short,  the
    issue of coming from Somaliland or Puntland will need to have been  "in
    play" in the appellate proceedings.

578.  So far as concerns an ability to live  in  Mogadishu  at  the  present
    time without Article 15(c)  risk,  the  exception  we  have  identified
    (paragraphs 357 - 358 above), though undoubtedly  limited,  we  do  not
    regard as inherently fanciful.  Whether it becomes such in the  context
    of a particular case will depend on all the circumstances.



                                   Part K

                          SUMMARY OF LEGAL FINDINGS

579.  At  this  point,  it  is  probably  helpful  to  gather  together  and
    summarise the various legal findings we have found it necessary to make
    in the course of determining these appeals.

580. Whilst section 2 of the Human Rights Act 1998 and its  associated  case
    law requires United Kingdom tribunals in general to give effect to  the
    jurisprudence of the European Court of  Human  Rights,  including  that
    Court's  guidance  on  how  to  approach  evidence   in   international
    protection  cases,  the  weighing  of  evidence  and  the  drawing   of
    conclusions as to the relative weight to be placed on items of evidence
    adduced before a United Kingdom tribunal  are  ultimately  matters  for
    that tribunal. Whilst the factual finding the Strasbourg Court has made
    as a result of applying its own guidance  is  something  to  which  the
    domestic tribunal must have regard, pursuant to section 2,  it  is  not
    bound to reach the same finding (paragraphs 97 - 123).

581. There is nothing  jurisprudentially  problematic  with  the  Strasbourg
    Court's judgment in Sufi & Elmi, as regards Article 3 of the ECHR.  The
    Court's finding, that the predominant cause of the humanitarian  crisis
    in southern and central Somalia was due to the current warring parties,
    meant that the high threshold (identified, inter alia, in  N  v  United
    Kingdom) for finding an Article 3 violation in the  case  of  naturally
    occurring phenomena did not need to be met (paragraphs 124 - 130).

582.  That high threshold is, however, still capable  of  being  crossed  in
    cases of sufficient exceptionality. In  deciding  what  constitutes  an
    exceptional case, regard must be had to all the factors, including  the
    actions of the parties to a conflict, albeit that those actions are not
    the predominant cause of the humanitarian crisis (paragraphs 131 -  132
    and 474 - 482).

583.  Despite the suggestion in the judgment in Sufi & Elmi  that  there  is
    no difference in the scope of, on the one hand, Article 3 of  the  ECHR
    (and, thus, Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive) and,  on  the
    other, Article 15(c) of the Directive, the binding Luxembourg case  law
    of Elgafaji (as well as the binding domestic authority  of  QD  (Iraq))
    makes it plain that Article 15(c) can be satisfied without there  being
    such a level of  risk  as  is  required  for  Article  3  in  cases  of
    generalised violence (having regard to the high threshold identified in
    NA v United Kingdom). The difference appears to involve the fact  that,
    as the CJEU found at [33] of Elgafaji, Article  15(c)  covers  a  "more
    general risk of harm" than does Article 3 of  the  ECHR;  that  Article
    15(c)  includes  types  of  harm  that  are  less  severe  than   those
    encompassed  by  Article  3;  and  that  the  language   indicating   a
    requirement of exceptionality is invoked for different purposes in NA v
    United Kingdom and Elgafaji respectively (paragraphs 328 - 335).

584.   Article 10 of the Qualification Directive  requires  the  holding  of
    some sort of belief, comprising a coherent and genuinely held system of
    values, whether these be theistic, non-theistic or  atheistic,  and  is
    not satisfied in the case of a person who holds no such belief.  Social
    restrictions, such as bans on watching football or television,  do  not
    comprise an interference with the right to religion, in the case  of  a
    person whose religious etc  beliefs  do  not  require  him  or  her  to
    participate in those activities. It is immaterial that a person may  be
    permitted, according to those beliefs, to participate in the activities
    concerned.

585.  Even where the motivation  for  a  law  is  religious,  the  religious
    aspect  will  not,  without  more,  lay  the  basis  of  a   claim   to
    international protection in relation to anyone who might fall  foul  of
    that law. However, the more such religiously motivated  laws  interfere
    with someone's ability to hold and practise their  religious  or  other
    beliefs, the more intense will be the scrutiny.

586.  The necessary  religious  element  to  satisfy  Article  1(A)  of  the
    Refugee  Convention  is  not  satisfied  solely  by  reference  to  the
    persecutor; but  that  element  can  be  satisfied  if  the  persecutor
    ascribes to the victim a perceived religious opinion (paragraphs 190  -
    199).

587. There is no general legal principle that,  in  determining  a  person's
    entitlement to international protection, the Tribunal must leave out of
    account any possibility of that person's carrying out  an  act  in  the
    country of proposed return, which  -  if  carried  out  in  the  United
    Kingdom - would constitute a criminal offence. A genuine  conscientious
    objection to complying  with  unjust  laws  or  demands  may,  however,
    provide an entitlement to such protection (paragraphs 200 - 206 and 536
    - 543).

588.  On the assumption that Al-Shabab's likely behaviour towards those  who
    transgress its rules is as found in this determination, the position is
    as "extreme" as the factual basis in RT (Zimbabwe). In the light of RT,
    a person from an Al-Shabab area who can  show  they  do  not  genuinely
    adhere  to  Al-Shabab's  ethos  will  have  a  good  claim  to  Refugee
    Convention  protection,  once  outside  Somalia  (subject  to  internal
    relocation and exclusion clause  issues),  regardless  of  whether  the
    person could and would "play the  game",  by  adhering  to  Al-Shabab's
    rules. As can be seen from a comparison with Sufi & Elmi, the effect of
    RT  is,  accordingly,  to  take  the  Refugee  Convention  beyond   the
    comparable ambit of Article 3 ECHR protection (paragraphs 207 - 217 and
    491 to 496).

589.  There is no legal burden on the  Secretary  of  State  to  prove  that
    there is a part of the country of nationality etc of an appellant,  who
    has established a well-founded fear in their home area,  to  which  the
    appellant could reasonably be expected to go and  live.  The  appellant
    bears  the  legal  burden  of  proving  entitlement  to   international
    protection; but what that  entails  will  very  much  depend  upon  the
    circumstances of  the  particular  case.  In  practice,  the  issue  of
    internal relocation needs to be raised by the Secretary of State in the
    letter of refusal  or  (subject  to  procedural  fairness)  during  the
    appellate proceedings. It will then be for the appellant to  make  good
    an assertion  that,  notwithstanding  the  general  conditions  in  the
    proposed place of relocation, it would not be  reasonable  to  relocate
    there. In an Article 3 claim, a similar  position  pertains,  in  that,
    although the test of reasonableness/undue harshness does  not  formally
    apply, unduly harsh living  conditions  etc  -  albeit  not  themselves
    amounting to a breach of Article 3 -  may  nevertheless  be  reasonably
    likely to lead to a person returning to their home area, where  such  a
    breach is reasonably likely (paragraphs 218 - 227).

590. An appellant who  pursues  their  appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds, following a grant of leave,  is  entitled  to  have
    their appeal decided  on  the  hypothetical  basis  (if  the  facts  so
    demonstrate) that family members would be reasonably likely  to  return
    with the appellant and that potential  harm  to  those  family  members
    would cause the appellant to suffer persecution or Article  15(b)  harm
    (paragraphs 228 - 237).

591.  A person is not entitled to protection under the  Refugee  Convention,
    the Qualification Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR, on the basis of a
    risk of harm to  another  person,  if  that  harm  would  be  willingly
    inflicted by the person seeking such protection (paragraphs 238  -  240
    and 561  - 567).

592.  Article 8(1) of  the  Qualification  Directive  provides  that  Member
    States may determine that a person is  not  in  need  of  international
    protection "if in a part of the country of origin  there  is  no  well-
    founded fear of being persecuted or no real risk of  suffering  serious
    harm and the applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part
    of  the  country.  Article  8(3)  states  that  Article  8(1)   applies
    "notwithstanding technical  obstacles  to  return  to  the  country  of
    origin". Although the Court of Appeal in HH & Others found that Article
    8 was "to do principally with internal relocation", there is nothing in
    that judgment or in the Qualification Directive that  demonstrates  the
    Article is so confined, and it would be illogical  for  it  to  be  so.
    Accordingly, difficulties in securing documentation to effect a  return
    to a person's home area may not entitle that  person  to  international
    protection, whether or not there are real risks to that person in  some
    other area of the country concerned (paragraphs 530 - 531).

593.  In assessing the  effect  of  an  appellant's  lies  (whether  to  the
    Secretary of State or a judicial fact-finder),  it  is  unnecessary  to
    construct a prescribed set of steps from the judgments of  the  Supreme
    Court  in  MA  (Somalia),  particularly  if  they  might  lead   to   a
    "mechanistic" rather than a  holistic  approach.  The  significance  or
    "negative pull" of the  lie  will  possibly  depend  not  only  on  the
    strength of the background evidence but on whether the lie - looked  at
    in its own terms - is about an issue that is central to the disposition
    of the appeal. Where a person tells lies about issues which that person
    thinks are important to their claim but which, because of  the  passage
    of time or otherwise, are not, it is open to the  Tribunal,  given  the
    earlier lies, to approach with caution the person's evidence  regarding
    matters that are central to the current claim (paragraphs 568 - 578).


                                   PART L

                         COUNTRY GUIDANCE ON SOMALIA

                                  Mogadishu

594.    Despite  the  withdrawal  in  early   August   2011   of   Al-Shabab
    conventional forces from at least most of Mogadishu, there  remains  in
    general a real risk of Article 15(c) harm for  the  majority  of  those
    returning to that city after a significant period of time abroad.  Such
    a risk does not arise in the case of a person connected  with  powerful
    actors or belonging to a  category  of  middle  class  or  professional
    persons, who can live to a reasonable standard in  circumstances  where
    the Article 15(c) risk, which exists for  the  great  majority  of  the
    population, does not apply. The significance of  this  category  should
    not, however, be overstated and, in particular, is not automatically to
    be assumed to exist, merely because a person has told lies.

595. The armed conflict in Mogadishu does not, however, pose a real risk  of
    Article 3 harm in respect of any person in  that  city,  regardless  of
    circumstances. The humanitarian crisis in southern and central  Somalia
    has led to a declaration of famine in IDP camps  in  Mogadishu;  but  a
    returnee from the United Kingdom who is fit  for  work  or  has  family
    connections may be able to avoid having to  live  in  such  a  camp.  A
    returnee may, nevertheless, face a real risk  of  Article  3  harm,  by
    reason of his or her vulnerability.

596. Except as regards the issue of female genital mutilation (FGM),  it  is
    unlikely that a proposed return to Mogadishu at the present  time  will
    raise Refugee Convention issues.

               Southern and central Somalia, outside Mogadishu

597.   Outside Mogadishu, the fighting in southern and  central  Somalia  is
    both sporadic and localised and is not such as to place every  civilian
    in that part of the country at real risk  of  Article  15(c)  harm.  In
    individual cases, it will be necessary  to  establish  where  a  person
    comes from and what the background  information  says  is  the  present
    position in that place. If fighting is going on, that will have  to  be
    taken into account in deciding whether  Article  15(c)  is  applicable.
    There is, likewise, no generalised current risk of Article 3 harm as  a
    result of armed conflict.

598.  In general, a returnee with no recent experience of living in  Somalia
    will be at real risk of being  subjected  to  treatment  proscribed  by
    Article 3 in an Al-Shabab controlled area. "No recent experience" means
    that the person concerned left Somalia before the rise of Al-Shabab  in
    2008. Even if a person has such experience, however,  he  or  she  will
    still be returning from the United Kingdom, with all that is likely  to
    entail, so far as Al-Shabab perceptions are concerned, but  he  or  she
    will be less likely to be readily identifiable as a returnee.  Even  if
    he or she were to be so identified,  the  evidence  may  point  to  the
    person having struck up some  form  of  accommodation  with  Al-Shabab,
    whilst living under their rule. On  the  other  hand,  although  having
    family in the Al-Shabab area of return  may  alleviate  the  risk,  the
    rotating nature of Al-Shabab leadership and the fact  that  punishments
    are meted out in apparent disregard of local sensibilities  mean  that,
    in general, it cannot be said that the presence of family is likely  to
    mean the risk ceases to be a real one.

599.  Al-Shabab's reasons for imposing its  requirements  and  restrictions,
    such as regarding manner of dress and spending  of  leisure  time,  are
    religious and those who transgress are regarded as  demonstrating  that
    they remain in a state of kufr (apostasy). The same is  true  of  those
    returnees who are identified as  coming  from  the  West.  Accordingly,
    those at real risk of such Article 3 ill-treatment from Al-Shabab  will
    in general be refugees, since the persecutory  harm  is  likely  to  be
    inflicted on the basis of imputed religious opinion.

600.  Although those with recent experience of living  under  Al-Shabab  may
    be able to "play the game", in the sense of conforming with Al-Shabab's
    requirements and avoiding suspicion of apostasy, the extreme nature  of
    the consequences facing anyone who might  wish  to  refuse  to  conform
    (despite an ability to do so) is such as to attract the principle in RT
    (Zimbabwe). The result is that such people will also in general  be  at
    real risk of persecution by Al-Shabab for a Refugee Convention reason.

601.  The same considerations apply to those who are  reasonably  likely  to
    have to pass through Al-Shabab areas.

602.   For someone at real risk in  a  home  area  in  southern  or  central
    Somalia, an internal relocation alternative to Mogadishu is in  general
    unlikely to be available, given the risk of indiscriminate violence  in
    the city, together with the present humanitarian situation.  Relocation
    to an IDP camp in the  Afgoye  Corridor  will,  as  a  general  matter,
    likewise be unreasonable, unless there  is  evidence  that  the  person
    concerned would be able to achieve the lifestyle  of  those  better-off
    inhabitants of the Afgoye Corridor settlements.

603.  Internal  relocation  to  an  area  controlled  by  Al-Shabab  is  not
    feasible for a person who has had no history of living under  Al-Shabab
    in that area (and is in general unlikely to be a reasonable proposition
    for someone  who  has  had  such  a  history  -  see  above).  Internal
    relocation to an  area  not  controlled  by  Al-Shabab  is  in  general
    unlikely to be an option,  if  the  place  of  proposed  relocation  is
    stricken by famine or near famine.

604.   Within the context of these findings, family and/or clan  connections
    may have an important part to play in determining the reasonableness of
    a proposed place of relocation. The importance of these connections  is
    likely to grow, as  the  nature  of  the  present  humanitarian  crisis
    diminishes and if Al-Shabab continues to lose territory.

605.  Travel by land across southern and central Somalia to a home  area  or
    proposed place of relocation is an issue that falls to be addressed  in
    the course of determining  claims  to  international  protection.  Such
    travel may well, in general, pose real risks of serious harm, not  only
    from Al-Shabab checkpoints but also as a result of the  present  famine
    conditions. Women travelling without male friends or relatives  are  in
    general likely to face a real risk of sexual violence.

606.  An issue that may have implications for future Somali appeals  is  the
    availability of air travel within Somalia  (including  to  Somaliland).
    Flying into Mogadishu International Airport is sufficiently safe. There
    is no evidence to indicate a real risk to commercial aircraft flying to
    other airports in Somalia.


                           Somaliland and Puntland

607.   The present appeals were not  designed  to  be  vehicles  for  giving
    country guidance on the position within Somaliland or  Puntland.  There
    is no evidential basis for departing from  the  conclusion  in  NM  and
    others, that Somaliland  and  Puntland  in  general  only  accept  back
    persons who were former residents of those regions and were members  of
    locally based clans or sub clans. In the context of Somali  immigration
    to the United Kingdom, there is a close connection with Somaliland.

608.  A person from Somaliland will not, in general, be  able  without  real
    risk of serious harm to travel overland  from  Mogadishu  International
    Airport to a place  where  he  or  she  might  be  able  to  obtain  an
    unofficial travel  document  for  the  purposes  of  gaining  entry  to
    Somaliland, and then by land to Somaliland. This  is  particularly  the
    case if the person is female. A proposed return  by  air  to  Hargeisa,
    Somaliland (whether or not via Mogadishu International Airport) will in
    general involve no such risks.


                          Female genital mutilation

609.  The incidence of FGM in Somalia is universally agreed to be over  90%.
    The predominant type of FGM is  the  "pharaonic",  categorised  by  the
    World Health Organisation as Type III. The societal requirement for any
    girl or woman to undergo FGM is strong. In general,  an  uncircumcised,
    unmarried Somali woman, up to the age of 39, will be at  real  risk  of
    suffering FGM.

610.  The risk will be greatest in cases where both parents  are  in  favour
    of FGM. Where both are opposed, the question of whether the  risk  will
    reach the requisite level will need to be determined  by  reference  to
    the extent to which the parents are likely to be able to withstand  the
    strong societal pressures. Unless the parents are from a socio-economic
    background that is likely  to  distance  them  from  mainstream  social
    attitudes, or there is some other particular feature of their case, the
    fact of parental opposition may well as a general matter  be  incapable
    of eliminating the real risk to the daughter that others  (particularly
    relatives) will at some point inflict FGM on her.

                                   Part M

                   Re-making the decisions in the appeals


Appellant AMM

611.  Appellant AMM has been comprehensively disbelieved  in  his  evidence,
    save that he comes  from  Jowhar.   It  is  common  ground  that  those
    negative credibility findings stand.  Amongst  the  undoubted  problems
    with the credibility of appellant AMM is the fact that he gave a  false
    name to the United Kingdom authorities when he made  his  third  asylum
    application.  His assertion in oral evidence that he was forced  to  do
    so struck us as absurd.

612.   In  general,  having  had  the  opportunity  of  hearing  and  seeing
    appellant AMM give oral evidence, we considered him to be an  extremely
    poor witness.  His evidence regarding his alleged religious differences
    with Al-Shabab bore every indication of having  been  manufactured  for
    the purpose of the present proceedings.  He entirely failed to persuade
    us that he held any genuine religious or similar  beliefs,  which  were
    likely to be stifled, restricted or otherwise interfered  with  by  Al-
    Shabab.  Appellant AMM is, in short, a cynical opportunist,  intent  on
    securing status in the United Kingdom by any means he considers  likely
    to achieve that result,  regardless  of  whether  those  means  involve
    lying.  Having said this, the previous finding, that he is from Jowhar,
    stands.  Jowhar is  in  an  Al-Shabab-controlled  area.   We  are  also
    prepared, just, to accept that appellant AMM has been  outside  Somalia
    since 2000.  He has certainly been here since 2005 and  the  respondent
    does not appear to take issue with the  fact  that  appellant  AMM  was
    rescued  in  the  Mediterranean  from  a  sinking  vessel.    He   has,
    accordingly, been away from Somalia for a  long  time,  certainly  long
    before the rise of Al-Shabab.  Appellant AMM's claim not  to  know  the
    whereabouts of his wife and 12 year old child struck us  as  a  further
    instance of his mendacity, since he has no  doubt  calculated  that  it
    would be better from his point of view to assert that he was no  longer
    in touch with them.  Given his general lack of credibility and the ease
    with which contact can be made over mobile  telephones  with  those  in
    Somalia, we consider that the truth of the  matter  is  that  appellant
    AMM's wife and children are living in Jowhar, and that  he  knows  this
    full well.

613.   Does the "negative pull" of appellant  AMM's  lies  reach  the  point
    where it overrides the general evidence regarding risk to returnees  to
    Al-Shabab areas from the United Kingdom for those who  have  been  away
    from Somalia for a  significant  period?   The  issue  is  whether  the
    extreme likelihood that appellant  AMM  has  close  family  members  in
    Jowhar would facilitate his return there, removing any real  risk  that
    he  would  suffer  the  serious  adverse  attention  of  Al-Shabab;  in
    particular, as a perceived spy.  We do not consider that it would.  The
    evidence before us as to Al-Shabab executions, beatings and  so  forth,
    does not disclose that the victims of  these  atrocities  were  lacking
    family members in the areas concerned.   Whilst  it  plainly  might  be
    possible for appellant AMM's family to liaise with the then current Al-
    Shabab commander, in advance of appellant AMM's return, the  capricious
    and unpredictable  nature  of  Al-Shabab  rule  means  that  we  cannot
    conclude that this would eliminate a real risk to  appellant  AMM.   On
    the contrary, the highlighting of  his  having  come  from  the  United
    Kingdom may have the opposite effect.

614.  Added to this is  the  reasonable  likelihood,  given  the  geographic
    spread  of  Al-Shabab's  control  in  southern  and  central   Somalia,
    diminishing though it is, that appellant AMM would have to cross an Al-
    Shabab area on his way to Jowhar.   Even  if  he  has  family  etc.  in
    Jowhar, they would be unlikely to be able to smooth his passage through
    such  intermediary  areas.  Those  operating   such   checkpoints   are
    reasonably likely to observe from appellant AMM's behaviour that he has
    no recent experience of Somalia, which may very well lead to him  being
    identified or at least assumed to be from the West.

615.  It is reasonably likely that any serious  harm  that  Al-Shabab  would
    inflict upon appellant AMM would be motivated  by  that  organisation's
    Manichean view of religion and that appellant AMM would suffer  because
    - irrespective of his own absence of any religious belief - he would be
    perceived as a religious apostate.

616.  Although, in view of that  finding,  it  is  immaterial,  we  did  not
    believe appellant AMM when he sought to persuade us that  he  had  some
    kind of conscientious objection to paying  taxes  to  Al-Shabab.   Once
    again, his oral evidence bore every appearance of being concocted.

617.  The respondent did not  point  to  any  other  areas  of  central  and
    southern Somalia, outside Mogadishu, to which appellant AMM  might  go,
    where Al-Shabab are not in control.  That  there  are  such  areas  is,
    however, apparent from the evidence.  In the circumstances, we  do  not
    consider that appellant AMM could, at the present time,  reasonably  or
    without undue hardship relocate to such an area.   The  likelihood  is,
    bearing in mind the current humanitarian emergency, that appellant  AMM
    would struggle to survive.  This is so, notwithstanding the  fact  that
    he could avail himself of an initial  500  and,  possibly,  a  further
    1,000, from UKBA's relocation package.  Coupled with a family or other
    support network, such as  that  provided  by  a  clan,  such  financial
    assistance may well render internal relocation reasonable, according to
    Januzi standards.  On its own, however, we  do  not  consider  that  it
    would, in the case of appellant AMM.

618.  Again, despite the negative pull of his lies, we  do  not  find  that,
    looking at the evidence overall, appellant AMM has  failed  to  show  a
    reasonable likelihood that, wherever else he might go  in  central  and
    southern Somalia, he would have such family/clan connections.

619.  The same is true of relocation to Mogadishu.  We do not consider  that
    the negative credibility of appellant AMM is so strong as to lead us to
    conclude  that  he  would  be  able  to  live  there  in  the  kind  of
    circumstances we have described as being the current exception  to  the
    general Article 15(c) risk to returnees to that city.

620.  Appellant AMM's appeal accordingly falls  to  be  allowed  on  refugee
    grounds.  He is not entitled to humanitarian  protection.   His  appeal
    succeeds on Article 3 ECHR grounds by reference to the risk to him from
    Al-Shabab.


Appellant MW

621.  Appellant MW has not been found credible in the past, save as  to  her
    assertion that she comes  from  Merka.   In  particular,  her  previous
    evidence, that she did not know what clan  she  was  from,  is  plainly
    damaging  of  her  credibility,  given  her  background  and  continued
    exposure to Somali culture.

622.  Her oral evidence to us was intensely problematic.  Her  reply  to  Ms
    Short's question as to what would happen if she  arrived  in  Mogadishu
    with her three children, was to state that "people in Mogadishu did not
    use pushchairs" and that  she  would  be  unable  to  carry  her  three
    children without one.  This reply we  consider  to  be  symptomatic  of
    appellant MW's lack of inclination to engage seriously with the  appeal
    process (perhaps because of her recent grant of discretionary leave).

623.  What was revealing, however,  was  her  oral  evidence  regarding  her
    attitude towards  female  circumcision.   Appellant  MW's  answers  are
    recorded in Appendix 1 to this determination.  We  consider  that  they
    demonstrate clearly  appellant  MW's  acceptance  of  the  practice  in
    Somalia.  Indeed, we conclude that the only factor that would  preclude
    appellant MW from circumcising her daughter in the  United  Kingdom  is
    the criminal proscription on the practice that exists here.   Although,
    as we have seen from the background  evidence,  societal  pressures  in
    Somalia to have FGM performed can be severe, appellant MW's decision to
    have her daughter circumcised would be likely to be  made  long  before
    any such pressures arose.

624.   Appellant  MW's  partner  gave  oral  evidence.   Despite  his  vague
    assertion that he was taking medication  "for  his  memory",  with  the
    implication that memory problems had  affected  his  performance  as  a
    witness in the past, it was plain to us that the partner was merely not
    a very good liar.  It beggars belief  that,  as  he  asserted,  he  was
    unaware that he had been found in the past in a  judicial  context  not
    capable of being believed.  It was also striking that, although he said
    in evidence that his clan did not have "any power", he claimed  he  did
    not know what his clan in fact was.  When it was put to him that he had
    been divorced in the United Kingdom under British law, he replied "what
    divorce?"  His subsequent reply to the question of  how  he  might  not
    know how to get married and yet knew how to get divorced  was  entirely
    unpersuasive.

625.  The partner's assertions regarding  his  attitude  to  FGM,  whilst  a
    little more  coherent,  struck  us  as  being  more  manufactured  than
    genuine.  Whilst we accept  what  Ms  Short  said  about  the  position
    regarding  benefits  and  how,   until   appellant   MW   was   granted
    discretionary leave,  there  may  well  have  been  negative  financial
    implications for her and her partner to be living  together,  both  she
    and her partner exhibited an extremely  supine  attitude  towards  this
    issue.  We certainly did not form the impression that the  couple  were
    straining to live together.  We say that notwithstanding  the  evidence
    that they now have three children and that the partner is mentioned  on
    the relevant birth certificates.

626.  Having said all this, we do accept  that  appellant  MW  has  maternal
    feelings towards her children and that, if forcibly removed to Somalia,
    she is at least reasonably likely to seek to  take  her  children  with
    her, in order not to be parted from them.  We were  presented  with  no
    evidence to suggest that her partner or anyone  else  would,  in  those
    circumstances, seek to prevent the children's departure with  appellant
    MW.

627.  Accordingly, for the purposes of section 84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act,  we
    approach appellant MW's appeal on the hypothesis that  she  would  find
    herself in Somalia with her three children.  In such circumstances,  it
    is, we find, possible that her partner would choose to accompany  them;
    but it is sufficiently unclear to conclude that there is  a  reasonable
    likelihood of MW and her children going to Somalia alone.

628.  In view of what we have found to be the true attitude of appellant  MW
    towards female circumcision, it is evident that she cannot  succeed  in
    showing that she is a refugee on the basis of the real  risk  that  her
    daughter would be circumcised.  Appellant MW is highly likely either to
    be the perpetrator of such mutilation or to procure it from others (see
    paragraphs 561 et seq above).  We have formed our conclusions  of  this
    aspect of appellant MW's evidence having regard to the  report  of  the
    independent social worker,  Ms  Cox,  who  claimed  that  appellant  MW
    "became visibly upset when talking about her fear of [b]eing subject to
    FGM if she were to return with her to Somalia".  We witnessed  no  such
    distress during the quite lengthy questioning of appellant MW  on  this
    issue in the present proceedings.  Whilst we  are  prepared  to  accept
    that this  is  what  Ms  Cox  saw,  appellant  MW's  thorough  lack  of
    credibility in other areas of her claim leads us to conclude  that  she
    was seeking to deceive the social worker.  What we do accept,  however,
    as we have said, and as Ms Cox goes on to record, is that appellant  MW
    "could not consider leaving  [the  children]  in  the  UK  if  she  was
    returned to Somalia but equally feared for their safety there".

629.  Leaving aside FGM,  in  the  light  of  our  findings  regarding  MW's
    maternal feelings, it is  plain  that  she  would  be  very  likely  to
    experience feelings of anguish, amounting to Article  3  ill-treatment,
    if she were to see her  children  severely  harmed  or  suffering  from
    severe malnutrition, somewhere in southern and central Somalia.  As  we
    have found, the situation in large parts of that region are such as  to
    make such a fear well-founded.  Whilst  we  accept  that  appellant  MW
    could well receive money transfers, not only from UKBA  but  also  from
    her relative in Canada, the general insecurity faced by women, with  no
    male protector would, we find, be significantly aggravated in the  case
    of appellant MW, by reason of her long absence  from  Somalia  and  her
    consequent lack of coping mechanisms, such as women heads of households
    have had to forge in recent years.

630.  In view of our adverse  credibility  findings,  we  consider  it  very
    likely that appellant MW has some (albeit extended)  family  in  Merka;
    but that is an area controlled by Al-Shabab  and  we  accordingly  make
    similar findings in relation to appellant MW as we have in the case  of
    appellant AMM.  Like him, appellant MW has been outside Somalia  for  a
    significant period of time  and  would  be  returning  from  a  Western
    country.  There is, accordingly, a real risk of her being perceived  as
    an apostate.  We do not, however, accept, any more than we did  in  the
    case of appellant AMM, that appellant MW has any genuine religious  etc
    beliefs that are reasonably likely to be interfered with by Al-Shabab's
    socio-religious requirements.  Her children are far  too  young  to  be
    subject to forced recruitment and we do not consider that appellant  MW
    has any conscientious objection to the payment of "taxes".

631.  As a single woman with children, appellant MW would clearly  be  in  a
    heightened risk category from the point of  view  of  sexual  violence,
    which is prevalent  in  southern  and  central  Somalia.   We  do  not,
    however, find that she is at real risk of Article  15(b)  ill-treatment
    or persecutory ill-treatment by reason of having to  wear  oppressively
    heavy clothing in an Al-Shabab area.  As we have  found,  the  evidence
    that Al-Shabab imposes such requirements is too sporadic to  give  rise
    to a generalised real risk.

632.  Appellant MW's travel to Merka from  Mogadishu  International  Airport
    is likely to involve serious problems, including  those  faced  at  Al-
    Shabab  checkpoints.   As  with  appellant  AMM,  we  find  that  those
    operating  the  checkpoints  are  reasonably  likely  to  discern  from
    appellant MW's appearance, and those of her  children,  (leaving  aside
    issues of clothing) that she has no recent experience of Somalia and is
    likely to be from the West.

633.  As with appellant  AMM,  whilst  it  is  theoretically  possible  that
    appellant MW could relocate to a  non-Al-Shabab  area  in  southern  or
    central Somalia, no such potential area  has  been  identified  by  the
    respondent.  Furthermore, there remain the problems of getting to  such
    an area and the reasonableness of conditions there, given  the  general
    humanitarian situation and the likelihood (despite appellant MW's  lack
    of credibility) that she would not have family or clan protection.

634.  As for Mogadishu, in the light of our Article 15(c) findings, this  is
    plainly not a reasonable relocation alternative for  appellant  MW  and
    her children, whether or not her partner (who says he comes from there)
    would be hypothesised as returning with her.

635.  At [91] of Ms Short's closing  submissions,  she  submitted  that  the
    right to education of appellant MW's  children  would  be  violated  by
    returning them to Somalia.  Given, however, that  the  only  hypothesis
    with which we are concerned is that in section  84(1)(g)  of  the  2002
    Act, the children's right to education is not an issue in  the  present
    proceedings.

636.   On  the  basis  of  these  findings,  appellant  MW  is  entitled  to
    recognition as a refugee.  She is, accordingly,  not  entitled  to  the
    grant of humanitarian protection.


Appellant ZF

637.  Appellant ZF is, at 67, the oldest of  the  five  appellants;  she  is
    also the most recent arrival in this country, having  reached  here  in
    September 2009.  On the basis of the  original  Tribunal's  undisturbed
    findings of fact, appellant ZF comes from north-west Somalia, which, as
    we have indicated, in this  context  means  Somaliland.   The  original
    Tribunal found  that  there  was  a  "chance  that  she  has  lived  in
    Mogadishu",  although  she  did  not   originate   from   there.    The
    overwhelming likelihood is, accordingly, that appellant ZF is an Isaaq.

638.  We had the benefit of hearing and seeing appellant ZF  give  evidence.
    She cut a poor figure.  She sought to resile from an important  element
    of her evidence regarding her alleged rape by Al-Shabab  militia.   She
    failed to come up to proof, in  terms  of  her  written  statement,  in
    relation to alleged religious differences  with  Al-Shabab.   She  gave
    inconsistent evidence as to when her daughter was supposed to have left
    Somalia.  She attempted to exaggerate problems  regarding  her  health,
    mentioning a variety  of  conditions  from  heart  problems  to  severe
    arthritis, which her GP had not seen fit to refer  to  in  his  letter.
    She could give no credible explanation for not being  in  contact  with
    her daughter.  She could give no credible explanation of how, according
    to her, she had been able to make  a  long  journey  on  her  own  from
    Ethiopia to the United Kingdom.  She persisted in her assertion, in the
    face of the evidence (including linguistic evidence) that she  was  not
    from Somaliland.  Her evidence as to why she  had  not  left  with  her
    daughter involved appellant ZF contradicting herself as to whether  she
    had money (albeit in the form of jewellery which she could have  sold).
    She claimed there was  no  Somali  community  in  Newcastle,  when  her
    doctor's letter stated that she had specifically requested being  moved
    to that city in order to be near the Somali community.   Her  claim  to
    have been raped by Al-Shabab, who were also supposed to have killed her
    husband, was intensely problematic, given that she said  this  happened
    in 2001, before the emergence of that organisation.

639.  The case of appellant ZF is a striking  instance  of  a  person  whose
    claim to international protection turns entirely  on  the  respondent's
    decision  to  return  the  appellant  to  Mogadishu,  as   opposed   to
    Somaliland.  In Part I we have examined the possible  reasons  why  the
    respondent has adopted such a course.

640.  On the basis of our credibility findings and the background  evidence,
    we have no doubt at all that appellant ZF would not be at real risk  of
    persecution or other serious harm in Somaliland.   She  has  completely
    failed to show that she is without family and/or clan protection there.
     Her ability to raise US$3,000  to  fund  her  journey  to  the  United
    Kingdom  demonstrates  that  she  is  able  to  call  upon  significant
    financial resources, even before one takes account of  the  money  that
    UKBA would make available to assist her return.

641.  However, appellant ZF will be a refugee if there is  a  real  risk  of
    her being persecuted for a Refugee Convention reason in the country  of
    her nationality; namely, Somalia, at or after the point of her  return.
    In order to get an old green Somali passport (see above)  appellant  ZF
    would have to run  the  real  risk  of  Article  15(c)  harm,  if  such
    passports are still available in Bakara Market (and assuming  it  would
    be open for business), or Article 3 and Refugee Convention harm, if she
    has to venture into the Afgoye Corridor.  The respondent submitted that
    there was, in fact, evidence from appellant ZF that she had lived for a
    significant period of time in Mogadishu and also been in  Afgoye.   The
    previous Tribunal, however, plainly did not believe anything more  than
    that there was  a  chance  appellant  ZF  had  at  some  time  been  in
    Mogadishu.  Her whole account of  problems  in  Mogadishu  and  Afgoye,
    which were central to appellant ZF's claim before  that  Tribunal,  was
    found (quite properly) to be lies.  We consider that it is  taking  the
    consequences of those lies too far to hold that appellant  ZF  has,  in
    reality, been able to live without difficulties in those places.

642.  At [26] of his closing submissions  on  behalf  of  appellant  ZF,  Mr
    Schwenk contended "that all  the  evidence  points  to  the  Respondent
    proposing to send the Appellant to Mogadishu from where she is expected
    to make her way overland to the north".  We agree.  The respondent  did
    not to any material extent advance the submission  that  appellant  ZF,
    having  got  the  old  green  passport,  could  return   to   Mogadishu
    International  Airport  and  board  a  plane  to  Hargeisa.   We  have,
    nevertheless, considered that possibility; but by that time there is  a
    real risk that serious harm will have befallen her.

643.  As we have already found by  reference  to  the  background  evidence,
    appellant ZF's overland route to the borders of Somaliland  is  fraught
    with dangers.  The evidence does not disclose that appellant  ZF  would
    be able to avoid a real risk of serious harm.  In particular, we  agree
    with Mr Schwenk  at  [31]  "that  when  travelling  through  Al-Shabab-
    controlled  areas  she  will  be  perceived  by   Al-Shabab   to   have
    transgressed  Islamic  mores  and  will  thereby  be  at  risk".    The
    Convention ground is perceived religious opinion, albeit that we do not
    consider appellant  ZF  has  any  genuine  religious  or  conscientious
    beliefs that are likely to be interfered with by  Al-Shabab.   In  this
    regard, we do not consider it necessary to repeat  what  we  have  said
    regarding appellant AMM and appellant MW, save that there is nothing to
    suggest that appellant ZF's age would remove any real risk to her.

644.  Appellant ZF is entitled to recognition as  a  refugee.   She  is  not
    entitled to the grant of humanitarian protection.  Her appeal will also
    be allowed on Article 3 ECHR grounds.


Appellant FM

645.  Appellant FM, who arrived in the United Kingdom  in  July  2006,  from
    Kenya, told Immigration Judge Courtney that he was from a minority clan
    (Ashraf), had lived his entire  life  up  to  leaving  Somalia  in  the
    district of Hamar JaabJab, Mogadishu, had  married  a  woman  from  the
    majority Hawiye clan and thereby incurred the animosity of his in-laws,
    causing him to leave.  The only part of this evidence that survived the
    Immigration Judge's well-founded adverse credibility findings was  that
    appellant FM had lived in Hamar JaabJab.

646.  In his oral evidence to us, appellant FM said he could not return,  on
    the basis that he would have no employment and there was no  stability.
    He said he could not look for work because jobs were organised by clans
    and given to people who belonged to the clans concerned.  The port near
    Hamar JaabJab was, he said, controlled by major clans  and  other  clan
    members would be unable to find work there.

647.  Appellant FM claimed to be a Sufi.   He  described  elements  of  that
    sect's beliefs and practices, which persuaded us that  he  was  telling
    the truth about  this.   We  also  considered  that  he  gave  truthful
    evidence about being able to live in Hamar JaabJab during the fighting,
    but having to move to a different district, such as Hamar  Weyne,  when
    the fighting was intense.  Asked about present circumstances, appellant
    FM said that although government forces held Hamar JaabJab  during  the
    day "during the night others would come".   He  considered  nowhere  in
    Mogadishu to be safe.  He did not believe that he could move to another
    area outside Mogadishu, not controlled by Al-Shabab, because  a  person
    needed a clan connection.  He agreed that  there  was  no  conflict  in
    Somaliland.

648.  Appellant FM said that he had last spoken to his wife five  weeks  ago
    and that his father-in-law had asked him to release his wife  from  the
    marriage so that she could marry someone else.  They were now  said  to
    live in Ceelasha Biyaha, an area outside Mogadishu that was  controlled
    by Al-Shabab.  He had tried to call his wife back but there had been no
    reply.  He confirmed that he had left Somalia because his father-in-law
    opposed the marriage and now wanted appellant FM to divorce.

649.  It is in our view significant that  appellant  FM's  own  evidence  is
    that his reason for leaving Hamar JaabJab  in  February  2006  was  not
    because of the fighting and consequent displacement of  civilians  from
    that district but because of alleged ill-treatment from his  father-in-
    law.  Immigration Judge Courtney did not believe the  account  of  that
    ill-treatment or, indeed, that appellant FM was even  married.   Having
    heard appellant FM ourselves, we do not conclude that he has shown  why
    that finding should be displaced, save that we consider  it  reasonably
    likely that he is, in fact, married.  The evidence that he had been  in
    touch with his wife as recently as five weeks ago did not strike us  as
    overtly self-serving, notwithstanding the assertion that the father-in-
    law supposedly wants appellant FM to divorce his wife.

650.  At the time of the hearing and for a significant period before,  Hamar
    JaabJab had been under the control of the TFG/AMISOM.   Notwithstanding
    that  and  the  withdrawal  of  Al-Shabab's  conventional  forces  from
    Mogadishu, we have found that it would in general  be  a  violation  of
    Article 15(c) to return any civilian to Mogadishu at the present  time.
    We have carefully considered whether appellant FM might fall within the
    limited exception to that general finding, concerning those whose socio-
    economic position enables them to avoid the  risks  run  by  the  great
    majority of the population, whilst maintaining a reasonable  lifestyle,
    albeit centred on a residential compound.  The fact that  appellant  FM
    did not leave Mogadishu because of the generalised fighting could  well
    be said to be a pointer towards his falling within such  an  exception.
    On the other hand, his description of moving with his wife and children
    to other districts, such as Hamar Weyne, fits well with the  background
    evidence and tends to put him outwith the category just described.

651.  Looking at the evidence overall, we conclude that  the  negative  pull
    of the lies appellant FM has seen fit to tell is not such as  to  place
    him within the exception.  Accordingly, appellant FM would be  entitled
    to humanitarian protection by reason of Article 15(c),  if  we  do  not
    find him to be a refugee.

652.  We do not, however, find that appellant FM's hypothetical presence  in
    Hamar JaabJab is such as to make him a refugee.   Whilst  Al-Shabab  is
    capable of posing a real risk of indiscriminate violence  to  civilians
    generally in that district, we do not consider that the evidence  shows
    that  -  even  before  the  August  2011  withdrawal   of   Al-Shabab's
    conventional fighting forces - they were reasonably likely to have  had
    such a presence in Hamar JaabJab as to be able to  persecute  appellant
    FM for his  imputed  religious  opinions.   Appellant  FM  told  us  he
    understood that, by  night,  "others"  (presumably  meaning  Al-Shabab)
    would come into Hamar JaabJab.  That may be so; but the evidence  as  a
    whole simply fails to disclose a sufficient risk of  persecutory  harm,
    as opposed to the real risk of a threat of indiscriminate violence.

653.  Mr Symes submitted that appellant FM would have to  venture  into  Al-
    Shabab-controlled  areas  of  Mogadishu  in  order  to  have   anything
    resembling an ordinary life; in particular, he  would  need  to  go  to
    Bakara Market to buy everyday things and, possibly, obtain  employment.
    That may have been so before Al-Shabab's withdrawal; but it is not  the
    case now.  In any event, even before  that  withdrawal,  Mr  Burns  had
    confirmed that there were a host of markets around  Mogadishu  catering
    for basic needs, including in TFG/AMISOM-controlled areas,  albeit  not
    operating on the  scale  of  Bakara  Market.   Furthermore,  employment
    opportunities exist in Hamar JaabJab and in  its  adjacent  port  area.
    Appellant FM claimed that he  would  be  unable  to  secure  employment
    there, because he was from a minority clan.  He has not  been  believed
    as to that aspect of his claim.  Furthermore, Mr Burns' evidence was to
    the effect that the demographics of  Hamar  JaabJab  were  considerably
    different from those that existed in 2006.

654.  Since appellant FM does not have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    for a Refugee Convention reason in his home area, it is unnecessary  to
    determine whether, for the purposes  of  that  Convention,  he  has  an
    internal relocation alternative, either in southern or central  Somalia
    or in Somaliland/Puntland.  The  respondent,  however,  contended  that
    such an internal relocation  was  feasible,  as  a  means  of  avoiding
    Article 15(c) harm in Mogadishu.

655.  We reject that submission, as regards southern  and  central  Somalia,
    for the same reasons as we have  given  in  relation  to  the  previous
    appellants.  As for Somaliland and Puntland, we have already  indicated
    why we do not consider that such a relocation alternative can  properly
    be raised at this stage of the appellate proceedings.  On  this  issue,
    Mr Symes drew attention to  the  judgment  of  Sedley  LJ  in  Daoud  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 755, that:-

         "Internal relocation is not, as  Home  Office  presenting  officers
         seem often to think it is, a throw-away submission  in  case  other
         arguments fail.  It  is  a  serious  and  frequently  problematical
         issue,  requiring  proper  notice,  proper  evidence   and   proper
         argument, and it is governed by legal tests to which this court has
         more than once devoted attention." [12]

656.  In any event, the adverse credibility findings in appellant FM's  case
    are nowhere near those required to raise as a  serious  issue  that  he
    might, in  reality,  have  the  requisite  degree  of  connection  with
    Somaliland and Puntland as to be  able  to  live  in  either  of  those
    regions.  Finally, even if this were otherwise, appellant FM would have
    to make his way from Mogadishu to the borders of  those  regions,  with
    the attendant risks  that  we  have  described  in  relation  to  other
    appellants.

657.  As we have earlier held, to live in Mogadishu  at  the  present  time,
    following the withdrawal of Al-Shabab, does not in general raise a real
    risk of treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.

658.  Appellant FM is not entitled to recognition  as  a  refugee.   He  is,
    however, entitled to  humanitarian  protection  (Article  15(c)).   His
    appeal is dismissed on Article 3 grounds.


Appellant AF

659.   Like appellant AMM, appellant AF  has  extensive  experience  of  the
    appellate system in the United Kingdom.  This is the second occasion on
    which his appeal has been remitted  to  a  tribunal  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal.   Previous  judicial  findings  of  fact,  undisturbed  by  the
    circumstances of the remittals, establish that appellant AF is a member
    of the Madhiban clan (a Migdan) who, although being born in  Merka  and
    having lived there until 1989, made  his  home  in  Mogadishu,  in  the
    districts of Shangani, Hamar Weyne and Hamar JaabJab (all of  which  at
    the hearing were under TFG/AMISOM control).   Although  he  experienced
    discrimination and some minor harassment during the time  of  the  clan
    conflicts, he was never physically harmed.  He enjoyed  the  protection
    of a Habargidir man, who was appellant AF's clan  patron.   Immigration
    Judge Adio did not believe that the patron had been killed, contrary to
    the assertion of appellant AF.

660.  Appellant AF was able to  raise  money  with  the  assistance  of  his
    patron, by selling appellant AF's mother's land.  Appellant AF left his
    wife  and  children  at  home,  went  to  Bakara  Market,  made  travel
    arrangements and then left Somalia for the United Kingdom.  This was in
    2001.

661.  Like appellant FM, appellant AF told  us  in  oral  evidence  that  he
    would move with his wife and children to  another  area  of  Mogadishu,
    when the fighting in their area  became  intense.   He  confirmed  that
    during the fighting he had never left the city.  Appellant  AF  claimed
    not to know where his family were and that he had no  connections  with
    his clan.  Looking at the  evidence  overall,  including  the  previous
    judicial findings, we do not consider that there is any credibility  in
    those assertions.  We consider that the truth of  the  matter  is  that
    appellant AF's family remain in Hamar JaabJab, that he knows this  full
    well and that he  is  likely  to  be  in  touch  with  them  by  mobile
    telephone.  Appellant AF claimed in oral evidence that he had no  phone
    cards and no money to spend on calling persons  in  Somalia,  but  then
    undermined that assertion by saying that "if he did call they would ask
    him for money".  He then changed his evidence again, by asserting  that
    the reason he did not speak to them was that "he  did  not  know  their
    numbers".

662.  Appellant AF's attempt to portray himself as  religiously  opposed  to
    Al-Shabab was entirely unpersuasive.   He  claimed  that  he  had  been
    brought up "believing that even killing  an  insect  was  wrong".   The
    hyperbolic nature of that assertion  did  not  advance  appellant  AF's
    case; quite the opposite.  The reasoning we have employed  in  relation
    to appellant FM, so as to conclude that he is at real risk  of  Article
    15(c) harm, if returned to Mogadishu, is also relevant in the  case  of
    appellant AF and causes us to make the same finding in respect of  him.
    In both cases, we do not, in particular,  consider  that  the  problems
    with credibility properly lead us  to  conclude  that  appellants  fall
    within the exception to the Article 15(c) class of those at risk.

663.  By the same token, however, we do not find that appellant AF falls  to
    be recognised as a refugee.  There is no real risk of him coming to the
    adverse attention of Al-Shabab in Hamar JaabJab or in any other area of
    the city to which he might wish or need to go, whether  for  employment
    or other purposes, such as to constitute a real risk of persecution  or
    Article 3 harm. Like appellant FM, however, he does face the real  risk
    of a serious threat of Article 15(c) harm.

664.  We make the same  findings  regarding  other  areas  of  southern  and
    central Somalia and the possibility of  relocation  to  Somaliland  and
    Puntland, as we have just made in relation to appellant  FM.   Finally,
    there is on the evidence no real risk of appellant AF suffering Article
    3 harm in Mogadishu at the present time.

665.  Appellant AF is not entitled to be recognised as a  refugee.   He  is,
    however, entitled to  humanitarian  protection  (Article  15(c)).   His
    appeal is dismissed on Article 3 grounds.



                               Signed
                                   Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge P R Lane
                                 Appendix 1

                          Summary of Oral Evidence

Appellant AMM

 1. The appellant gave his evidence in Somali through the court interpreter
    and confirmed that he lived in Manchester and  that  he  had  made  the
    statement contained in the bundle. He stated that it had been read back
    to him in Somali and that the contents were true.

 2. The appellant was asked for his opinion of Al Shabab.  He  stated  that
    the difference between himself and Al Shabab was the interpretation  of
    the religion. He stated that according to Islam, killing  and  taxation
    was prohibited and so Al Shabab were acting against  Islam.  He  stated
    that they  entered  other  people's  houses  by  force  and  took  away
    televisions and radios. He was asked what he had to say about the claim
    that Al Shabab were killing in  the  name  of  Islam.  He  stated  that
    according to his religion, only God could give and take away  life.  He
    said Somalia had been a Muslim country for centuries that now Al Shabab
    had a different version of Islam which they were using  for  their  own
    interests. He stated that they interpreted the religion in a  different
    way. Islam meant peace and the killing and execution of people was  not
    allowed. He  stated  that  the  collection  of  taxes  was  not  right,
    particularly when it was used to buy  weapons  and  wage  wars  against
    civilians. He was asked how he would  feel  if  he  was  stopped  at  a
    checkpoint and asked to pay money. He stated that he would feel  guilty
    because he would believe that he had committed a crime against  God  by
    paying money. He was asked to explain his reply and he  stated  it  was
    because that money would be used to kill others.

 3. The appellant was then cross examined by Mr Staker. He  confirmed  that
    he was born in January 1977 and that he was 34 years old. It was put to
    him that he was healthy and able bodied. He replied that  he  may  look
    that way but he was stressed. It was acknowledged that  he  might  find
    the hearing stressful but it was pointed out that there was no  medical
    evidence as to any ongoing health problems. He stated that he had  been
    stressed for six years. He agreed that  he  had  had  several  previous
    appeals. He confirmed he arrived in 2005 and that after the refusal  of
    his first appeal he had gone to Ireland and claimed  asylum  there.  He
    stated that it had not been his intention but  when  he  had  lost  his
    appeal and was told to leave the country  he  went  there  and  made  a
    claim. He had been told at Dublin that he had to return to the  UK  and
    that was what had happened and he then had several more appeals. It was
    put to him that the Tribunal had accepted he was from Jowhar  but  that
    the rest of his account had been rejected. He said  he  disagreed  with
    the findings. He was asked whether he had any family in Somalia and  he
    said he did not. He had three brothers in Libya and although they  used
    to have contact with each other, that was no longer possible because of
    the ongoing problems in Libya. He stated that he did not believe  there
    was any communication with people in Libya and he said a lot of Somalis
    had been killed there  because  they  were  suspected  of  working  for
    Gaddafi's forces. He stated that he had two sisters working as cleaners
    in Saudi Arabia and that he was in contact with them. He had also  been
    in contact with his wife before his departure for  Ireland  but  he  no
    longer knew where she was. He stated he had  no  relatives  at  all  in
    Somalia as his father had been an only child and so had his mother.  He
    was asked about clan connections. He stated that there were always clan
    connections but it was not possible to rely on them. He stated  he  had
    considered committing suicide many times. He had  some  Somali  friends
    here and he watched Somali news on the television.

 4. The appellant confirmed that he had heard  of  the  voluntary  assisted
    return program and he was aware of the assistance offered under it.  He
    was asked whether he would accept that assistance  if  he  returned  to
    Somalia. He replied that he had not come to the UK to make money but to
    save his life. He stated  that  if  Somalia  was  stable  he  would  go
    voluntarily. He did not want any money. He was  asked  whether  he  was
    aware that 80% of the population of Mogadishu lived under TFG  control.
    He asked whether Mr. Staker was suggesting that Mogadishu was safe. The
    question was repeated. He replied that he believed that Mr. Staker  was
    misinformed. He stated that the TFG  were  only  in  control  in  Villa
    Somalia and they were unable to move  without  guards.  The  population
    generally was not safe and there was no '80% safe area'. It was put  to
    him that 80% of the population lived in areas that were not  under  the
    control of Al Shabab. He  stated  that  the  population  lived  outside
    Mogadishu and only came into the city in the morning in order to  avoid
    war. He stated there were no safe areas and there was  war  everywhere.
    He stated that a minister had been killed by his own niece and the port
    was under fire just the other day. It was put to him  that  there  were
    large areas outside Mogadishu that were not under  the  control  of  Al
    Shabab. He replied that he was not aware of any  such  places;  to  his
    knowledge the whole of Somalia, with the exception  of  Somaliland  and
    Puntland, was under Al Shabab control. He  was  asked  whether  he  had
    heard that there were parts of Somalia where there was no fighting.  He
    replied that if the capital was not safe  then  nowhere  was  safe.  He
    stated that Somaliland and Puntland were clan-based and had  their  own
    problems. He stated that Jowhar was an Al Shabab  base.  He  was  asked
    whether he was aware that internal travel was possible in  Somalia.  He
    replied that he would be accused of being a spy if he returned. It  was
    put to him that  there  were  transport  links  between  Mogadishu  and
    Jowhar. He stated that he was aware of that. It was  put  to  him  that
    people did  move  between  Al  Shabab  and  TFG  controlled  areas.  He
    disagreed with that and said that once somebody was  in  an  Al  Shabab
    area, they would be unable to move into a TFG controlled area and  vice
    versa. The only way to move between  areas  was  to  avoid  checkpoints
    otherwise one could be executed. He said he had  heard  people  talking
    about this.

 5. The appellant was asked whether he knew of anyone who had  returned  to
    Somalia after living for a long time in the UK or in Western Europe. He
    said he had, but did not specifically know anyone who had done so.

 6. It was put to him that he had claimed in  his  witness  statement  that
    children were forcibly recruited by Al Shabab. He agreed with this.  It
    was put to him that he was not a child and had no children.  He  stated
    that he  did  have  a  12-year-old  child  but  he  did  not  know  his
    whereabouts. He was asked on what basis he  claimed  in  his  statement
    that Al Shabab forced people to listen to long  sermons  of  jihad.  He
    replied that Al Shabab aimed to brainwash people. It  was  put  to  him
    that this was just a presumption on his part. He replied he  had  heard
    people talking about it. He was asked whether he knew of anyone who had
    been punished for refusing to fight for Al Shabab. He replied  that  Al
    Shabab did not allow any news broadcasters to record facts  about  them
    but he had heard that people were missing. The question  was  repeated.
    He said he had not seen anything on the television but there were lists
    on the internet of people who had been executed.

 7. The appellant stated that he was a Sunni Muslim. He was  asked  whether
    there was anything about  him  that  was  different  from  other  Sunni
    Muslims. He stated that Al Shabab called  themselves  Sunnis  but  they
    were not. He stated that Al Shabab  were  after  people  like  him  and
    wanted to force them to do what they (Al Shabab ) wanted. The appellant
    was asked whether he was required by his religion  to  smoke  and  chew
    khat. He stated he was permitted to do so. The question  was  repeated.
    He replied that it was his hobby  to  smoke  and  chew.  He  was  asked
    whether he would be prevented from going to the mosque and  praying  by
    Al Shabab. He said he had not heard that they would do  that  but  they
    did force people to go and pray.

 8. He was asked about his objections to taxation. He  replied  that  taxes
    were taken and used to kill people and so in a  way  both  he  and  the
    killers were at fault. He was asked whether it  would  be  against  his
    religion to pay taxes in the UK if he disagreed with the objectives  of
    the government. He replied that he had not claimed  that  his  religion
    did not allow him to pay tax and he explained that if he paid taxes  in
    the UK he knew that  the  money  would  be  used  for  housing  or  the
    infrastructure and not for killing.

 9. In re-examination the appellant confirmed that he had left  Somalia  in
    2000 and had not been back since then.

10. In response to questions from the Tribunal the appellant stated that he
    believed the UK was a safe country and that it was up to the government
    here to use taxation in whatever way it chose. He was  asked  where  he
    had left his wife when he left Somalia. He stated that he had left  her
    in Jowhar with her family. He  was  asked  what  had  happened  to  her
    family. He replied that she was an orphan and he meant he had left  her
    with his family. He was asked why he had given a false name to  the  UK
    authorities when he made his third asylum application. He  stated  that
    he was forced to do so; it had not been his intention and  that  people
    who came here after him had obtained refugee status. He  accepted  that
    it had been a mistake and he should not have done it but  he  had  been
    given the wrong advice.

11. The appellant was asked what he had done  between  leaving  Somalia  in
    2000 and arriving here in 2005. He said he had been travelling  through
    Ethiopia, Sudan and Libya. He had spent ten days at sea trying  to  get
    to Europe from Libya. The boat had sunk and he had been  rescued  by  a
    cargo ship and brought to the UK.

12. The appellant was asked whether he understood what a Sufi  Muslim  was.
    He asked whether that was the name of a man. He was  asked  whether  he
    understood Sufism. He said he understood it  as  'Khalifi';  they  were
    peaceful religious people. He was not one of them; he was Tabliq. There
    were no questions arising and that completed this appellant's evidence.


Appellant MW

13. The appellant was examined in chief by Ms Short. She gave her  evidence
    in Somali through the court interpreter. She confirmed her  address  in
    Bristol. She confirmed that she recalled the statement she had made  to
    the solicitors and that she had told the truth for  that  purpose.  She
    confirmed the signature at the end of the statement was hers  and  that
    she would tell the truth to the tribunal.

14. The appellant stated that  she  had  travelled  from  Bristol  for  the
    hearing with her husband and their three children. She said  she  would
    have struggled without him. She was asked how she would have managed to
    carry their children if she had been on her own and she stated that two
    were in a pushchair and one was holding her hand. She  was  asked  what
    would happen if she arrived in Mogadishu with the children. She  stated
    that people in Mogadishu did not use pushchairs. She would be unable to
    carry her three children without one. She was asked  where  she  bought
    her children's clothes from. She replied she  bought  them  from  Asda,
    Next and H&M. She was asked whether she had any Islamic clothes for the
    children and she replied in the negative.

15. The appellant was asked about her religion. She stated that she  was  a
    Muslim. She described herself as  a  normal  Muslim  and  not  like  Al
    Shabab. That completed examination in chief.

16. The appellant was then cross-examined by Mr Staker. She stated that she
    knew nobody in Somalia and had  no  friends  or  family  there  and  no
    contact with anybody else. She knew some Somali people in  the  UK  but
    had no family here. As far as she knew her husband had no family either
    and did not know many people here. She was asked what her knowledge  of
    Somalia was and she replied that she heard on the news that there  were
    killings and chaos. It was  put  to  her  that  the  Tribunal  had  not
    considered it credible that she did not know which  clan  she  belonged
    to. She repeated that she did not know.

17. The appellant confirmed that she had arrived with entry clearance as  a
    spouse in 2006 and that she left her first husband  in  May  2007.  She
    moved in with her current partner although  they  subsequently  had  an
    argument and she moved out. Although they later reconciled and  had  an
    Islamic marriage, they had not lived together since. She stated that in
    April 2008 he was registered as the father of her first child and  that
    her two younger children were also his. She confirmed that at the  time
    of her initial hearing she was in  an  ongoing  relationship  with  her
    partner. She stated that she disagreed with the finding of the Tribunal
    that it was not a strong relationship. When she was asked why they were
    not living at the same address, she stated that it was the government's
    job to put them in the same  house.  She  was  asked  whether  she  had
    applied for housing so that they could live together  and  she  replied
    that they were going to do that;  they  received  an  application  form
    yesterday. That was despite the fact that they had reconciled in 2008.

18. The appellant stated that she had been looked  after  by  her  aunt  in
    Somalia and they maintained contact after the appellant came to the  UK
    and whilst she was still married to her first husband but when they had
    separated he retained the contact details. She stated she had no  other
    way to contact her. Her aunt's son lived in Canada  but  there  was  no
    communication between them. The appellant was asked about the time when
    she had left her current partner in 2008. She said she had met a family
    on the street and had gone to live with them. It was put  to  her  that
    that did not sound credible. She maintained her reply.

19. The appellant was asked about  her  comment  in  paragraph  12  of  her
    witness statement and she was asked to clarify whether she  meant  most
    or all girls were circumcised. She said  girls  were  circumcised.  The
    question was repeated and she replied that all those that she knew  had
    been circumcised. She was asked whether she  knew  of  anyone  who  was
    called names for being uncircumcised. She replied "they would  say  bad
    things to you if you were not circumcised". She was asked whether  that
    meant that she knew people who were not circumcised.  She  stated  that
    everyone was. She explained in her culture it was a shame  not  to  be.
    She was asked whether she knew of any Somalis opposed to the  practice.
    She replied that it was forbidden in the UK but  it  was  permitted  in
    Somalia. The question was repeated and she gave the same answer. It was
    put to her that people could still oppose the practice even if  it  was
    the norm. She stated that it would be shameful not to  be  circumcised.
    She was asked whether she knew of anybody in the  UK  who  opposed  the
    practice or whether it was just the law that stopped them  from  having
    their daughters circumcised. She stated that  in  Somalia  people  were
    circumcised by unprofessionals. She was asked what the attitude of  the
    Somali community was here. She stated that people followed the law. She
    was asked whether Somalis here would consider circumcision if they were
    able to. She replied in the negative. She was asked whether she knew of
    anyone who opposed the  practice  and  she  stated  she  did  not.  She
    repeated that all females in Somalia were  circumcised.  The  appellant
    was asked who would  place  pressure  on  her  to  have  her  daughters
    circumcised if she had no family or clan links in Somalia. She  replied
    that it was their tradition and if she did not do so  "everyone"  would
    say "bad words".  She was asked who she meant. She  stated  "everywhere
    you go people would say it". She was asked how anybody would know.  She
    stated that there were no private toilets and showers, children  played
    and urinated outside and it would become known. She was  asked  whether
    there would be any other consequences apart from the calling of  names.
    She replied that it would be shameful. She was asked who would be  able
    to force her to have her child circumcised if she refused to do it. She
    replied that it would be degrading for  her  child  and  she  would  be
    depressed. She was asked what she would do if she had to choose between
    having the procedure done and being called names. She replied she would
    have her daughter circumcised.

20. The appellant was asked whether she was aware of the support  available
    to Somalis who returned voluntarily. She said she was not. It  was  put
    to her that the VAR programme provided funds and assistance. She stated
    that she did not need to contact them.

21. The appellant was asked whether there was  any  reason  why  Al  Shabab
    would be displeased with her if she returned  to  Somalia.  She  stated
    that they would be able to differentiate between those who had remained
    in Somalia and those who returned there. It was put to her that she did
    not have any information about what happened to  people  who  returned.
    She replied that she was aware that there were  killings,  torture  and
    looting every day. She was asked whether there was anything contrary to
    her religion if she did what Al Shabab wanted to do. She  replied  that
    they forced people to do things and people preferred to dress  the  way
    they wanted to. She was asked whether she would be able  to  look  like
    someone who had never left Somalia and she replied that this would  not
    be possible because with children one could not pretend.  The  question
    was repeated. She stated that people in Somalia looked rough, they were
    starving and so it would not be possible to look like them. It was  put
    to the appellant that there were women in Somalia without husbands  who
    were able to look after their children. She replied  that  those  women
    had families and clans and she did not.

22. In re-examination the appellant stated that her accommodation was  paid
    for by NASS and that her husband received housing benefit.  She  stated
    that she did not experience any  difficulties  regarding  the  payments
    that she received.

23. In response to questions from the Tribunal, the appellant  stated  that
    her husband had left the Wilson Street address in 2008. When asked  why
    he had left, she replied that it was because the  accommodation  was  a
    bedsit. She was asked whether that was where she had  lived  with  him.
    She stated it was not, they had lived together somewhere else.  It  was
    put to her that Wilson Street was the address where  they  had  married
    and she was asked where it was that she had then lived. She  then  said
    that she had lived there with  her  husband  but  they  then  moved  to
    another address. She stated that he had left Wilson Street  for  health
    reasons. She was asked whether  it  was  shameful  amongst  the  Somali
    community in the UK not to circumcise daughters. She  replied  that  it
    was not allowed here but it was done in Somalia where  there  was  only
    one culture. She was asked how it was that the culture changed just  by
    being in the UK. She stated that people were not forced here and it was
    not shameful. The government would detain people who  carried  out  the
    procedure on their children. In the UK it was normal not to carry  this
    out and there were no problems for uncircumcised girls to get  married.
    That completed this appellant's evidence.



Oral evidence of appellant MW's partner

24. The witness, partner of MW, gave his other name as AMM and his address.
    His evidence was given in Somali. He confirmed that he had been telling
    the truth when he prepared his statement but said that he had  been  on
    medication at the time. He was asked whether  the  medication  had  any
    impact on his memory and he replied that he took the medication for his
    memory. When this was queried, he replied that he suffered headaches so
    he took the medicine. He had sustained an  injury  which  affected  his
    nervous system. He confirmed that it was his signature on the statement
    and that he would tell the truth to the Tribunal.

25. The witness was asked whether he would be able to support  his  partner
    if she were returned to Somalia with the  children.  He  said  that  he
    received income support, had no other source of income and had no money
    to send them. He was asked whether he had ever sent money  to  Somalia.
    He said he had sent money to his mother on two occasions. He was  asked
    where she had been living and he replied she had been in  Ethiopia  but
    because she was attacked there, she had returned to Somalia.

26. In cross-examination the witness confirmed that he had  given  evidence
    for his partner at her earlier appeal. He was asked whether he had been
    aware that he was found to have been a witness  not  capable  of  being
    believed. He said he had not known this. He was asked  whether  he  had
    lived with his partner from 2007 until January 2008. He confirmed  that
    he had and added that people 'could fight'. He was asked whether he and
    his partner had reconciled at the time of her appeal and  he  confirmed
    that they had. He was asked why they had not lived together since  then
    and he replied that he  lived  in  a  one-bedroom  place  with  elderly
    people. He was asked whether he had made attempts via  the  authorities
    to be re-housed with his family. He stated that  they  had  received  a
    form this week having advised their solicitor that they  wanted  to  be
    together. He  stated  that  no  children  were  allowed  where  he  was
    currently living. He was asked why it had  taken  from  September  2008
    until now to take steps to be re-housed. He said it was due to his lack
    of experience and because he did not  speak  the  language.  There  was
    nobody that he could have asked. He was asked why he  and  his  partner
    had not married under British law. He stated that he did not  know  how
    to do that as he did not know the language. He said  he  did  not  know
    many Somalis in the UK and he did not know of anyone sending money back
    to Somalia.

27. When asked about his views on FGM he stated that he did  not  want  his
    daughter to be circumcised and that he  was  strongly  opposed  to  the
    practice. He was asked whether he knew of any others who opposed it and
    he replied that he did not want it for his daughter. He was asked  what
    the attitude towards circumcision was in Somalia and  he  replied  that
    there were bad people there who forced others into it. He was asked who
    would be able to compel them  to  have  the  procedure  done  on  their
    daughter if they opposed it. He replied Al Shabab would. It was put  to
    him that he need not be in an Al Shabab area. He replied  that  he  had
    lived in Mogadishu. To his knowledge all of Mogadishu was controlled by
    Al Shabab.

28. In response to questions from the Tribunal the witness was  asked  what
    clan he came from. He stated that it was not a clan that had any power.
    The question was repeated. He stated that he did not know. He was asked
    whether he had opposed FGM whilst he lived in Somalia. He replied  that
    his religion said  that  no  looting  was  allowed.  The  question  was
    repeated. He replied that he  believed  it  was  wrong.  He  was  asked
    whether he would have been willing to marry a woman who  had  not  been
    circumcised and he said he would.

29. The witness was asked when he had left his earlier address. He said  he
    could not remember. He had lived on the top floor and had been  offered
    a ground floor flat because of health problems. It was put to him  that
    he had been divorced in the  UK  under  British  law.  He  asked  "what
    divorce?". He was reminded of what he stated  in  paragraph  3  of  his
    witness statement. He said he had not divorced MW. He was asked whether
    he had been divorced and he said he  had.  He  was  asked  whether  the
    divorce had taken place through the British courts. He said he received
    a letter and signed it. He was asked how he had known what to  do  with
    it. He stated that he had been helped by a Somali lady.  He  was  asked
    how it was that he did not know how to get married yet knew how to  get
    divorced. He stated that his former wife had brought him here  and  she
    knew how the system worked. She was the one who had  contact  with  the
    courts and when he received a letter a man had helped him.  There  were
    no questions arising and that completed the evidence of this witness.



Appellant ZF

30. The appellant gave evidence in Somali through  the  court  interpreter.
    Examined by Mr. Schwenk, the appellant confirmed her Newcastle  address
    and agreed that she had made the statement dated 31st May 2010. She was
    asked whether  it  was  right,  as  stated  at  paragraph  12  of  that
    statement, that she had been raped by Al  Shabab  militia.  She  stated
    that she had been raped but as she had been in a state of confusion she
    did not know who had been responsible. Subject to  that  amendment  she
    adopted the contents as being true and accurate.

31. The appellant was asked about her religion. She stated that she  was  a
    Muslim. When asked what type of Muslim she was,  she  replied  she  was
    "just a Muslim". She was asked whether she followed the  same  form  of
    Islam as other Somalis and she said  she  was  a  genuine  Muslim.  The
    question was put again; she gave the same reply. She was asked  whether
    she had ever worn clothes that covered her face and she replied in  the
    negative. She said she was elderly. She did not know why people covered
    their faces. She wore a bra. She had been married but her  husband  had
    been killed ten years ago. She had a daughter but she had left  Somalia
    in 2000 and they had not had contact since then. She then amended  that
    to 2002. She said she had no idea of the whereabouts of  her  daughter.
    She knew no one in Somalia.  There  was  no  one  who  could  obtain  a
    passport for her. She had no form of travel document. She was supported
    by NASS and had no savings. She had not been asked by the Secretary  of
    State to complete any kind of application form for a travel document.

32. The appellant was then cross examined by Mr Staker. It was put  to  her
    that the position of the elderly in  Islam  was  one  of  respect.  She
    disagreed. She was asked whether she had a clan attachment. She  stated
    she was from a minority clan. She had no family at all in Somalia.  She
    had not had any siblings; she then amended this evidence and  said  she
    had had one who had left Somalia. There had been an uncle  but  he  had
    health problems and she did not know whether he was alive or dead.

33. The appellant was asked about her health. She said she had difficulties
    walking. It was put to her that the only  letter  in  relation  to  her
    health was a letter from her doctor which was written for accommodation
    purposes. She confirmed she had headaches and pains in  her  thumb  and
    foot. It was put to her that the other problems she  complained  of  in
    her witness statement - heart problems, high blood pressure, asthma and
    severe arthritis - were not mentioned by her doctor in his letter.  She
    maintained she had told the doctor about those problems and  could  not
    explain why  they  had  not  been  included.  She  stated  she  was  on
    medication. She had no other documentary evidence of her ill health.

34. The appellant said that she disagreed with the findings of fact made by
    the Tribunal. She was from a minority clan and had lived in  Mogadishu.
    After she was widowed she lived in Hamar Weyne and then  in  a  refugee
    camp near Afgoye. She said she could not recall when her  daughter  had
    left Somalia; it was 2001 or 2002. They  had  lost  contact  with  each
    other. It was put to her that that was remarkable given the evidence of
    the extent of communication between those who had left  and  those  who
    remained. The appellant replied that her daughter was  not  in  Africa;
    perhaps she was in Europe. She agreed that it was unusual for there  to
    be no contact but she could not explain the lack of communication.

35. The appellant stated that the $3000 she had spent on her  journey  came
    from jewellery that her husband had bought for her. It was put  to  her
    that she had survived alone for some eight years. She said she had been
    able to do so by moving from  place  to  place  however  she  had  been
    persecuted and raped. She was reminded that that part  of  her  account
    had been rejected by the Tribunal. She made no comment. It was  put  to
    the appellant that she had been able to make a long journey  alone  via
    Ethiopia. She replied by stating that she had no protection  and  would
    be killed if she returned.

36. The appellant was asked whether she was aware of the Voluntary Assisted
    Returns  Programme  (VARP).  She  repeated  her  previous  answer.  The
    question was put again. She said she had not heard of it. It was put to
    her that assistance was made available through the programme  not  only
    for the journey but also to contact family and that she would be  given
    1500. She stated she could not go; there was no protection in  Somalia
    and there were rapes and killings.  She  was  asked  whether  she  kept
    abreast of the situation in Somalia. She said that she did not see many
    Somalis in the UK but she knew the situation in Somalia  was  unstable.
    She was asked for the source of her information. She  said  that  there
    was no Somali community in Newcastle but she knew it was  not  safe  to
    return. She was asked whether she had heard that 40% of the  population
    in Mogadishu lived under TFG control. She said she did not  know  that.
    She also said she was not aware that Hamar Weyne was under TFG control.
    It was put to her that the evidence did not indicate a  high  level  of
    violence in Hamar Weyne. She maintained that her clan faced problems on
    a daily basis. She was asked whether she had been aware that the Afgoye
    corridor had become more urbanised and permanent. She said she had not.
    She was asked whether she  was  aware  that  it  was  possible  to  fly
    directly to Somaliland. She said she was not from Somaliland.  She  was
    asked whether she was aware that  the  situation  in  Al  Shabab  areas
    varied from district to district. She said she had not  heard  anything
    about that but maintained that Al Shabab controlled most places. It was
    put to her that some areas had more lenient requirements  than  others.
    She said she was elderly and had health problems; she was not aware  of
    what was happening in Somalia. It was  put  to  her  that  she  was  no
    different from other Muslims and so she should have no problems with Al
    Shabab. She stated she could not return. If she  did,  she  would  have
    problems. She did not know anyone who had returned and she  agreed  she
    had no personal knowledge of what would happen on return.

37. The appellant was asked whether anything Al Shabab  might  ask  of  her
    would be contrary to her religion. She maintained that  she  was  happy
    with the way she currently dressed and that Al Shabab forced  women  to
    cover their faces and body and wear gloves.

38. She stated that her husband was from the Bandhabow clan.

39. In re-examination the appellant said that she would not cover her face;
    if she had to, she would feel frustrated. She  stated  that  her  uncle
    would be around 70. She then said that she had been 65  when  she  left
    Somalia two years ago and her uncle was 78. She repeated that  she  did
    not know what had happened to her daughter.

40. In response to questions from the Tribunal, the appellant  stated  that
    her  daughter  left  Somalia  after  the  death  of  her  father   (the
    appellant's husband). She did not live with her  in  Afgoye.  She  fled
    with other people. It was said she was going to the UK.  The  appellant
    had not been able to accompany her because she had no money and  had  a
    bad back. She was reminded that she had said that  she  had  jewellery.
    She then said that the situation had been  chaotic  and  she  had  been
    unable to sell it. When asked why it had taken her some seven years  to
    leave Somalia after her daughter's departure, she said that  there  had
    been no market for her jewellery and besides, she was looking after the
    two children of her deceased sister.  When asked what had  happened  to
    those children, she said that she had asked  people  to  take  them  to
    Kenya because she had health problems.  Some  nine  months  later,  she
    left.  The appellant said that her health problems began after she  had
    been beaten and raped ten  years  ago.  She  said  that  she  had  been
    supported by aid organisations in Afgoye and in Mogadishu other  people
    had helped her. The money for her daughter's travel had been raised  by
    her clan and her late husband's clan. It was pointed out  to  her  that
    although she stated that there was no Somali  community  in  Newcastle,
    the letter from her doctor specifically requested that she be moved  to
    Newcastle in order that she could be near the Somali community. She was
    asked whether she was in contact with them. The appellant  then  agreed
    that there was a Somali community in Newcastle but she stated that  she
    received no help from anyone. She was asked whether she was in  contact
    with them and she admitted she saw some of them.

41. It was put to  the  appellant  that  she  had  stated  in  her  witness
    statement that her husband had been killed by Al Shabab. She was  asked
    whether that was correct. She replied that she did not know.  She  said
    four people came to their home,  killed  him  and  raped  her.  It  was
    pointed out to her that in her witness  statement  she  expressed  fear
    about Al Shabab because of what  she  claimed  they  did  to  her.  She
    replied that Al Shabab controlled the area and killed people.  She  was
    asked whether she knew if Al Shabab existed in 2001. She replied  there
    had been many Islamic groups. There were no questions arising and  that
    completed this appellant's oral evidence.



Appellant FM

42. The appellant gave evidence through the Somali interpreter provided  by
    the court. He was examined by Mr Symes. He gave his address as 3  Ray's
    Avenue and his date of birth as 5 August 1987. He confirmed that he had
    said in his statement that most of his friends had left for  Kenya.  He
    was asked what had happened to his other friends. He  replied  what  he
    had meant was that he did not know about the others, only  about  those
    with whom he had contact. He was asked how he would support himself  if
    he returned to Somalia. He stated he could not  return  as  he  had  no
    employment and there was no stability. He was asked  whether  he  would
    look for work if he returned to Hamar JaabJab. He stated that he  would
    not be able to look for work because jobs were organised by  clans  and
    given to people who belonged to the clans concerned. It was put to  him
    there was a port in Hamar JaabJab and it was asked whether he would  be
    able to find work there. He stated that  it  was  controlled  by  major
    clans and other clan members would be unable to find work there.

43. The appellant confirmed that he followed the Sufi sect. He said he  had
    always done so and his family were Sufis. He was asked for  an  example
    of what this meant in  practice.  He  stated  that  Sufis  commemorated
    certain saints and  visited  their  graves.  He  said  they  were  very
    religious people. He had visited the graves of saints whilst he was  in
    Somalia but this had been before Al Shabab took control. He  also  used
    to go to the mosque to commemorate the Prophet's birth.  He  was  asked
    how he followed the Sufi faith in the UK. He  stated  that  every  year
    there was a celebration and people gathered together and had  a  drink,
    prayed and speeches were  given.  This  was  known  as  Digri.  It  was
    specific to Sufism and was an important part of his life.

44. The appellant was asked whether his appearance had altered since he had
    arrived in the UK. He said it had. He was asked to describe in what way
    it had changed. He stated that he had been slim, younger  and  had  not
    had any grey hair when he came here.

45. In cross-examination the appellant confirmed that he had lived in Hamar
    JaabJab all his life. It was put to him that there would  have  been  a
    lot of fighting in that area and he agreed that  was  correct.  He  was
    asked how it was that his family  had  never  moved  out  of  the  area
    despite the conflict. He then said that they had moved temporarily when
    there was fighting and that they then moved back when the situation had
    stabilised. He was asked whether they had moved to a different district
    of Mogadishu. He replied they sometimes went to  Hamar  Weyne.  He  was
    asked whether it had always been possible to move away and  he  replied
    in the affirmative, adding that lots of families did the same.

46. It was put to the appellant that the Tribunal had found that he and his
    aunt had been able to enjoy sufficient  protection  in  order  to  keep
    their assets safe during the war. He confirmed that the aunt  had  been
    his father's sister and said that they had land attached to that mosque
    and that the people in the mosque had looked after it. People knew  his
    father who owned the land. He now had no family left in  Mogadishu  and
    his aunt was in Kenya. He was asked whether he had any clan connections
    and he said that he did not know anybody in  Mogadishu.  The  appellant
    was asked whether there was anyone at the mosque  who  still  knew  his
    father. He said that they knew his aunt and that he had  no  connection
    with them. He agreed he had Somali friends in the UK.

47. The appellant was asked whether he was aware that 80% of the population
    of Mogadishu lived in TFG controlled areas. He said  that  he  had  not
    been aware of this. He was asked whether he had been aware  that  Hamar
    JaabJab was currently under TFG  control.  He  replied  that  he  heard
    government forces came in during the day  but  that  during  the  night
    others would come. He was asked whether he was aware that there was not
    a high degree of conflict in Hamar JaabJab.  He  replied  that  it  was
    similar to other districts and that nowhere in Mogadishu was  safe.  He
    was asked whether he was aware that a lot of  people  lived  there  and
    made a living. He maintained that those  people  had  connections  with
    their clan and had money so they were safe. He said without  that,  one
    was not safe. He added that if someone agreed with Al Shabab then  they
    would have no problems. The appellant was asked whether  he  was  aware
    that there were places in  Somalia  outside  Mogadishu  that  were  not
    controlled by Al Shabab. He stated that he listened  to  the  news  and
    watched television and that it was important to have a clan  connection
    as without it survival was not possible. The question was repeated.  He
    agreed that there was no conflict in Somaliland. It was put to him that
    they were even areas without fighting in central and southern  Somalia.
    He stated that he was not sure of that and gave an  example  of  a  man
    from the south who went to the central area to work as a butcher a  few
    months ago. He stated that some livestock went missing and this man was
    accused of being responsible because he was  an  outsider  and  he  was
    killed.

48. The appellant was asked whether he was aware that there were  minibuses
    for internal travel. He said he only knew of travel by  lorry.  He  was
    asked whether he was aware that people travelled  between  TFG  and  Al
    Shabab controlled areas. He stated that if someone did this they  would
    be suspected and killed. He was asked whether he  was  suggesting  that
    this happened to anyone travelling from one area to  another.  He  said
    that he meant only those who were new and  had  not  been  seen  before
    would be at risk.

49. The appellant was asked whether he had heard of the voluntary  assisted
    returns and reintegration programme. He said that he had  heard  a  lot
    about it. He confirmed he was aware of the available assistance. He was
    asked whether he would seek such assistance if he returned. He  replied
    that if he had to return he would kill himself.

50. The appellant was asked whether there was  anything  different  between
    him and any other Sufi in Somalia. He stated that Sufis  were  all  the
    same. He was asked whether there was any reason  why  Al  Shabab  would
    target him as opposed to any other  Sufi.  He  stated  that  Al  Shabab
    members had gone to the graves of saints and had dug out their  bodies.
    He said they did not permit anyone to visit the graves or celebrate. He
    said they had placed a bomb in a Sufi mosque and many people  had  been
    killed. The appellant was  asked  whether  he  was  prohibited  by  his
    religion from having a beard. He stated that he was not. He  was  asked
    whether Al Shabab would require him to do anything that was contrary to
    his religion. He stated that the disagreement between the Somali people
    and Al Shabab was that the latter wanted to make  rules  about  how  to
    dress whereas the former wanted freedom. He was asked whether  he  knew
    of anyone who had been killed for not having a beard. He said  that  he
    had heard of this. He added that they gave people a hard time and  beat
    them.

51. It was put to the appellant that he would know how to make himself look
    like the other Somalis if he was returned to Somalia.  He  stated  that
    coming from abroad, it would take some time to socialise and  it  would
    be difficult to integrate. He agreed that there would be  a  period  of
    adjustment. It was put to him that the duration  of  the  period  might
    depend on how motivated he would be to re-integrate. He  said  that  it
    also depended on having family, friends and links to provide  one  with
    information. He was asked whether he knew of anyone  targeted  for  not
    watching executions. He said he did not but that he heard on the  radio
    and on television that people were forced to watch. He said people were
    executed for refusing to fight for Al Shabab. He did not know of anyone
    personally because he  had  no  family  there  but  he  heard  this  on
    television.  That  concluded  cross  examination.  There  was  no   re-
    examination.

52. In response to questions from the Tribunal, the appellant  stated  that
    after the death of his parents he had gone to live with  his  aunt  who
    lived in a separate house in Hamar  JaabJab.  He  was  asked  what  had
    happened to his family's house and he said it had been hit by a missile
    and destroyed when the civil war started in 1990.  There  had  been  no
    adult male in his aunt's household. His aunt left for Kenya in 2007. He
    was asked to clarify his earlier evidence that having  money  made  one
    safe. He replied that money alone did not help; one also  had  to  have
    clan links. It was put to the appellant that the  expert  evidence  had
    been their clan membership was no longer a relevant factor in the issue
    of security. He stated that no one was safe but  if  the  situation  of
    minority and majority clans was compared, then the majority  clans  had
    more of a chance. The appellant was asked how he had been able to  hold
    on to the family land throughout the civil war. He stated that  it  was
    attached to the mosque and the people there protected it. He was  asked
    what clan those people belonged to and he replied they were mostly from
    majority clans but they  nevertheless  helped  him  because  they  were
    honest and religious people.

53. The appellant stated that he had been married in 2006 and that his wife
    was still in Hamar JaabJab when he left. He was asked when he had  last
    spoken to her and he said that this was five weeks ago.  He  said  that
    his father-in-law had asked him to release his wife so that  she  could
    marry somebody else. He said this was because he  (the  appellant)  was
    unable to support her.  He  said  that  his  father-in-law  had  always
    opposed the marriage because he was from the  Hawiye  clan.  He  stated
    that they were now in Ceelasha Biyaha, an area outside  Mogadishu  that
    was controlled by Al Shabab. A lot of people had fled there. He said he
    had been surprised and shocked by his father-in-law's request  and  had
    not agreed to it. He said he had since tried to call back but there had
    been no reply. He was asked whether there had been  any  suggestion  in
    the conversation that the appellant could  return  and  live  with  his
    wife. He stated that he had  left  Somalia  because  his  father-in-law
    opposed the marriage and that he now wanted the  appellant  to  divorce
    his wife. He said that his father-in-law had given him an ultimatum  on
    the phone and had said that if he did not divorce  his  wife  he  would
    offer her to somebody else even though she was still  married  to  him.
    That completed his evidence.



Appellant AF

54. The appellant gave evidence in Somali through the court interpreter and
    confirmed that he recalled making his witness statement,  that  it  had
    been read back to him in Somali and that the contents were truthful. He
    agreed that he had been referred to a consultant about his  health  and
    stated that he had an appointment to see him on 16 July. He stated that
    his condition was the same as  it  had  been  when  his  statement  was
    prepared and he had been given some medication in the  interim  by  his
    doctor.

55. The appellant was asked how he would feel about having to pay taxes  to
    Al Shabab at checkpoints. He stated he was not happy about that because
    he knew that the money was used to buy weapons. He stated  that  if  he
    paid the money he would feel guilty about that but if he  refused  then
    he could be beaten. He was asked why he would feel guilty about  paying
    the money. He stated that the money would be used to  kill  people  and
    therefore he would be indirectly responsible for that.

56. In cross-examination the appellant confirmed that his  health  had  not
    given him any problems until a few months ago. He stated  that  he  had
    first seen his doctor about his current problems in April  or  May  but
    because he had moved he was  unable  to  see  the  doctor  and  had  to
    register with a new one. The letter he had produced from his doctor was
    the first time that he had seen him about his  problems.  It  had  been
    around April. It was put to the appellant that although he had  claimed
    in his statement to have bouts of vomiting, his doctor's letter  failed
    to mention that. The appellant stated that he had been given medication
    for the vomiting. It was put to him that it seemed strange that his  GP
    would fail to mention vomiting in his letter  to  the  consultant.  The
    appellant stated that the purpose of the letter  was  so  that  a  scan
    could be arranged. This had been booked  for  16  July.  He  was  asked
    whether his appeal hearing might have caused his  health  concerns.  He
    replied that he could not blame the Tribunal for that and that his ill-
    health had come from God.

57. The appellant was asked whether he had any family left in  Somalia.  He
    said he had some distant relatives and clan links but he did  not  know
    where his cousins, uncles and aunts were. The  last  time  he  had  any
    information, they were in Mogadishu. He stated he was from the minority
    Madhiban clan but he now had no connections with them at all. His uncle
    was from the same clan. He agreed that his uncle might have connections
    but he and his uncle had not had any contact with each other since  the
    appellant's departure.

58. The appellant confirmed that he  had  lived  in  several  districts  of
    Mogadishu and that he had been able to move between districts in  order
    to avoid the conflict. He stated, however, that this had nothing to  do
    with moving to clan-based areas;  he  would  move  with  his  wife  and
    children and others fleeing the conflict and then move  back  when  the
    fighting had ceased. He confirmed that he had been living in  Mogadishu
    when the war broke out  and  that  he  had  never  left  the  city.  He
    confirmed that he was originally from Merka. Despite  the  conflict  he
    had not returned there. It was put to him that  he  had  been  able  to
    live, work, marry and raise a family in Mogadishu despite the conflict.
    He agreed this had been the case. It was put to him that the  situation
    was not particularly different at the current time and  that  he  could
    return and do the  same  thing.  He  replied  that  it  was  completely
    different now. It was put to him that he  could  return  to  Merka.  He
    stated that Merka was under Al Shabab control.

59. The appellant was asked whether he was aware of the  voluntary  returns
    programme and he stated that he was. He was also aware of the available
    assistance. He was asked whether he would take advantage of this if  he
    returned. He stated that Mogadishu was not  safe  and  that  Merka  was
    under Al Shabab control. If he returned he would be killed. It was  put
    to him that 80% of the population in Mogadishu lived under TFG control.
    He replied that he did not believe that and it was more  likely  to  be
    40%. He was asked whether he was aware that Shingani, Hamar JaabJab and
    Hamar Weyne, all areas that he had lived in, were under TFG control. He
    confirmed that he was. It was put to him  that  the  evidence  did  not
    suggest there was a high level of conflict in any of  those  areas.  He
    maintained that was not the case and stated that Mogadishu was not safe
    and was under siege. He stated that even government members were unable
    to travel without escorts and that recently a minister had been  killed
    and Al Shabab had accepted responsibility for that. It was put  to  him
    that a significant number of ordinary Somalis lived  in  Mogadishu  and
    made a living in some way.  He  replied  that  those  people  were  not
    living, they were just  surviving.  There  was  no  employment  and  no
    security. It was put to the appellant that people  also  lived  in  the
    Afgoye corridor and moved to Mogadishu to work. He  stated  that  there
    was no security and no safety  and  that  whatever  money  such  people
    earned was less than what they lost on a daily basis. It was put to the
    appellant that Merka was stable. He said it was not  and  that  it  was
    under the control of Al Shabab. It was put to the appellant that  there
    was no fighting there. He questioned how  that  could  be  claimed  and
    stated that there was a war going on.

60. The appellant was asked whether he was aware that travel  was  possible
    between TFG controlled areas and those controlled by Al Shabab. He said
    that anyone coming from an Al Shabab area would be seen as  a  spy  and
    would not be safe. He stated that in Merka people were forced to go and
    fight in the war. It was put to the appellant that Al Shabab were  less
    hard-line in some parts of the country, particularly outside Mogadishu.
    He stated that was not correct; there was one  ideology  and  that  was
    jihad and he did not want to kill anyone.

61. The appellant stated that he was a Sunni Muslim. He was  asked  whether
    there was  anything  about  his  background  that  would  make  him  of
    particular interest to Al Shabab. He stated that his religion  and  the
    way that he lived was  different  to  Al  Shabab's  interpretation.  He
    stated that he was brought up believing that even killing an insect was
    wrong. He stated that Al Shabab wanted people to commit acts which were
    unreligious. He was asked whether there was any reason that  Al  Shabab
    would seek to recruit him over any other Somali. He replied  that  they
    would recruit anyone who was strong. It was put to him that he would be
    able to blend in on his return. He stated that he had been away for  10
    years and he would be unable to live within the  new  system.  He  felt
    safe here and was unable to return.

62. The appellant was asked whether he would be required to do anything  by
    Al Shabab that was contrary to his religion. He said he would  not  but
    maintained that his religion permitted  him  to  choose  how  to  dress
    whereas Al Shabab imposed dress requirements and also forced people  to
    go to the mosque. The appellant was asked whether it  was  contrary  to
    his religion to pay taxes because he disagreed with how the money would
    be spent and whether it would be against his principles  to  pay  taxes
    here. He stated that once people started working in  the  UK,  tax  was
    deducted but that in return if they fell ill they knew  the  government
    would support them. He questioned what Al Shabab would  use  the  taxes
    paid to them for.

63. In re-examination the appellant was asked why it had taken a  month  to
    get an appointment to see a specialist. He stated that he had been told
    by his GP  that  he  would  have  to  wait  for  a  few  weeks  for  an
    appointment. He stated that he had got fed up of waiting  and  on  25th
    May he called the hospital to ask whether he could have an appointment.
    None were available at the time but shortly afterwards he was contacted
    and offered an appointment for 16th July.

64. The appellant was asked why he  had  not  had  contact  with  any  clan
    members since he left Somalia. He stated that he had no phone cards and
    no money to spend on calling them. He added that if he  did  call  they
    would ask him for money. In any event, he added, he did not know  their
    numbers.

65. In response to questions from the Tribunal, the appellant said that  he
    had left his wife and children alone. He was asked how he  had  thought
    they would be able to manage without any support. He stated that he had
    been in the Bakara area when all his travel arrangements were made  and
    he had no time to go and see his wife. The question  was  repeated.  He
    stated that he had been in Bakara for three days and there was no  time
    to go home. He was asked whether he had considered using his  money  to
    move himself and his family somewhere closer where they  could  all  be
    safe. He stated he had never thought of that; he only thought  that  he
    had to save himself and escape.

66. The appellant was asked to clarify his earlier  evidence  about  people
    being made to go and pray. He stated that his religion required  people
    to wash themselves before prayers but if they were seen on the  streets
    they would be taken and made to go to the mosque. He stated  that  some
    mosques might have facilities for ablutions but his main objection  was
    to people being forced to go and pray. He  confirmed  that  there  were
    five times a day for praying and that those times did not differ in  Al
    Shabab areas. That completed the appellant's evidence.



 Dr Laura Hammond

67. Dr Hammond confirmed that the contents of her report  were  a  truthful
    response to the questions that had been put to her  in  the  letter  of
    instructions from Wilson Solicitors. She stated that she had undertaken
    research in the Horn of Africa from 1992  and  had  lived  in  Ethiopia
    between then and 1997. She had been involved in working  for  the  UNDP
    repatriating refugees from Ethiopia back to Somalia. She had spent time
    in Puntland, Somaliland and the Gedo region and had returned  there  in
    early 2002 and late 2008. Meanwhile she had continued her  research  on
    Somalia and in 2008 had  done  some  further  work  for  the  UN  which
    included advising the UK government. She had  returned  to  the  region
    twice in 2011 examining six  sites  in  southern  and  central  Somalia
    (although she had remained in Nairobi) and the position of  the  Somali
    Diaspora in Nairobi, Oslo, London, Dubai, Toronto and Minneapolis.  She
    stated that last week she had been in the Horn teaching  for  the  Rift
    Valley Institute and giving a training course in Kenya  where  she  had
    been able to speak to many people who had just returned from the Accord
    meeting in Kampala.  She stated that her expertise was in  applied  and
    academic work with Somalis and non Somalis who had worked in this  area
    for a very long time. She stated that by comparison she was regarded as
    a junior and she had nineteen years of experience.  She  had  extensive
    contacts among the UN and NGOs and amongst the aid community. She  also
    had dealings with people of all clan groups and from all walks of  life
    in the Diaspora.

68. Dr Hammond was asked whether her assessment had changed since she wrote
    the report. She replied that the area under the control of  AMISOM  and
    the TFG had expanded since then and there was an increase  in  fighting
    around Bakara market. She  referred  to  a  recent  incident  where  an
    airport VIP guard leaving a mosque had been killed by a suicide  bomber
    and also to the assassination of the interior minister. She stated that
    the TFG was not a functioning structure and there  was  a  crisis  over
    whether its mandate would be extended.  She  said  those  in  the  know
    predicted that the TFG would lose the expanded area of control as  they
    did not have the capability to maintain it. She explained,  when  asked
    for clarification, that the TFG had never been very strong, that it had
    been set up in 2004  under  donor  led  pressure  and  had  never  been
    popular. Its mandate was due to expire in August 2011 and it had pushed
    for a three-year extension which was not accepted. However, a  one-year
    extension had been approved in Kampala on the condition that the  Prime
    Minister resigned. People on the ground in TFG areas wanted an election
    and were not happy that the Prime Minister had been forced  to  resign;
    as a result there were currently protests on the streets.

69. Dr Hammond confirmed that she  was  aware  of  people  who  voluntarily
    travelled to Mogadishu. She explained that these would be aid  workers,
    society  leaders,  business  people  and  contractors  working  at  the
    airport. She agreed that they were taking a risk  in  returning  there.
    She explained that when an aircraft landed at Mogadishu airport it  had
    to dip down sharply on the runway and then stop before it  reached  the
    end of the runway so as to avoid being hit by mortar shells. She stated
    people then disembarked from the aircraft and ran towards  the  airport
    building. She agreed that AMISOM control was tight at the airport.  She
    stated that important personnel travelled between the airport and Villa
    Somalia in armed military vehicles.  For  the  'ordinary'  Somali,  she
    stated it was not advisable to hire security escorts or guards as  that
    would invite attention and suspicion from the TFG and  Al  Shabab.  She
    stated that some people travelled with a few  armed  guards  in  a  car
    behind them. People minimised risk by coming in to  Mogadishu,  staying
    for short periods and leaving as soon as possible. She pointed out that
    their families lived elsewhere.

70. Dr Hammond was asked about the reference to Ceelasha Biyaha referred to
    at paragraph 1.18 of her report. She stated  it  was  an  area  on  the
    outskirts of Waberi, further down  the  coast  from  the  airport.  She
    stated that in order for people from that area to reach the market they
    would have to pass through roadblocks. She stated that although  AMISOM
    posted patrols on main roads which they checked on a  daily  basis  for
    landmines and other security risks, they did not  clear  the  secondary
    roads. She was asked what inferences could be drawn  from  the  reports
    that thousands of people used the roads to cross to Bakara market.  She
    stated that people knew there were risks but they had to purchase goods
    they needed and they had to work. This was part of daily life. Although
    many people were injured in the marketplace, risks had to be taken. The
    conflict had been ongoing for  some  twenty  years  and  residents  had
    normalised a certain amount of risk which they balanced  against  daily
    life challenges.

71. Dr Hammond was referred to her observations on the capacity  of  people
    to obtain protection (paragraph 1.17  of  her  report)  and  was  asked
    whether she would have given the same reply two or three years ago. She
    stated that she would not have done so. She  said  that  two  or  three
    years ago it was much more about clan politics but  now  the  situation
    had shifted. Support was drawn from a range of clans although there was
    a breakdown of clan protection in the city. She pointed  out  that  the
    president's own clan (the Hawiye) had demonstrated against him and that
    the interior minister had been killed by his niece. She said  that  the
    impact of the conflict on the economy had meant  that  those  who  were
    powerful in the past had had their positions challenged. Some  were  no
    longer as wealthy, some had to pay protection money to  Al  Shabab  and
    some had had  to  change  their  allegiances.  There  was  a  different
    situation now as to who held power compared to the situation five years
    ago. Even if someone had been  in  a  position  to  provide  protection
    before, due to the impact of the  conflict  there  was  no  longer  any
    guarantee that they would be in a position to do so now.

72. Dr Hammond was asked whether there were any  organisations  in  Somalia
    which promoted the return of displaced people to Mogadishu. She  stated
    there were none. She explained that  most  international  organisations
    had no access to displaced  people  who  were  largely  in  the  Afgoye
    corridor. The last estimate was that  409,000  displaced  people  lived
    there. She stated that all international organisations agreed  that  it
    was not appropriate to send people back there. Those who returned  were
    aid workers or people who were able to come and go quickly and who knew
    they could seek shelter in the airport if necessary or could leave  the
    country. The average Somali could not do that; they did  not  have  the
    resources or necessary travel documents.

73. Dr Hammond was asked to explain why Al Shabab tried to  control  Somali
    behaviour (paragraph 1.37). She explained that their  ideology  claimed
    to be a literal interpretation of  the  Quran.  They  fought  different
    kinds  of  Jihad,  inside  Somalia  and   also   internationally,   and
    additionally a personal jihad to control behaviour, maintain purity and
    resist temptation. She was asked to explain why people  returning  from
    the West would be suspected of being  spies  (1.41).  She  stated  that
    someone who had travelled to the West and applied for asylum  would  be
    seen as someone trying to escape the movement and their loyalties would
    be seen as being with the  West.  Al  Shabab  had  a  hostile  attitude
    towards the West which it viewed as a corrupting force  drawing  people
    away from purity and therefore considered those returning from the West
    as  spies  or  informants.   The  consequences  could  be  torture   or
    execution, often without evidence.  She  stated  it  was  unclear  what
    provoked this reaction as in all the cases she had seen  there  was  no
    evidence to support the suspicion that the people were spies. She added
    that as many of the suicide bombers had been people returning from  the
    West; the TFG were also suspicious of them.

74. Dr Hammond elaborated on her comments about patron client relationships
    pertaining to AF, a Madhiban (Midgan) clan member (paragraph 2.4).  She
    stated that such a relationship ensured somewhere  for  the  client  to
    live  and  work  but  this  protection  did  not  extend  to   physical
    protection. She stated that AF had been away from Somalia for some time
    and because of the economic  collapse  the  war  had  brought  to  many
    people, the arrangement of who had power had changed since  that  time.
    There were questions as to whether the person who had provided him with
    support in the past would still be able to do so.  She  explained  that
    protection in this sense  did  not  transfer  from  one  individual  to
    another and other clan members would not feel the  same  responsibility
    to someone who had been protected by one of their members.

75. Dr Hammond stated  that  she  had  met  AMM  just  before  the  hearing
    commenced.  She was asked whether there was  anything  about  him  that
    would make him identifiable as an outsider if he returned  to  Somalia.
    She stated that it would be clear that he was  wearing  clothes  bought
    outside Somalia, that he looked healthy and was rather  heavy,  all  of
    which suggested he was relatively well  off.  That  would  make  people
    suspect that he had come from a foreign country or that he  had  access
    to wealth and either he or his family members could  be  kidnapped  and
    held for ransom. If he returned to Jowhar, which was where he was from,
    that could be a problem as he did not have a beard.

76. Dr Hammond was asked for her reaction  to  the  statements  taken  from
    people in Nairobi by a team of solicitors from Wilsons. She stated that
    given the short period of time involved, she was impressed by the  wide
    range of people who had been located and  interviewed;  these  included
    the former prime minister, residents of Eastleigh and aid workers.  She
    agreed the contents of their statements were entirely  consistent  with
    her own knowledge of the situation. She pointed out that if aid workers
    or NGO staff were questioned about their  experiences,  many  might  be
    unwilling to speak on record for fear of putting  themselves  or  their
    organisations at risk particularly if they lived in  Al  Shabab  areas.
    She confirmed that although she sat on a panel charged  with  reviewing
    country of origin information, there was no independent review  of  the
    fact-finding mission report or the OGNs as the latter contained  policy
    information.

77. When questioned specifically about ZF, Dr Hammond stated that she would
    have to be met by  somebody  at  Mogadishu  airport  and  transport  to
    Hargeisa would have to be arranged. If the journey was made  over  land
    she would have to travel by bus or minibus from Mogadishu through south-
    central Somalia and through Gulkayo. All  these  areas  were  under  Al
    Shabab control except for Gulkayo which was  under  the  control  of  a
    different militia. If  she  was  wearing  foreign  clothing  or  had  a
    suitcase which looked as though it had been purchased abroad, or if she
    wore  jewellery  she  would  be  noticed  and   would   be   vulnerable
    particularly travelling alone.  Women  were  under  the  most  scrutiny
    regarding their dress and  behaviour.  She  would  then  have  to  pass
    through Puntland, and North Gulkayo tended to return  people  to  South
    Gulkayo if they were not from that area. Assuming she made it  through,
    she would then have to cross the border into Somaliland. She would have
    to show that she had family waiting for her and they might have  to  be
    questioned before she was admitted. In all, it was a perilous  journey.
    Additionally, she might be made to pay fees at roadblocks and she could
    be robbed, beaten or arrested  if  she  breached  behaviour  and  dress
    codes. She stated that a relatively speedy journey would take three  or
    four days but it had been known to take  weeks.  She  stated  that  one
    would have to stay overnight when the bus stopped and  if  she  had  no
    family she would have to remain on  the  bus.  An  unaccompanied  woman
    would have difficulties in being accepted at a hotel.

78. With regard to MW who had no family in Somalia, Dr Hammond said it  was
    unclear who would be able to meet her at the airport. As  her  area  of
    Merka was under Al Shabab control it would be difficult even if she had
    family members for them to travel from Merka to Mogadishu. As  she  had
    been away from Somalia for twelve years, the situation was nothing like
    it was when she had left. She would now be required  to  cover  herself
    from head to toe, cover her face, leave no hair showing, and wear thick
    socks and, possibly, gloves.  As  traditional  Somali  dress  sometimes
    revealed  the  shoulder  and  hair,  the  expectation  that  she  would
    immediately be able to fall into the new dress code was not  realistic.
    She referred to an incident a week ago where several indigenous  Somali
    women were arrested for expressing joy at  a  wedding.  The  point  she
    wanted to make was that even though they  had  lived  there  all  their
    lives and  would  have  been  aware  of  behavioural  codes,  this  was
    unexpected.

79. Dr Hammond explained that children were seen as the  asset  of  a  clan
    which had responsibility for raising  them  and  making  sure  cultural
    expectations were met. If a mother objected to FGM it was  not  enough.
    If the clan were in favour of circumcision  then  the  child  could  be
    subjected to the procedure at any time when the mother was absent.  The
    only option available to the mother would be to leave the family but as
    Al Shabab did not permit women to work, she needed  family  support  to
    survive. As long as a woman remained living with her family  she  would
    be unable to withstand pressure to have her daughters  circumcised.  If
    she were to leave the family,  she  would  need  some  other  means  to
    survive. Widows were sometimes married off to  soldiers  in  Al  Shabab
    areas and she would be vulnerable to that.

80. Dr Hammond was asked whether MW's divorce in the UK would  be  accepted
    as a valid Islamic divorce by Al Shabab. She replied  that  if  it  had
    been granted by the UK  courts  and  not  in  accordance  with  Islamic
    practice, then there was the chance that it would not  be  accepted  as
    valid. This could have consequences for MW as she had three children by
    her second husband. It would  depend  on  the  attitude  of  her  first
    husband's clan who may not accept that she had left them  and  who  may
    make claims on the children, their education,  the  issue  of  FGM  and
    whether they should be recruited into armed service.

81. In cross-examination by Mr Eicke, Dr Hammond was asked whether she  was
    aware of the guidance on the preparation of expert reports contained in
    the practice directions. She confirmed that she was.  She  stated  that
    she believed that she had provided a balanced  picture.  She  confirmed
    that she was a social  anthropologist  and  stated  that  her  academic
    research had focused on refugees and that she was aware of refugee law.
    She was also convener on an MSc programme on migration. When questioned
    about her comments on linguistic analyses, she stated that in reviewing
    country of origin information she had seen questions  asked  about  the
    usefulness of Sprakab reports and that she was aware of  challenges  to
    them. She admitted that she had not been aware  that  this  matter  had
    been considered by the Tribunal in 2010.

82. Dr Hammond stated that she had last been in Somaliland  in  2008.  When
    she conducted her research between June 2010 and May 2011 she had  been
    the team leader for a group of researchers some of whom were  in  South
    and Central Somalia. She explained that  they  were  local  researchers
    living in those areas. The research  had  pertained  to  investors  who
    received money from abroad and the manner in which they were perceived.
    She stated that people were reluctant to  talk  about  receiving  money
    from the Diaspora for fear of making themselves a target for  extortion
    or of being seen as a spy. She stated that the information fed back  to
    her was that people were worried that information they  gave  would  be
    traced back to them by Al Shabab and they would be suspected of  having
    foreign allegiances. It  was  put  to  her  that  the  social  services
    providers she had referred  to  were  mainly  returnees  yet  they  had
    returned without problems and  were  playing  important  roles  in  the
    community. She replied that it depended on where they  were.  More  had
    returned to TFG controlled areas. She explained that  some  people  who
    returned came and went making use of the fact  that  they  had  durable
    residence in  another  country  or  foreign  citizenship  in  order  to
    facilitate  their  travels.  She  was  questioned  about  the  lack  of
    interview transcripts in her material. She stated that two  transcripts
    had been provided with it but the other information  contained  in  her
    report had not been undertaken specifically for this case and  that  it
    would be impossible for her to keep track of  all  the  interviews  and
    conversations she had ever had. She stated that it was not her practice
    to keep transcripts of all the interviews  she  conducted.  She  stated
    that the situation was different for researchers  preparing  the  fact-
    finding mission report because they did  not  have  her  experience  or
    knowledge and so they had to  follow  a  list  of  set  questions.  She
    explained that she had prepared her report in  the  way  that  she  had
    because she had been asked to provide her own opinion  of  the  answers
    she had been given. She stated she had undertaken research  in  Nairobi
    about Somalis travelling back and forth to Somalia and  had  been  told
    that they did so for business reasons. They did not consider  Mogadishu
    to be safe but managed to minimise the risk by making short trips.

83. In clarifying the  information  contained  in  paragraph  1.50  of  the
    report, Dr Hammond stated that the UN source she had cited was the same
    person who had been interviewed in transcript 2  that  the  information
    had been contained in a conversation that had taken place  outside  the
    interview context. It had been about displaced  people  in  the  Afgoye
    corridor who were not assisted by international workers but were helped
    instead by local businessmen or the Diaspora.  She cited an example  of
    a recent incident where a business woman  had  set  aside  $10,000  for
    distribution in the Afgoye corridor.

84. It was pointed out to Dr Hammond  that  she  had  relied  on  just  two
    reports - Human Rights Watch and the Fact Finding Mission - in reaching
    her analysis. She was asked why she had not referred to the vast number
    of other available reports contained, for example, in the  respondent's
    bundle. She replied that she did  not  find  the  UN  Security  Council
    reports to be particularly  reliable  because  they  had  a  particular
    agenda and that she had not referred, for  example,  to  the  Oxfam  or
    Landinfo reports not because of neglect but because of the  wide  range
    of information that was available. She conceded  that  the  two  latter
    reports were reliable. She was asked why she had  relied  upon  the  UN
    monitoring group report of March 2010 and she replied she found  it  to
    be a more authoritative  source  than  the  UN  Security  Council.  She
    explained this was the last report  that  had  been  prepared  by  them
    although a more up-to-date one was expected soon.  She  also  explained
    that she was  analysing  how  the  situation  had  changed  since  2008
    following the end of the Ethiopian  occupation.  The  monitoring  group
    report had been relied on to show how the  situation  had  changed  for
    combatants in the intervening period. She explained that the shift  had
    occurred with the withdrawal of Ethiopian troops and  the  rise  of  Al
    Shabab; suicide bombings had begun at this time rather than before.

85. Dr Hammond was asked to comment upon the  reliability  of  UNOCHA.  She
    stated that they had a reasonable understanding of what  was  going  on
    but had no presence in Al Shabab areas. They were  less  reliable  than
    organisations not associated with the UN. Questions were then put about
    the figures from the Elman peace organisation cited at paragraph 3.3 of
    her report. She agreed that it was unclear whether the  so-called  rise
    in casualty figures was a comparison to the  2009  figures  or  to  the
    earlier and higher 2007 figures. She  stated,  however,  that  not  all
    casualties were reported. She had cited the figures  because  they  had
    been requested although she remained sceptical about them. However,  as
    far as figures went, they were a reliable reflection of the information
    that was available. She suggested that the organisation  may  not  have
    access to figures of casualties in other areas. She explained that  the
    risks to the population between 2006 and 2009 were different  and  that
    the shift in tactics had led to random violence and  bombings,  all  of
    which are impacted on civilians. She stated  that  in  considering  the
    drop in the number of casualties in Mogadishu cited by the Elman  peace
    organisation, one had to bear in mind the enormous displacement of  the
    population from the city. She stated that a drop  in  absolute  numbers
    when 1 million people had  left  did  not  provide  any  indication  of
    whether the risk to them had decreased. She agreed that  the  city  was
    more  clearly  delineated  between  two  factions  now  than   it   was
    previously. She was asked whether that  could  be  an  improvement  for
    civilians in Mogadishu. She stated that it  was  possible  to  live  in
    areas which posed fewer risks but given that all civilians  would  need
    to get to Bakara market they would have to  cross  riskier  areas.  She
    explained that TFG areas had expanded since the report had been written
    and there were safer residential areas but civilians could not  survive
    in those areas alone. She gave the example of  the  district  of  Hamar
    JaabJab; it was a smaller area and a  resident  would  have  to  travel
    outside for facilities. Additionally, Al Shabab were able to infiltrate
    and attack TFG controlled areas. She agreed that there  were  at  least
    seventeen markets in Mogadishu (as listed on the map key) and that  one
    of them was shown to be in Hamar JaabJab.  However  she  insisted  that
    civilians would still have to travel outside the area to Bakara,  which
    was a large commercial centre providing a range of services,  including
    money transfer.

86. Dr Hammond was asked to explain how the citation she  had  given  of  a
    journalist's article in paragraph 1.12 of her report could be  used  to
    justify her conclusion that the information as to  the  extent  of  TFG
    control was unreliable. She stated that this passage emanated  from  an
    article written by Geoffrey York who had  visited  areas  under  AMISOM
    control and had found that in fact they were not controlled by  AMISOM.
    It was put to her about the quotation contained in her report  did  not
    support that  finding.  She  stated  that  there  were  other  ways  he
    established that control was not as great as it was claimed to be.  She
    was asked whether she had seen any other figures  of  areas  under  TFG
    control and she stated that there were no composite figures but she had
    seen reports where it was said that areas claimed to  be  under  AMISOM
    control were not in fact so controlled.  She  stated  there  were  some
    9,000 AMISOM troops in Somalia.

87. Dr Hammond was referred to the information  contained  in  Dr  Mullen's
    report that 80% of the fighting in Mogadishu was centred around  Bakara
    market. She was asked whether that meant that the  risk  for  civilians
    was not as high outside that area as it was in 2008. She  replied  that
    some areas of Mogadishu were deserted. Many residents had fled  to  the
    Afgoye corridor. However there were risks wherever people remained  and
    Bakara was one of those places. The TFG now had control over the access
    road and had plans to take control of that area but it would be a tough
    fight and as the TFG was in some confusion at the current time, now was
    not the moment to launch an attack to do so. They were waiting for  the
    right time. When asked to clarify  her  earlier  comment  about  people
    taking to the streets to protest, she clarified that supporters of  the
    Prime Minister  had  demonstrated  on  the  streets  and  demanded  the
    resignation of the speaker and the president  instead.  She  was  asked
    whether that meant that people felt  safe  enough  to  protest  on  the
    streets. She said that some did but there had been retaliation  by  the
    police and it was not without risk. She explained that there were times
    when people felt frustrated enough to behave in this way and pointed to
    an example in 2008 when people had protested about the increase in food
    prices. She said the TFG was not able to  quell  the  protests  and  Al
    Shabab took advantage of the unrest to attack as they had recently done
    at the seaport. She agreed that the list of districts controlled by the
    TFG provided in the Mullen  report  was  mostly  correct  although  the
    district of Hodan was not entirely under TFG control. She was  shown  a
    map of conflict areas (respondent's volume 3, Tab 13, p.1485). She  was
    asked where Bakara market was and she said it  was  in  the  centre  of
    Hawal Wadaag.

88. Dr Hammond was shown a news report about Bakara being a  no-fire  zone.
    She stated that AMISOM  had  issued  such  statements  before  but  had
    breached them. They were unpopular with the civilian population because
    they fired indiscriminately and showed no concern for civilians. Whilst
    they did not fire around the market area, casualties would drop however
    things could change in weeks  or  months;  this  was  not  a  long-term
    picture. The only reason they had not taken the market  at  the  moment
    was because they did not have the ability to maintain it. She said that
    when AMISOM troops were attacked  by  Al  Shabab,  their  response  was
    always to fire into the market regardless of where the attack had  come
    from.

89. Dr Hammond was referred to pages 273 and 288 of respondent's  volume  1
    regarding relocation to Mogadishu. She stated that the airport compound
    was secure and that the AMISOM compound was also safer now than it  had
    been about troops were unable to travel around the city and  it  was  a
    'bunkerised' presence.

90. Dr Hammond was referred to paragraph 1.13 of her report and asked  what
    dates this estimate was based on. She said she  was  unsure.  Different
    figures from  different  reports  were  put  to  her  pointing  to  the
    unreliability of statistics and she agreed that figures were  difficult
    to obtain. She was asked  whether  she  agreed  with  the  UNHCR  paper
    contained at Tab 6, respondent's volume 1, on displacement and  nomadic
    lifestyles. She stated that the 60% figure  applied  to  the  whole  of
    Somalia and that lifestyles were more nomadic  in  the  north  and  the
    north east.

91. With regard to safety on return to Mogadishu, Dr  Hammond  agreed  that
    armed escorts were not needed between the city and the airport  because
    they could be counter-productive but she stated that travel was a  risk
    nevertheless. She stated that ordinary Somalis would not use  an  armed
    escort because they did not have access to any but even if they did  it
    would be seen as a risk. She stated she had asked people how  they  had
    travelled around and was told they used minibuses or taxis. She  stated
    that there used to be clan-based armed buses on the streets  but  these
    had been prohibited by Al Shabab. She agreed that the situation  inside
    the airport had improved.

92. Dr Hammond was referred to paragraph 3.21-3.25 of Mr Burns'  report  on
    airport security. She said she had never heard of  a  deal  being  made
    between Al Shabab and the TFG/AMISOM. She stated that although  it  was
    secure in the airport, people inside had been passing information on to
    Al Shabab. This was illustrated by the incident last week of an airport
    VIP guard who had been killed when leaving  a  mosque.  She  said  that
    Somalis were not allowed into a number of areas  housing  aid  workers.
    She stated  that  although  the  road  to  the  airport  was  currently
    controlled by AMISOM, the situation could change at any time.

93. It was put to Dr Hammond that her reference  to  a  checkpoint  in  her
    report (1.23 to 1.24) was about a roadblock in Afgoye  rather  than  in
    the city of Mogadishu.  She  agreed  there  was  no  information  about
    checkpoints in Mogadishu. It was put to her that the quotation did  not
    support her analysis of risks and  checkpoints  and  that  perhaps  the
    reason why there were no reports of problems with Mogadishu checkpoints
    was that there weren't any problems. She said that there were  articles
    which dealt with forced recruitment of young men  at  checkpoints.  She
    said the only information in  the  fact-finding  mission  report  about
    checkpoints was the information  she  had  provided  and  she  did  not
    believe  that  the  experience  of  people  at   checkpoints   differed
    regardless of whether or not they were inside or outside Mogadishu. She
    stated that we knew checkpoints in Mogadishu existed because  a  leader
    had recently been killed at one.

94. With regard to the issue of forced recruitment, Dr Hammond was referred
    to Mr Burns's report which maintained that it did not frequently occur.
    She stated that Al Shabab had a sophisticated way of compelling  people
    to join them. They used a range of  tactics  including  threatening  to
    harm family members and putting pressure on schools to provide recruits
    so that although people chose to join them, it was not a  free  choice.
    She disagreed with Mr Burns and maintained that people were taken  away
    at gunpoint at checkpoints. With reference to  paragraph  1.44  of  her
    report, she was asked how credible it was for someone to be  telephoned
    three times regarding recruitment. She stated that  this  practice  was
    also followed in other cases she was familiar  with.  The  pattern  was
    that somebody would be approached and given some  time  to  decide  and
    then would be phoned, texted and threatened.

95. Dr Hammond was referred to paragraphs 1.25, 1.26, 1.40 and 1.41 of  her
    report; she agreed that this information was raised on  press  reports.
    She also agreed that none of these reports made any references  to  the
    people concerned  being  returnees.  She  maintained  however  that  if
    somebody was suspected of spying, the punishment would be harsh. It was
    put to her that there was nothing in  the  evidence  to  show  that  an
    ordinary returnee was more at risk of being perceived  as  a  spy  than
    anybody else and that at most they faced the risk  of  being  kidnapped
    and held for ransom. She agreed that there was a risk of kidnapping but
    added that they would also be seen as being  sympathetic  to  the  west
    because of their asylum claim. She was asked why it was that  the  part
    time returnees who performed social  services  were  not  perceived  as
    spies. She stated that she did not have information as  to  when  those
    people had returned but many had been doing it for a long time  and  so
    were not perceived as newcomers. Additionally, they were in TFG  areas,
    did not travel widely and may  have  negotiated  their  positions  with
    local  administrative  leaders.  It  was  put  to  her   that   another
    explanation could be that there were no problems for such  people.  She
    conceded that there was a shortage of information. It  was  put  to  Dr
    Hammond that there was no evidence to support her contention  that  the
    appellants would be seen as spies if returned. She maintained  that  in
    her view that there was such a risk and she based this on  what  people
    had told her about how they were treated at roadblocks and  so  on.  It
    was put to Dr Hammond that Saudi  Arabia  had  recently  deported  some
    16,000 Somalis back to Somalia and there was  no  evidence  to  suggest
    they had been targeted as spies on return. She replied that  there  was
    no information as to what  had  happened  to  them  and  in  any  event
    deportation from Saudi Arabia was different to deportation from the UK.
    From the former, one would be more likely to be seen as a failed labour
    worker.

96. Dr Hammond was asked whether she mistrusted reports from  NGOs  in  the
    same way that  she  did  not  find  the  UN  Security  Council  reports
    reliable. She said NGO reports presented a different kind of problem in
    that many NGOs practised self-censorship. She said that  those  working
    in Al Shabab areas would deny their work outright  for  fear  of  being
    targeted or having their funding cut. She did not accept that there was
    over reporting although she agreed that two  journalists  might  report
    the same incident in a different way. She agreed  that  monitoring  was
    difficult. She stated that in Somalia aid was provided where there  was
    access. It did not necessarily flow to the areas that were most needed;
    for example the Afgoye  corridor  faced  an  appalling  situation  yet,
    because of poor access, aid did not make its way to that area.

97. Dr Hammond was asked about travel in Somalia.  She  stated  that  there
    were minibuses and lorries to and from Mogadishu and  there  were  also
    regular internal flights to other cities. With regard to paragraph 1.47
    of  her  report,  she  stated  most  of  this  information  came   from
    conversations that she had with different people.  She  disagreed  that
    her report presented a different picture to the  information  contained
    in the fact-finding mission report. She stated that as long  as  people
    obeyed Al Shabab rules,  they  would  be  able  to  travel.  However  a
    returnee would not know the rules. She stated she had  focused  on  the
    risks faced by  those  who  travelled  whereas  the  other  report  had
    concentrated on the fact that people moved. She stated  that  the  fact
    that there was movement did not mean there was no  risk.  People  could
    take their chances and lie but that might lead  to  problems  as  well,
    depending on the kind of questions asked.

98. It was put to her that Al Shabab rule was not  uniform  throughout  the
    country particularly with regard to the treatment of women. She  agreed
    with this but pointed out that they were strict in all  areas  but  how
    strict they were from district to  district  was  another  matter.  She
    stated that she was not, however, aware of any Al  Shabab  areas  where
    the rules regarding women would be different. She stated that  in  most
    places women were prohibited from engaging in gainful activity. She was
    asked to explain how that  fitted  with  her  earlier  example  of  the
    businesswoman who distributed money in  Afgoye.  She  stated  that  the
    woman would have had to have travelled with a male  relative  and  then
    would have stayed in a house, called women in and handed it out in that
    way.

99. With reference to her earlier evidence of the reluctance of  people  to
    reveal how much money they were receiving from abroad, she was asked to
    explain how the amount of money was relevant to  the  determination  of
    their allegiance.  She  stated  that  more  money  might  suggest  more
    contributors and so greater ties with the West. She was  asked  whether
    the social services providers were all men and if  not  how  they  were
    able to undertake their work. She replied that any women workers in  Al
    Shabab areas would have to work through a male agent.

100. Dr Hammond was referred to paragraphs  1.48  and  1.49  of  her  report
    regarding IDPs. She was asked why she had relied on a Guardian  article
    rather than the information in the  fact-finding  mission  report.  She
    stated that the fact-finding mission report  was  based  on  interviews
    conducted in Nairobi and was therefore second-hand information  whereas
    the journalist who wrote the Guardian article had spoken directly  with
    displaced people. It was put to her that he had interviewed  people  in
    Somaliland and there was no information about how long  they  had  been
    living there. She stated that as the interviewees had talked  about  Al
    Shabab, they  must  be  relatively  recent  post  Ethiopian  occupation
    arrivals. She stated that despite the fact they had no clan  protection
    in that area and lived in dismal conditions they chose to  stay  there.
    She stated that Somaliland clans had very little representation in  the
    south of the country. They were mainly the Isaaq clan  and  they  would
    return clan members who opposed the idea of an independent  Somaliland.
    She confirmed that no returnee to Somalia could expect clan  protection
    from a different clan.  She was  asked  to  explain  how  it  was  that
    support from the Diaspora was not clan specific.  She  stated  that  on
    balance most support was along clan lines, however assistance was given
    across clan lines in IDP camps; that did  not  mean  that  a  displaced
    person could go to another clan and seek help.

101. It was put to Dr Hammond that  information  between  the  Diaspora  and
    Somalia flowed very quickly and  that,  for  example,  money  could  be
    transferred within hours. She  agreed.  She  was  asked  then  in  that
    context how realistic it was that returnees would  not  know  what  the
    rules were. She stated that whilst relatives might be able to warn them
    about general expectations, there were things that might be overlooked.

102. With  reference  to  the  specific  circumstances  of  AF,  Dr  Hammond
    confirmed that one of the main concerns was forced  recruitment  to  Al
    Shabab. It was put to her that evidence (respondent's volume 3, Tab 10,
    pp. 1302-3) did not suggest that a Midgan was  incapable  of  obtaining
    protection. She stated that given that even majority clan members could
    no longer be guaranteed any protection, she  was  unsure  how  minority
    clan members could obtain any. Even if AMM were to  find  a  patron  as
    before, that was an economic relationship and  would  not  provide  any
    physical protection. She agreed that his home area was  not  controlled
    by Al Shabab. It was controlled by a different militia  allied  to  the
    TFG.

103. With regard to MW, Dr Hammond stated that Merka was a stronghold of  Al
    Shabab support and therefore there was no question of  them  moderating
    their position to compromise with local administrators as they might in
    the areas where their support was weaker. She stated that MW  would  be
    unable to live in Mogadishu because she had been away from the  country
    for twelve years and there were concerns that she had  no  family  ties
    there. Further, it was a big obligation for any hosting family to  take
    in for additional people and there would have to be  a  male  relative.
    She  may  be  able  to  receive  support  in  a  TFG  area  but  as  an
    unaccompanied woman with three young children she was vulnerable. There
    was also the risk that she might be married off to Al Shabab  soldiers.
    It was put to her that the latter scenario was unlikely if she was in a
    TFG area. She stated that it depended upon the shifting situation.

104. Dr Hammond agreed that FGM was not her area of specialisation. She  was
    asked whether  it  was  a  social  pressure  rather  than  a  religious
    requirement. She replied that many clergy claimed it was a  requirement
    although it was not Quranic practice.  She  agreed  that  it  might  be
    possible to hide the fact that one was not circumcised  until  marriage
    but pointed out that once it was discovered the woman could be returned
    to her family as her husband would be unlikely to accept it. It was put
    to her that as MW's daughter was very young that was not  an  immediate
    concern. She  stated  that  girls  were  generally  between  eight  and
    fourteen years old when they were circumcised and that 98%  of  females
    were circumcised in one way or another. There was a more extreme method
    and a less invasive procedure. It was put to her that if someone had no
    familial links then there was  no  pressure  upon  them  to  circumcise
    children. She replied that if MW did not seek family  or  clan  support
    she would not be able to survive. She was referred to the Oxfam  report
    (volume 2, Tab 8) which suggested that 20% of women in 2004 had not had
    their daughters circumcised. She suggested that  incorrect  information
    may have been given to NGOs who prepared the report. She explained that
    people were reticent to talk about this as it was a  sensitive  subject
    and they knew that NGOs wanted to eradicate it.

105. She was asked about her comments regarding  appellant  FM.  She  agreed
    she had not addressed the possibility of his travel by  air.  She  also
    agreed that although she had said that he might  have  to  leave  Hamar
    JaabJab to shop, there were provisions available there. It was  put  to
    her that appellant ZF would also be able to fly home.  She  agreed  but
    pointed out that she would be subject to questioning  about  where  she
    had come from and about the whereabouts of her  family.  She  suggested
    that if Appellant ZF could not find her family then there may be a risk
    for her. It was put to her that is appellant ZF travelled by land,  she
    could travel in the company of other men. Dr Hammond clarified  that  a
    woman needed a man to look after her specifically; travelling on a  bus
    where  there  were  male  passengers  was  not  sufficient.  This   was
    information gleaned from conversations she had had. She stated that  in
    order  to  access  Somaliland,  appellant  ZF  would  need  to  have  a
    connection to her family to confirm her clan links. She agreed that the
    figures cited in paragraph 3.10 of the report was somewhat out of  date
    and admitted that she was sceptical of them in any event but they  were
    included in the report because they were the only ones she could  find.
    She also agreed that her speculation at 3.13  was  before  the  Kampala
    Accord. She stated  that  the  figures  pertaining  to  mental  illness
    related to Somaliland and Puntland; those from Mogadishu could be  much
    higher in her opinion.

106. In re-examination Dr Hammond was asked how she rated UNHCR reports  for
    reliability. She stated that depended on the subject matter. She stated
    they were useful as a snapshot but that as people  kept  moving  around
    the situation kept changing and  one  needed  to  be  careful  of  what
    conclusions were drawn from the reports. She pointed out  that  the  UN
    had a difficult time getting  access  to  Somalia  as  trust  had  been
    eroded. She stated that as far as Somalis were concerned the UN,  UNHCR
    and UNICEF were all perceived in the same way. She was asked about  her
    view of the AMISOM declaration of the no fire zone. She maintained  her
    earlier evidence that the plan was to attack the market at some  point.
    She was not aware when the declaration had  been  made  but  agreed  it
    would have been at least since December 2010, that being  the  date  of
    the IRIN article (Appellant's bundle C, p.266). She was  asked  whether
    AMISOM had fired mortars into  the  market  since  that  time  and  she
    replied she believed that they had but she was unable to provide  dates
    or casualty figures. She also said that  in  the  past  they  had  made
    similar declarations which they had breached.

107. Dr Hammond was asked where Somali  MPs  lived.  She  stated  that  they
    resided within TFG areas and that the  more  senior  figures  lived  in
    Villa Somalia. All had armed protection. She was  referred  to  a  news
    report on the Kampala Accord contained at Tab 10  of  the  respondent's
    supplementary bundle. She was asked  why  the  next  meeting  had  been
    postponed. She stated that this was because there was no safe place  in
    Mogadishu for the meeting to take place. Dr Hammond was asked about the
    consequences for someone who refused to join Al Shabab. She said  there
    was a pattern of harassment of an individual or his family designed  at
    coercing him to join the movement. She stated that although  some  were
    forcibly taken away, usually the pattern  was  telephoned  threats  and
    text messages.

108. Dr Hammond was referred to evidence in the respondent's bundle  (volume
    2 at pages 683 and 685); she confirmed that the figures  accorded  with
    her experience of  circumcision.  She  was  asked  to  comment  on  the
    conclusion of that report and she replied that the context in  which  a
    questions was put and the manner in which it was asked could  sway  the
    responses received. With regard to  the  US  aid  report  contained  in
    bundle MW1, she stated that she did not believe the  figures  would  be
    deliberately inflated or deflated but the questions  were  based  on  a
    particular agenda, intervention, and  those  responding  to  them  were
    aware  of  that.  She  agreed  that  the  figures  of  98.4%  of  women
    circumcised in rural areas accorded with her  knowledge  and  that  the
    general figure of just under 98% was accurate.

109. On the issue of checkpoints she stated that she had seen  many  reports
    of women travelling alone and being stopped, although she  herself  had
    not been to such a checkpoint. Even if women were travelling on  a  bus
    with other male passengers, they would still have to have a male family
    member with them. She agreed that  some  people  might  lie  about  the
    purpose of their travel when questioned at checkpoints. She stated that
    all parties in Somalia operated checkpoints, some were  more  permanent
    as, for example, on major roads; however they could move around and  be
    set up in different areas. Dr Hammond was asked  whether  someone  from
    Somaliland arriving  at  Mogadishu  airport  would  have  any  hope  of
    obtaining assistance from his community to make the journey  back.  She
    said that the members of the Isaaq clan remaining in Mogadishu would be
    opposed to the independence of Somaliland, as otherwise they would  not
    have remained there, and would not support somebody  leaving  Mogadishu
    for Somaliland. A person could not therefore just rely on clan ties for
    support.

110. Dr Hammond was asked about the market in Hamar JaabJab  marked  on  the
    map. She stated that she was not aware whether it was  still  open  but
    she added that the map included a list of embassies  and  other  places
    that were probably no longer functional. She was  asked  what  kind  of
    work FM would be likely to find in that area. She replied it would have
    to be in the informal  sector  and  there  were  several  opportunities
    around  the  port,  albeit  that  it  functioned  intermittently.   She
    confirmed that it could be directly reached from Hamar JaabJab. She was
    asked whether there were any circumstances in which FM would have to go
    to Bakara market. She stated virtually everyone in Mogadishu had to  go
    to there at one point or another.

111. In response to questions from the Tribunal, Dr Hammond stated  that  Al
    Shabab viewed FGM as advisable and, although she was not aware  of  any
    examples of enforced circumcision, she did not believe they would  seek
    to eradicate it.  She was advised that all  returns  of  failed  asylum
    seekers were to Mogadishu and she was asked whether it was possible  to
    travel from Mogadishu to Somaliland, She replied that whenever she  had
    travelled to Somaliland, it was by air from Nairobi.  She  stated  that
    although she travelled on special UN  flights,  there  were  commercial
    airline flights to Hargeisa from Nairobi and Dubai. She was  unsure  of
    the costs of internal flights but stated that a flight from Nairobi  to
    Hargeisa was about $500. She was asked to clarify  the  situation  with
    regard to aid in Al Shabab areas. She stated that officially there  was
    none but there were in fact organisations at local level that  provided
    limited support. This was  mainly  geared  towards  medical  assistance
    rather than food as Al Shabab did not consider food aid  was  necessary
    in their areas.  She  stated  that  Al  Shabab  would  not  permit  new
    organisations to set up but those that had been operating for some time
    were allowed to continue their work. She stated that food was  obtained
    from Bakara market if people had the resources to go there;  there  was
    also some food available in the Afgoye area. Dr Hammond was referred to
    the map of areas of conflict in Mogadishu that had been  shown  to  her
    earlier by Mr Eicke. It was  pointed  out  to  her  that  Bondhere  was
    described as an area of acute conflict and she was asked whether  there
    was anything about that area that would attract  conflict.  She  stated
    that the presidential palace  of  Villa  Somalia  was  close  by.    Dr
    Hammond was asked to expand on her evidence about Al  Shabab  tailoring
    their behaviour in accordance with the support they had  in  particular
    areas. She gave an example of an area where NGOs provided  teaching  to
    children and there were mixed sex classrooms. When Al Shabab  objected,
    the NGO threatened to withdraw  and  so  Al  Shabab  backed  down  and,
    unusually, children were taught in mixed sex classes. She was asked  to
    explain what she meant by returnees having a different gait  (paragraph
    1.40). She stated they had a different way of carrying themselves. They
    did not walk as slow and did not shuffle as  they  would  in  Mogadishu
    where they would wear sandals.

112. There were no questions arising and that completed  Dr  Hammond's  oral
    evidence.



Mr Tony Burns

113. Mr Burns gave evidence by video link from Brisbane.  He  commenced  his
    evidence by confirming that  he  had  given  a  truthful  and  accurate
    account in his statement of September 2009 and his report of May  2011,
    both of which he sought to rely upon.  He explained that the withdrawal
    of the Ethiopian forces created a vacuum which Al Shabab were  able  to
    exploit. AMISOM had managed  to  establish  a  green  line  around  the
    airport, seaport and presidential palace. Each time their position  was
    attacked by Al Shabab they responded by indiscriminately firing mortars
    in the direction of the attack and in the vicinity.  This  resulted  in
    large civilian casualties and was the biggest danger that civilians now
    faced. In his view the situation was  much  worse  than  in  2008;  the
    situation had led to a  degradation  of  livelihood  and  security.  He
    stated that in rural areas  there  were  severe  crop  failures  and  a
    minimum of 30% to a maximum of 100% herd loss. He  described  Mogadishu
    as an active war zone but explained that  nonetheless  desperate  rural
    civilians had moved there in order to find food and employment.

114. Mr Burns was asked to expand upon paragraph 3.7 of his report in  which
    he set out the daily threats faced by civilians. Specifically,  he  was
    asked to describe the situation for civilians in districts of low-level
    violence. He stated that all sixteen districts  of  Mogadishu  suffered
    from the violent tactics  of  criminal  freelance  militias  that  were
    pervasive, particularly at night. Many of these might be TFG or  AMISOM
    militias by day but at night they raped, looted,  killed  and  extorted
    money from civilians. He stated that a colossal number  of  people  had
    moved out of Mogadishu and into the Afgoye area although the  situation
    there was dire. He stated that the displacement  figure  was  initially
    put at 3 million  but  was  then  amended  to  2.5  million.  From  the
    beginning of 2011 there were large movements back into Mogadishu  which
    was still the  main  area  of  livelihood.  His  organisation,  SAACID,
    operated food  kitchens  throughout  the  city.  He  stated  that  many
    families were split, with some  coming  into  Mogadishu  for  food  and
    others living outside the city. He explained that a significant  number
    of rural families had taken their chances and moved into  Mogadishu  in
    order to look for food because their crops had failed, their herds  had
    died and there was no water. They moved into TFG areas which were  less
    oppressive than those controlled by Al Shabab. Hamar  Weyne  and  Hamar
    JaabJab were minority districts and many people moving there  had  clan
    connections. However these areas were filled to capacity and unable  to
    absorb any more incoming people. As a result some  were  spilling  over
    into Shingani  but  basically  all  areas  were  seeing  newcomers.  He
    estimated the population of Mogadishu to be around the 1.1 million mark
    whereas it had been some 600,000 when it was at a low point.

115. Mr Burns stated that the situation in  rural  areas  was  untenable  in
    terms of basic human existence and that if people remained  there  they
    would die of starvation so even if Mogadishu was a war zone it was more
    tenable choice than dying in the countryside. He stated that  they  had
    been very high displacement  after  the  Ethiopian  occupation  but  he
    described Somalis as having very good coping strategies.  New  services
    had been set up between Afgoye and Mogadishu. Initially those who  were
    displaced were the poor but  increasingly  there  were  more  displaced
    people from the middle and upper  classes  which  led  to  the  poorest
    people being forced out through lack of  space;  they  were  forced  to
    return to Mogadishu and take their risks. However there were wells  for
    water and opportunities for day labour.

116. Mr Burns was asked to  explain  why  he  stated  that  Al  Shabab  were
    hypersensitive and viewed detainees with suspicion. He stated  that  Al
    Shabab set themselves up on a district basis in Mogadishu and in  rural
    areas. The centre of their operations was in  Jowhar  in  the  Shabelle
    district. The majority of their political and military  structures  was
    based there. They considered the primary threat against them to be from
    the Ethiopian intelligence and military forces and indeed the Ethiopian
    forces continued to  make  incursions  into  Somalia.  Al  Shabab  were
    vigilant to Ethiopian operatives moving into  their  areas.  They  were
    also aware that the Ethiopians worked closely with the US  and  Western
    governments  from  whom  they  received  funds.  He  stated  that   his
    organisation no longer had facilities in Jowhar as their  compound  had
    been taken over  by  Al  Shabab.  He  explained  that  it  was  a  huge
    logistical effort for SAACID staff to move around.

117. With regard to the movement of civilians, Mr Burns stated that  if  the
    poor were moving as a group and obtained  the  necessary  letters  they
    should not have any problems passing through check points although they
    would be asked questions about where they were going. However it  would
    be different for the Diaspora who would be identifiable on  return  and
    would be seen as being tainted with western ideology and  suspected  of
    being spies and/or a potential source of income. They  may  be  coerced
    into paying money or be held for ransom. They may also be compelled  to
    become an operative or a suicide bomber. At the very least, they  would
    face detention and interrogation.  He  stated  that  he  could  provide
    information about the conditions in jails because many of his staff had
    spent time in Jowhar prison. He stated that the  conditions  were  very
    poor. There was a basic compound and prisoners had to obtain their  own
    meals and water, or else pay for them. If they were unable  to  do  so,
    they starved. Beatings were common. He gave an example of a former  MSF
    employee who had an arm and a  leg  broken  on  suspicion  of  being  a
    Christian. He survived only because other inmates gave him food. He was
    released after some six or seven months but had suffered very badly.

118. Mr Burns was  asked  questions  by  Mr  Schwenk  about  appellant  ZF's
    particular circumstances, specifically about her ability to  travel  by
    land to Gedo. He stated that she would have to pass through  Hiran  and
    Galgadud in order to get there and that prospect beggared belief as  he
    did not know of any Somali who would contemplate  such  a  trip.  There
    would be innumerable Al Shabab checks, conflict  zones  and  she  would
    have to pass through the pirate areas mentioned above where  she  would
    be viewed with great suspicion. Moreover the area was  hit  by  drought
    and there was no access to basic facilities.

119. It was put to him that it might be suggested  by  the  respondent  that
    travel was safe given the numbers of people moving into  Mogadishu.  He
    replied that his organisation interviewed new entrants  into  Mogadishu
    on a daily basis and the overwhelming consensus was that it was  unsafe
    to travel. A woman on her own would be  raped  or  killed  and  no  one
    travelled from Mogadishu to Somaliland by land. It was best  to  travel
    in groups and the more men within the group, the better.

120. Mr Burns was asked what travel documents appellant ZF would require  to
    gain entry into Somaliland. He replied that  she  needed  an  old-style
    Somali passport as Somaliland did not accept the TFG issued  passports.
    An old-style passport could be obtained in Bakara market but the market
    was currently closed. Businesses had had to relocate to other parts  of
    Mogadishu or to the Afgoye corridor and she may be  able  to  obtain  a
    passport there.

121. Ms Short then asked questions on  behalf  of  appellant  MW.  Mr  Burns
    stated that it was not possible to travel on the K4 road  to  Merka  as
    that had been closed by AMISOM. She would therefore have to go via  the
    back roads and would face many checkpoints. He stated that as Al Shabab
    were currently under great economic  stress  and  suffering  ammunition
    shortages, they had increased the number of road blocks so as to obtain
    money from travellers. There were now  roadblocks  in  every  district,
    taxes had increased and the  situation  looked  likely  to  deteriorate
    further.

122. With regard to FGM, he stated that he stood by  the  opinion  contained
    in his report. He stated that around  99%  of  women  in  Somalia  were
    circumcised and that the extreme  version  consisted  of  the  complete
    removal of the  clitoris  and  the  labia  and  the  stitching  of  the
    genitalia so as to leave a hole just the size of a grain  of  rice.  He
    stated that the health consequences were appalling, there  was  extreme
    pain during intercourse and childbirth and many women died.  The  least
    invasive form was performed in a  minority  of  cases  in  rural  areas
    although it  was  more  widespread  in  Mogadishu.  Al  Shabab  had  no
    pronouncement on the issue. Mr Burns was  reminded  that  it  had  been
    found that appellant MW had no family  in  Somalia  and  he  was  asked
    whether she would be able to seek protection from her majority clan  in
    her effort to prevent her daughter from being  circumcised.  He  stated
    that it would be impossible to exist without  clan  networks  as  clans
    still dominated all  socio-economic  structures.  He  stated  that  all
    Diaspora would be seen as foreigners and not as 'real' Somalis. He said
    that appellant MW would have to attach  herself  to  her  clan  and  to
    accept social and cultural norms. He stated that 99%  of  Somali  girls
    were circumcised despite any objections their  families  may  have.  He
    stated that most of his staff opposed  FGM  but  their  daughters  were
    still circumcised because families would simply take them away and  get
    it done whilst their parents were not around. The only way to avoid the
    risk was to leave Somalia. She would then have the option of going to a
    refugee camp in Yemen or Kenya. She would be unable to  hide  the  fact
    that her daughter had not been circumcised if she stayed in Somalia  as
    there were no secrets in Somali villages. He  explained  that  families
    did not have private showers and that if people bathed they would do so
    in creeks or near wells. Children would  play  together  naked  and  an
    uncircumcised girl would be noticed. Additionally,  there  were  always
    inquisitive women around who would make it their business to find  out,
    especially as the appellant was Diaspora.

123. In response to questions put by Mr Symes  regarding  appellant  FM  and
    his ability  to  find  employment,  Mr  Burns  stated  that  there  was
    systematic unemployment in Somalia, reaching some 70%. The main  market
    was currently barricaded by AMISOM troops so  the  largest  opportunity
    for potential employment was lost for the moment.  He stated  that  the
    average family size was nine individuals, family  income  was  $70  and
    expenses $100; average debt was $110. A returnee would  face  suspicion
    from the TFG and Al Shabab. Appellant FM would have little  opportunity
    for employment. He may be able to sell fruit. He may have skills  which
    he could use. There were no NGOs operating in Hamar JaabJab which was a
    minority district. A lot of rural  minorities  were  coming  into  that
    area.

124. Mr Eicke then  cross-examined.  Mr  Burns  confirmed  that  his  report
    consisted of raw data obtained from his own  background  and  expertise
    and that he had not relied upon any outside material.  He  stated  that
    his organisation operated throughout Somalia; he was  the  director  of
    operations and received daily briefings. He had sought  to  provide  an
    analysis of the  trends  currently  in  operation  rather  than  giving
    examples of specific incidents. SAACID was a women's organisation based
    in Mogadishu and operating in all  sixteen  districts  including  those
    controlled by Al Shabab. It also had a presence in other  districts  in
    south and central Somalia controlled by Al Shabab. It sought to provide
    food to those in need.

125. Mr Burns was asked  about  the  garbage  clearing  exercise  which  his
    organisation had undertaken. He explained that it had been designed  to
    cover all districts but in practice the funds ran out and had  operated
    for just twelve weeks in the ten TFG controlled parts of the  city.  He
    stated that 60% of his employees were women and they worked in both TFG
    and  Al  Shabab  controlled  areas.  He  stated  that   his   workforce
    overwhelmingly consisted of members of minority clans; some 2,200  were
    employed, and at least 50% of positions were  allocated  to  women  and
    minority clan members. A  majority  were  displaced  persons.  However,
    every clan was represented in every district and SAACID resources  were
    distributed as evenly as possible throughout the city. He stated it was
    not common for the workforce to move across districts. It was up to the
    leaders of each team to  select  staff;  however,  positions  requiring
    qualifications and skills were filled on merit. He  stated  that  there
    had been a recent programme to select nurses and applicants  came  from
    everywhere including Afgoye. He said that specialist staff members were
    selected randomly across clan lines and efforts were made to  integrate
    different plans. He stated that the organisation did not talk  formally
    with Al Shabab; it used community leaders and elders as  middlemen.  He
    stated that operations had to be suspended in Jowhar. This was  because
    of a lack of consensus amongst the different Al Shabab  militias,  some
    of whom supported the programme whereas others did not. He stated  that
    Al Shabab were not a unified force and  when  broken  down  were  clan-
    based. He stated that SAACID had a primary duty of care  to  its  staff
    and as no consensus had been reached, the programme was not implemented
    in this area. Mr Burns stated that  he  defined  minority  clans  on  a
    numerical basis so in his view all clans excluding the  Abgal  and  the
    Habir Gadir were minorities in the city; even the other Hawiye were  in
    the minority.

126. Mr Burns stated that north east Hodan  was  still  a  heavily  disputed
    area.  He was asked  whether  it  was  possible  for  lone  women  with
    children to work, even in such areas. He replied that it was  essential
    for women to work as if they did not, they starved.

127. It was put to Mr Burns that the SAACID  operation  (described  at  page
    407) appeared to have been conducted with few incidents  and  that  the
    picture he now painted did not accord with that contained in  parts  of
    this report.  He stated that the lack of incidents  were  down  to  the
    skill with which SAACID operated. He explained that DDG referred to the
    Danish De-mining Group which had a presence in Mogadishu.

128. He was reminded that he had stated that the risk of armed violence  was
    limited to rural areas (paragraph 3.4) and  asked  whether  that  meant
    that the risk outside those areas was  reduced.   He  replied  that  in
    comparison to the three areas cited, the risk was  negligible.  He  was
    asked whether the risk emanated from Al Shabab intelligence rather than
    armed violence and he replied that in terms of the  Diaspora  that  was
    certainly the case as Al Shabab's greatest fear  was  that  their  base
    would be threatened by Ethiopian agents. He was asked  whether  he  was
    aware of any incident  where  any  member  of  the  Diaspora  had  been
    targeted and he responded that he was not; he had no contact with  them
    at all. He was asked whether there were any reports that described  the
    incidents he had set out in paragraph 3.4 of his report. He replied  he
    could not comment on any documents in the public domain and stated that
    the only Diaspora he knew of were  those  businessmen  who  stayed  for
    short periods. He was asked whether there was any  evidence  that  they
    were treated as spies. He replied that there were a number of cases  to
    show indigenous Somalis were treated as spies and  that  therefore  the
    risk to an outsider would be even greater. It was put to  him  that  he
    was speculating on the risk, given the lack  of  evidence;  he  replied
    that his views were given in the context of the situation and  that  he
    believed it would be a probable outcome. It was put to him that in 2010
    Saudi Arabia had deported 16,000 Somalis back to Somalia and that there
    were no reports that any of them had been treated in the  way  that  he
    had described. He replied that the information in the public domain was
    very limited. For example, there was a chronic under reporting  of  the
    number of casualties. He  stated  that  stabbings,  rapes  and  machete
    attacks all occurred. He stated he could guarantee that some  of  those
    returnees would have been ill treated or killed.

129. Mr. Burns agreed that Al Shabab was an umbrella organisation  and  that
    it had no uniform code of rules and no uniform enforcement of same.  He
    agreed that to some extent the risk to an individual depended upon  the
    locality to which they returned that pointed out that Al  Shabab  moved
    around their personnel every three months. For  his  organisation  this
    meant regular re-negotiations.

130. With regard to what he  had  said  earlier  about  minorities  and  the
    contents of paragraph 3.6 of his report, Mr. Burns stated that in order
    to determine which clan was in a  minority  one  had  to  look  at  the
    situation region by region, even district by district. He  stated,  for
    example, the Habir Gadir may have traditionally been in the majority in
    Afgoye but currently they were a minority there. He  stated  that  many
    districts and areas had developed coping mechanisms to  deal  with  the
    structures that had been implemented  by  Al  Shabab  and  he  did  not
    believe that an outsider would be able to return and fit in. He  stated
    that there had been no sociological change to the norms, and minorities
    were still badly treated.

131. Mr Burns was referred to paragraph 3.10 of  his  report.  He  explained
    that his understanding of the question was that  it  referred  to  high
    profile individuals. He agreed that what he had said  did  not  reflect
    the situation of the  ordinary  Somali  citizen.  He  stated  that  the
    threats faced by an individual depended  on  where  they  were  on  the
    social strata. There was  a  notable  rise  in  the  assassinations  of
    community leaders and  an  increase  in  kidnappings  for  middle-class
    members who were also at risk  of  stray  bullets.  For  the  poor  the
    problems included subsistence as well as stray bullets,  indiscriminate
    mortar fire and rape. He was asked whether the risk varied according to
    whether one lived in a higher or lower conflict area. He  replied  that
    there were no safe areas and that the problems of obtaining food, basic
    security, and ability to find employment, threats from  militias,  rape
    extortion  and  kidnapping  for  ransom  were  risks  that  were  found
    everywhere. It was put to him that it would be wrong  to  look  at  the
    risk in Mogadishu as being uniform  at  the  present  time.  Mr.  Burns
    agreed that in military conflicts the majority  of  the  city  was  not
    always  in  conflict  but  he  pointed  out  that  the  situation   was
    unpredictable and that some  parts  of  the  city  faced  more  chronic
    fighting than others. With regard  to  movement  within  the  city,  he
    stated  that  if  people  obtained  the  relevant  letters   from   the
    administrative authorities than they should have  no  problems  passing
    through checkpoints. He stated that when  people  were  displaced  they
    tended to go to areas where they had some kind of link. He  stated  50%
    of the population of Mogadishu had been displaced in one year.  It  was
    put to him that there were safer areas within the city. He agreed  that
    there were always safer areas however there was always the fear that Al
    Shabab would attack and that AMISOM would  respond  by  firing  mortars
    into the city. He stated that people left Al Shabab areas in  order  to
    get away from AMISOM mortars and because Al Shabab  gave  them  a  hard
    time. He confirmed that there had been an agreement between  Al  Shabab
    and  AMISOM  regarding  the  airport.  The  US  and  the  UK  had  also
    contributed to keeping the airport safe.

132. Mr. Burns confirmed that he travelled to  Mogadishu  once  every  eight
    weeks. He was asked whether the flights were busy  and  he  replied  it
    varied. For example, if he was travelling from the UAE the flights were
    always full because of the  drop-offs  to  Somaliland  and  Yemen,  but
    travelling from Nairobi they were not so busy. He confirmed that people
    did return to join their families for holidays and younger Somalis  who
    had never been to Somalia wanted to come and  see  what  it  was  like.
    Others came for  marriage  and  some  brought  their  daughters  to  be
    circumcised. He agreed that there were onward flights from Mogadishu to
    areas in Somalia and Somaliland.

133. Mr. Burns was asked whether returnees to urban areas would  be  treated
    any differently to those in rural areas. He stated that his comments in
    paragraph 3.37 of his report related to rural  areas  where  Al  Shabab
    were very sensitive to intelligence operations and hence to  newcomers.
    He explained that  currently  they  were  struggling  economically  and
    therefore on the lookout for Diaspora who were easy  to  spot.  It  was
    considered that they were tainted by Western culture and were not  true
    Muslims.  They  spoke  differently,  dressed  differently  and   walked
    differently. It was put to him that there was no  evidence  that  those
    returning for family visits were badly treated. He agreed that  he  had
    not seen any such evidence but  stated  that  such  returnees  did  not
    travel around, would remain in the family compound and then  leave.  He
    stated that when he visited Somalia he never left the compound.

134. Questions were then put about forced recruitment. Mr Burns agreed  that
    Al Shabab did not forcibly take people away to fight;  that  had  never
    been their policy, however  now  that  they  were  under  pressure  the
    concern was that they might start to  do  that.  He  stated  that  some
    minority clans had been brought into the Al  Shabab  structure  and  in
    return had to contribute a number of males to fight. He described  this
    as being the norm in many rural areas. He agreed that the risk did  not
    emanate  from  roadblocks  (paragraph  3.42)   but   from   Al   Shabab
    intelligence. He was asked whether he was aware  of  the  detention  of
    anyone in such circumstances, whether indigenous Somalis  or  Diaspora.
    He stated it was  very  common  for  Al  Shabab  to  detain  people  at
    checkpoints and call the central office in the district to  check  what
    they should do. People would be released within hours or  days  but  if
    their story did not check out they  would  be  taken  to  the  district
    office and perhaps even to the  regional  office.  He  stated  that  Al
    Shabab were looking for ways to make money and for individuals who  did
    not meet the required profile. He was asked whether armed escorts  were
    still necessary to accompany individuals through checkpoints. He stated
    that they were not as roadblocks  had  reduced  banditry;  however,  he
    expressed concern that as Al Shabab came under financial pressure their
    members might become freelance bandits.  He  agreed  there  was  public
    transport available between Mogadishu and Kenya  and  that  there  were
    daily vans. Volume was so great for inland travel that this had  to  be
    regulated. Although it was easy  to  travel  to  Kenya,  travelling  to
    Jowhar, for example, was a different story and it was just not done  to
    travel to Hargeisa.

135. Mr. Burns was asked to clarify whether he was  referring  to  small  or
    large groups of people seeking food and water at paragraph 3.44 of  his
    report. He stated that he was talking about rural families who moved in
    clumps of 20 to 50 families. He stated that they travelled on foot  and
    that this was a daily occurrence as wells  dried  up  and  food  became
    unavailable. There was free movement into Mogadishu and well  regulated
    trade from Kenya to Mogadishu. For those travelling to Kenya,  the  fee
    was paid to the driver and he would solve any potential problems. There
    were instances of rape but it was not Al  Shabab  policy  and  was  not
    condoned.

136. It was put to Mr Burns that food assistance had been increased  by  the
    EU. He appeared not to be aware  of  that  but  pointed  out  that  for
    southern Somalia the only significant food assistance was  provided  by
    his organisation. Funds came from Sweden and Denmark but he was  unsure
    whether the programme would be able to continue after the  end  of  the
    month. There were questions over whether the donors could  continue  to
    fund it and he indicated that EU commitment was static at  $1  million.
    However as the cost of the kitchen programme amounted to $4.8  million,
    EU funding was meaningless. Mr Burns stated that from impressions drawn
    from his staff, he concluded that Mogadishu was going through the worst
    humanitarian crisis since the beginning of the civil war and  that  his
    staff members considered the situation now to be even worse than it was
    in 1991 and 1992.

137. With specific regard to appellant AMM, Mr Burns stated  that  he  would
    be identified as Diaspora and would  be  seen  as  a  security  threat.
    Again, it was put to him  that  there  were  no  reports  available  to
    support that conclusion but he stated that he reached that view on  the
    bases of how indigenous people had been treated. As a result it was his
    belief that he had no chance of escaping detection and suspicion.

138. It was put to Mr  Burns  that  despite  the  fact  that  Jowhar  was  a
    regional centre for Al  Shabab,  it  remained  in  the  top  ten  towns
    receiving IDPs. He replied that Somalis had to try  and  survive.  They
    moved to areas where  they  had  family  or  a  clan  structure  or  an
    opportunity for employment. He confirmed that he  had  members  of  the
    Midgan (Madhiban) clan working for him. It was put to him that he could
    be expected to know if they experienced problems. He replied that there
    had been no sociological changes as to how minority clans were  treated
    over the last twenty years and that  they  suffered  inequalities  that
    were  unacceptable  because  they  were  at  the  bottom  of  the  clan
    structure.

139. With regard to appellant MW, he agreed he  was  unable  to  assess  her
    linguistic aptitude. He stated, however, that his staff  had  told  him
    that they could pick out members of the Diaspora by the way they walked
    and spoke if there was a line up of 100 Somalis. He  added  that  Merka
    was the headquarters for Al Shabab military structures in  the  region.
    He accepted that he did not know the specific facts of  MW's  case  but
    stated that from his own experience of his staff who were 100%  against
    circumcision,  he  was  aware  that  their  daughters  ended  up  being
    circumcised nonetheless. He said one needed to know the context of  the
    family and clan.

140. Mr Burns was asked whether someone with money would be able to  set  up
    a business. He stated that someone with money  and  short-term  support
    could have a viable means of survival but  the  risk  was  that  people
    would see money coming in and that led to different  risks.  He  agreed
    there was a large business community in Mogadishu  particularly  around
    Bakara market but pointed out that the big businessmen were not in  the
    country. He stated that the next level of  businessmen  came  and  went
    whereas those who had less than half $1 million to invest remained  and
    paid taxes to the TFG. He stated that for 95% of Somalis annual  income
    was less than $5000 a year. He stated  that  socially  and  politically
    they had to be part of the clan structure.

141. Mr  Burns  was  questioned  about  education.  He  agreed  that  SAACID
    provided education through schools but stated that from the end of  the
    month fifteen schools were being closed for lack of funding.  Four  had
    been closed by Al Shabab. He stated that 2010 was worse than 2008 as it
    was harder  to  get  cash.  He  referred  to  the  information  in  the
    respondent's bundle 3, tab 13 at page 1454 as 'rubbery'. He stated that
    many of those schools had closed and whilst  there  were  some  schools
    functioning in Merka, they included Jihad classes.

142. Mr Burns accepted that  it  was  possible  to  fly  from  Mogadishu  to
    Hargeisa but said this could not be done on the  same  day.  If  flying
    from Nairobi then it was part of the same  route  and  could  be  done.
    There were also flights to Somaliland from Dubai and Yemen.  He  stated
    that appellant ZF would need travel documents and cash if she  were  to
    make that journey. He was asked whether she would be able  to  rely  on
    the support of the Isaaq clan in Mogadishu if she  had  to  stay  there
    overnight. Mr. Burns replied that there were virtually  no  members  of
    that clan left in Mogadishu and it also depended whether she  would  be
    able to find somebody who would be willing to help with  accommodation.
    He was referred  to  evidence  confirming  the  presence  of  an  Isaaq
    community that he stated that he had never heard of such a community or
    an Isaaq individual in Mogadishu. He was  asked  whether  an  old-style
    Somali passport could be obtained on her behalf by another  person.  He
    said that anything was possible in  Somalia  if  the  right  fixer  was
    found. He added that all IT technology available in the West  was  also
    available in Somalia if one knew where to find it.

143. In re-examination Mr Burns was asked to explain the connection  between
    the financial pressure on Al  Shabab  and  the  increase  in  political
    assassinations. He stated that international  cash  had  decreased  and
    taxation had been raised as much as was possible. With  the  increasing
    pressure from AMISOM, ammunition costs amounted to some $2000 to  $3000
    a day and could not be sustained. If the TFG were to show a modicum  of
    competence, Al Shabab would be unable to maintain their position and so
    rather than confront AMISOM they were likely  to  return  to  guerrilla
    tactics  and  kill  community  leaders  thereby  attempting  to   cause
    disruption within the TFG.

144. In response to questions put by Mr. Schwenk about the legal  status  of
    passports obtained from  Bakara  market,  Mr.  Burns  stated  that  the
    passports were still accepted in Somaliland and Djibouti. The  question
    was put again and he gave the same reply. He was asked what the  status
    of the passport would be if it was newly obtained  and  once  again  he
    repeated his reply. He was asked whether there were minibus routes from
    Mogadishu to Hargeisa and he said there were none.

145. Ms Short then asked questions about the position for women.  Mr.  Burns
    stated that women were allowed to work to a degree in Al  Shabab  areas
    because there were so many female heads of households. He  stated  that
    women could obtain a business license but business women were subjected
    to harassment. For example, their goods could be taken away by militia,
    there could be demands for money or they may be subjected to sexual  or
    ideological harassment. Mr. Symes had no questions.

146. In response to questions from the Tribunal, Mr Burns  conceded  he  was
    not aware whether it would be possible to gain entry to Somaliland with
    EU travel documents. Neither did he know the position  for  holders  of
    foreign passports. He stated it was more than likely admission would be
    possible but he was not sure. He was asked about Bakara market  and  he
    replied that it was situated in the Hawal Daag  district  of  Mogadishu
    and that the road to the market was controlled by AMISOM who had  plans
    at some point to force Al Shabab out of the area. He stated it had been
    closed for the last few months in terms of  vehicles  coming  into  the
    area. He stated that the market had largely  moved  into  Afgoye  as  a
    result. He was asked whether there were  provisions  elsewhere  in  the
    city and he stated there were around fifty  public  markets  throughout
    Mogadishu. Some areas had specialist markets, for example  Hamar  Weyne
    and Hamar JaabJab had fish markets. He stated that there was no trading
    going on at the current time in Bakara and the big businessmen were  in
    the process of moving their goods out. There were no questions  arising
    and that completed his oral evidence.


                                 APPENDIX 2

                             Background evidence




|     |Document                                           |Date          |
|Item |                                                   |              |
|1    |OHCHR, "Violence against women: CEDAW general      |29 January    |
|     |recom. 19"                                         |1992          |
|2    |United Nations (UN) Security Council, "Resolution  |31 October    |
|     |1325"                                              |2000          |
|3    |Reliefweb, "Eight year old shoeshine boy shot dead |17 June 2001  |
|     |in Mogadishu"                                      |              |
|4    |UK Border Agency, "Policy Bulletin 11: Mixed       |27 January    |
|     |Households"                                        |2003          |
|5    |UNHCR, "Guidelines on International Protection:    |23 July 2003  |
|     |"Internal Flight or Relocation Alternative" within |              |
|     |the Context of Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention|              |
|     |and/or 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of     |              |
|     |Refugees"                                          |              |
|6    |Writenet, "Somalia: a situation analysis and trend |August 2003   |
|     |assessment"                                        |              |
|7    |NOVIB / Oxfam, "Knowledge, attitudes, beliefs and  |October 2004  |
|     |practices of female genital mutilation in          |              |
|     |Somalia/land"                                      |              |
|8    |House of Commons, "Hansard written answers for 18  |18 November   |
|     |November 2004 (pt 96)"                             |2004          |
|9    |James Hathaway, "The Rights of Refugees under      |2005          |
|     |International Law" (extract: 2.5.2 Conclusions and |              |
|     |guidelines on international protection, pages      |              |
|     |112-118)                                           |              |
|10   |UNHCR, "Conclusion on women and girls at risk"     |6 October 2006|
|11   |Danish Refugee Council / NOVIB / Oxfam (Joakim     |November 2006 |
|     |Gundel), "The predicament of the 'Oday'"           |              |
|12   |UNHCR map, "Points of Interest in Mogadishu"       |February 2007 |
|13   |Households in Conflict Network (Anna Lindley),     |March 2007    |
|     |"Remittances in Fragile Settings: a Somali case    |              |
|     |study" HiCN Working Paper 27                       |              |
|14   |UNHCR, "UNHCR Handbook for the Protection of Women |January 2008  |
|     |and Girls"                                         |              |
|15   |Advisory Panel on Country Information (Dr Alan     |April 2008    |
|     |Ingram), "Review of COI Fact Finding Mission       |              |
|     |Reports and Guidelines"                            |              |
|16   |UNHCR map, "Central Operational Zone - Migration   |April 2008    |
|     |Routes"                                            |              |
|17   |UNHCR map, "Mid-Southern Operational Zone -        |April 2008    |
|     |Migration Routes"                                  |              |
|18   |UNHCR map, "North-Eastern Operational Zone -       |April 2008    |
|     |Migration Routes"                                  |              |
|19   |UNHCR map, "North-Western Operational Zone -       |April 2008    |
|     |Migration Routes"                                  |              |
|20   |Advisory Panel on Country Information, "Minutes of |1 May 2008    |
|     |10th meeting"                                      |              |
|21   |UK Home Office, "Female Genital Mutilation (FGM)   |20 June 2008  |
|     |Report: Somalia"                                   |              |
|22   |UNHCR map, "Southern Operational Zone - Migration  |June 2008     |
|     |Routes"                                            |              |
|23   |Foreign and Commonwealth Office letter, "Isaaq clan|15 July 2008  |
|     |in Mogadishu"                                      |              |
|24   |UK Border Agency, "Fact finding missions -         |September 2008|
|     |methodology and guidance - response to ACPI review |              |
|     |April 2008"                                        |              |
|25   |UK Home Office, "COI Report: Somalia"              |3 October 2008|
|26   |Advisory Panel on Country Information, "Minutes of |7 October 2008|
|     |11th meeting"                                      |              |
|27   |UK Border Agency, "Operational Guidance Note:      |7 October 2008|
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|28   |USAID, "Horn of Africa - complex emergency"        |31 October    |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|29   |Amnesty International, "Fatal insecurity: attacks  |October 2008  |
|     |on aid workers and rights defenders in Somalia"    |              |
|30   |UN, "Monthly cluster report: humanitarian response |October 2008  |
|     |in Somalia"                                        |              |
|31   |LandInfo, "Conflict, security and clan protection  |12 November   |
|     |in South Somalia"                                  |2008          |
|32   |BBC News, "Insurgents 'seize' Somali port"         |12 November   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|33   |BBC News, "Somalis grow fearful of Islamists"      |12 November   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|34   |UN, "Somalia: 2009 consolidated appeal"            |12 November   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|35   |Missionary International Service News Agency       |13 November   |
|     |(MISNA), "Somalia: rebels continue to advance,     |2008          |
|     |Elasha and Adado fall"                             |              |
|36   |Reuters, "Somali Islamists move closer to          |14 November   |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |2008          |
|37   |Reuters, "Rival Islamists clash near Somali        |17 November   |
|     |capital, 6 dead"                                   |2008          |
|38   |UN Security Council, "Report of the                |17 November   |
|     |Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia"     |2008          |
|39   |UN Security Council, "Recent political progress in |20 November   |
|     |Somalia obscured by deteriorating security,        |2008          |
|     |humanitarian conditions, Security Council hears in |              |
|     |several briefings"                                 |              |
|40   |UN Security Council, "Resolution 1844"             |20 November   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|41   |BBC News, "Fierce gun battle rocks Mogadishu"      |21 November   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|42   |United Nations Office for the Coordination of      |21 November   |
|     |Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA), "Somalia: situation |2008          |
|     |report no. 46"                                     |              |
|43   |IRIN, "Somalia: talks resume amid continuing       |24 November   |
|     |violence"                                          |2008          |
|44   |IRIN, "Kenya-Somalia: Thousands flee amid fears of |27 November   |
|     |fighting along border"                             |2008          |
|45   |UNOCHA, "Somalia: situation report no. 47"         |28 November   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|46   |UN, "Monthly cluster report: humanitarian response |November 2008 |
|     |in Somalia"                                        |              |
|47   |Reuters, "Shelling kills at least 15 in Somalia's  |5 December    |
|     |capital"                                           |2008          |
|48   |Reuters, "Somalia's Al Shabab seize central town,  |6 December    |
|     |13 dead"                                           |2008          |
|49   |Human Rights Watch, "And what about Somali women?" |9 December    |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|50   |LandInfo, "Female genital mutilation in Sudan and  |10 December   |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2008          |
|51   |Reuters, "Sharif back in Mogadishu as death toll   |10 December   |
|     |hits 16,210"                                       |2008          |
|     |LandInfo, "Female genital mutilation in Sudan and  |15 December   |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2008          |
|52   |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Review" Vol. 1 Issue 11  |November - 15 |
|     |                                                   |December 2008 |
|53   |Reuters, "Eleven killed in fighting in Somalia's   |17 December   |
|     |capital"                                           |2008          |
|54   |Swiss Refugee Aid / Markus Virgil Hoehne, "Somalia:|17 December   |
|     |update on the current situation (2006-2008)"       |2008          |
|55   |IRIN, "Somalia: AWD kills dozens in Galgadud"      |23 December   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|56   |Mdecins Sans Frontires, "MSF calls on combatants |27 December   |
|     |to respect medical facilities in Guri El, Somalia" |2008          |
|57   |SAACID, "Results of the "SAACID rapid Population   |2008          |
|     |Assessment of IDP Settlements in Mogadishu""       |              |
|58   |UNHCR map, "Mogadishu and Surrounds"               |2008          |
|59   |World Food Programme map, "Somalia - Flood-Affected|2008          |
|     |Areas"                                             |              |
|60   |BBC News, "Somali police stations taken over"      |4 January 2009|
|61   |IRIN, "Somalia: "Too poor to escape the fighting"" |6 January 2009|
|62   |BBC News, "Islamist rebels clash in Somalia"       |11 January    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|63   |IRIN, "Somalia: displaced families in dire need"   |12 January    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|64   |Reuters, "Fear and threats as Ethiopian troops quit|14 January    |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |2009          |
|65   |Reuters, "Somali Islamists strike at departing     |14 January    |
|     |Ethiopians"                                        |2009          |
|66   |UNOCHA, "Somalia: situation report no. 3"          |16 January    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|67   |IRIN, "Somalia: hundreds flee Bardera in fear of   |15 January    |
|     |attacks"                                           |2009          |
|68   |Agence France-Presse (AFP), "Mogadishu residents   |17 January    |
|     |trickle back to their homes"                       |2009          |
|69   |AFP, "12 killed in Mogadishu fighting"             |21 January    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|70   |UNOCHA, "Somalia: situation report no. 4"          |23 January    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|71   |AFP, "Suicide car bomb, gunfight kill 22 civilians |24 January    |
|     |in Somalia"                                        |2009          |
|72   |Reuters, "Somali Islamists to rule by Sharia law in|27 January    |
|     |Baidoa"                                            |2009          |
|73   |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 2 Issue 1 |15 December   |
|     |                                                   |2008 - January|
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|74   |Reuters, "Somalis say Ethiopian troops enter, Addis|3 February    |
|     |denies"                                            |2009          |
|75   |Human Rights Watch, "Somalia: new violence         |5 February    |
|     |highlights need for independent inquiry"           |2009          |
|76   |IRIN, "In brief: top Somali journalist killed"     |5 February    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|77   |UNOCHA, "Horn of Africa crisis report"             |6 February    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|78   |IRIN, "Somalia: Hawo Nagash, "My biggest fear is   |10 February   |
|     |that somebody will take my daughters and circumcise|2009          |
|     |them""                                             |              |
|79   |UN, "Technical Assistance and Capacity-building:   |24 February   |
|     |Report of Shamsul Bari, independent expert         |2009          |
|     |appointed by the Human Rights Council on the       |              |
|     |situation of human rights in Somalia"              |              |
|80   |BBC News, "Islamist rebels seize Somali town"      |25 February   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|81   |Reuters, "Somalia death toll hits 81 in worst      |25 February   |
|     |fighting for weeks"                                |2009          |
|82   |US Department of State, "2008 Human rights Reports:|25 February   |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2009          |
|83   |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 2 Issue 2 |February 2009 |
|84   |UNOCHA map, "Mogadishu and periphery: HRF supported|February 2009 |
|     |projects"                                          |              |
|85   |Amnesty International, "Somalia: civilians pay the |4 March 2009  |
|     |price of intense fighting in Mogadishu"            |              |
|86   |IRIN, "Somalia: Merka IDPs virtually out of food"  |6 March 2009  |
|87   |UN Security Council, "Report of the                |9 March 2009  |
|     |Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia"     |              |
|88   |Reuters, "Roadside blast kills four in Somalia"    |11 March 2009 |
|89   |IRIN, "Somalia: thousands displaced in Galgadud    |16 March 2009 |
|     |attack"                                            |              |
|90   |IRIN, "Somalia: children, IDPs hardest hit by lack |23 March 2009 |
|     |of water"                                          |              |
|91   |Reuters, "Fighting kills at least 14 in Somalia"   |30 March 2009 |
|92   |UK Border Agency, "Operational Guidance Note:      |March 2009    |
|     |Somalia v19.0"                                     |              |
|93   |UN, "Quarterly cluster report: humanitarian        |January -     |
|     |response in Somalia"                               |March 2009    |
|94   |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 2 Issue 3 |March 2009    |
|95   |UNHCR, "A tale of three cities: internal           |March 2009    |
|     |displacement, urbanization and humanitarian action |              |
|     |in Abidjan, Khartoum and Mogadishu" Research Paper |              |
|     |No. 173                                            |              |
|96   |Refugees International, "Somalia: political        |3 April 2009  |
|     |progress, humanitarian stalemate"                  |              |
|97   |MISNA, "Two Somali aid workers and driver killed"  |10 April 2009 |
|98   |IRIN, "Somalia: second thoughts about returning to |14 April 2009 |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|99   |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 2 Issue 4 |April 2009    |
|100  |USAID, "Somalia - complex emergency"               |5 May 2009    |
|101  |Reuters, "Clashes kill at least 65 in Somalia in 3 |10 May 2009   |
|     |days"                                              |              |
|102  |BBC News, "Mogadishu mired in fresh mayhem"        |13 May 2009   |
|103  |Amnesty International, "Somalia: amputations and   |14 May 2009   |
|     |public killings must stop"                         |              |
|104  |AFP, "Five killed in clash in Somalia village"     |15 May 2009   |
|105  |Reuters, "Militants take key Somali town, fighting |17 May 2009   |
|     |rages"                                             |              |
|106  |Mdecins Sans Frontires, "Somali refugees         |18 May 2009   |
|     |imperilled in overcrowded camps in Kenya"          |              |
|107  |IRIN, "Somalia: Al-Shabab's pyrrhic victory?"      |19 May 2009   |
|108  |New York Times, "Somalia: Ethiopian troops return" |19 May 2009   |
|109  |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre, "Somalia: |20 May 2009   |
|     |security and protection crisis continues despite   |              |
|     |peace deal"                                        |              |
|110  |Reuters, "Insurgents in Mogadishu attack AU        |23 May 2009   |
|     |peacekeepers"                                      |              |
|111  |AFP, "8,000 displaced in one day by Mogadishu      |24 May 2009   |
|     |fighting: UN"                                      |              |
|112  |AFP, "208 killed in two weeks of Mogadishu         |25 May 2009   |
|     |fighting: minister"                                |              |
|113  |UN Security Council, "Resolution 1872"             |26 May 2009   |
|114  |UNOCHA map, "Mogadishu and periphery: Secondary and|27 May 2009   |
|     |primary health care facilities and list"           |              |
|115  |AllAfrica, "Teenagers with guns threaten region"   |1 June 2009   |
|116  |Reuters, "Bomb, battles kill at least 38 more in   |1 June 2009   |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|117  |LandInfo, "Somalia: Protection and conflict        |2 June 2009   |
|     |resolution mechanisms"                             |              |
|118  |LandInfo, "Somalia: Vulnerability - Minority       |2 June 2009   |
|     |groups, weak clans and vulnerable individuals"     |              |
|119  |DPA, "UN: almost 100,000 have fled Somali capital" |4 June 2009   |
|120  |Reuters, "Somali battle kills 123, rebels deny     |6 June 2009   |
|     |leader Aweys dead"                                 |              |
|121  |IRIN, "Somalia: no one left to tell the story"     |10 June 2009  |
|122  |AFP, "In Somalia war, children wage jihad"         |12 June 2009  |
|123  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 22  |5-12 June 2009|
|124  |LandInfo, "Somalia: Armed groups and recruitment"  |16 June 2009  |
|125  |LandInfo, "Southern Somalia: The security          |16 June 2009  |
|     |situation"                                         |              |
|126  |AFP, "Mogadishu police chief, seven others killed  |17 June 2009  |
|     |in fighting: witnesses"                            |              |
|127  |USAID, "Somalia - complex emergency"               |17 June 2009  |
|128  |AFP, "Somalia: at least 26 killed in Mogadishu     |18 June 2009  |
|     |fighting"                                          |              |
|129  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin"             |12-19 June    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|130  |AFP, "Somalia violence sparks mass exodus from     |20 June 2009  |
|     |capital"                                           |              |
|131  |Reuters, "Somali Islamists order teenagers' hands, |22 June 2009  |
|     |legs amputated"                                    |              |
|132  |USAID, "Drought in key northern and north-eastern  |22 June 2009  |
|     |pastoral regions threatens livestock"              |              |
|133  |UNHCR, ""Before it comes to my house, let me run"" |22 June 2009  |
|134  |AFP, "Somalia violence displaces 159,000 in six    |23 June 2009  |
|     |weeks: UN"                                         |              |
|135  |IRIN, "Somalia: pastoralists leave drought-hit     |23 June 2009  |
|     |villages"                                          |              |
|136  |UNICEF, "UNICEF situation report - Somalia"        |1-30 June 2009|
|137  |MICROCON (Anna Lindley), "Leaving Mogadishu: The   |June 2009     |
|     |War on Terror and Displacement Dynamics in the     |              |
|     |Somali Regions" Research Working Paper 15          |              |
|138  |UNOCHA, "Somalia - humanitarian access analysis"   |January - June|
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|139  |UN, "Donor alert - Deteriorating health situation  |1 July 2009   |
|     |in South and Central Somalia calls for urgent      |              |
|     |humanitarian action"                               |              |
|140  |IRIN, "Somalia: conditions worsen as more IDPs     |7 July 2009   |
|     |flood into Kismayo"                                |              |
|141  |Mdecins Sans Frontires, "In Somalia, majority of |7 July 2009   |
|     |north Mogadishu population flees as fighting       |              |
|     |escalates"                                         |              |
|142  |UNHCR, "Somalia: new fighting in Mogadishu         |7 July 2009   |
|     |displaces more than 200,000"                       |              |
|143  |IRIN, "Somalia: young men running from military    |9 July 2009   |
|     |conscription"                                      |              |
|144  |OHCHR, "UN human rights chief says reports suggest |10 July 2009  |
|     |possible war crimes in Somalia"                    |              |
|145  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 26  |3-10 July 2009|
|146  |Reuters, "Fighting kills at least 43 in Somali     |12 July 2009  |
|     |capital"                                           |              |
|147  |AFP, "Somalia - a land of kidnappings"             |14 July 2009  |
|148  |International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),   |16 July 2009  |
|     |"Somalia: renewed fighting in Mogadishu takes heavy|              |
|     |toll on civilians"                                 |              |
|149  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 27  |10-17 July    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|150  |UN Security Council, "Report of the                |20 July 2009  |
|     |Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia"     |              |
|151  |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin Information   |21 July 2009  |
|     |Report: Somalia"                                   |              |
|152  |UNHCR, "Somalia displacement update"               |21 July 2009  |
|153  |Xinhau, "Eleven die in Mogadishu shelling"         |22 July 2009  |
|154  |IRIN, "Feeding centres closed amid heavy fighting" |23 July 2009  |
|155  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 28  |17-24 July    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|156  |AFP, "Somali rebels bombard parliament as clashes  |27 July 2009  |
|     |kill seven"                                        |              |
|157  |BioMed Central, "Prevalence and associated factors |27 July 2009  |
|     |of female genital mutilation among Somali refugees |              |
|     |in eastern Ethiopia: a cross-sectional study"      |              |
|158  |Reliefweb, "Mogadishu fighting puts children at    |28 July 2009  |
|     |risk"                                              |              |
|159  |Reliefweb, "Somalia: many displaced, many to feed" |28 July 2009  |
|160  |United Nations, "Promotion and Protection of all   |30 July 2009  |
|     |Human Rights, Civil, Political, Economic, Social   |              |
|     |and Cultural Rights, including the Right to        |              |
|     |Development: Annual report of the Special          |              |
|     |Representative of the Secretary-General for        |              |
|     |Children and Armed Conflict, Radhika Coomaraswamy" |              |
|161  |Somalia Inter Agency Standing Committee (IASC      |31 July 2009  |
|     |Somalia), "Protection cluster update"              |              |
|162  |International Relations and Security Network (ISN),|31 July 2009  |
|     |"Somalia's new religious war"                      |              |
|163  |UNOCHA, "Somalia - humanitarian access update"     |1-31 July 2009|
|164  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 2 Issue 7 |July 2009     |
|165  |UNICEF / World Health Organization (WHO),          |July 2009     |
|     |"Carrurteenna "our children" - joint UNICEF/WHO    |              |
|     |Somalia newsletter"                                |              |
|166  |UNHCR, "Population movement tracking - Somalia"    |July 2009     |
|167  |UNHCR, "Somalia briefing sheet"                    |July 2009     |
|168  |MISNA, "New African Union (AU) contingent in       |3 August 2009 |
|     |Mogadishu, arrests and clashes"                    |              |
|169  |UNHCR, "UN High Commissioner calls for urgent      |6 August 2009 |
|     |international action to remedy "dire" situation in |              |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|170  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 30  |31 July - 7   |
|     |                                                   |August 2009   |
|171  |AFP, "Somalia's humanitarian crisis 'critical': UN |11 August 2009|
|     |agency"                                            |              |
|172  |International Crisis Group, "Somalia: The Trouble  |12 August 2009|
|     |with Puntland"                                     |              |
|173  |IRIN, "Somalia: humanitarian crisis "at new low""  |12 August 2009|
|174  |UNHCR, "Displaced by conflict, families in Somalia |13 August 2009|
|     |often left divided"                                |              |
|175  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 31  |7-14 August   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|176  |Voice of America (VOA) News, "Somali militants vow |19 August 2009|
|     |to launch new attacks on government, peacekeepers  |              |
|     |during Ramadan"                                    |              |
|177  |Reuters, "Somalia fighting kills at least 45 -     |20 August 2009|
|     |residents"                                         |              |
|178  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 32  |14-21 August  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|179  |Food Security Nutrition Analysis Unit (FSNAU)      |24 August 2009|
|     |Somalia, "Somalia: half the population in          |              |
|     |humanitarian crisis amid an escalating war"        |              |
|180  |IRIN, "Somalia: humanitarian situation "worst in 18|25 August 2009|
|     |years""                                            |              |
|181  |UNOCHA map, "Mogadishu and Afgooye Corridor - IDP  |25 August 2009|
|     |Camps and Conflict Zones"                          |              |
|182  |USAID, "Somalia - complex emergency"               |25 August 2009|
|183  |IRIN, "Somalia: cut off by insecurity, IDPs in     |27 August 2009|
|     |Jowhar run out of food"                            |              |
|184  |MISNA, "Mogadishu: clashes on the road to Afgoye,  |27 August 2009|
|     |food crisis in Jowhar"                             |              |
|185  |USAID, "Humanitarian crisis in Somalia continues to|27 August 2009|
|     |deepen"                                            |              |
|186  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 33  |21-28 August  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|187  |Reliefweb, "Militias advance, news that Ethiopians |30 August 2009|
|     |are to return"                                     |              |
|188  |UNICEF, "UNICEF situation report - Somalia"        |1-31 August   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|189  |UNOCHA, "Somalia - humanitarian access update"     |1-31 August   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|190  |Danish Refugee Council / SAACID map, "Hot meal     |August 2009   |
|     |distribution: Mogadishu, Somalia"                  |              |
|191  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 2 Issue 8 |August 2009   |
|192  |AFP, "At least 50 killed in Mogadishu fighting: UN"|1 September   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|193  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 34  |28 August - 4 |
|     |                                                   |September 2009|
|194  |Xinhau, "Shelling in Somali capital leaves eight   |7 September   |
|     |dead"                                              |2009          |
|195  |IRIN, "Interview with IDP in Jowhar"               |8 September   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|196  |FSNAU, "Nutrition situation post Gu 2009"          |11 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|197  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 35  |4-11 September|
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|198  |ICRC, "Somalia: shelling of Mogadishu hospital     |12 September  |
|     |results in several casualties"                     |2009          |
|199  |AFP, "Somalia: Mogadishu bombings pile pressure on |18 September  |
|     |peacekeepers"                                      |2009          |
|200  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update: weekly   |18 September  |
|     |report"                                            |2009          |
|201  |Save the Children, "Children in Somalia face       |18 September  |
|     |unprecedented danger as food shortages and fierce  |2009          |
|     |fighting deliver double blow"                      |              |
|202  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 36  |11-18         |
|     |                                                   |September 2009|
|203  |Reuters, "At least 19 killed in violence across    |21 September  |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2009          |
|204  |AlertNet, "Interview - Somalia faces worst drought |22 September  |
|     |in 20 years, UN says"                              |2009          |
|205  |IRIN, "Somalia: instead of a safe haven, fear and  |23 September  |
|     |rape in Galkayo"                                   |2009          |
|206  |Reuters, "Fighting kills at least 12 in Somali     |23 September  |
|     |capital"                                           |2009          |
|207  |Reuters, "Interview - Somalia risks being 'new     |23 September  |
|     |Afghanistan' - EU aid head"                        |2009          |
|208  |USAID, "Somalia - complex emergency"               |23 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|209  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 37  |18-25         |
|     |                                                   |September 2009|
|210  |IRIN, "Somalia: insecurity "no excuse" to neglect  |30 September  |
|     |IDPs"                                              |2009          |
|211  |IRIN, "Somalia: civilians flee fighting in Kismayo"|1 October 2009|
|212  |BBC News, "Somali port city buries the dead"       |2 October 2009|
|213  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update: weekly   |2 October 2009|
|     |report"                                            |              |
|214  |Reuters, "Shabab rebels take full control of Somali|2 October 2009|
|     |port"                                              |              |
|215  |IRIN, "Somalia: thousands stranded near the Kenyan |6 October 2009|
|     |border"                                            |              |
|216  |BBC News, "'Rebels' threaten Somali hospital"      |8 October 2009|
|217  |New York Times, "Somalia: compulsory viewing of    |10 October    |
|     |amputations as punishment"                         |2009          |
|218  |Reliefweb, "Somalia: Women take on men's jobs to   |15 October    |
|     |feed their families"                               |2009          |
|219  |BBC News, "Islamists break Somali port truce"      |21 October    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|220  |OHCHR, "UN representative on internally displaced  |21 October    |
|     |persons says the international community is failing|2009          |
|     |displaced Somalis"                                 |              |
|221  |BBC News, "Shelling 'kills Somali civilians'"      |22 October    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|222  |Reuters, "Somalia: shell fire kills at least 30 in |22 October    |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |2009          |
|223  |AFP, "Rapists, hunger and hyenas stalk displaced   |23 October    |
|     |Somali women"                                      |2009          |
|224  |BBC News, "Somalis 'made to view executions'"      |25 October    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|225  |Reuters, "Dozens killed in Somali fighting - rights|1 November    |
|     |group"                                             |2009          |
|226  |Reuters, "Somali rebels close women's              |2 November    |
|     |organisations"                                     |2009          |
|227  |BBC News, "Somali adulterer stoned to death"       |6 November    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|228  |MISNA, "Somalia/Mogadishu: civilians killed in     |16 November   |
|     |clashes"                                           |2009          |
|229  |BBC News, "Somali woman stoned for adultery"       |18 November   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|230  |Amnesty International, "Somalia: unlawful killings |24 November   |
|     |and torture demonstrate Al Shabab's contempt for   |2009          |
|     |the lives of civilians"                            |              |
|231  |IRIN, "Somalia: mass exodus as militia takes       |24 November   |
|     |control of southern town"                          |2009          |
|232  |MISNA, "Somalia: clashes in Mogadishu, victims     |24 November   |
|     |among civilians"                                   |2009          |
|233  |Reuters, "Hardline rebels take Somali border town  |28 November   |
|     |near Kenya"                                        |2009          |
|234  |AFP, "Anger grows after Somalia suicide bomber"    |5 December    |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|235  |Reuters, "Somalia: residents clash with rebels on  |8 December    |
|     |Mogadishu outskirts"                               |2009          |
|236  |Internal Displacement Monitoring Council (IDMC),   |10 December   |
|     |"Somalia: political and security crises, access    |2009          |
|     |limits and donor cuts increasing IDP vulnerability"|              |
|237  |Reuters, "Islamist rebels fight over executions in |14 December   |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2009          |
|238  |MISNA, "Somalia/Mogadishu: bus and civilians       |16 December   |
|     |attacked"                                          |2009          |
|239  |LandInfo, "Somalia: Reer Hamar"                    |17 December   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|240  |Reuters, "Mortar shell attacks kill at least 14 in |20 December   |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2009          |
|241  |BBC News, "Mortar attack on MPs in Somalia"        |21 December   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|242  |IRIN, "Somalia: IDPs targeted over violence in     |21 December   |
|     |Galkayo"                                           |2009          |
|243  |AFP, "UN security officer shot dead in Somalia"    |22 December   |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|244  |AFP, "11 killed in heavy fighting in Somali        |24 December   |
|     |capital"                                           |2009          |
|245  |UN Security Council, "Report of the                |31 December   |
|     |Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia"     |2009          |
|246  |Austrian Red Cross / Accord (Joakim Gundel), "Clans|December 2009 |
|     |in Somalia"                                        |              |
|247  |IRIN, "Somalia: thousands displaced by clashes in  |4 January 2010|
|     |Galgadud"                                          |              |
|248  |BBC News, "Somali militants force WFP exits"       |5 January 2010|
|249  |Reuters, "Fighting in two Somali towns kills at    |11 January    |
|     |least 18"                                          |2010          |
|250  |AFP, "Sixteen killed in battles in central Somalia"|12 January    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|251  |AFP, "Seven children killed in Somalia shelling"   |13 January    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|252  |Reuters, "Somalia clashes kill 138 in two weeks -  |15 January    |
|     |rights group"                                      |2010          |
|253  |IRIN, "Somalia: IDPs on the run again as fighting  |19 January    |
|     |hits Beletweyne"                                   |2010          |
|254  |IRIN, "Somalia: hospital desperate for specialists"|21 January    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|255  |UN, "Report of the Representative of the           |21 January    |
|     |Secretary-General on the human rights of internally|2010          |
|     |displaced persons, Walter Klin"                   |              |
|256  |AFP, "Somali insurgents raid foreign aid offices"  |22 January    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|257  |Reuters, "Islamist rebels take central Somali town,|22 January    |
|     |eight dead"                                        |2010          |
|258  |Reuters, "Blast at AU hospital in Somalia kills at |25 January    |
|     |least one"                                         |2010          |
|259  |Reuters, "Fighting in central Somalia kills at 16" |27 January    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|260  |OHCHR, ""Extremely serious" - strong warning on    |28 January    |
|     |security, human rights and humanitarian situation  |2010          |
|     |in Somalia"                                        |              |
|261  |BBC News, "Somali fighting mars anniversary"       |29 January    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|262  |New York Times, "Islamic insurgents attack troops  |30 January    |
|     |in the Somali capital"                             |2010          |
|263  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol.3 Issue 1  |15 December - |
|     |                                                   |30 January    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|264  |Human Rights Watch, "Annual Report: Somalia"       |January 2010  |
|265  |UNHCR, "Population Movement Tracking Monthly       |January 2010  |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|266  |Reuters, "Somali rebels unite, profess loyalty to  |1 February    |
|     |al Qaeda"                                          |2010          |
|267  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol.3 Issue 2  |2 February    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|268  |IRIN, "Somalia: "dwindling shelter and little      |3 February    |
|     |water""                                            |2010          |
|269  |Refugee Documentation Centre (Ireland),            |3 February    |
|     |"Information on whether young women who have       |2010          |
|     |children born out of wedlock are in danger of      |              |
|     |attack by Al Shabab or any other terror grouping in|              |
|     |Somalia,"                                          |              |
|270  |USAID, "Somalia - complex emergency"               |3 February    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|271  |BBC News, "Somalia bombs 'target civilians'"       |4 February    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|272  |Reuters, "Shelling kills at least 9 in Somalia -   |8 February    |
|     |group"                                             |2010          |
|273  |Reuters, "Somali clashes kill 24, thousands flee   |10 February   |
|     |capital"                                           |2010          |
|274  |New York Times, "Somali: at least 15 die in        |11 February   |
|     |shootouts"                                         |2010          |
|275  |BBC News, "'Thousands flee' Somalia fighting"      |12 February   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|276  |Reuters, "Somalia in turmoil"                      |12 February   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|277  |BBC News, "Somali minister survives bombing"       |15 February   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|278  |UN, "Written statement submitted by Amnesty        |26 February   |
|     |International, a non-governmental organization in  |2010          |
|     |special consultative status: the urgent need for   |              |
|     |protection of civilians and accountability for war |              |
|     |crimes in Somalia"                                 |              |
|279  |Forced Migration Review, "Adapting to urban        |February 2010 |
|     |displacement" Issue 34 (extract)                   |              |
|280  |UNHCR, "Population Movement Tracking Monthly       |February 2010 |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|281  |UNOCHA map, "HRF supported projects, 2009 -        |February 2010 |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|282  |Reuters, "Fighting in Somali capital kills 12 -    |3 March 2010  |
|     |rights group"                                      |              |
|283  |Reuters, "Inter-clan fighting kills 14 in central  |5 March 2010  |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|284  |UN, "Report of the independent expert on the       |8 March 2010  |
|     |situation of human rights in Somalia, Shamsul Bari"|              |
|285  |Reuters, "Fighting in Somali capital kills 17,     |10 March 2010 |
|     |rebels behead 2"                                   |              |
|286  |The Guardian, "Half of all food sent to Somalia is |10 March 2010 |
|     |stolen, says UN report"                            |              |
|287  |US Department of State, "2009 Human Rights Reports:|11 March 2010 |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|288  |IRIN, "Somalia: without food and unable to bury the|15 March 2010 |
|     |dead in Mogadishu"                                 |              |
|289  |UN Security Council, "Resolution 1916"             |19 March 2010 |
|290  |IRIN, "Kenya-Somalia: thousands flee Mogadishu     |22 March 2010 |
|     |"death trap""                                      |              |
|291  |AFP, "Five civilians killed in Mogadishu fire      |23 March 2010 |
|     |fight"                                             |              |
|292  |Kismaayo News, "TFG district commissioner destroyed|27 March 2010 |
|     |before he could destroy shanty houses"             |              |
|293  |VOA News, "Somali government official killed after |27 March 2010 |
|     |Mogadishu evictions"                               |              |
|294  |Reuters, "Clan clashes in central Somalia kill 16" |31 March 2010 |
|295  |UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, "Human Rights  |March 2010    |
|     |Annual Report 2009 - Countries of Concern: Somalia"|              |
|296  |UNHCR, "Population Movement Tracking Monthly       |March 2010    |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|297  |AFP, "Artillery fire in Somalia kills at least 11  |3 April 2010  |
|     |civilians: medics"                                 |              |
|298  |BBC News, "Somali conflict's long reach"           |5 April 2010  |
|299  |BBC News, "Militants raid UN base in Somalia"      |8 April 2010  |
|300  |BBC News, "Somalia fighting leaves 19 dead"        |13 April 2010 |
|301  |New York Times, "Somali radio stations halt music" |13 April 2010 |
|302  |Jamestown Terrorism Monitor, "Conflict between     |14 April 2010 |
|     |Somali leaders halts military operations against   |              |
|     |Islamist insurgents" Volume IX Issue 15            |              |
|303  |BBC News, "Somali ban on 'Christian' bells"        |15 April 2010 |
|304  |Reuters, "Somalia violence kills 14, parliament    |18 April 2010 |
|     |fails to meet"                                     |              |
|305  |Human Rights Watch, "Harsh War, Harsh Peace"       |19 April 2010 |
|306  |Reuters, "Five die in mortar shell attacks in      |20 April 2010 |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|307  |Reuters, "Somalia clashes kills 11, five headless  |21 April 2010 |
|     |bodies found"                                      |              |
|308  |AFP, "Hardline Islamists seize three Somali towns" |23 April 2010 |
|309  |IRIN, "Somalia: where fun is forbidden"            |27 April 2010 |
|310  |Reuters, "Violence in Somalia capital kills at     |27 April 2010 |
|     |least 16"                                          |              |
|311  |IRIN, "Sudan-Somalia: dangerous for minorities"    |29 April 2010 |
|312  |Committee to Protect Journalists, "Exiled Somali   |April 2010    |
|     |journalists face new challenges in Nairobi"        |              |
|313  |European Union (EU) Council Secretariat,           |April 2010    |
|     |"Factsheet: EU Engagement in Somalia"              |              |
|314  |Opinion Research Business newsroom, "Clinging to   |April 2010    |
|     |hope, living in crisis: the Mogadishan way of life"|              |
|315  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 3 Issue 4 |April 2010    |
|316  |UNHCR, "Population Movement Tracking Monthly       |April 2010    |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|317  |BBC News, "Somali blasts kill 'at least 30'"       |1 May 2010    |
|318  |Reuters, "Somali rebels urge school pupils to join |3 May 2010    |
|     |jihad"                                             |              |
|319  |UNICEF, "Statement from UNICEF's Executive Director|4 May 2010    |
|     |and the Secretary-General's Special Representative |              |
|     |on Children and Armed Conflict on the recruitment  |              |
|     |of child soldiers in Somalia"                      |              |
|320  |BBC News, "Gunmen in Somalia kill journalist"      |5 May 2010    |
|321  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office letter, "Travel    |5 May 2010    |
|     |within and to Somalia"                             |              |
|322  |Human Rights Watch, "Somalia's saviours are making |5 May 2010    |
|     |everything worse"                                  |              |
|323  |UNHCR, "Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the   |5 May 2010    |
|     |International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers   |              |
|     |from Somalia"                                      |              |
|324  |AFP, "Exiled Somali journalists threatened by      |6 May 2010    |
|     |hardliners"                                        |              |
|325  |UNOCHA map, "Somalia - Mogadishu Landmarks"        |6 May 2010    |
|326  |IRIN, "In brief: nearly half of Somali women,      |7 May 2010    |
|     |children have anaemia"                             |              |
|327  |Reuters, "Somali rebels seize town bordering       |8 May 2010    |
|     |Ethiopia"                                          |              |
|328  |UN Security Council, "Report of the                |11 May 2010   |
|     |Secretary-General on Somalia"                      |              |
|329  |AFP, "Nine killed as Somali forces attack          |12 May 2010   |
|     |insurgents"                                        |              |
|330  |IRIN, "Thousands displaced by floods, fear of      |12 May 2010   |
|     |renewed clashes"                                   |              |
|331  |Refugee Documentation Centre (Ireland),            |13 May 2010   |
|     |"Information on the safety of returns to the       |              |
|     |Mogadishu area of Somalia, including any dangers on|              |
|     |the route of return"                               |              |
|332  |BBC News, "Rebels attack Somali Parliament"        |16 May 2010   |
|333  |International Crisis Group, "Somalia's Divided     |18 May 2010   |
|     |Islamists" Africa Briefing No. 74                  |              |
|334  |AFP, "Somalia: three killed in Mogadishu violence" |20 May 2010   |
|335  |BBC News, "Somaliland-Ethiopia border clash 'kills |22 May 2010   |
|     |13'"                                               |              |
|336  |Reuters, "Fighting in Somali capital kills 20,     |23 May 2010   |
|     |rights group"                                      |              |
|337  |Amnesty International, "Amnesty International      |28 May 2010   |
|     |Report 2010 - The State of the World's Human       |              |
|     |Rights: Somalia"                                   |              |
|338  |Critical Threats, "Somalia Conflict Maps: Islamist |31 May 2010   |
|     |and Political"                                     |              |
|339  |Garowe Online (Dr Michael Weinstein), "The present |31 May 2010   |
|     |military balance in Mogadishu (Intelligence brief)"|              |
|340  |SAACID, "Education Report - Faadumo Mohamed Hassan"|May 2010      |
|341  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 3 Issue 5 |May 2010      |
|342  |UNHCR, "Population Movement Tracking Monthly       |May 2010      |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|343  |World Food Programme / Logistics Cluster map,      |May 2010      |
|     |"Somalia: Road Networks"                           |              |
|344  |Freedom House, "Worst of the Worst 2010:  The      |1 June 2010   |
|     |World's Most Repressive Societies: Somalia"        |              |
|345  |Reuters, "Fighting in central Somalia kills 24 -   |2 June 2010   |
|     |rights group"                                      |              |
|346  |IRIN, "Rise in mental health disorders blamed on   |3 June 2010   |
|     |conflicts"                                         |              |
|347  |BBC News, "Somali troops fight al-Shabab militants |4 June 2010   |
|     |in Mogadishu"                                      |              |
|348  |The Guardian, "How Somalia's civil war became new  |7 June 2010   |
|     |front in battle against al-Qaida"                  |              |
|349  |IRIN, "Somalia: thousands displaced by rains and   |8 June 2010   |
|     |clashes"                                           |              |
|350  |Reuters, "Fighting, blast kills at least 12 in     |9 June 2010   |
|     |Somali capital"                                    |              |
|351  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 22  |4-11 June 2010|
|352  |AFP, "At least seven killed in Mogadishu clashes"  |12 June 2010  |
|353  |New York Times, "Children carry guns for a US ally,|13 June 2010  |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|354  |Reuters, "Clash between Somalia police, soldiers   |13 June 2010  |
|     |kill 13"                                           |              |
|355  |War on Terror News, "Fighting between Somali       |13 June 2010  |
|     |police, soldiers kills at least 10"                |              |
|356  |New York Times, "Somali insurgents detain soccer   |15 June 2010  |
|     |fans"                                              |              |
|357  |New York Times, "UN voices concern on child        |16 June 2010  |
|     |soldiers in Somalia"                               |              |
|358  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, "In Somalia: the  |16 June 2010  |
|     |World Cup is a dangerous game"                     |              |
|359  |AFP, "Somalia: 11 killed in Mogadishu clashes"     |18 June 2010  |
|360  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |18 June 2010  |
|     |report"                                            |              |
|361  |Reuters, "Fighting in Somali capital kills 20"     |19 June 2010  |
|362  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |25 June 2010  |
|     |report"                                            |              |
|363  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: Somali MPs held  |28 June 2010  |
|     |meeting in Mogadishu"                              |              |
|364  |AFP, "Somalia: battle in northern Mogadishu kills  |29 June 2010  |
|     |eight"                                             |              |
|365  |Reporters Sans Frontires, "Several journalists    |30 June 2010  |
|     |seriously hurt in press conference bombing in      |              |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|366  |UNHCR map, "Population Movement Tracking Mogadishu |June 2010     |
|     |monthly dashboard"                                 |              |
|367  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |June 2010     |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|368  |BBC News, "Somali president leads troops in        |1 July 2010   |
|     |anniversary battle"                                |              |
|369  |Minority Rights Group International, "State of the |1 July 2010   |
|     |World's Minorities and Indigenous Peoples 2010:    |              |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|370  |Reuters, "Somali clashes kill 21, wound 42"        |1 July 2010   |
|371  |IASC Somalia, "Protection Cluster Update Weekly    |2 July 2010   |
|     |Report "                                           |              |
|372  |AFP, "Somalia: 12 killed in fresh Mogadishu        |4 July 2010   |
|     |fighting"                                          |              |
|373  |AFP, "16 killed in Mogadishu classes"              |6 July 2010   |
|374  |IRIN, "Mogadishu faces a catastrophe"              |6 July 2010   |
|375  |Reuters, "Somalis protest about extra peacekeepers,|7 July 2010   |
|     |many coerced"                                      |              |
|376  |Australian Government Refugee Review Tribunal,     |9 July 2010   |
|     |"Country Advice: Somalia"                          |              |
|377  |The Guardian, "Somalia needs good government to    |12 July 2010  |
|     |turn back the terrorist tide"                      |              |
|378  |IRIN, "Conditions worsen for IDPs in and around    |14 July 2010  |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|379  |AFP, "Aid worker in Somalia detained, not          |19 July 2010  |
|     |kidnapped: UN"                                     |              |
|380  |AFP, "Somalia - Mogadishu fighting kills 14        |19 July 2010  |
|     |civilians: witnesses"                              |              |
|381  |BBC News, "Somali shell attacks injures Koranic    |19 July 2010  |
|     |schoolchildren"                                    |              |
|382  |Reuters, "Kenyan forces, Al Shabab rebels clash on |20 July 2010  |
|     |border"                                            |              |
|383  |Reuters, "Somalia: Mogadishu fighting kills 52     |20 July 2010  |
|     |civilians in a week - group"                       |              |
|384  |IRIN, "Somalia: deadly skies above Mogadishu"      |21 July 2010  |
|385  |New York Times, "Guards for Somali leader join     |22 July 2010  |
|     |Islamists"                                         |              |
|386  |IDMC, "Somalia: displacement and worsening         |30 July 2010  |
|     |humanitarian situation as a result of ongoing      |              |
|     |violence and conflict"                             |              |
|387  |Amnesty International, "Hard news: journalists'    |July 2010     |
|     |lives in danger in Somalia"                        |              |
|388  |UK Border Agency, "Operational Guidance Note on    |July 2010     |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|389  |UNHCR, "UNHCR Operation in Somalia Factsheet"      |July 2010     |
|390  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |July 2010     |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|391  |AFP, "Mogadishu violence kills seven"              |4 August 2010 |
|392  |AFP, "Somalia fighting kills 21 near Ethiopia      |4 August 2010 |
|     |border"                                            |              |
|393  |AFP, "Civilians worst hit by Mogadishu clashes: aid|5 August 2010 |
|     |group"                                             |              |
|394  |The Wall Street Journal, "Africa Dispatch: Jewelry |5 August 2010 |
|     |for Jihad"                                         |              |
|395  |IRIN, "Somalia: unarmed and under fire in          |6 August 2010 |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|396  |Reuters, "Somalia's al Shabab rebels expel three   |9 August 2010 |
|     |aid groups"                                        |              |
|397  |OHCHR, "UN expert calls on international community |10 August 2010|
|     |to protect civilians and pursue rights violators"  |              |
|398  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |13 August 2010|
|     |report"                                            |              |
|399  |Reuters, "Somalia's Al Shabab increases Kenyan     |18 August 2010|
|     |border raids"                                      |              |
|400  |BBC News, "'Ten killed' in Mogadishu blast as      |21 August 2010|
|     |militants blamed"                                  |              |
|401  |AFP, "Somali militants step up campaign against    |22 August 2010|
|     |WFP"                                               |              |
|402  |AFP, "Somalia: 11 civilians killed in Mogadishu    |23 August 2010|
|     |fighting"                                          |              |
|403  |LandInfo, "Somalia: Security and Conflict in the   |23 August 2010|
|     |South"                                             |              |
|404  |Reuters, "Somali militants storm hotel, 31 dead    |24 August 2010|
|     |including MPs"                                     |              |
|405  |AFP, "Somalia: 10 civilians die in Mogadishu's     |25 August 2010|
|     |third day of heavy fighting"                       |              |
|406  |Reuters, "Somalis flee fourth day of violence in   |26 August 2010|
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|407  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |27 August 2010|
|     |report"                                            |              |
|408  |AFP, "Somalia: 11 civilians dead in fresh Mogadishu|28 August 2010|
|     |fighting"                                          |              |
|409  |IRIN, "Mogadishu fighting cuts food supplies"      |30 August 2010|
|410  |The Guardian, "Ten die and 27 injured in clashes in|30 August 2010|
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|411  |New York Times, "Somalia: roadside bomb kills 8    |31 August 2010|
|     |civilians"                                         |              |
|412  |Reliefweb, "Mogadishu: After nine days of fighting,|31 August 2010|
|     |more casualties"                                   |              |
|413  |International Organization for Migration, "Somalia"|August 2010   |
|414  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 3 Issue 8 |August 2010   |
|415  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |August 2010   |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|416  |UNOCHA map, "Mogadishu - Conflict Zone"            |August 2010   |
|417  |New York Times, "In Somalia, battle ends for       |1 September   |
|     |streets of capital"                                |2010          |
|418  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |3 September   |
|     |report"                                            |2010          |
|419  |AFP, "Eleven killed in Mogadishu battles"          |8 September   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|420  |BBC News, "'Slow genocide' in Somalia's capital    |8 September   |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |2010          |
|421  |IRIN, "Somalia: no high school, no hope in Gedo"   |8 September   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|422  |BBC News, "Somali suicide attackers hit Mogadishu  |9 September   |
|     |airport"                                           |2010          |
|423  |IRIN, "In brief: Somali civilian deaths at         |9 September   |
|     |"alarming" levels"                                 |2010          |
|424  |UN Security Council, "Report of the                |9 September   |
|     |Secretary-General on Somalia"                      |2010          |
|425  |AFP, "Somalia: Mogadishu shelling kills 12         |16 September  |
|     |civilians"                                         |2010          |
|426  |UN, "Report of the independent expert on the       |16 September  |
|     |situation of human rights in Somalia, Shamsul Bari"|2010          |
|427  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |17 September  |
|     |report"                                            |2010          |
|428  |Reuters, "Suicide bomber attacks Somali            |20 September  |
|     |presidential palace"                               |2010          |
|429  |IASC Somalia, "Somalia: Agriculture and Livelihoods|20 September  |
|     |Cluster - Ongoing Activities"                      |2010          |
|430  |Reuters, "Somali PM Sharmarke resigns, caretaker   |21 September  |
|     |named"                                             |2010          |
|431  |AFP, "Fresh Mogadishu fighting kills 19 civilians: |23 September  |
|     |medics"                                            |2010          |
|432  |Critical Threats, "Mogadishu Map: al Shabab's      |23 September  |
|     |Ramadan offensive"                                 |2010          |
|433  |New York Times, "Somali forces fight Islamists in  |23 September  |
|     |the capital"                                       |2010          |
|434  |The Guardian, "19 dead in Somalia as militants     |23 September  |
|     |clash with pro-government troops"                  |2010          |
|435  |IRIN, "Now there is nothing - no handouts, no work"|29 September  |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|436  |IRIN, "Somalia: spotlight on maternal health risks |30 September  |
|     |in rural areas"                                    |2010          |
|437  |IASC Somalia, "Gender Strategy of the Somalia      |September 2010|
|     |Agriculture and Livelihoods Cluster"               |              |
|438  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 3 Issue 9 |September 2010|
|439  |UNHCR, "IDP population assessment of the Mogadishu |September 2010|
|     |periphery - September 2010"                        |              |
|440  |UNHCR map, "Population Movement Tracking Mogadishu |September 2010|
|     |monthly dashboard"                                 |              |
|441  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |September 2010|
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|442  |UNOCHA map, "Somalia: 3W Agriculture and           |September 2010|
|     |Livelihoods"                                       |              |
|443  |AFP, "Seven civilians killed in Somali fire fight" |2 October 2010|
|444  |Bar-kulan, "Al-Shabab forcefully collecting Zakat  |3 October 2010|
|     |in Jowhar"                                         |              |
|445  |Bar-kulan, "Al-Shabab to collect monthly fee from  |3 October 2010|
|     |Kismayo Residents"                                 |              |
|446  |UK Border Agency, "Somalia: Report of Fact Finding |8 October 2010|
|     |Mission to Nairobi, 8-15 September 2010"           |              |
|447  |New York Times, "Somali militias clash, undermining|15 October    |
|     |new strategy"                                      |2010          |
|448  |The Guardian, "British security worker kidnapped in|15 October    |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2010          |
|449  |Amnesty International, "Human rights concerns in   |18 October    |
|     |southern and central Somalia"                      |2010          |
|450  |BBC News, "Al Shabab bans mobile phone money       |18 October    |
|     |transfers in Somalia"                              |2010          |
|451  |IRIN, "Somalia: insurgents' defeat leaves town     |18 October    |
|     |between hope and fear"                             |2010          |
|452  |The Guardian, "British aid worker freed in Somalia"|20 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|453  |The Guardian, "Somali schoolboy tells of how       |20 October    |
|     |Islamists cut off his leg and hand"                |2010          |
|454  |Jamestown Terrorism Monitor, "Schism in Al-Shabab  |21 October    |
|     |leadership in Somalia follows failed Ramadan       |2010          |
|     |offensive" Volume VIII Issue 38                    |              |
|455  |IRIN, "Somalia: help running out as IDP numbers    |25 October    |
|     |rise in Afgoye"                                    |2010          |
|456  |IRIN, "Border town emptied by fighting"            |27 October    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|457  |New York Times, "Somali Islamists kill two girls   |28 October    |
|     |branded spies"                                     |2010          |
|458  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |29 October    |
|     |report"                                            |2010          |
|459  |SAACID, "Education Report - Maryan Mahad Mohamed"  |October 2010  |
|460  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 3 Issue 10|October 2010  |
|461  |UNHCR map, "Population Movement Tracking Mogadishu |October 2010  |
|     |monthly dashboard"                                 |              |
|462  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |October 2010  |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|463  |WHO, "A situation analysis of mental health in     |October 2010  |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|464  |AFP, "Somalia: Mogadishu fighting kills 12"        |1 November    |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|465  |IRIN, "Fight over water, pasture sends hundreds    |9 November    |
|     |fleeing"                                           |2010          |
|466  |UN Security Council, "Report of the                |9 November    |
|     |Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in|2010          |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|467  |UNOCHA map, "Afgooye Corridor - IDP Numbers"       |10 November   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|468  |UNOCHA map, "Afgooye Corridor - Settlement         |10 November   |
|     |Positions"                                         |2010          |
|469  |Maplecroft, "Somalia overtakes Iraq, Afghanistan,  |15 November   |
|     |Pakistan and Colombia to become world's terror     |2010          |
|     |capital - global study"                            |              |
|470  |AFP, "Somalia: twenty-one civilians 'killed by     |17 November   |
|     |shelling in Mogadishu'"                            |2010          |
|471  |US Department of State, "International Religious   |17 November   |
|     |Freedom Report 2010"                               |2010          |
|472  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: Lifeline Africa  |23 November   |
|     |displays death toll 2089, injuries carried to 6753"|2010          |
|473  |New York Times, "Six peacekeepers in Somalia       |24 November   |
|     |arrested in civilian deaths"                       |2010          |
|474  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |26 November   |
|     |report"                                            |2010          |
|475  |MISNA, "Somalia: civilians wounded in the fighting,|26 November   |
|     |doctors denounce "hospitals on the brink of        |2010          |
|     |collapse""                                         |              |
|476  |European Country of Origin Sponsorship, "EU common |November 2010 |
|     |guidelines on (Joint) Fact Finding Missions"       |              |
|477  |Minority Rights Group International, "No redress:  |November 2010 |
|     |Somalia's forgotten minorities"                    |              |
|478  |SAACID, "Education Report - Safio Abdullaahi Ga'al"|November 2010 |
|479  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 3 Issue 11|November 2010 |
|480  |UNHCR map, "Population Movement Tracking Mogadishu |November 2010 |
|     |monthly dashboard"                                 |              |
|481  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |November 2010 |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|482  |IRIN, "Accusations traded over rising casualties at|2 December    |
|     |Mogadishu market"                                  |2010          |
|483  |UNHCR, "Somalia: Accusations traded over rising    |2 December    |
|     |casualties at Mogadishu market"                    |2010          |
|484  |BBC News, "Rape with impunity - plight of Somalia's|15 December   |
|     |women refugees"                                    |2010          |
|485  |AFP, "Tension between Islamist factions near Somali|16 December   |
|     |capital"                                           |2010          |
|486  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |17 December   |
|     |report"                                            |2010          |
|487  |UN Security council, "Resolution 1964"             |22 December   |
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|488  |UN Security Council, "Report of the                |30 December   |
|     |Secretary-General on Somalia"                      |2010          |
|489  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 51  |23-31 December|
|     |                                                   |2010          |
|490  |Opinion Research Business newsroom, "The world has |December 2010 |
|     |forgotten about Somalia"                           |              |
|491  |SAACID, "Employment for Peace II - Composite       |December 2010 |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|492  |UNHCR map, "Population Movement Tracking Mogadishu |December 2010 |
|     |monthly dashboard"                                 |              |
|493  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |December 2010 |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|494  |Accord, "Whose peace is it anyway?" Issue 21       |2010          |
|495  |ICRC, "Annual Report 2010"                         |2010          |
|496  |UN, "Somalia: Consolidated Appeal: End-Year Report"|2010          |
|497  |WHO map, "Major Hospitals in Mogadishu"            |2010          |
|498  |AllAfrica, "Somalia: 19 killed in Mogadishu        |1 January 2011|
|     |clashes, govt forces mutiny"                       |              |
|499  |BBC News, "Somalia's al-Shabab bans mixed-sex      |7 January 2011|
|     |handshakes"                                        |              |
|500  |Daily Nation, "Kenyan herder killed by Al-Shabab"  |7 January 2011|
|501  |IRIN, "Somalia: Mogadishu women eke out a living   |10 January    |
|     |among the shells"                                  |2011          |
|502  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: Al Shabab bans   |11 January    |
|     |women from working"                                |2011          |
|503  |IRIN, "Fighting for an education"                  |12 January    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|504  |UNHCR, "PMT Mogadishu Dashboard: since 1 December  |14 January    |
|     |2010"                                              |2011          |
|505  |Bar-kulan, "Al-Shabab to tax telecommunications    |17 January    |
|     |workers"                                           |2011          |
|506  |Human Rights Watch, "World Report 2011: Somalia"   |24 January    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|507  |BBC News, "Somalia: 20 years of anarchy"           |25 January    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|508  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |28 January    |
|     |report"                                            |2011          |
|509  |BBC News, "Somali 'cleric spying for CIA' was      |31 January    |
|     |killed by al-Shabab"                               |2011          |
|510  |BBC News, "Somali police battle troops, leaving 16 |31 January    |
|     |dead"                                              |2011          |
|511  |Laura Hammond et al., "Cash and Compassion: The    |January 2011  |
|     |Role of the Somali Diaspora in Relief, Development |              |
|     |and Peace-building"                                |              |
|512  |SAACID, "Employment for Peace II - Composite       |January 2011  |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|513  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 4 Issue 1 |December      |
|     |                                                   |2010-January  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|514  |UNHCR map, "Population Movement Tracking Mogadishu |January 2011  |
|     |monthly dashboard"                                 |              |
|515  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |January 2011  |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|516  |IRIN, "Aid agencies struggle to access communities |3 February    |
|     |as drought looms"                                  |2011          |
|517  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |4 February    |
|     |report"                                            |2011          |
|518  |UNOCHA map, "Somalia: Nutrition Services and list  |7 February    |
|     |of agencies and areas"                             |2011          |
|519  |Human Rights Watch, "Stop war crimes in Mogadishu" |14 February   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|520  |UNHCR, "Somalia: Stop War Crimes in Mogadishu"     |14 February   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|521  |AFP, "Somalia: three killed at Mogadishu pro-peace |15 February   |
|     |demo"                                              |2011          |
|522  |AFP, "At least seven killed in Somalia unrest"     |15 February   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|523  |FSNAU Somalia, " Post Deyr 2010/11 Analysis"       |15 February   |
|     |Special Brief                                      |2011          |
|524  |New York Times, "Peacekeepers in Somalia hit       |20 February   |
|     |trenches of rebels"                                |2011          |
|525  |BBC News, "Mogadishu police camp rocked by deadly  |21 February   |
|     |suicide car bomb"                                  |2011          |
|526  |International Crisis Group, "Somalia: The          |21 February   |
|     |Transitional Government on Life Support" Africa    |2011          |
|     |Report No. 170                                     |              |
|527  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, "Suicide blast in |21 February   |
|     |Somalia kills at least five people"                |2011          |
|528  |AFP, "Somali anti-insurgent push leaves 50 dead"   |23 February   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|529  |UNHCR, "Somalia Population Movement Tracking"      |23 February   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|530  |New York Times, "Shifting battlefronts cut a long  |24 February   |
|     |gash across Somalia"                               |2011          |
|531  |AFP, "Renewed fighting erupts in Mogadishu"        |25 February   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|532  |FSNAU Somalia, "Post Deyr 2010/11 Nutrition        |25 February   |
|     |Technical Series Report"                           |2011          |
|533  |Reliefweb, "Somalia: TFG minister condemns         |27 February   |
|     |extremists theft of animals from pastoralists"     |2011          |
|534  |The Guardian, "Somalia government ends latest      |27 February   |
|     |crackdown on militants"                            |2011          |
|535  |IRIN, "Somalia: Access to food key challenge as IDP|28 February   |
|     |numbers in Afgoye rise"                            |2011          |
|536  |Reliefweb, "Somalia: Access to food key challenges |28 February   |
|     |as IDP numbers rise in Afgoye"                     |2011          |
|537  |SAACID, "Employment for Peace II - Mobilisation    |February 2011 |
|     |Monthly Report"                                    |              |
|538  |SAACID, "Mid-Term Progress Report on Mogadishu"    |February 2011 |
|539  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 4 Issue 2 |February 2011 |
|540  |UNHCR, "Total IDPs"                                |February 2011 |
|541  |UNHCR map, "Population Movement Tracking Mogadishu |February 2011 |
|     |monthly dashboard"                                 |              |
|542  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |February 2011 |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|543  |IRIN, "Thousands displaced in offensive against    |1 March 2011  |
|     |militants"                                         |              |
|544  |Mdecins Sans Frontires, "New offensive in Somalia|1 March 2011  |
|     |causes score of casualties"                        |              |
|545  |Reliefweb, "Somalia, on the brink of a humanitarian|2 March 2011  |
|     |disaster - UN Independent Expert"                  |              |
|546  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |4 March 2011  |
|     |report"                                            |              |
|547  |Somalia Report, "Mogadishu's main market ordered   |7 March 2011  |
|     |closed"                                            |              |
|548  |Foreign Office Minister Henry Bellingham's         |10 March 2011 |
|     |statement at the UN Security Council Somalia open  |              |
|     |debate                                             |              |
|549  |UN Security Council, "Statement by the President of|10 March 2011 |
|     |the Security Council"                              |              |
|550  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |11 March 2011 |
|     |report"                                            |              |
|551  |Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council   |11 March 2011 |
|     |Committee addressed to the President of the UN     |              |
|     |Security Council pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)|              |
|     |and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea     |              |
|552  |Refugee Action, "Choices - VARRP Programme - Help  |13 March 2011 |
|     |with the Journey & to build a new life"            |              |
|553  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: three AMISOM     |15 March 2011 |
|     |soldiers receive two year prison sentence for      |              |
|     |shooting civilians"                                |              |
|554  |AFP, "Somalia: fighting in Mogadishu kills 17"     |16 March 2011 |
|555  |Garowe Online, "Somalia: dozens die, others injured|16 March 2011 |
|     |in Mogadishu clashes"                              |              |
|556  |Refugee Action, "AVRFC Programme - Help with the   |16 March 2011 |
|     |journey & to build a new life"                     |              |
|557  |Refugee Action, "Choices - Reintegration Payments" |16 March 2011 |
|558  |IASC Somalia, "Protection cluster update weekly    |18 March 2011 |
|     |report"                                            |              |
|559  |EU Council Conclusions on Somalia, 3076th Foreign  |21 March 2011 |
|     |Affairs Council meeting                            |              |
|560  |IRIN, "Recruitment of child soldiers on the        |21 March 2011 |
|     |increase"                                          |              |
|561  |IRIN, "Somalia: Recruitment of child soldiers on   |21 March 2011 |
|     |the increase"                                      |              |
|562  |All Headline News, "Al Shabab decapitates two      |22 March 2011 |
|     |teenagers in central Somalia"                      |              |
|563  |MISNA, "Somalia: civilians killed in clashes       |22 March 2011 |
|     |overnight"                                         |              |
|564  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: fighting,        |22 March 2011 |
|     |shelling erupt in the capital"                     |              |
|565  |Statement by Chairman of Security Council Working  |22 March 2011 |
|     |Group on Children and Armed Conflict Security      |              |
|     |Council SC/10205                                   |              |
|566  |Garowe Online, "Somalia: mortars kill 10 in        |24 March 2011 |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|567  |Press TV, "Clashes leave 12 dead in Mogadishu"     |26 March 2011 |
|568  |Reuters, "Burundi, Uganda to send 3,000 more troops|27 March 2011 |
|     |to Somalia"                                        |              |
|569  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: artillery shell  |27 March 2011 |
|     |struck at some of Mogadishu neighbourhoods"        |              |
|570  |AlertNet (Nairobi), "UN boosts aid presence in     |28 March 2011 |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|571  |Press TV, "29 people die in battle for Mogadishu"  |28 March 2011 |
|572  |Mdecins Sans Frontires, "MSF suspends operations |30 March 2011 |
|     |in Median area, Mogadishu, Somalia, following      |              |
|     |direct attacks on its compound"                    |              |
|573  |UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, "Human Rights  |31 March 2011 |
|     |and Democracy: The 2010 Foreign and Commonwealth   |              |
|     |Office Report: Somalia"                            |              |
|574  |IDMC, "Internal Displacement: Global Overview of   |March 2011    |
|     |Trends and Developments in 2010"                   |              |
|575  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 4 Issue 3 |March 2011    |
|576  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |March 2011    |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|577  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 13  |25 March-1    |
|     |                                                   |April 2011    |
|578  |Terror Free Somalia Foundation, "Al Shabab orders  |2 April 2011  |
|     |Somali school to pay monthly "contribution"        |              |
|     |Al-Qaida links al-Shabab imposes jihad tax on      |              |
|     |school children"                                   |              |
|579  |Reliefweb, "UN leaders raise alarm on plight of    |3 April 2011  |
|     |Somali refugees in Kenya"                          |              |
|580  |Field Nutrition Cluster Update (FNCU), "Mogadishu  |4 April 2011  |
|     |Meeting Minutes"                                   |              |
|581  |Garowe Online, "Fighting, bomb blast kills eight in|6 April 2011  |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|582  |IRIN, "Fighting limits access to Bakara market"    |7 April 2011  |
|583  |US Department of State, "2010 Country reports on   |8 April 2011  |
|     |Human Rights Practices: Somalia"                   |              |
|584  |Press TV, "68 die in battle for Mogadishu"         |9 April 2011  |
|585  |Garowe Online, "10 die in Somalia clashes"         |12 April 2011 |
|586  |AFP, "33,000 Somalis flee surge in fighting: UNHCR"|13 April 2011 |
|587  |Reliefweb, "Shoe-shining in a war zone"            |14 April 2011 |
|588  |Reliefweb, "Drought hits villagers and IDPs fleeing|15 April 2011 |
|     |fighting"                                          |              |
|589  |Reliefweb, "Somalia: unexploded shells threaten    |15 April 2011 |
|     |hospital in Mogadishu"                             |              |
|590  |Press TV, "Skirmishes leave 12 dead in Mogadishu"  |19 April 2011 |
|591  |UNHCR, "Somalia: Mahamud Abdi Omar, "I am not only |19 April 2011 |
|     |surviving but thriving""                           |              |
|592  |Reliefweb, "Worst drought in a lifetime"           |20 April 2011 |
|593  |IASC Somalia, "Protection Cluster Update Weekly    |8-21 April    |
|     |Report"                                            |2011          |
|594  |Reliefweb, "Trapped between conflict and natural   |21 April 2011 |
|     |disaster"                                          |              |
|595  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: DBG establishes  |21 April 2011 |
|     |houses for IDPs in Mogadishu"                      |              |
|596  |Money Jihad, "Al-Shabab enlists kids in money      |25 April 2011 |
|     |jihad"                                             |              |
|597  |VOA News, "Aid workers say child soldiers involved |25 April 2011 |
|     |in escalating Somali violence"                     |              |
|598  |Garowe Online, "Landmine kills 8 in southern       |26 April 2011 |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|599  |Garowe Online, "Somalia: 15 killed in Somalia      |26 April 2011 |
|     |clashes"                                           |              |
|600  |Garowe Online, "Somalia: Mogadishu clashes kill 5" |26 April 2011 |
|601  |IRIN, "Thousands trapped between conflict and      |27 April 2011 |
|     |drought in Galgadud"                               |              |
|602  |Reliefweb, "Thousands trapped between conflict and |27 April 2011 |
|     |drought in Galgadud"                               |              |
|603  |UN Security Council, "Report of the                |28 April 2011 |
|     |Secretary-General on Somalia"                      |              |
|604  |US Commission on International Religious Freedom,  |28 April 2011 |
|     |"Annual Report 2011"                               |              |
|605  |Garowe Online, "Somalia: fighting kills 5 in Luuq  |29 April 2011 |
|     |district"                                          |              |
|606  |International Federation of Red Cross and Red      |29 April 2011 |
|     |Crescent Societies, "Annual Report: Somalia"       |              |
|607  |FSNAU, "Food Security & Nutrition Quarterly Brief -|April 2011    |
|     |Outcome of Jilaal Dry Season"                      |              |
|608  |FSNAU, "Nutrition Update"                          |March - April |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|609  |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" Vol. 4 Issue 4 |April 2011    |
|610  |UNHCR map, "Population Movement Tracking Mogadishu |April 2011    |
|     |monthly dashboard"                                 |              |
|611  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |April 2011    |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|612  |UNHCR map, "Total IDPs"                            |April 2011    |
|613  |UN, "Report of the Special Rapporteur on violence  |2 May 2011    |
|     |against women, its causes and consequences, Rashida|              |
|     |Manjoo"                                            |              |
|614  |Home Land, "Al-Shabab executes 2 for spying"       |4 May 2011    |
|615  |IASC Somalia, "Protection Cluster Update Weekly    |6 May 2011    |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|616  |Bariga Afrika, "Al-Shabab imprisons 40 traders in  |8 May 2011    |
|     |Baydhabo"                                          |              |
|617  |Tony Burns, "Narrative summary on the current      |9 May 2011    |
|     |context in Somalia"                                |              |
|618  |Reliefweb, "Rains worsen conditions for IDPs"      |10 May 2011   |
|619  |Reliefweb, "At least 13 dead in Somalia clashes"   |12 May 2011   |
|620  |Reliefweb, "U.N. boosts aid presence in Somalia"   |12 May 2011   |
|621  |Street Fight, "Al-Shabab restricts local movement" |12 May 2011   |
|622  |"Aid groups warn of worsening food crisis in       |13 May 2011   |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|623  |Amnesty International, "Annual report: Somalia"    |13 May 2011   |
|624  |Reliefweb, "Aid groups warn of worsening food      |13 May 2011   |
|     |crisis in Somalia"                                 |              |
|625  |Witness statement of Abdihakim Omar Jimale, refugee|16 May 2011   |
|626  |Witness statement of Ali Musa Abdi                 |16 May 2011   |
|627  |Witness statement of Habiba Moallin Nur            |16 May 2011   |
|628  |Witness statement of recent arrival from Mogadishu |16 May 2011   |
|629  |US Department of State, "Background Note: Somalia" |17 May 2011   |
|630  |AFP, "Somali shelling kills 14 civilians at market"|18 May 2011   |
|631  |Reliefweb, "Somalia shelling kills 14 civilians at |18 May 2011   |
|     |market"                                            |              |
|632  |Witness statement of representative of Somali NGO  |18 May 2011   |
|633  |Witness statement of Tanja Schumer, Somalia NGO    |18 May 2011   |
|     |Consortium                                         |              |
|634  |Reliefweb, "AMISOM civilian staff relocate to      |19 May 2011   |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|635  |Reliefweb, "Sustainable partnerships with the      |19 May 2011   |
|     |Somali diaspora forged"                            |              |
|636  |Witness statement of Abdi Majid Ali Sabriye        |19 May 2011   |
|637  |Witness statement of Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke,     |19 May 2011   |
|     |former Prime Minister of Somalia                   |              |
|638  |Witness statement of Abdullahi Abdi                |19 May 2011   |
|639  |Witness statement of Bashir Ali Geedi              |19 May 2011   |
|640  |Witness statement of Hussein Hassan Abdulle        |19 May 2011   |
|641  |Witness statement of Rahma Mohamed Ali             |19 May 2011   |
|642  |IASC Somalia, "Protection Cluster Update Weekly    |20 May 2011   |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|643  |Reliefweb, "AU force says it will not bomb key     |20 May 2011   |
|     |Mogadishu market"                                  |              |
|644  |Witness statement of Ahmed Ismail Zebe             |20 May 2011   |
|645  |Witness statement of representatives of            |20 May 2011   |
|     |international NGO operating in Somalia             |              |
|646  |Witness statement of Ugas Abdirahman Ugas Khalif   |20 May 2011   |
|647  |BBC News, "Somalia food aid cut amid UN funding    |21 May 2011   |
|     |shortfall"                                         |              |
|648  |Somalia Report, "Top al-Shabab leader killed at    |22 May 2011   |
|     |Bakara market"                                     |              |
|649  |Africa Defence Journal, "African Union lays siege  |24 May 2011   |
|     |to Al-Shabab controlled Market"                    |              |
|650  |Reliefweb, "Somalia: Mogadishu's lost generation"  |24 May 2011   |
|651  |AFP, "At least 7 killed in mortar attack"          |25 May 2011   |
|652  |GIEWS, "Country Brief: Somalia"                    |25 May 2011   |
|653  |War Victims Monitor, "Somalia: Battle for          |25 May 2011   |
|     |Mogadishu's Bakara market proves costly,           |              |
|     |complicated"                                       |              |
|654  |UK Border Agency, " COI Report: Somalia"           |27 May 2011   |
|655  |Reliefweb, "Refugee camp in Kenya swells to crisis |30 May 2011   |
|     |point"                                             |              |
|656  |Reliefweb, "Latest violence in Mogadishu causes    |31 May 2011   |
|     |high toll of wounded children under the age of     |              |
|     |five"                                              |              |
|657  |Reliefweb, "Under-fives make up almost half of     |31 May 2011   |
|     |Mogadishu casualties"                              |              |
|658  |Map based on Tony Burns' report to the Upper       |May 2011      |
|     |Tribunal, "Areas of control - Mogadishu"           |              |
|659  |Map based on Tony Burns' report to the Upper       |May 2011      |
|     |Tribunal, "Levels of 'armed conflict' as of April  |              |
|     |2011"                                              |              |
|660  |Map based on Tony Burns' report to the Upper       |May 2011      |
|     |Tribunal, "Violence levels in Somalia"             |              |
|661  |MICROCON (Susan Zimmermann and Roger Zetter),      |May 2011      |
|     |"Reconsidering the Role of Conflict in the Lives of|              |
|     |Refugees: The Case of Somalis in Europe" Research  |              |
|     |Working Paper 45                                   |              |
|662  |SAACID, "Caring for the Most in Need Report"       |May 2011      |
|663  |SAACID, "Drought in Somalia Report"                |May 2011      |
|664  |UNHCR, "Operation in Somalia: Fact Sheet"          |May 2011      |
|665  |UNHCR, "Population Movement Tracking Monthly       |May 2011      |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|666  |UNHCR map, "Population Movement Tracking Mogadishu |May 2011      |
|     |monthly dashboard"                                 |              |
|667  |UNHCR map, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking  |May 2011      |
|     |monthly report"                                    |              |
|668  |Witness statement of representative of             |May 2011      |
|     |international NGO                                  |              |
|669  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office letter, "Somali    |1 June 2011   |
|     |questions"                                         |              |
|670  |International Crisis Group, "CrisisWatch Database: |1 June 2011   |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|671  |LandInfo, "Somalia: armed groups and recruitment in|1 June 2011   |
|     |the south"                                         |              |
|672  |IASC Somalia, "Protection Cluster Update Weekly    |3 June 2011   |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|673  |Daily Monitor, "Somalia govt, AMISOM take over     |5 June 2011   |
|     |al-Shabab supply routes"                           |              |
|674  |New Vision, "AMISOM captures more territory"       |5 June 2011   |
|675  |Statement of Janice Lyn Marshall, Deputy Director  |6 June 2011   |
|     |in the Division of International Protection at the |              |
|     |Office of the UNHCR                                |              |
|676  |Famine Early Warning Systems Network, "East Africa |7 June 2011   |
|     |Food Security Alert"                               |              |
|677  |Himilo News, "Somalia: The Kampala Accord"         |9 June 2011   |
|678  |Dr Laura Hammond, "Response to query from the      |10 June 2011  |
|     |Treasury Solicitor's Department in the Somalia     |              |
|     |Country Guidance Case"                             |              |
|679  |Treasury Solicitor's Department letter to Upper    |10 June 2011  |
|     |Tribunal, "Foreign and Commonwealth Office         |              |
|     |information on cost of internal flights within     |              |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|680  |Daily Nation, "Kenya: Locals hunt for business in  |12 June 2011  |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|681  |Garowe Online, "Somalia: AMISOM vows to seize      |12 June 2011  |
|     |Bakara market"                                     |              |
|682  |Garowe Online, "Fighters killed in southern        |14 June 2011  |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|683  |Garowe Online, "Somalia: Al-Shabab executed        |18 June 2011  |
|     |teenager in Mogadishu"                             |              |
|684  |Garowe Online, "Somalia: 25 people killed in       |18 June 2011  |
|     |Hirran"                                            |              |
|685  |FSNAU Somalia, "Food, Security & Nutrition         |20 June 2011  |
|     |Quarterly Brief"                                   |              |
|686  |Fund for Peace, "The Failed States Index 2011"     |20 June 2011  |
|687  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al-Shabab starts military |20 June 2011  |
|     |movement in central Somalia"                       |              |
|688  |Shabelle Media Network, "Ten killed in Somalia Gedo|20 June 2011  |
|     |region fighting"                                   |              |
|689  |Treasury Solicitor's Department letter to the Upper|20 June 2011  |
|     |Tribunal, "Secretary of State for the Home         |              |
|     |Department's position on Assisted Voluntary Returns|              |
|     |to Somalia"                                        |              |
|690  |Reliefweb, "Six die in roadside bomb blast in      |21 June 2011  |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|691  |Shabelle Media Network, "Mogadishu roadside bomb   |21 June 2011  |
|     |kills 4, injures more than 10"                     |              |
|692  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali officer: Al-Shabab |21 June 2011  |
|     |plotting terrorist attacks in the capital"         |              |
|693  |Daily Nation / AllAfrica, "Somalia: AU force       |22 June 2011  |
|     |closing in on Mogadishu's prized market in tricky  |              |
|     |urban warfare"                                     |              |
|694  |Shabelle Media Network, "Calm returns to southern  |23 June 2011  |
|     |Somalia town after battle"                         |              |
|695  |Shabelle Media Network, "One killed, another       |23 June 2011  |
|     |wounded in the seaside Somali capital"             |              |
|696  |Reliefweb, "Kenya sees 20,000 Somali refugees      |24 June 2011  |
|     |arriving in just two weeks"                        |              |
|697  |Reliefweb, "More details: foreign helicopters raid |24 June 2011  |
|     |in southern Somalia town"                          |              |
|698  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali president: we shall|24 June 2011  |
|     |keep on fighting against Al-Shabab"                |              |
|699  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: residents start  |24 June 2011  |
|     |displacing after air strike in Kismayo"            |              |
|700  |UNOCHA, "Weekly Humanitarian Bulletin" Issue # 25  |17-24 June    |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|701  |Witness statement of Peter Greste, freelance       |24 June 2011  |
|     |journalist                                         |              |
|702  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al-Shabab arrests people  |25 June 2011  |
|     |for allegedly espionage activities"                |              |
|703  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia's Benadir         |25 June 2011  |
|     |administration: aid agencies are spies             |              |
|704  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali military officer:  |25 June 2011  |
|     |we are at war on Al Shabab controlled areas"       |              |
|705  |Shabelle Media Network, "One dies as Somali        |26 June 2011  |
|     |soldiers clash in the Somali capital"              |              |
|706  |Reliefweb, "Over eight hundred children a day      |27 June 2011  |
|     |arriving at Kenyan refugee camp as drought worsens |              |
|     |in Somalia"                                        |              |
|707  |Street Fight, "AMISOM, TFG forces trigger backlash |27 June 2011  |
|     |attacks"                                           |              |
|708  |BBC News, "Horn of Africa sees 'worst drought in 60|28 June 2011  |
|     |years'"                                            |              |
|709  |Reliefweb, "Eastern Africa: severe food crisis hits|28 June 2011  |
|     |region"                                            |              |
|710  |Reliefweb, "Millions facing severe food crisis amid|28 June 2011  |
|     |worsening drought in Horn of Africa - UN"          |              |
|711  |Reliefweb, "Thousands of Somalis fleeing to        |28 June 2011  |
|     |northern Kenya"                                    |              |
|712  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali government         |28 June 2011  |
|     |official: some elders are held hostage by          |              |
|     |Al-Shabab"                                         |              |
|713  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali soldiers clash in  |28 June 2011  |
|     |the Somali capital"                                |              |
|714  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: small businessmen|28 June 2011  |
|     |complain of government soldiers"                   |              |
|715  |Shabelle Media Network, "Two government soldiers   |28 June 2011  |
|     |killed in Mogadishu roadside bomb"                 |              |
|716  |Reliefweb, "Press conference by UN Resident and    |29 June 2011  |
|     |Humanitarian Coordinator for Somalia"              |              |
|717  |SAACID, "The worst of times"                       |29 June 2011  |
|718  |Shabelle Media Network, "15 killed in southern     |29 June 2011  |
|     |Somali fighting"                                   |              |
|719  |IRIN / AllAfrica, "Somalia: cash transfers 'a      |30 June 2011  |
|     |better aid option'"                                |              |
|720  |Reliefweb, "FSNAU releases the update on the number|30 June 2011  |
|     |of people in food security crisis in Somalia"      |              |
|721  |Reliefweb, "Thousands flee Somalia as devastating  |30 June 2011  |
|     |drought takes hold"                                |              |
|722  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al-Shabab charged with    |30 June 2011  |
|     |destabilizing Somalia's central town of Galk"      |              |
|723  |UNHCR, "Update to May 2010 UNHCR Eligibility       |June 2011     |
|     |Guidelines for Assessing the International         |              |
|     |Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Somalia"   |              |
|724  |IASC Somalia "Protection Cluster Update Weekly     |1 July 2011   |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|725  |KAAFI News, "Somalia: nearly 3,000 extra Ugandan   |1 July 2011   |
|     |soldiers arrive at Mogadishu"                      |              |
|726  |Reliefweb, "Disturbances at Kenya's Dadaab complex |1 July 2011   |
|     |as Somali influx grows"                            |              |
|727  |Reliefweb, "Somalia: on the brink of disaster"     |1 July 2011   |
|728  |UNHCR, "PMT Mogadishu Dashboard"                   |1 July 2011   |
|729  |UNHCR, "Somalia: Population Movement Tracking since|1 July 2011   |
|     |1st December 2010"                                 |              |
|780  |VOA News, "Somalia's birthday gift: a night without|1 July 2011   |
|     |violence"                                          |              |
|781  |Shabelle Media Network, "Low-level flying aircrafts|2 July 2011   |
|     |hover over southern Somalia town"                  |              |
|782  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia calls for         |2 July 2011   |
|     |international community to help in its battle      |              |
|     |against Al Shabab"                                 |              |
|783  |Shabelle Media Network, "US expands its drone war  |2 July 2011   |
|     |into Somalia"                                      |              |
|784  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab in a 'nowhere to run'   |2 July 2011   |
|     |situation"                                         |              |
|785  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab charged with    |3 July 2011   |
|     |stoking central Somalia clannish clashes"          |              |
|786  |Shabelle Media Network, "Clan related confrontation|3 July 2011   |
|     |restarts in central Somalia"                       |              |
|787  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: Ahlu Sunna vows  |3 July 2011   |
|     |it fight newly announced Azania State"             |              |
|788  |Shabelle Media Network, "Twenty killed as clannish |3 July 2011   |
|     |clash intensifies in central Somalia"              |              |
|789  |Shabelle Media Network, "UPDF in Somalia complain  |3 July 2011   |
|     |over pay cuts"                                     |              |
|790  |Reliefweb, "Halima Omar "I watched four of my      |4 July 2011   |
|     |children die of hunger""                           |              |
|791  |Reliefweb, "The vital statistics of hunger"        |4 July 2011   |
|792  |Shabelle Media Network, "Tense is still high in    |4 July 2011   |
|     |central Somalia, death toll rises to 35"           |              |
|793  |Reliefweb, "East Africa: famine warning for        |5 July 2011   |
|     |southern Somalia"                                  |              |
|794  |Reliefweb, "Staggering malnutrition rates as       |5 July 2011   |
|     |quarter of Somalia population uprooted"            |              |
|795  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab escalates punishment of |5 July 2011   |
|     |civilians"                                         |              |
|796  |Street Fight, "Al-Shabab escalates punishment of   |5 July 2011   |
|     |civilians"                                         |              |
|797  |BBC News, "Somalia Islamists lift aid ban to help  |6 July 2011   |
|     |drought victims"                                   |              |
|798  |Reliefweb, "Somalia: Engaging Somalia's Al-Shabab  |6 July 2011   |
|     |to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid"         |              |
|799  |Shabelle Media Network / AllAfrica, "Somalia: Al   |6 July 2011   |
|     |Shabab calls for Muslims, non-Muslims to help needy|              |
|     |people"                                            |              |
|800  |Shabelle Media Network / AllAfrica, "Somalia:      |6 July 2011   |
|     |Shabelle launches a programme collecting aid for   |              |
|     |drought-hit people"                                |              |
|801  |Somalia Report, "Airstrikes hit Lower Juba...      |6 July 2011   |
|     |again"                                             |              |
|802  |Somalia Report, "Enter the drones"                 |6 July 2011   |
|803  |VOA News, "Somali diaspora helps nation through    |6 July 2011   |
|     |crisis"                                            |              |
|804  |ISS Africa News, "Somalia: failed state and failing|8 July 2011   |
|     |responses"                                         |              |
|805  |BBC News, "Horn of Africa drought: survival of the |9 July 2011   |
|     |fittest"                                           |              |
|806  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab blocks          |9 July 2011   |
|     |drought-hit people from fleeing to Kenya"          |              |
|807  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab fighters in     |9 July 2011   |
|     |central Somalia take over wells"                   |              |
|808  |BBC News, "Somalis escaping the drought flee to the|10 July 2011  |
|     |capital"                                           |              |
|809  |Daily Nation / AllAfrica, "Somalia: AU plans new   |10 July 2011  |
|     |Somali battle rules"                               |              |
|810  |Shabelle Media Network / AllAfrica, "Somalis in    |10 July 2011  |
|     |Sweden welcome Shabelle's campaign to help the     |              |
|     |needy"                                             |              |
|811  |Reliefweb, "Somalia: USAID provides food to Somalis|11 July 2011  |
|     |hit by drought"                                    |              |
|812  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali soldiers clash     |11 July 2011  |
|     |themselves in Mogadishu"                           |              |
|813  |Somalia Report, "Fighting breaks out in Garbaharey"|11 July 2011  |
|814  |RBC Radio, "Somalia: TFG forces give their salaries|12 July 2011  |
|     |to help displaced families"                        |              |
|815  |Somalia Report, "ASWJ vows new offensive against   |12 July 2011  |
|     |Al-Shabab"                                         |              |
|816  |BBC News, "Horn of Africa drought: UK charities    |13 July 2011  |
|     |boost Somalia aid"                                 |              |
|817  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab arrests aid     |13 July 2011  |
|     |workers in southern Somalia town"                  |              |
|818  |World Food Programme, "Statement by the World Food |13 July 2011  |
|     |Programme on humanitarian access to southern       |              |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|819  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia asks help destroy |14 July 2011  |
|     |Al Shabab, Al Qaeda"                               |              |
|820  |Somalia Report, "Fighting breaks out in Gedo and   |15 July 2011  |
|     |Hiran"                                             |              |
|821  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab torches vehicle |16 July 2011  |
|     |carrying aid medicine in southern Somalia"         |              |
|822  |Shabelle Media Network, "Govt forces, Al Shabab    |17 July 2011  |
|     |combat in southern Somalia border town"            |              |
|823  |Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council   |18 July 2011  |
|     |Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and   |              |
|     |1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea         |              |
|     |addressed to the President of the Security Council,|              |
|     |containing:                                        |              |
|     |UN Security Council, "Report of the Monitoring     |              |
|     |Group on Somalia and Eritrea pursuant to Security  |              |
|     |Council resolution 1916 (2010)"                    |              |
|824  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali soldier shoots a   |18 July 2011  |
|     |civilian driver in Mogadishu"                      |              |
|825  |Somalia Report, "Major rift breaks out over cabinet|18 July 2011  |
|     |posts"                                             |              |
|826  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab arrests men,    |19 July 2011  |
|     |women in southern Somalia town"                    |              |
|827  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali govt soldiers clash|19 July 2011  |
|     |at the presidency in Mogadishu"                    |              |
|828  |Amnesty International, "In the line of fire:       |20 July 2011  |
|     |Somalia's children under attack"                   |              |
|829  |Shabelle Media Network, "Mogadishu mayor: there is |20 July 2011  |
|     |corruption in IDPs camps"                          |              |
|830  |Shabelle Media Network, "Official: Gedo battles    |20 July 2011  |
|     |against Al Shabab hampered by TFG bickering"       |              |
|831  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: gunmen open fire |20 July 2011  |
|     |on truck killing 2 persons"                        |              |
|832  |LandInfo, "Al Shabab and forced marriage"          |21 July 2011  |
|833  |LandInfo, "Somalia: vulnerability, minority groups,|21 July 2011  |
|     |weak clans and individuals at risk"                |              |
|834  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab opposes famine          |21 July 2011  |
|     |declaration"                                       |              |
|835  |LandInfo, "Somalia: linguistics and dialects"      |22 July 2011  |
|836  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab arrests         |23 July 2011  |
|     |teenagers for allegedly anti-Islamic deeds"        |              |
|837  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab beheads two     |23 July 2011  |
|     |herders in southern Somalia"                       |              |
|838  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab: relief agencies|25 July 2011  |
|     |displace Somalis"                                  |              |
|839  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab apprehends 30   |26 July 2011  |
|     |women for not wearing special veils"               |              |
|840  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali MP: Al Shabab      |26 July 2011  |
|     |blocking aid from needy starving people"           |              |
|841  |Somalia Report, "Five killed in clash after        |26 July 2011  |
|     |football game"                                     |              |
|842  |Somalia Report, "Villagers take on Al-Shabab"      |27 July 2011  |
|843  |AMISOM, "Somalia: AMISOM / TFG forces contain      |28 July 2011  |
|     |extremist threat to humanitarian operations in     |              |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|844  |Fox News, "Somalia offensive: 300 new militants in |28 July 2011  |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|845  |Shabelle Media Network, "Ahlu Sunna threatens it   |28 July 2011  |
|     |will clear Al Shabab from central Somalia"         |              |
|846  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab, local clan     |28 July 2011  |
|     |militias to take on in southern Somalia"           |              |
|847  |Shabelle Media Network, "Official: Al Shabab       |28 July 2011  |
|     |masterminded bomb blast at Somalia-Kenya border"   |              |
|848  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab bans meats in Afgoye"   |28 July 2011  |
|849  |Somalia Report, "Government, AU launches offensive |28 July 2011  |
|     |in Mogadishu"                                      |              |
|850  |Somalia Report, "Nine killed as insecurity grows in|28 July 2011  |
|     |Puntland"                                          |              |
|851  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: Ahlu Sunna warns |29 July 2011  |
|     |threat from Al Shabab"                             |              |
|852  |Somalia Report, "Extensive shelling kills Mogadishu|29 July 2011  |
|     |residents"                                         |              |
|853  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: fighting is      |30 July 2011  |
|     |looming in Lower Jubba region"                     |              |
|854  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab on fresh forced         |30 July 2011  |
|     |recruitment drive"                                 |              |
|855  |Somalia Report, "10 killed, 20 wounded in fresh    |30 July 2011  |
|     |fighting"                                          |              |
|856  |Shabelle Media Network, "Kenya calls for the       |31 July 2011  |
|     |eradication of Al Shabab"                          |              |
|857  |UNHCR, "Population Movement Tracking Monthly       |July 2011     |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|858  |Al Jazeera, "Genocidal politics and Somali famine" |1 August 2011 |
|859  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: heavy fighting   |1 August 2011 |
|     |rocks parts of Gedo region"                        |              |
|860  |Somalia Report, "IED blast hits Puntland           |1 August 2011 |
|     |celebrations"                                      |              |
|861  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab retakes Busar"          |2 August 2011 |
|862  |Somalia Report, "Angry residents kill Al-Shabab    |2 August 2011 |
|     |leader"                                            |              |
|863  |Somalia Report, "Fight at Mogadishu checkpoint     |3 August 2011 |
|     |kills 4"                                           |              |
|864  |UN News, "UN declares famine in another three areas|3 August 2011 |
|     |of Somalia"                                        |              |
|865  |Reuters, "ICRC wants food for Somalia but can't    |4 August 2011 |
|     |take UN aid"                                       |              |
|866  |Somalia Report, "Snipers kill 4 in Mogadishu Bakara|4 August 2011 |
|     |market"                                            |              |
|867  |UNOCHA, "Somalia: nutrition interventions - Hiraan,|4 August 2011 |
|     |and corresponding table - ongoing and completed    |              |
|     |interventions by district and sub-sector"          |              |
|868  |Reliefweb, "Somali gunmen kill five as they loot   |5 August 2011 |
|     |food aid"                                          |              |
|869  |Reliefweb, "Somali rebels stopping men fleeing     |5 August 2011 |
|     |drought"                                           |              |
|870  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab burns 12 homes, kills   |5 August 2011 |
|     |civilians"                                         |              |
|871  |Somalia Report, "Pro-government militia in deadly  |5 August 2011 |
|     |clash"                                             |              |
|872  |US Department of State, "Country Reports on        |5 August 2010 |
|     |Terrorism 2009: Chapter 6. Terrorist Organizations"|              |
|873  |BBC News, "Somalia's al-Shabab rebels leave        |6 August 2011 |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|874  |New York Times, "Shabab concede control of capital |6 August 2011 |
|     |to Somalia government"                             |              |
|875  |Reliefweb, "Extremists flee from Somali capital"   |6 August 2011 |
|876  |Reliefweb, "Somali Shabab rebels abandon positions |6 August 2011 |
|     |in capital"                                        |              |
|877  |Reliefweb, "SRSG welcomes news of Al Shabab        |6 August 2011 |
|     |vacating Mogadishu"                                |              |
|878  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab admits its      |6 August 2011 |
|     |withdrawal from Mogadishu"                         |              |
|879  |Shabelle Media Network, "Death toll of Mogadishu   |6 August 2011 |
|     |aid food violence rises to 11"                     |              |
|880  |Shabelle Media Network, "Seven killed as food aid  |6 August 2011 |
|     |looted in Mogadishu"                               |              |
|881  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab quits Mogadishu"        |6 August 2011 |
|882  |Somalia Report, "Mogadishu remains tense as        |6 August 2011 |
|     |Al-Shabab flees"                                   |              |
|883  |Somalia Report, "President says his troops in full |6 August 2011 |
|     |control"                                           |              |
|884  |UN News, "UN envoy welcomes news of Al-Shabab      |6 August 2011 |
|     |vacating Somali capital"                           |              |
|885  |AlertNet, "Fighting erupts in Somali capital after |7 August 2011 |
|     |rebels say leaving"                                |              |
|886  |Somalia Report, "9 killed in heavy gunfire in      |7 August 2011 |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|887  |Australian Broadcasting Corporation News, "Al      |8 August 2011 |
|     |Qaeda-inspired rebels abandon Somalia's capital"   |              |
|888  |Bloomberg, "Al-Shabab's Mogadishu retreat may bring|8 August 2011 |
|     |some respite to starving Somalis"                  |              |
|889  |Reliefweb, "Analyst warns al-Shabab retreat is not |8 August 2011 |
|     |victory"                                           |              |
|890  |Reliefweb, "Mogadishu residents flee Somali rebel  |8 August 2011 |
|     |clashes"                                           |              |
|891  |Reliefweb, "NGOs and nonstate armed actors:        |8 August 2011 |
|     |improving compliance with international norms"     |              |
|892  |Reliefweb, "Number of drought-displaced arriving in|8 August 2011 |
|     |Mogadishu "dropping""                              |              |
|893  |Reliefweb, "Q&A: Somalia expert Ken Menkhaus on the|8 August 2011 |
|     |famine"                                            |              |
|894  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab: we have plans  |8 August 2011 |
|     |to increase attacks against Somali govt"           |              |
|895  |Shabelle Media Network, "Deadly battle rocks parts |8 August 2011 |
|     |of southern Somalia"                               |              |
|896  |Shabelle Media Network, "Kenya on high alert after |8 August 2011 |
|     |Al Shabab pullout from Mogadishu"                  |              |
|897  |Shabelle Media Network, "Prominent elder killed in |8 August 2011 |
|     |central Somalia"                                   |              |
|898  |Somalia Report, "Conflict enters new phase"        |8 August 2011 |
|899  |Somalia Report, "Puntland on high alert for        |8 August 2011 |
|     |Al-Shabab"                                         |              |
|900  |VOA News, "Analyst warns al-Shabab retreat is not  |8 August 2011 |
|     |victory"                                           |              |
|901  |BBC News, "Somalia 'needs more AU troops' after    |9 August 2011 |
|     |al-Shabab pull out"                                |              |
|902  |IRIN, "Al-Shabab pullout- the beginning of the     |9 August 2011 |
|     |end?"                                              |              |
|903  |Reliefweb, "Al-Shabab pull out - the beginning of  |9 August 2011 |
|     |the end?"                                          |              |
|904  |Reliefweb, "AU Special Representative commends     |9 August 2011 |
|     |AMISOM and TFG troops on the recent military       |              |
|     |offensive in Mogadishu"                            |              |
|905  |Reliefweb, "Somali government offers amnesty to    |9 August 2011 |
|     |insurgent fighters"                                |              |
|906  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab fighter dies    |9 August 2011 |
|     |after his explosives laden car went off"           |              |
|907  |Shabelle Media Network, "Clashes still continue in |9 August 2011 |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|908  |Reliefweb, "Al-Shabab and Somalia's spreading      |10 August 2011|
|     |famine"                                            |              |
|909  |Reliefweb, "Somali government forces warily enter  |10 August 2011|
|     |former rebel areas"                                |              |
|910  |Somalia Report, "Government forces take village"   |10 August 2011|
|911  |Somalia Report, "Government on "clean up" operation|10 August 2011|
|     |in Mogadishu"                                      |              |
|912  |Somali Report, "Police arrest five Al-Shabab       |10 August 2011|
|     |suspects"                                          |              |
|913  |"Statement by SRSG Mahiga to the Security Council" |10 August 2011|
|914  |Logistics Cluster, "Somalia famine response        |11 August 2011|
|     |situation report"                                  |              |
|915  |Reliefweb, "UN official voices concern over reports|11 August 2011|
|     |of rape of Somali women fleeing famine"            |              |
|916  |Somalia Report, "TFG-AMISOM reach new areas of     |11 August 2011|
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|917  |Turnstyle News, "Q&A: Somalia expert Ken Menkhaus  |11 August 2011|
|     |on the famine"                                     |              |
|918  |UNOCHA, "Humanitarian Country Team - Somalia:      |11 August 2011|
|     |meeting notes"                                     |              |
|919  |BBC News, "Somali army warns about al-Shabab mines |12 August 2011|
|     |in Mogadishu"                                      |              |
|920  |Jamestown Foundation, "Terrorism Monitor" volume 9,|12 August 2011|
|     |issue 32                                           |              |
|921  |Mdecins Sans Frontires, "Somalia: MSF rapidly    |12 August 2011|
|     |scaling up its activities in Mogadishu"            |              |
|922  |Reliefweb, "Mogadishu mayor says aid not reaching  |12 August 2011|
|     |famine victims"                                    |              |
|923  |Reliefweb, "Thousands of Somalis fleeing famine and|12 August 2011|
|     |war continue to arrive"                            |              |
|924  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab evicts 300 IDP families"|12 August 2011|
|925  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab, locals clash in Jowhar"|12 August 2011|
|926  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab says it did not give up |12 August 2011|
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|927  |Somalia Report, "TFG and Raskamboni fight in       |12 August 2011|
|     |Dhobley"                                           |              |
|928  |VOA News, "A glimmer of hope in Somalia"           |12 August 2011|
|929  |VOA News, "Al-Shabab vows to use guerrilla tactics |12 August 2011|
|     |in Somalia"                                        |              |
|930  |Somalia Report, "Police arrest a dozen suspects in |13 August 2011|
|     |swoop"                                             |              |
|931  |Somalia Report, "President declares state of       |13 August 2011|
|     |emergency"                                         |              |
|932  |UNOCHA, "We have the aid to save the lives of      |13 August 2011|
|     |thousands of Somalis but we need safe passage"     |              |
|933  |Human Rights Watch, ""You don't know who to blame":|14 August 2011|
|     |war crimes in Somalia"                             |              |
|934  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab declares it     |14 August 2011|
|     |began hit and run attacks"                         |              |
|935  |Shabelle Media Network, "MP: Somalia, partner      |14 August 2011|
|     |countries will keep on air strikes against Al      |              |
|     |shabab"                                            |              |
|936  |Shabelle Media Network, "Roadside bomb wounds two  |14 August 2011|
|     |Puntland soldiers in central Somalia"              |              |
|937  |The Telegraph, "Africa famine: food aid reaching   |14 August 2011|
|     |Somalis after al-Shabab leave Mogadishu"           |              |
|938  |Reliefweb, "Drawing the right lesson from "Black   |15 August 2011|
|     |Hawk Down""                                        |              |
|939  |Reliefweb, "Security Council press statement on    |15 August 2011|
|     |situation in Somalia"                              |              |
|940  |Reliefweb, "Somali businesses warily return to     |15 August 2011|
|     |war-hit market"                                    |              |
|941  |Reliefweb, "Somali government's statement towards  |15 August 2011|
|     |food aid diversion"                                |              |
|942  |Shabelle Media Network, "Mogadishu residents ask   |15 August 2011|
|     |govt for mine clearing"                            |              |
|943  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab claims new tactics      |15 August 2011|
|     |successful"                                        |              |
|944  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab, militia clash near     |15 August 2011|
|     |Ethiopia border"                                   |              |
|945  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab redeploys fighters to   |15 August 2011|
|     |Gedo region"                                       |              |
|946  |Reuters, "Doctors, children flee hospital in       |16 August 2011|
|     |Mogadishu fighting"                                |              |
|947  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali forces, Al Shabab  |16 August 2011|
|     |fight in Mogadishu"                                |              |
|948  |Shabelle Media Network, "Thousands of sacks of food|16 August 2011|
|     |aid stolen in Somalia"                             |              |
|949  |Somalia Report, "Pro-government forces advance in  |16 August 2011|
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|950  |"Statement by SRSG Mahiga to the AUPSC"            |16 August 2011|
|951  |BBC News, "Somalia famine: Andrew Mitchell visits  |17 August 2011|
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|952  |Garowe Online, "UK development secretary warns     |17 August 2011|
|     |400,000 children could die in Somalia"             |              |
|953  |Reliefweb, "Who's who in Somalia's new cabinet?"   |17 August 2011|
|954  |Shabelle Media Network, "AMISOM denies one of its  |17 August 2011|
|     |tanks destroyed in Mogadishu"                      |              |
|955  |Somalia Report, "Mogadishu clashes continue"       |17 August 2011|
|956  |UNHCR, "East and Horn of Africa update: Somali     |17 August 2011|
|     |displacement crisis at a glance"                   |              |
|957  |Islamic Relief UK, "Somalia blog"                  |18 August 2011|
|958  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab arrests people  |18 August 2011|
|     |accused of not performing fasting"                 |              |
|959  |BBC News, "Somalia famine: Turkish PM Erdogan      |19 August 2011|
|     |visits Mogadishu"                                  |              |
|960  |Jamestown Foundation, "Terrorism Monitor: internal |19 August 2011|
|     |disputes plague Al-Shabab leadership after         |              |
|     |Mogadishu withdrawal" volume 9, issue 33           |              |
|961  |Reliefweb, "Large scale emergency response launched|19 August 2011|
|     |amid heartbreaking famine in Somalia"              |              |
|962  |Reliefweb, "Turkey to reopen embassy in famine-hit |19 August 2011|
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|963  |Shabelle Media Network, "Two killed in Mogadishu   |19 August 2011|
|     |fighting"                                          |              |
|964  |The Guardian, "Turkish PM visits famine-hit Somalia|19 August 2011|
|     |and calls on west to do more"                      |              |
|965  |UNOCHA, "Somalia: health services and number of    |19 August 2011|
|     |malnourished cases - Banadir"                      |              |
|966  |UNOCHA, "Somalia: nutrition interventions - Bakool,|19 August 2011|
|     |and corresponding table - ongoing and completed    |              |
|     |interventions by district and sub-sector"          |              |
|967  |UNOCHA, "Somalia: nutrition interventions - Gedo,  |19 August 2011|
|     |and corresponding table - ongoing and completed    |              |
|     |interventions by district and sub-sector"          |              |
|968  |UNOCHA, "Somalia: nutrition interventions - Lower  |19 August 2011|
|     |Juba, and corresponding table - ongoing and        |              |
|     |completed interventions by district and sub-sector"|              |
|969  |UNOCHA, "Somalia: nutrition interventions - Lower  |19 August 2011|
|     |Shabelle, and corresponding table - ongoing and    |              |
|     |completed interventions by district and sub-sector"|              |
|970  |UNOCHA, "Somalia: nutrition interventions - Middle |19 August 2011|
|     |Juba, and corresponding table - ongoing and        |              |
|     |completed interventions by district and sub-sector"|              |
|971  |UNOCHA, "Somalia: nutrition interventions - Middle |19 August 2011|
|     |Shabelle, and corresponding table - ongoing and    |              |
|     |completed interventions by district and sub-sector"|              |
|972  |UNOCHA, "Somalia: nutrition services - Banadir, and|19 August 2011|
|     |corresponding table - ongoing and completed        |              |
|     |interventions by district and sub-sector"          |              |
|973  |UNOCHA, "Somalia: WASH interventions and number of |19 August 2011|
|     |malnourished cases - Banadir"                      |              |
|974  |Reliefweb, "Cholera puts mothers and their children|20 August 2011|
|     |at risk"                                           |              |
|975  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab an obstacle to  |20 August 2011|
|     |aid in Somalia"                                    |              |
|976  |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab loots trucks    |20 August 2011|
|     |carrying aid food to starving people"              |              |
|977  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab beheads young man"      |20 August 2011|
|978  |Somalia Report, "Fighting among TFG soldiers kills |20 August 2011|
|     |3"                                                 |              |
|979  |Somalia Report, "3 Al-Shabab fighters killed in    |20 August 2011|
|     |bomb attack"                                       |              |
|980  |Shabelle Media Network, "One soldier dies as Somali|21 August 2011|
|     |forces clash in Mogadishu; aid food looted"        |              |
|981  |Shabelle Media Network, "7 killed as Al Shabab,    |21 August 2011|
|     |Ahlu Sunn fight in central Somalia"                |              |
|982  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali official: we are to|21 August 2011|
|     |attacks Al Shabab bases in Jubba regions"          |              |
|983  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: Benadir admin to |21 August 2011|
|     |reopen Mogadishu roads"                            |              |
|984  |Shabelle Media Network, "Tense situation at        |21 August 2011|
|     |southern Somalia town"                             |              |
|985  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab infighting kills 2,     |21 August 2011|
|     |wounds 5"                                          |              |
|986  |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab warns civilians over    |21 August 2011|
|     |defeat"                                            |              |
|987  |Somalia Report, "Deadly fighting breaks out in     |21 August 2011|
|     |Gedo"                                              |              |
|988  |Somalia Report, "Grenade aimed at TFG soldiers hits|21 August 2011|
|     |kids"                                              |              |
|989  |Australian Broadcasting Corporation News, "The     |22 August 2011|
|     |World Today: Mogadishu calm after al-Shabab        |              |
|     |retreat"                                           |              |
|990  |Global Post, "Somalia: Mogadishu still wary after  |22 August 2011|
|     |rebels retreat"                                    |              |
|991  |Reliefweb, "Mogadishu remains risky despite Al     |22 August 2011|
|     |Shabab withdrawal"                                 |              |
|992  |Reliefweb, "Somalia to unveil security plan"       |22 August 2011|
|993  |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali soldiers clash in  |22 August 2011|
|     |Mogadishu; grenade attacks injures 4"              |              |
|994  |Shabelle Media Network, "Three killed as Somali    |22 August 2011|
|     |soldiers fire in IDPs collecting aid"              |              |
|995  |Somalia Report, "Gunmen assassinate Galkayo        |22 August 2011|
|     |official"                                          |              |
|996  |UNHCR, "Mogadishu IDP influx"                      |22 August 2011|
|997  |USAID, "Kenya: Dekadal food security monitoring"   |22 August 2011|
|998  |Cable News Network (CNN), "Global Public Square:   |23 August 2011|
|     |How to end Somalia's famine and weaken the         |              |
|     |insurgents"                                        |              |
|999  |Garowe Online, "Somalia: international envoys      |23 August 2011|
|     |attend security meeting in Mogadishu"              |              |
|1000 |Garowe Online, "Somalia PM: 'Fighting will not stop|23 August 2011|
|     |until we defeat Al Shabab"                         |              |
|1001 |Mdecins Sans Frontires, "Somalia: expanding      |23 August 2011|
|     |activities despite significant obstacles"          |              |
|1002 |Reliefweb, "Joint Security Committee meeting held  |23 August 2011|
|     |for the first time in Mogadishu"                   |              |
|1003 |Reliefweb, "The nitty-gritty of flight"            |23 August 2011|
|1004 |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab executes three  |23 August 2011|
|     |people in Mogadishu for spying"                    |              |
|1005 |Somalia Report, "Civilians killed in hit and run   |23 August 2011|
|     |attacks"                                           |              |
|1006 |Somalia Report, "Commander of Darvish forces       |23 August 2011|
|     |killed"                                            |              |
|1007 |UNOCHA, "Somalia famine & drought: situation report|23 August 2011|
|     |no. 10"                                            |              |
|1008 |EU, "Statement of High Representative Catherine    |24 August 2011|
|     |Ashton on the EU response to famine in the Horn of |              |
|     |Africa"                                            |              |
|1009 |Reuters, "Bruised by war, Mogadishu slowly         |24 August 2011|
|     |reawakens"                                         |              |
|1010 |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab arrests young   |24 August 2011|
|     |people accused of having links with TFG"           |              |
|1011 |Shabelle Media Network, "Unlawful money imposed on |24 August 2011|
|     |aid planes landing at Mogadishu airport"           |              |
|1012 |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab orders Somalis to watch |24 August 2011|
|     |Arab only TV"                                      |              |
|1013 |Somalia Report, "TFG captures militants with       |24 August 2011|
|     |explosives"                                        |              |
|1014 |IRIN, "Somalia: countdown to calamity"             |25 August 2011|
|1015 |Reliefweb, "Amid restrictions, MSF seeks to widen  |25 August 2011|
|     |assistance to malnourished Somalis"                |              |
|1016 |Reliefweb, "Interview: distributing food in        |25 August 2011|
|     |famine-struck Somalia"                             |              |
|1017 |Reliefweb, "Overview of the drought situation in   |25 August 2011|
|     |the Horn of Africa"                                |              |
|1018 |Reliefweb, "They have nothing left - not even hope"|25 August 2011|
|1019 |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab kidnaps         |25 August 2011|
|     |businessman just outside of Mogadishu"             |              |
|1020 |Shabelle Media Network, "Headless body of young    |25 August 2011|
|     |Somali discovered in Mogadishu"                    |              |
|1021 |Somalia Report, "Family of executed insurgent says |25 August 2011|
|     |he was no spy"                                     |              |
|1022 |Somalia Report, "Mogadishu clashes kill 5"         |25 August 2011|
|1023 |Somalia Report, "Mogadishu's second largest market |25 August 2011|
|     |reopened"                                          |              |
|1024 |UNHCR, "East & Horn of Africa Update: Somali       |25 August 2011|
|     |displacement crisis at a glance"                   |              |
|1025 |UNOCHA, "Horn of Africa drought crisis: situation  |25 August 2011|
|     |report no. 11"                                     |              |
|1026 |USAID, "Horn of Africa - drought"                  |25 August 2011|
|1027 |Garowe Online, "Somali Islamists behead 11         |26 August 2011|
|     |civilians in capital"                              |              |
|1028 |IASC Somalia,  "Protection Cluster Update Weekly   |26 August 2011|
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|1029 |Reliefweb, "Drought-stricken central Somalia       |26 August 2011|
|     |struggling to cope with influx of people fleeing   |              |
|     |famine in the south - more aid is critical"        |              |
|1030 |Reliefweb, "DSRSG chairs meeting with              |26 August 2011|
|     |representatives of emerging administrations from   |              |
|     |southern Somalia"                                  |              |
|1031 |Reliefweb, "Security Council commits to            |26 August 2011|
|     |strengthening partnership with troop, police       |              |
|     |contributors in debate on United Nations           |              |
|     |peacekeeping operations"                           |              |
|1032 |Reliefweb, "UAE Red Crescent intensifies relief    |26 August 2011|
|     |operations in Somalia"                             |              |
|1033 |Reuters, "Somali militants behead boys in Mogadishu|26 August 2011|
|     |attacks"                                           |              |
|1034 |Shabelle Media Network, "Famine displaced people   |26 August 2011|
|     |complain of robbing, looting by govt soldiers"     |              |
|1035 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali government charged |26 August 2011|
|     |with graft"                                        |              |
|1036 |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab vows new offensive in   |26 August 2011|
|     |Gedo"                                              |              |
|1037 |Somalia Report, "Gunmen assassinate top security   |26 August 2011|
|     |official"                                          |              |
|1038 |Somalia Report, "More die as attacks in Galkayo    |26 August 2011|
|     |increase"                                          |              |
|1039 |Somalia Report, "Somaliland military build up in   |26 August 2011|
|     |Taleh"                                             |              |
|1040 |Reliefweb, "UNICEF Somalia situation report #6,    |27 August 2011|
|     |19-25 August 2011 - famine in southern Somalia"    |              |
|1041 |Shabelle Media Network, "Ahlu Sunna threatens      |27 August 2011|
|     |purging Al Shabab from central Somalia"            |              |
|1042 |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab set a light to  |27 August 2011|
|     |water well amid famine in Somalia"                 |              |
|1043 |Somalia Report, "6 killed, 7 injured in Al-Shabab  |27 August 2011|
|     |attacks"                                           |              |
|1044 |Somalia Report, "Somali youths face the wrath of   |27 August 2011|
|     |Al-Shabab"                                         |              |
|1045 |Reliefweb, "Horn of Africa crisis - regional       |28 August 2011|
|     |situation report #6, reporting period: 19-25       |              |
|     |August"                                            |              |
|1046 |Shabelle Media Network, "IDPs at Mogadishu's       |28 August 2011|
|     |Badbado refugee camp start fleeing"                |              |
|1047 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: govt creates     |28 August 2011|
|     |special forces to assure Mogadishu security"       |              |
|1048 |Somalia Report, "10 killed as Al-Shabab attacks TFG|28 August 2011|
|     |bases"                                             |              |
|1049 |The Telegraph, "Deadly Mogadishu bomb 'targeted    |28 August 2011|
|     |peacekeepers'"                                     |              |
|1050 |LandInfo, "Somalia: security and conflict in the   |29 August 2011|
|     |south"                                             |              |
|1051 |Reliefweb, "Border town feels the refugee pressure"|29 August 2011|
|1052 |Reliefweb, "Fighting famine at its source"         |29 August 2011|
|1053 |Reliefweb, "Locals join IDP camps in search for    |29 August 2011|
|     |food"                                              |              |
|1054 |Reliefweb, "Poor security: a key reason for drought|29 August 2011|
|     |disaster"                                          |              |
|1055 |Reliefweb, "RIs Dania Gharaibeh reports from the   |29 August 2011|
|     |famine"                                            |              |
|1056 |Somalia Report, "Checkpoints source of extortion,  |29 August 2011|
|     |kickbacks"                                         |              |
|1057 |Somalia Report, "Clan fighting over water kills 10 |29 August 2011|
|     |in Mudug"                                          |              |
|1058 |Somalia Report, "Government takes over Gedo        |29 August 2011|
|     |villages"                                          |              |
|1059 |UN, "Report of the independent expert on the       |29 August 2011|
|     |situation of human rights in Somalia, Shamsul Bari"|              |
|1060 |Reliefweb, "Hunt for water turns desperate"        |30 August 2011|
|1061 |Reliefweb, "Protecting people in the midst of      |30 August 2011|
|     |famine - responding to urgent risks in the Horn of |              |
|     |Africa: dangerously low levels of funding for      |              |
|     |life-saving activities in the Horn of Africa"      |              |
|1062 |Reliefweb, "UNHCR chief Guterres calls for         |30 August 2011|
|     |scaled-up aid effort inside Somalia"               |              |
|1063 |Reuters, "Somalian militant leader denounces       |30 August 2011|
|     |reluctant fighters"                                |              |
|1064 |Shabelle Media Network, "Eid celebrated in Somalia,|30 August 2011|
|     |Al Shabab vows more attacks"                       |              |
|1065 |Somalia Report, "Galkayo grenade attack kills      |30 August 2011|
|     |three"                                             |              |
|1066 |UN Security Council, "Report of the                |30 August 2011|
|     |Secretary-General on Somalia"                      |              |
|1067 |AllAfrica, "Somalia: agency identifies 23,000 IDP  |31 August 2011|
|     |shelters in Mogadishu"                             |              |
|1068 |Garowe Online, "Food aid looting kills 15 in       |31 August 2011|
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|1069 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali soldier kills a    |31 August 2011|
|     |civilian driver in Mogadishu"                      |              |
|1070 |Somalia Report, "50 arrested in Garowe security    |31 August 2011|
|     |crackdown"                                         |              |
|1071 |Somalia Report, "Paranoid insurgents ramp up       |31 August 2011|
|     |beheadings"                                        |              |
|1072 |UNITAR / UNOSAT, "Overview of IDP shelter changes  |31 August 2011|
|     |in Mogadishu, Somalia (as of 22 August 2011)"      |              |
|1073 |UNITAR / UNOSAT, "Update 1: emergency assessment of|31 August 2011|
|     |Somali IDP shelter concentrations in Mogadishu,    |              |
|     |Somalia (22 August 2011)"                          |              |
|1074 |Oxfam, "Briefing on the Horn of Africa drought     |August 2011   |
|     |2011"                                              |              |
|1075 |Oxfam, "Briefing on the Horn of Africa drought:    |August 2011   |
|     |climate change and future impacts on food security"|              |
|1076 |SAACID, "The human cost of international failure"  |August 2011   |
|1077 |Somalia Report, "Background to the TFG"            |August 2011   |
|1078 |UN, "Somalia Humanitarian Overview" vol. 4 issue 8 |August 2011   |
|1079 |UNHCR, "Population Movement Tracking Monthly       |August 2011   |
|     |Report"                                            |              |
|1080 |WHO, "Emergency humanitarian action: weekly        |August 2011   |
|     |highlights 20-26 August 2011"                      |              |
|1081 |AFP, "Starving Somalis make new life in war-torn   |1 September   |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |2011          |
|1082 |Logistics Cluster, "Somalia famine response        |1 September   |
|     |situation report"                                  |2011          |
|1083 |Reliefweb, "UNHCR chief visits Mogadishu, urges    |1 September   |
|     |massive humanitarian assistance"                   |2011          |
|1084 |Shabelle Media Network, "Seven wounded in southern |1 September   |
|     |Somalia grenade attack"                            |2011          |
|1085 |Somalia Report, "Grenade attack injures eight"     |1 September   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1086 |Somalia Report, "Puntland battles Al-Shabab        |1 September   |
|     |suspects in Galkayo"                               |2011          |
|1087 |Garowe Online, "Somalia: Puntland forces kill 'over|2 September   |
|     |20 Al Shabab militants' in Galkayo"                |2011          |
|1088 |Shabelle Media Network, "Displaced famine hit      |2 September   |
|     |people called to back in Mogadishu's IDPs camp"    |2011          |
|1089 |Shabelle Media Network, "15 killed as fighting is  |2 September   |
|     |still continuing in central Somalia town"          |2011          |
|1090 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: Mogadishu        |2 September   |
|     |residents welcome security operation by the govt"  |2011          |
|1091 |Somalia Report, "Another ten beheaded bodies found"|2 September   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1092 |Somalia Report, "Assassination of Somaliland       |2 September   |
|     |president foiled"                                  |2011          |
|1093 |UK Border Agency, "COI Somalia Bulletin: Al        |2 September   |
|     |Shabab's withdrawal from Mogadishu"                |2011          |
|1094 |UNOCHA, "Somalia: famine (as of 2 September 2011)" |2 September   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1095 |Garowe Online, "At least 21 dead in Somali rebel   |3 September   |
|     |clashes"                                           |2011          |
|1096 |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab accused of      |3 September   |
|     |committing violations against humanity"            |2011          |
|1097 |Shabelle Media Network, "Bernama TV cameraman      |3 September   |
|     |killed in Somalia shooting"                        |2011          |
|1098 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: govt forces clash|3 September   |
|     |with armed militias in Mogadishu"                  |2011          |
|1099 |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab steals livestock in     |3 September   |
|     |Hiiraan"                                           |2011          |
|1100 |Somalia Report, "Army commander killed in Galkayo" |3 September   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1101 |Somalia Report, "4 killed in military clashes in   |3 September   |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |2011          |
|1102 |Somalia Report, "Leaders console Malaysia over     |3 September   |
|     |scribe's killing"                                  |2011          |
|1103 |Shabelle Media Network, "Seven killed in central   |4 September   |
|     |Somalia clan related clash"                        |2011          |
|1104 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: blast at Al      |4 September   |
|     |Shabab gun store kills eight, witnesses say"       |2011          |
|1105 |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab fighters killed in an   |4 September   |
|     |explosion"                                         |2011          |
|1106 |Somalia Report, "Gunmen kill civilians in Middle   |4 September   |
|     |Shabelle Region"                                   |2011          |
|1107 |Somalia Report, "The gold rush begins"             |4 September   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1108 |Somalia Report, "2 dead as building collapses"     |4 September   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1109 |Garowe Online, "Somalia: Somaliland to 'expel      |5 September   |
|     |foreigners within 30 days'"                        |2011          |
|1110 |Hiiraan Online, "Somalis fear tyranny of al-Shabab |5 September   |
|     |as they flee drought stricken areas"               |2011          |
|1111 |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab imposes curfew  |5 September   |
|     |on southern Somalia town"                          |2011          |
|1112 |Shabelle Media Network, "Armed men force 300       |5 September   |
|     |families to flee from IDPs camp in Mogadishu"      |2011          |
|1113 |Shabelle Media Network, "Malaysia evacuates its aid|5 September   |
|     |workers from Somalia"                              |2011          |
|1114 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: Al Shabab impose |5 September   |
|     |curfew in Afgoye corridor for IDPs"                |2011          |
|1115 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: famine displaced |5 September   |
|     |people warned to settle at broken buildings"       |2011          |
|1116 |UNOCHA, "Somalia: famine"                          |5 September   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1117 |Hiiraan Online, "US drone attacks kill 35 in S     |6 September   |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2011          |
|1118 |IRIN, "Somalia: insurgents divert famine IDPs from |6 September   |
|     |aid"                                               |2011          |
|1119 |Shabelle Media Network, "Two beheaded bodies       |6 September   |
|     |discovered in war torn Mogadishu"                  |2011          |
|1120 |Somalia Report, "TFG and AMISOM battle Al-Shabab in|6 September   |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |2011          |
|1121 |Hiiraan Online, "A man-made disaster: how militant |7 September   |
|     |Islamism, the war against terror and famine are    |2011          |
|     |connected in Somalia"                              |              |
|1122 |Hiiraan Online, "Mortar attacks cause civilian     |7 September   |
|     |fatalities in Mogadishu"                           |2011          |
|1123 |Hiiraan Online, "Special Forces in Mogadishu"      |7 September   |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1124 |Integrated Regional Information Networks (IRIN),   |7 September   |
|     |"Mogadishu after Al-Shabab"                        |2011          |
|1125 |Shabelle Media Network, "Mogadishu artillery shell |7 September   |
|     |leaves 3 persons dead"                             |2011          |
|1126 |The Guardian, "Insurgents prevent Somalis fleeing  |7 September   |
|     |famine from reaching Mogadishu"                    |2011          |
|1127 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali soldier kills six  |8 September   |
|     |civilians in Mogadishu shooting spree"             |2011          |
|1128 |Somalia Report, "AMISOM takes 3 more districts,    |8 September   |
|     |gets attacked"                                     |2011          |
|1129 |IASC Somalia, "Protection Cluster Update Weekly    |9 September   |
|     |Report"                                            |2011          |
|1130 |New York Times, "As an enemy retreats, clans carve |9 September   |
|     |up Somalia"                                        |2011          |
|1131 |Refworld, "Amid improved security, UNHCR scales up |9 September   |
|     |operations inside Somalia"                         |2011          |
|1132 |Shabelle Media Network, "Four killed, 10 injured in|9 September   |
|     |Mogadishu bomb blast"                              |2011          |
|1133 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali soldier kills six  |9 September   |
|     |civilians in Mogadishu shooting spree"             |2011          |
|1134 |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab controls Mogadishu      |9 September   |
|     |returnees"                                         |2011          |
|1135 |Somalia Report, "Kids die playing with explosives  |9 September   |
|     |in market"                                         |2011          |
|1136 |UNHCR, "PMT Mogadishu Dashboard"                   |16 June-9     |
|     |                                                   |September 2011|
|1137 |UNOCHA, "Somalia: nutrition services and number of |9 September   |
|     |malnourished cases - Banadir"                      |2011          |
|1138 |African Union Peace and Security Council, "Report  |13 September  |
|     |of the Chairperson of the Commission on the        |2011          |
|     |situation in Somalia"                              |              |
|1139 |Bar-kulan, "Turkish delegation visits Mogadishu,   |13 September  |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2011          |
|1140 |ABC News, "Somalia famine: measles epidemic hits   |14 September  |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |2011          |
|1141 |UN Security Council, "In Somalia 'seeds of hope and|14 September  |
|     |progress have begun to sprout, but they need to be |2011          |
|     |carefully and generously nurtured' Security council|              |
|     |told"                                              |              |
|1142 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somali forces stop again  |15 September  |
|     |aid workers from reaching Al Shabab areas"         |2011          |
|1143 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia soldier fires at  |16 September  |
|     |bus, killing two passengers in Mogadishu"          |2011          |
|1144 |Somalia Report, "Airstrikes continue in southern   |16 September  |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2011          |
|1145 |Somalia Report, "TFG soldier fires on minibus,     |16 September  |
|     |killing 3"                                         |2011          |
|1146 |The Globe and Mail, "Fear of al-Shabab brings      |16 September  |
|     |Mogadishu to a standstill"                         |2011          |
|1147 |The Nation, "Blowback in Somalia"                  |16 September  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1148 |Reuters, "Somalia bans foreign aid workers from    |17 September  |
|     |rebel areas"                                       |2011          |
|1149 |Shabelle Media Network, "Roadside bomb targeted    |17 September  |
|     |AMISOM convey in Mogadishu"                        |2011          |
|1150 |Somalia Report, "ASWJ declares all out war against |17 September  |
|     |Al-Shabab"                                         |2011          |
|1151 |Somalia Report, "Fierce fighting leaves 3 dead"    |17 September  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1152 |Somalia Report, "Suspected IED kills 3 in          |17 September  |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |2011          |
|1153 |Somalia Report, "Al-Shabab seizes 10 youths in     |18 September  |
|     |Middle Shabelle"                                   |2011          |
|1154 |Somalia Report, "Militants vow to retake Mogadishu"|18 September  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1155 |The Times Live, "SA doctors to the rescue in       |18 September  |
|     |Somalia"                                           |2011          |
|1156 |Bar-kulan, "Somalia's National Security Committee  |19 September  |
|     |meets in Mogadishu"                                |2011          |
|1157 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: Mogadishu airport|19 September  |
|     |authorities - aid planes are not charged"          |2011          |
|1158 |AMISOM, "Opening remarks by DSRCC, HON. Wafula     |20 September  |
|     |Wamunyinyi at the Mogadishu consultative meeting on|2011          |
|     |ending the transition"                             |              |
|1159 |Bar-kulan, "Mogadishu IDPs receive relief food"    |20 September  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1160 |Reliefweb, "Flying in the food"                    |20 September  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1161 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: armed militias   |20 September  |
|     |dressed govt military uniforms arrested in         |2011          |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |              |
|1162 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: in Mogadishu, an |20 September  |
|     |enemy retreats but fear remains"                   |2011          |
|1163 |UN News, "Newsmakers: UN Special Envoy for Somalia,|20 September  |
|     |Augustine Mahiga"                                  |2011          |
|1164 |UNOCHA, "Somalia Famine and Drought: Situation     |20 September  |
|     |Report no. 14"                                     |2011          |
|1165 |IRIN, "Lives before politics"                      |21 September  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1166 |Reliefweb, "OIC Contact Group Meeting on Somalia   |21 September  |
|     |discuss peace building and humanitarian assistance"|2011          |
|1167 |Bar-kulan, "Defence ministry working on bolstering |22 September  |
|     |security in Mogadishu, claims minister"            |2011          |
|1168 |Somalia Report, "Violence claims three soldiers in |22 September  |
|     |Mogadishu"                                         |2011          |
|1169 |UNICEF, "Situation report - Horn of Africa Somalia"|22 September  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1170 |UNOCHA, "Somalia: humanitarian access and coverage"|22 September  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1171 |Bar-kulan, "Security agency displays               |23 September  |
|     |donkey-driven-cart laden with explosives"          |2011          |
|1172 |RBC Radio, "Somalia: security forces foil suicide  |23 September  |
|     |attempt used for a donkey"                         |2011          |
|1173 |UNHCR, "Mogadishu IDP influx"                      |23 September  |
|     |                                                   |2011          |
|1174 |Bar-kulan, "Al-Shabab militias fight themselves    |25 September  |
|     |outside Mogadishu"                                 |2011          |
|1175 |Garowe Online, "Prime Minister of Somalia's        |25 September  |
|     |statement, General debate of the 66th session of   |2011          |
|     |the United Nations General assembly"               |              |
|1176 |RBC Radio, "Somalia: first aid from Somaliland     |25 September  |
|     |arrives Mogadishu"                                 |2011          |
|1177 |Reliefweb, "To pledging conference for Horn of     |25 September  |
|     |Africa, Deputy Secretary-General says, 'If we do   |2011          |
|     |not respond we will be asked how we stood by and   |              |
|     |watched a generation die'"                         |              |
|1178 |Somalia Report, "Mogadishu city life returning to  |25 September  |
|     |normal"                                            |2011          |
|1179 |Reliefweb, "Somali government establishes committee|26 September  |
|     |of experts on draft constitution"                  |2011          |
|1180 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: President "Al    |26 September  |
|     |Shabab's power weakened""                          |2011          |
|1181 |Somalia Report, "Somali President warns youths     |26 September  |
|     |against al-Shabab"                                 |2011          |
|1182 |Reliefweb, "Somalia: the struggle against food     |27 September  |
|     |insecurity continues"                              |2011          |
|1183 |Somalia Report, "AMISOM urges more troops to fight |27 September  |
|     |al-Shabab"                                         |2011          |
|1184 |UK Border Agency, "COI Somalia Bulletin: Security  |27 September  |
|     |Situation In Mogadishu"                            |2011          |
|1185 |UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office letter to       |27 September  |
|     |European Court of Human Rights regarding Elmi and  |2011          |
|     |Sufi v United Kingdom                              |              |
|1186 |AllAfrica, "Somalia: Somali disaster management    |28 September  |
|     |agency denies food aid is corrupted"               |2011          |
|1187 |Reliefweb, "Human Rights Council holds interactive |28 September  |
|     |dialogues with experts on Somalia and Cambodia"    |2011          |
|1188 |LandInfo, "Somalia: protection and conflict        |30 September  |
|     |resolution mechanisms"                             |2011          |
|1189 |Amnesty International, "Annual Report 2011:        |2011          |
|     |Somalia"                                           |              |
|1190 |Bar-kulan, "News in English"                       |Undated       |
|1191 |Central Intelligence Agency, "Country Comparison:  |Undated       |
|     |Death Rates"                                       |              |
|1192 |"Checkpoints in Mogadishu"                         |Undated       |
|1193 |CNN, "African Union forces capture last western    |Undated       |
|     |outpost in Mogadishu"                              |              |
|1194 |Expert evidence submitted by Dr Joseph Mullen      |Undated       |
|1195 |Expert report submitted by Dr Laura Hammond        |Undated       |
|1196 |IDMC, "Factsheet: Somalia"                         |Undated       |
|1197 |Islamic Relief UK, "East Africa crisis appeal"     |Undated       |
|1198 |Map, "Mogadishu: estimated positions as of 16      |Undated       |
|     |December 2010"                                     |              |
|1199 |SAACID, "Employment for Peace II - Accident /      |Undated       |
|     |Incident / UXO Report"                             |              |
|1200 |SAACID, "Urban Development Planning"               |Undated       |
|1201 |Security Council Committee on Somalia and Eritrea  |Undated       |
|     |Issues List of Individuals Identified Pursuant to  |              |
|     |Paragraph 8 of resolution 1844 (2008)              |              |
|1202 |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab arrests aid     |Undated       |
|     |workers in southern Somalia town"                  |              |
|1203 |Shabelle Media Network, "Al Shabab bans selling    |Undated       |
|     |meat in southern Somalia town"                     |              |
|1204 |Shabelle Media Network, "Somalia: battle, shelling |Undated       |
|     |in capital leaves five hurt"                       |              |
|1205 |Somalia Report, "About us"                         |Undated       |
|1206 |Statement of Stephen Paul Morris, legal            |Undated       |
|     |representative of AM                               |              |
|1207 |UK Border Agency, "Managing Enforced Returns: The  |Undated       |
|     |Challenges of Documentation and Return"            |              |
|1208 |UNDP map, "Hiraan Region - Belet Weyne District"   |Undated       |
|1209 |UNDP map, "Lower Shabelle Region - Afgooye         |Undated       |
|     |District"                                          |              |
|1210 |UNDP map, "Lower Shabelle Region - Baraawe         |Undated       |
|     |District"                                          |              |
|1211 |UNDP map, "Lower Shabelle Region - Marka District" |Undated       |
|1212 |UNDP map, "Middle Shabelle Region"                 |Undated       |
|1213 |UNOCHA map, "Somalia: Education: Who, what, where -|Undated       |
|     |Funding Agencies"                                  |              |
|1214 |Witness statement of a businessman                 |Undated       |
|1215 |Witness statement of a country director of an      |Undated       |
|     |international NGO                                  |              |
|1216 |Witness statement of a representative of the       |Undated       |
|     |European Union                                     |              |
|1217 |Witness statement of a senior policy advisor to an |Undated       |
|     |international NGO, including a survey of media     |              |
|     |reports                                            |              |
|     |                                                   |              |
|     |Documentation specific to AF                       |              |
|1218 |Letter from Dr B Chaliha to a Consultant           |10 May 2011   |
|     |Gastroenterologist, regarding AF                   |              |
|1219 |Gastroenterology appointment letter, regarding AF  |Undated       |
|     |                                                   |              |
|     |Documentation specific to FM                       |              |
|1220 |Witness statement of FM                            |12 July 2006  |
|1221 |Witness statement of FM                            |15 August 2006|
|1222 |Expert evidence of Asha-Kin Duale                  |30 September  |
|     |                                                   |2006          |
|1223 |Expert report from Samuel Bekalo                   |19 October    |
|     |                                                   |2007          |
|1224 |Cellmark, "DNA relationship analysis case report"  |5 November    |
|     |                                                   |2007          |
|1225 |Statement of  cousin of FM                         |3 September   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|1226 |Witness statement of FM                            |3 September   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|1227 |Letter from Halliday Reeves                        |11 July 2008  |
|1228 |Supplementary expert report from Samuel Bekalo     |17 July 2008  |
|1229 |Expert report of Dr Virginia Luling                |18 August 2008|
|1230 |Cellmark, "DNA relationship testing"               |28 November   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|1231 |Statement of  uncle of FM                          |12 December   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|1232 |Witness statement of FM                            |12 December   |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|1234 |Witness statement of FM                            |26 May 2011   |
|1235 |Statement of uncle of FM                           |Undated       |
|     |                                                   |              |
|     |Documentation specific to MW                       |              |
|1236 |US Department of State, "Somalia: Report on Female |June 2001     |
|     |Genital Mutilation (FGM) or Female Genital Cutting |              |
|     |(FGC)"                                             |              |
|1237 |Asha-Kin Duale, "Expert report: notes on female    |15 May 2006   |
|     |genital mutilation (FGM)"                          |              |
|1238 |BBC News, "'I'm not afraid of al-Shabab'"          |28 January    |
|     |                                                   |2008          |
|1239 |Options Consultancy Services / Forward, "FGM is    |July 2009     |
|     |always with us: experiences, perceptions and       |              |
|     |beliefs of women affected by female genital        |              |
|     |mutilation in London"                              |              |
|1240 |Witness statement of Jabril Ibrahim Abdulle, Centre|14 September  |
|     |for Research and Dialogue"                         |2009          |
|1241 |Witness statement of Mariam Yassin Hagi, Women's   |15 September  |
|     |Development Organization                           |2009          |
|1242 |Witness statement of MW                            |16 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|1243 |Witness statement of Dr Nazra Shire Mohamed, GP    |16 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|1244 |Witness statement of Zacharia Mohamed Sheikh,      |16 September  |
|     |Lawyer                                             |2009          |
|1245 |Witness statement of someone who works in Mogadishu|17 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|1246 |Witness statement of a male active in human rights |18 September  |
|     |work                                               |2009          |
|1247 |Witness statement of a women active in human rights|18 September  |
|     |work                                               |2009          |
|1248 |Witness statement of an aid worker                 |18 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|1249 |Witness statement of Hassan Noor, Oxfam GB         |18 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|1250 |Witness statement of Sahra Omar Moallim            |19 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|1251 |Witness statement of Shamsa Ahmed, Midwife         |30 September  |
|     |                                                   |2009          |
|1252 |Witness statement of a Somali journalist           |September 2009|
|1253 |Witness statement of Abdillahi M. Yusuf, Oxfam GB  |September 2009|
|1254 |Witness statement of Amina Haji Elmi, Save Somalia |September 2009|
|     |Women and Children                                 |              |
|1255 |Witness statement of Faiza Mohamed, Save the       |September 2009|
|     |Children UK                                        |              |
|1256 |Witness statement of Maryan Seylac, Somalia Media  |September 2009|
|     |Women's Association                                |              |
|1257 |Witness statement of MAM                           |September 2009|
|1258 |Witness statement of Tanya Schumer, Somali NGO     |September 2009|
|     |Consortium                                         |              |
|1259 |Witness statement of Tony Burns, SAACID            |September 2009|
|1260 |Witness statement of a Somali women's NGO          |2 October 2009|
|1261 |US Department of State, "Trafficking in Persons    |14 June 2010  |
|     |Report 2010 - Somalia"                             |              |
|1262 |Population Reference Bureau, "Female Genital       |2010          |
|     |Mutilation/Cutting: Data and Trends: Update 2010"  |              |
|1263 |Witness statement of James Elliott, Solicitor,     |27 May 2011   |
|     |Partner in Wilson Solicitors LLP                   |              |
|1264 |Report by an independent social worker, regarding  |30 May 2011   |
|     |the children of MW                                 |              |
|1265 |GBV Prevention Network, "Two Somali journalists    |Undated       |
|     |arrested in Baidoa"                                |              |
|1266 |Witness statement of Comfort Momoh                 |Undated       |


