
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MW (Nationality; Art 4 QD; duty to substantiate) Eritrea [2016]  UKUT  00453
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2016                                 |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     MW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Manley, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

1.  Article 4(1) of the Qualification Directive does  not  impose  a  shared
duty of cooperation on the  Member  State  to  substantiate  an  applicant's
nationality.

2. Article 4(2) refers to documentation (including  documentation  regarding
nationality(ies))  "at  the  applicant's  disposal"  -  which  must  include
documentation which is not in the  applicant's  present  possession  but  is
within his or her  power to obtain.

3. The terms of Article 4(3)  are  consistent  with  the  position  that  an
applicant who denies he is a national of a country  where  he  could  obtain
protection can be expected to take reasonable steps to establish that he  is
not such a national.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who claims to be a national of Eritrea,  has  permission
    to challenge the decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) (Judge  Kimnell)
    dated 30 July 2015 dismissing his appeal against the decision  made  by
    the respondent on 12 May 2014 to remove her from the UK  following  the
    refusal of her application for asylum.   A  previous  decision  by  FtT
    Judge M R Oliver was set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lewis  in
    December 2014 for lack of reasons.

 2. The grounds which persuaded UTJ Bruce to  grant  permission  to  appeal
    were threefold.

 3. First, the judge was said to have erred in  rejecting  the  appellant's
    claim to have been arrested and detained by the Eritrean authorities in
    November 2010 and to have fled Eritrea in consequence.  The  error  was
    identified as being a failure to attach weight to the judge's  positive
    finding that the appellant was a Pentecostal Christian.  It was pointed
    out that the claimed arrest and detention in November 2010  took  place
    when the authorities found the appellant in her home praying with other
    Pentecostal worshippers.  It was stated that  the  judge  proffered  no
    effective reason for rejecting the claimed arrest  and  detention.   It
    was submitted that each of the three reasons given at [46] and [47] for
    rejecting the appellant's account (the  implausibility  of  her  escape
    account; her not having an identity card in  her  possession;  and  her
    inconsistency as regards who  was  arrested)  was  said  by  the  judge
    himself in the same paragraphs not to count against her: the  judge  it
    was said noted that the first two points had not been put to her at the
    hearing;  and  regarded  the  alleged   inconsistency   as   having   a
    satisfactory explanation.  Accordingly, the only reason in  effect  for
    rejecting the core of the appellant's claim was because of the  judge's
    (and respondent's) assessment  as  regards  her  nationality.   It  was
    submitted that it was an error of law to deduce an adverse  credibility
    finding solely from a determination of nationality.

 4. Before proceeding further, it is convenient to set out in full what the
    judge said at [46] - [47]:-

         "46. The appellant's information about her  uncle  engineering  her
             escape from detention in Eritrea is extremely vague.  She does
             not explain how it was arranged or why it would  be  that  her
             close relative would have such influence with the  authorities
             that, firstly, he would know  who  to  approach  in  order  to
             arrange a bribe, how he would  identify  an  officer  who  was
             susceptible, how the whole process was managed and, if a bribe
             was paid, how much it  was.   Quite  why  she  was  not  in  a
             possession of her identity card at the  time  of  her  arrest,
             given that the card and she were both at her uncle's home,  is
             unclear, but no questions were asked about  that  therefore  I
             draw no conclusions from it.  The appellant's journey  to  the
             United Kingdom requires some  explanation  because  she  spent
             three years en route and when she did leave Sudan to travel to
             the United Kingdom she was leaving a country in which she  had
             no well-founded fear of  persecution.   I  conclude  that  the
             appellant has been unforthcoming  because  she  has  not  been
             candid with the UK authorities and has failed to discharge the
             duty on her mentioned in the UNHCR  Handbook  to  provide  the
             respondent with full and complete information.


         47.  I did not find the appellant's answer to question 108  of  her
             interview to be particularly significant.  Ms Ellis sought  to
             argue that the  appellant  had  given  contradictory  evidence
             about who was arrested  because  the  words  'and  my  father'
             appear  in  the  answer.   I  agree  that  the   most   likely
             interpretation is that the appellant was saying in  answer  to
             question 108 that her father was arrested with others, but the
             reply is ambiguous and it is  possible  that  she  was  simply
             saying that the people arrested worshipped  with  her  father.
             Therefore I do not hold that reply against her either."

 5. We do not find this first ground made out.  For one thing  the  grounds
    are inaccurate in portraying the judge as  stating  that  none  of  the
    stated reasons are to count against her.   The  only  point  which  the
    judge states he "will draw no conclusion" from concerned the matter  of
    why she was not in possession of an identity card at the  time  of  her
    arrest.  The judge says he will draw no conclusions because she was not
    asked questions about this.  The judge says nothing in [46] to  suggest
    that the two reasons he relies on are not being  counted  against  her.
    These reasons were that the escape account was  "extremely  vague"  and
    that she had not been candid in the account she gave of the journey  to
    the UK via Sudan.   For  the  judge,  this  meant  she  had  failed  to
    discharge the duty on her to  provide  the  respondent  with  full  and
    complete information.  These reasons were considered by the judge to be
    reinforced by serious  difficulties  as  regards  her  claim  to  be  a
    returnee from Eritrea and to have adequate knowledge about the country.
     Considered cumulatively, we are quite  satisfied  that  these  reasons
    were ones that were both open to the judge and  sufficient  to  justify
    his specific conclusions.   The  judge  did  not  simply  rely  on  the
    difficulties as regards her claim to be a national of Eritrea.

 6. The second ground, which forms the  central  part  of  the  appellant's
    submission, attacks the judge's conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  a
    national of Ethiopia and not as claimed of  Eritrea.   This  conclusion
    was said to be flawed for essentially two reasons.  It is convenient to
    summarise and then give our assessment of  each  of  these  reasons  in
    turn.

 7. The first reason focuses on the judge's assessment  in  [60]  that  the
    appellant had not taken all reasonable steps to  obtain  evidence  from
    the Ethiopian Embassy in Croydon that she is not Ethiopian.   This  was
    said to be wrong  because  in  fact  the  responsibility  to  take  all
    reasonable steps was a shared one.  Specific objection was taken to the
    judge's statement in [59] that "[t]here is nothing the respondent could
    have done to assist  the  appellant  to  make  her  case  that  she  is
    Eritrean".   It  was  argued  that  there  clearly  was  something  the
    respondent could have done, as it is routine for her to engage with the
    Ethiopian Embassy to establish nationality at the  stage  when  she  is
    enforcing removal against someone considered to be a national  of  that
    country.  On the authority of MM v Minister for Justice,  Equality  and
    Law Reform, Ireland, and another (Case C-277/11); [2013]  1  WLR  1259)
    there  is  a  shared  responsibility  between  the  appellant  and  the
    respondent at  the  initial  fact-finding  pre-decision  stage  of  the
    proceeding with respect to  ascertaining  the  facts  to  establish  an
    asylum claim[1].  Yet  in  the  appellant's  case  the  respondent  had
    manifestly  not  made  any  inquiries  relating  to   the   appellant's
    nationality with the Ethiopian Embassy in London.  Since the  appellant
    had stated that she did not  fear  persecution  in  Ethiopia  (only  in
    Eritrea), there was no risk that inquiries would put her  in  jeopardy.
    Such inquiries of the Ethiopian Embassy could lawfully  and  reasonably
    have been made.

The duty to substantiate nationality

 8.  We  reject  this  contention.   In  our  judgement  it  rests   on   a
    misconception regarding the  shared  duty  of  the  respondent  in  the
    initial fact-finding stage as set out in Article 4 of the Qualification
    Directive as analysed by the CJEU in the MM case.   Article  4(1)  does
    specify that the assessment of the relevant elements of the application
    for international protection must be undertaken  by  the  Member  State
    "[i]n cooperation with the applicant".  But this shared  duty  must  be
    interpreted in light of the prior requirement in Member States such  as
    the UK to "consider it the duty of the applicant to submit as  soon  as
    possible all the elements needed to substantiate  the  application  for
    international protection".  Article 4(2) contains a list  of  what  the
    elements referred to in paragraph 1 consist of.   This  list  reads  as
    follows:

         "the  applicant's  statements  and   all   documentation   at   the
         applicant's disposal regarding  the  applicant's  age,  background,
         including that of relevant relatives,  identity,  nationality(ies),
         country(ies) and place(s) of previous  residence,  previous  asylum
         applications, travel routes, identity and travel documents and  the
         reasons for applying for international protection"


    (emphasis added in bold).


 9. Notably the wording of Article 4(2) refers  to  documentation  "at  the
    applicant's disposal";  it  does  not  refer  to  "in  the  applicant's
    possession".  "At the applicant's disposal" must include  documentation
    which is not in the applicant's present possession but which is  within
    the power of the applicant to obtain.

Assessment pertaining to  nationality/citizenship

10. Nor is it just that the Directive regards the duty of substantiation of
    nationality to rest on the applicant (by virtue of the Member State  in
    question - the UK - considering it the applicant's duty to substantiate
    his application). When setting out the basis on which assessment of  an
    application (what the MM judgment terms the second stage  of  assessing
    (or evaluating) the application) Article 4(3)  specifically  identifies
    the  steps  that  have  to  be  taken  in  the  context  of   assessing
    nationality/citizenship as being for the applicant:

         "3.  The assessment of an application for international  protection
             is to be carried out  on  an  individual  basis  and  includes
             taking into account:


          e) whether the applicant could reasonably be  expected  to  avail
             himself of the protection of another country  where  he  could
             assert citizenship."


    (emphasis added in bold)


    In our judgement, the terms of Article 4(3)  are  consistent  with  the
    position that an applicant who denies he is a  national  of  a  country
    where he could obtain protection can be  expected  to  take  reasonable
    steps to establish that he is not such a national.


11. Given that the appellant can derive no support from the  Directive  (or
    the corresponding  provision  of  the  Immigration  Rules  set  out  in
    paragraph 339I), there is no reason to consider departure from Court of
    Appeal authority on this point and in MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289
    their Lordships clearly did not view the duty resting on the  applicant
    to take reasonable steps as being in any way shared. Elias LJ stated at
    [50-[54] as follows:
        "50. In my judgment, where the essential issue before  the  AIT  is
             whether someone will or will  not  be  returned,  the  Tribunal
             should in the normal case require the  applicant  to  act  bona
             fide and take all  reasonably  practicable  steps  to  seek  to
             obtain the requisite documents to enable her to  return.  There
             may be cases where it would be unreasonable  to  require  this,
             such as if disclosure of identity might put  the  applicant  at
             risk, or perhaps  third  parties,  such  as  relatives  of  the
             applicant who may be at risk in the home state if it  is  known
             that the applicant has claimed asylum. That is not  this  case,
             however. There is  no  reason  why  the  appellant  should  not
             herself visit the  embassy  to  seek  to  obtain  the  relevant
             papers. Indeed, as I have said, she did so but wrongly told the
             staff there that she was Eritrean.
        51.  I am satisfied that there is no injustice to the appellant  in
             this approach: it does not put her at risk. The real risk  test
             is adopted  in  asylum  cases  because  of  the  difficulty  of
             predicting what will happen in the future in  another  country,
             and because the consequences of  reaching  the  wrong  decision
             will often be so serious for the applicant.  That  is  not  the
             case here. As Ms Giovannetti pointed out, there is no  risk  of
             ill treatment if an application to the embassy is made from the
             United Kingdom, even if it is refused.
        52.  Furthermore, this approach to the issue of return is  entirely
             consistent with the well-established principle that, before  an
             applicant for asylum can claim the protection  of  a  surrogate
             state, he or she must first take all steps to secure protection
             from the home state. That was the approach adopted in Bradshaw,
             to which I have made reference. It can be seen as an aspect  of
             the duty placed on an applicant to  co-operate  in  the  asylum
             process. Paragraph 205 of the UNHCR handbook  expressly  states
             that an applicant for asylum must, if necessary, make an effort
             to procure additional evidence to assist  the  decision  maker.
             Bradshaw is an example of such a case. The  issue  was  whether
             the applicant was stateless. Lord MacLean held  that  before  a
             person could be regarded  as  stateless,  she  should  make  an
             application for citizenship of the countries with which she was
             most closely connected.
         53. Any other approach leads, in my view,  to  absurd  results.  To
             vary an example given by my Lord, Lord Justice Stanley  Burnton
             in argument: the expert evidence might show that three  out  of
             ten in the appellant's position were not allowed to return.  If
             that evidence were accepted  it  would  plainly  be  enough  to
             constitute  a  real  risk  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
             successful in seeking authorisation to return. But it would  be
             strange if by the appellant's wilful inaction she could prevent
             the Tribunal from having the best  evidence  there  is  of  the
             state's attitude to her return. She could refuse to put to  the
             test whether she might  be  one  of  the  seven  who  would  be
             successful. It would in my view be little short  of  absurd  if
             she could succeed in  her  claim  by  requiring  the  court  to
             speculate on a question which she was in a position actually to
             have resolved.


         54. It is clear that the Tribunal did not approach matters in  this
             way. In the absence of evidence as to how she would  have  been
             treated had she made  a  proper  application,  they  sought  to
             resolve  the  issue  by  considering  whether  someone  in  her
             position was likely to be allowed to be  returned  or  not.  In
             adopting this approach they  were  apparently  approaching  the
             matter  in  line  with  the   submissions   of   the   parties.
             Nevertheless, for the reasons I have given, in my judgment this
             means that they erred in law. They ought not to have engaged on
             this inquiry without first establishing that the appellant  had
             taken all reasonably practicable steps to obtain  authorisation
             to return."
12. The judge may have stated matters too absolutely in [59], when he  said
    "[t]here is nothing the  respondent  could  have  done  to  assist  the
    appellant make her case that she is Eritrean".   It  was  possible  the
    respondent could have discussed with  the  appellant  whether  she  was
    content for the respondent to make inquiries of the Ethiopian  embassy.
    It was possible, if satisfied there would be no risk to the  appellant,
    that the respondent could have made inquiries of the Ethiopian  embassy
    herself.  But there was no duty on her to do this.

The issue of whether the appellant took reasonable steps

13. The second basis identified in the grounds for  attacking  the  judge's
    approach to assessment of nationality avers that the judge  was  simply
    wrong to conclude that the appellant had not taken all reasonable steps
    with respect to establishing  that  she  was  not  Ethiopian.   It  was
    submitted in this regard that the judge was wrong to conclude that  the
    appellant had not acted in accordance with the principles set out in MA
    (Ethiopia), in that:

        (i)   her solicitors had written to the Ethiopian Embassy on 30 May
             2014 to which there had been no reply; and


        (ii)  she had attended the Ethiopian Embassy  to  make  a  personal
             application taking with her a 13  June  2014  letter  from  the
             solicitors.


    To find that there was something more that  the  applicant  could  have
    done was to assume a "universal  finding  that  no  appellant  can  act
    reasonably in such circumstances as they are all dishonest".


14. We are unable to agree with this submission.  What the  judge  said  at
    [60] is this:

         "60. I do not accept that the appellant has  taken  all  reasonable
             steps to engage with the Ethiopian Embassy in London.  She has
             given only partial information which has been insufficient for
             the Ethiopian authorities to acknowledge her  nationality.   I
             found the appellant evasive and untruthful in relation to  her
             ability to establish contact with relatives  abroad.   I  find
             that she has done that in order to hide the  truth  about  her
             nationality and her journey to the United Kingdom."


15. The letters from the appellant's solicitors to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy
    dated 30 May and 13 June 2014 did state that they were acting  for  the
    appellant who was seeking to establish her  nationality  and  they  did
    give the home, place of birth and date of birth of her and her  parents
    etc., but they were stated in the context of what was only  an  inquiry
    as to how she should go  about  making  an  application  for  a  travel
    document or passport.  It is said the first letter did  not  receive  a
    reply, but in any event the appellant did then attend the embassy  with
    a copy of the June letter and  completed  an  application  form  for  a
    passport giving much the same particulars.  Her  completed  application
    form contains a handwritten refusal decision from the consul stating:

         "[T]he applicant has not attached  supportive  documents  with  her
         application for an Ethiopian passport.  Therefore there is no valid
         reason for the Embassy to issue her an Ethiopian passport.


         Taking into consideration the information letter and further to the
         questions  asked  to  the  applicant  in  relation  to  her  family
         background we have come to the conclusion that  the  applicant  has
         not   provided   sufficient   documents   to    substantiate    her
         reliability..."


    This handwritten decision conveys several things: that the embassy took
    into account the appellant's details given in  the  solicitor's  letter
    ("information letter"); that they interviewed the applicant in relation
    to her application with particular reference to her family  background;
    and  that  they  were  not  satisfied  she  had   provided   sufficient
    documentation.  As a statement of reasons for refusing  an  application
    for nationality it  seems  to  us  to  be  unexceptionable.   It  is  a
    recognised principle of international law that every  State  determines
    who its nationals  are  under  its  own  law[2]:  see  Art.  1  of  the
    Convention on Certain Questions Relating to the Conflict of Nationality
    Law, 179 LNTS 89, 13 April 1930 (entry into force: 1  July  1937);  see
    also Permanent Court of International Justice, advisory  opinion  of  7
    February 1923, Nationality Decrees in Tunis and Morocco, PCIJ Series B,
    No 4; KK & ors (Nationality; North  Korea)  Korea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  92
    (IAC). Documentary evidence to support an application  for  nationality
    is a common feature of countries' nationality determination procedures.
     We know from the solicitor's letter  and  the  appellant's  statements
    that she claimed to have no documents to support her  application,  but
    there is nothing to suggest that she made any effort  to  obtain  them,
    e.g. by seeking to contact family members for copies of their  identity
    documents.  Nor is there anything to suggest that her solicitors sought
    to establish from the Ethiopian  embassy  in  advance  of  her  embassy
    appointment what documents they would expect  her  to  produce  or,  if
    certain documents were unavailable, what evidence they would accept  in
    lieu. We would observe that if after her interview the appellant or her
    solicitors were of the view that the embassy had been  unreasonable  or
    unfair in basing their  rejection  on  her  having  failed  to  produce
    relevant documents, they could  have  written  to  say  so.   There  is
    nothing to suggest that they attempted to do that.


16. The appellant may not have been, as was the appellant in MA  (Ethiopia)
    someone who clearly "misled" the embassy, but she was someone  who  had
    not taken all reasonable  steps  because  the  evidence  was  that  her
    efforts to establish Ethiopian nationality (even on the assumption that
    she gave true particulars) were half-hearted. This is  what  the  judge
    found and it was entirely reasonable of him to do so.

17. We would also observe that  the  judge  did  not  simply  consider  the
    appellant's attempts to establish her lack of Ethiopian nationality  by
    reference to her contacts with the Ethiopian embassy. As is clear  from
    [60], he found her evidence to him as regards her inability to  contact
    relatives abroad "evasive and untruthful".

18. Given that we  find  no  error  in  the  judge's  assessment  that  the
    appellant had failed to take reasonable steps to establish that she was
    not Ethiopian, we see no merit whatsoever in the additional  contention
    of the appellant in the  renewed  grounds  that  the  judge's  approach
    assumed the appellant's dishonesty.  There were at least  two  possible
    views the judge could have taken about the appellant's  approaches  and
    exchanges with the Ethiopian embassy: that she was seeking to  help  by
    giving them full and true particulars; or that  she  was  not.   Having
    considered the evidence as a  whole,  the  judge  decided  it  was  the
    latter.  There were no artificial  assumptions  either  of  honesty  or
    dishonesty involved.

The Sprakab report

19. We turn then to the third and final ground advanced  by  the  appellant
    which assails the judge's reliance on the Sprakab report.  This  ground
    alleges that the judge  should  have  found  that  the  report  on  the
    appellant displayed procedural bias because at no stage did it test her
    understanding of Tigrinya, notwithstanding that  she  was  recorded  as
    having stated that she understood Tigrinya.  The judge should not  have
    accepted the respondent's assertion that due to her  claimed  parentage
    she should have used speech displaying some features  of  Tigrinya,  as
    the appellant had given a plausible account of why her speech  did  not
    display such features - principally that she was a  migrant  child  who
    had been brought up by an Ethiopian  nanny.   Further,  whilst  analyst
    one, Catharina Karlhager, records expertise in  analysing  Amharic  and
    Tigrinya, the second linguist, Petter Lovgren, records no  evidence  in
    his CV that he has expertise in either of these languages.  The finding
    of the judge at [56] that both  the  experts  are  well  qualified  was
    therefore irrational.  Finally, the judge should have taken account  of
    the fact that the "Knowledge" section of this report accepts  that  the
    appellant had knowledge of Assab  (her  claimed  birth  place)  and  of
    Eritrea.  The only point taken against  her  in  this  section  of  the
    report is limited to one, concerning her knowledge about the two ports,
    in Assab.

20. We are not persuaded that this ground discloses a material error of law
    either.   The  judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's  identity  and
    nationality was based on the evidence as a whole, so that, in  relation
    to the appellant's claimed knowledge of  Eritrea,  the  Sprakab  report
    section on "Knowledge" was only part of the overall  picture.   In  her
    asylum interview the appellant had failed to show adequate knowledge of
    Eritrea in several respects.  The respondent's refusal  decision  noted
    that she had failed to give correct answers to questions about  Eritrea
    regarding opening hours of shops, school uniforms, traditional  sports,
    winter months in Assab, the name of the ancient city  near  Assab,  the
    ancient islands in the Bay of Assab, the second port  in  Eritrea,  the
    name of the section of Assab by the  shoreline  and  the  part  of  the
    section of Assab  in  the  centre.   We  are  also  satisfied  that  in
    assessing the significance of these shortcomings the judge took  proper
    account of her claimed reasons for them (including her  claim  to  have
    only lived in Eritrea for three short periods). We  conclude  that  the
    judge's findings as regards knowledge were entirely open to him on  the
    evidence.

21. As regards the appellant's linguistic characteristics, it  was  equally
    the case that the judge had regard not just to the Sprakab  report  but
    to the  asylum  interview  (which  included  some  questions  asked  in
    Tigrinya)  and  the  appellant's  own  evidence  at  the  hearing:  see
    especially [17] - [19], and submissions made about the  Sprakab  report
    [39].

22. We would accept nevertheless that the judge did rely  significantly  on
    the Sprakab report, and that if such reliance was misplaced that  would
    give rise to a material error of law:  however  we  do  not  find  such
    reliance was misplaced.

23. What the judge concluded about the report is set out at [55] - [57]  as
    follows:-

         "55. I do not accept that the report shows evidence  of  procedural
             bias.  It is apparent from the  introductory  passage  to  the
             report at C1 that the  analysts  were  asked  to  examine  the
             applicant's language by analysis.  It does not  indicate  that
             the analysts were asked to establish  that  the  appellant  is
             from Ethiopia.  Secondly, it is acknowledged that  the  report
             was prepared on instructions from the Home Office but Sprakab,
             its linguists and analysts are aware that the  material  might
             be considered on appeal and that it is the duty of the analyst
             to help the Tribunal on matters  within  Sprakab's  expertise.
             The  duty,  it  is  said,  is  'paramount  and  overrides  any
             obligation to the Home Office.  We have complied with our duty
             to the Tribunal...'


         56.  I note what was said by the Supreme Court about  the  decision
             of the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  MN  (Somalia)  v  Home
             Secretary [2014] 1 WLR 2064, i.e., that where a Sprakab Report
             expresses an opinion in terms of certainty or  near  certainty
             then  little  more  is  required  to  support  a   conclusion,
             underplayed the importance in any case of the Tribunal  itself
             examining  such  a  report  critically.   But   the   specific
             criticisms made by Mr Chelvan in this case of this report seem
             to me to be unfounded.  The two  analysts  who  reached  their
             conclusion are well qualified and  I  give  due  deference  to
             their opinion, whilst at the same time placing the  report  in
             context with the other  evidence.   I  would  not  agree  with
             Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I A  Lewis  who  said  when
             remitting this case for a further hearing that the  report  is
             'near determinative' but it does deserve significant weight.


         57.  The appellant has given evidence that the reason  why  she  is
             not fluent in Tigrinya is because she was raised in an Amharic
             speaking environment.  Her father was away working a  lot  and
             her mother died when she was only 2  years  of  age.   On  the
             other hand the appellant was, on  her  evidence,  residing  in
             Ethiopia only until the age of 8.  She was residing  in  Sudan
             with her father for eight years until 2009 and has also  spent
             time in Eritrea and married a man in Eritrea on 23rd May 2010.
              I do not find her evidence that he  was  living  in  Ethiopia
             only until the age of 8 at all likely, given the  findings  in
             the Sprakab Report."

24. We derive from the judge's reasoning as set out in these paragraphs the
    following.  We begin  with  a  point  not  raised  by  Mr  Manley,  but
    important nonetheless.  The judge clearly took cognisance of what  Lord
    Carnwath had said in MN (Somalia) [2014]  UKSC  30  and  made  sure  to
    establish whether the judge had committed the same error as  the  Upper
    Tribunal was held to  have  done  in  that  case  of  underplaying  the
    importance  in  every  case  of  the  Tribunal  examining  the   report
    critically, and not just reading off its conclusions if expressed as  a
    near certainty.  We note also that, unlike the report considered in MN,
    the report in this case was by identified linguists.

25. We  next  observe  that  the  judge  gave  specific  attention  to  the
    appellant's contention that the report betrayed procedural bias.   What
    the judge concluded in [55] was his response to the contention  of  the
    appellant's representative  at  that  hearing,  Mr  Chelvan,  which  he
    recorded at [54] as being that "the respondent had  set  out  to  prove
    that the appellant is from Ethiopia rather than help her establish  her
    true nationality".  We consider the judge's reasons for rejecting  this
    contention was a sound one, and that the judge was  right  to  consider
    that the authors of the report  sought  to  establish  the  appellant's
    linguistic characteristics with an open mind and did not see themselves
    as seeking to establish that the appellant is from Ethiopia.  (We would
    recall that for reasons given earlier we reject the notion implicit  in
    the above argument that the burden of  substantiation  is  not  on  the
    applicant, but depends on help from the respondent.)

26. The third point we would make is that we see no material error  in  the
    judge stating at [56]  that  "[t]he  two  analysts  who  reached  their
    conclusions are well qualified  and  I  give  due  deference  to  their
    opinion".  This assessment did not assert that both were well qualified
    in Tigrinya and Amharic and as a statement about  their  qualifications
    as set out in their CVs, it was not incorrect.  It stood  as  a  direct
    answer to the submission from Mr Chelvan, recorded at  [39]  that  "the
    analysts were not suitably qualified to carry out the task" and at [54]
    that there was a "lack of any evidence of expertise in analysing either
    Amharic or Tigrinya in the second linguist's CV".   Whilst  the  second
    analyst's CV did not demonstrate any knowledge of Tigrinya or  Amharic,
    the report sets out  a  description  of  its  methodology  noting  that
    "[l]anguage analysis cases regional and local  linguistic  features  in
    phonology, prosody, morphology, syntax and lexica..."  It  states  that
    "[i]f necessary, a second opinion is requested by one or more analysts"
    and adds:

         "Every  language  analysis  report  is  reviewed  by  two  or  more
         linguists  to  ensure  the  quality  and  contents.   The  language
         analysis  in  this  report  has  been  compiled  by   analysts   in
         cooperation with Sprakab's linguists.  A Sprakab linguist bears the
         ultimate responsibility for the quality and content of the language
         analysis."


27. It is also confirms in respect of the report on the appellant that  the
    "Examination/analysis [was] carried  out  by  expert  analysis  working
    under the supervising umbrella of expert linguists."

28. To our satisfaction the above makes clear: (i) that  the  expertise  of
    language analysis goes beyond  linguistic  expertise  in  a  particular
    language/languages (and includes, for example, knowledge of  phonology,
    morphology, syntax, lexica); (ii) that whilst the analysts may  include
    more than one linguist it  is  only  necessary  for  there  to  be  one
    linguist (and a "second opinion"  can  be  requested  by  one  or  more
    analyst);  (iii)  it  is  the   linguist   who   bears   the   ultimate
    responsibility for the quality and contents of the  language  analysis;
    and (iv) that in addition to the input of the analysts, Sprakab ensures
    that its  analysts  work  under  the  supervising  umbrella  of  expert
    linguists.

29. Seen in this context, the second linguist involved in the report on the
    appellant may not have possessed any knowledge of Tigrinya or  Amharic,
    but he was a linguist whose qualification included basic,  intermediate
    and specialised and advanced courses in linguistics  and  a  basic  and
    intermediate course  in  computational  linguistics.   Given  that  the
    report's methodology accorded  ultimate  responsibility  to  the  first
    analyst, linguist Catharina Karlhager, who did have specific  expertise
    in Amharic, Tigrinya and Oromo,  we  see  nothing  untoward  about  the
    involvement of one analyst who did not.

30. As regards the contents of the report, the assessment made was that  it
    was  very  likely  that  the  appellant's  linguistic  background   was
    Ethiopian as she demonstrated that she had  "mastered  Amharic  to  the
    level of mother tongue speaker", that the variety of Amharic she  spoke
    was one found in Ethiopia and that "[h]er speech did  not  display  any
    feature of  Tigrinya  which  can  be  expected  among  Eritreans".   In
    reaching these conclusions the analysts were  clearly  aware  that  the
    appellant had stated, inter alia, that she had been born  in  Assab  in
    Eritrea of Eritrean parents but lived in Addis Ababa  in  Ethiopia  for
    seven years.  They clearly reached their conclusions after  a  specific
    analysis of linguistic level,  phonology,  morphology  and  syntax  and
    lexica (the last three with specific examples from her speech).  It  is
    also clear that the analysts reached the view they did  notwithstanding
    that on the section on knowledge  assessment  the  appellant  was  only
    noted to have lacked knowledge about Eritrea on one matter: "two  ports
    (she mentioned Dahlak which is not a port but an island)".  Given  that
    their report was a linguistic analysis, it would have been odd if  they
    had  treated  the  mixed  conclusions  of  the  knowledge  section   as
    determinative in any event.

31. In short, we reject the appellant's contention that the Sprakab  report
    was flawed and the concomitant contention  that  the  judge  fell  into
    error by placing reliance on it.

32. For the above reasons we conclude:

33. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not materially err in law.

34. His decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        [pic]                          Date


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


-----------------------
[1] Paragraphs 63-69 of MM state:

"63  As is clear from its title, Article 4 of Directive 2004/83 relates to
    the 'assessment of facts and circumstances'.

64      In actual fact, that 'assessment'  takes  place  in  two  separate
    stages.  The  first  stage  concerns  the  establishment   of   factual
    circumstances  which  may  constitute  evidence   that   supports   the
    application, while the second stage relates to the legal  appraisal  of
    that evidence, which entails deciding whether,  in  the  light  of  the
    specific facts of a given case, the substantive conditions laid down by
    Articles 9 and 10 or Article 15 of Directive 2004/83 for the grant of
    international protection are met.

65      Under Article 4(1) of Directive 2004/83, although it is generally
    for the applicant to submit all elements  needed  to  substantiate  the
    application, the fact remains that it is the duty of the  Member  State
    to cooperate with  the  applicant  at  the  stage  of  determining  the
    relevant elements of that application.

66      This requirement that the Member State cooperate therefore  means,
    in practical terms, that if, for any reason  whatsoever,  the  elements
    provided by an applicant for international protection are not complete,
    up to date or relevant, it is necessary for the Member State  concerned
    to cooperate  actively  with  the  applicant,  at  that  stage  of  the
    procedure,  so  that  all  the  elements  needed  to  substantiate  the
    application may be assembled. A Member State may also be better  placed
    than an applicant to gain access to certain types of documents.

67      Moreover, the interpretation set out  in  the  previous  paragraph
    finds support in Article 8(2)(b) of  Directive  2005/85,  pursuant  to
    which  Member  States  are  to  ensure  that  precise  and   up-to-date
    information is obtained on the  general  situation  prevailing  in  the
    countries of origin of applicants for asylum and, where  necessary,  in
    countries through which they have transited.

68      It is thus clear that Article 4(1) of Directive  2004/83  relates
    only to the first stage mentioned in paragraph 64  of  this  judgment,
    concerning  the  determination  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  qua
    evidence which may substantiate the asylum application.

69      By contrast, it is apparent that the argument put forward by Mr M.
    concerns the second stage, also mentioned at paragraph 64 above, which
    relates to the appraisal of  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  the
    evidence provided in support of the application, when it is  determined
    whether that evidence does in fact meet the conditions required for the
    international protection requested to be granted."


[2] As to the meaning of law in this type of context, see Pham  v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 19 at [34].

