






R (on the application of SS) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
(declaratory orders) IJR [2015] UKUT 00462 (IAC)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                     The Queen on the application of SS
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



    Before The Hon Mr Justice McCloskey, President of the Upper Tribunal




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr A Pipe,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Bhatia
Best Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and Ms N  Candlin,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Birmingham Civil justice Centre on 09  June  2015,  followed
by further written submissions.


   i) The Upper Tribunal has  a  discretion  to  make  a  declaration  under
      section 15(1)(d) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007.
      In common with all remedial orders  in  judicial  review  proceedings,
      this lies within the discretion of the Tribunal.



  ii) In deciding whether to make a declaration the Tribunal should bear  in
      mind  the  educative  and  corrective  function  of  judicial  review.
      Furthermore, where a challenge exposes that  a  public  authority  has
      acted unlawfully,  a  declaration  will  normally  be  appropriate  in
      circumstances where a quashing, mandatory or prohibitory order  is  an
      inappropriate form of relief.


                                  Judgment


                     Delivered (finally) on 28 July 2015

Introduction

(1)   This is the formal, written incarnation of  the  ex  tempore  judgment
      pronounced at the  conclusion  of  this  substantive  judicial  review
      hearing on 09 June 2015 and following consideration  of  the  parties'
      responses to the Tribunal's invitation to make further submissions.

   2) The Applicant was granted permission to  challenge  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision refusing to issue her  with  a  derivative  residence
      card under regulation 18A of the EEA Regulations 2006.  This provides,
      in material part:

           "(1)  The  Secretary  of  State  must  issue  a  person  with  a
                 derivative residence card on application and on  production
                 of -


                   a) a valid identity card issued by an  EEA  State  or  a
                      valid passport; and


                   b) proof that the applicant has a  derivative  right  of
                      residence under regulation 15A.

           (2)   On receipt of  an  application  under  paragraph  (1)  the
                 Secretary  of  State  must  issue  the  applicant  with   a
                 certificate of application as soon as possible."

      By regulation 29A(1), the Secretary of State is  empowered  to  accept
      alternative evidence of identity and nationality "where the person  is
      unable to obtain or produce the required document due to circumstances
      beyond his or her control."  In  accordance  with  regulation  15A,  a
      person is entitled to a derivative  right  to  reside  in  the  United
      Kingdom for as long as such  person  satisfies  the  three  prescribed
      criteria, that is to say that he/she -


        a) is the primary carer of a British citizen; who is


        b) residing in the United Kingdom; and

        c) such citizen would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom  or
           in another EEA State if the carer were required to leave.

      Two requirements are prescribed  for  acquisition  of  the  status  of
      "primary carer", namely, the person concerned -


           i)    is "a direct relative or a legal guardian" of the  British
              citizen  concerned; and


           (ii)  is "the person who has  primary  responsibility  for  that
                 person's care" or  "shares  equally  [such  responsibility]
                 with one other person who is not an exempt person."


      The Challenge

   3) The impugned decision of the Secretary of  State,  dated  28  November
      2013, yields the following analysis:

        i) The Applicant failed to satisfy the identity  card  or  passport
           requirement enshrined in regulation 18A(1)(a).


       ii) Irrespective of this failing, the application -

                 "...  would still fall  for  refusal  .........  [as]  ....
                 there is  ....  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
                 British citizen child ........... would be unable to remain
                 in the United Kingdom/EEA if you were forced to leave.  You
                 have not provided evidence as to why the child's father  is
                 not in a position to care for the British citizen child  if
                 you were forced to leave the United Kingdom .........


                 Furthermore, to be considered the primary  carer  we  would
                 expect you to provide evidence to show that the child lives
                 with you or spends the majority of her time with you,  that
                 you make the day to day decisions in regard to the  child's
                 health,  education  etc  and  that  you   are   financially
                 responsible for the child."

      iii) In summary, it was  considered  that  the  Applicant  failed  to
           discharge the burden of proof of demonstrating on the balance of
           probabilities that the statutory requirements were satisfied.

   4) There are four grounds of challenge in total. The first of these  (not
      in the pleaded sequence), which complains that the  application  could
      not be lawfully refused under regulation 18A(1)(a) on the ground  that
      the Applicant's passport was in the possession  of  the  Secretary  of
      State's agents, was disallowed at the permission  stage  following  an
      oral renewal hearing.  It is, therefore, moot at this stage. The  next
      ground raises the question of law of whether a claim based on  Article
      8  ECHR  can  be  incorporated  in  an  application  under   the   EEA
      Regulations.  The parties' representatives were aware  that  there  is
      currently pending a reserved decision  on  this  issue  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal and I indicated that it would not be appropriate  to  advance
      arguments thereon, given in particular  that  this  challenge  can  be
      decided on other grounds.

   5) The third ground which I shall address  challenges  the  Secretary  of
      State's assessment that the Applicant had failed to  demonstrate  that
      she is "the direct  relative  or  legal  guardian  of"  the  child  in
      question.  This formulation of this ground requires a slight amendment
      of the Applicant's pleaded  second  ground  which,  having  given  the
      parties  an  opportunity  to  make  submissions,  I  authorise.    The
      aforementioned  assessment  is  unparticularised  and  unreasoned.   I
      consider  that  the  evidence  supplied  with  the   application   and
      subsequently in response to a request for elaboration, which  included
      the child's birth certificate and other materials, demonstrated beyond
      peradventure that the Applicant is the mother of the child  concerned.
      On this basis alone, the impugned decision of the Secretary  of  State
      is vitiated by material  error  of  fact  and/or  irrationality.  This
      sounds also on the remainder of this ground since, taking into account
      the totality of the information supplied by the Applicant, I  consider
      that it was not rationally open to the decision maker to conclude that
      there was insufficient evidence of the various, inter-related elements
      of the status of "primary carer".

   6) The fourth, and final, ground of challenge complains that the impugned
      decision is unlawful as  it  is  in  breach  of  each  of  the  duties
      enshrined in section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
      Act 2009 (the "2009 Act").  There is no dispute  between  the  parties
      that the impugned decision falls within the section 55(2)  embrace  of
      "any function of the Secretary of State in  relation  to  immigration,
      asylum or nationality".  For the reasons elaborated in my  ex  tempore
      judgment, I consider  this  ground  to  be  clearly  established.   In
      summary:

        i) There is a patent misdirection in law in the impugned  decision,
           by reason of the formulation of the duty as a "duty of care".  I
           reproduce the offending passage in full:


                 "The Home Office discharges its duty of care by  acting  on
                 any  concerns  it  identifies  regarding  the  welfare   of
                 children with whom they come into contact and by conducting
                 checks that are consistent with the impact of its  decision
                 making."


           This is a  classic  breach  of  the  "Tameside"  principle:  the
           decision maker has asked the wrong question (Secretary of  State
           for Education and Science v Tameside MBC [1977] AC 1014).


       ii) This error is compounded by the  unintelligible  statement  that
           the Home Office conducts checks "that are inconsistent with  the
           impact of its decision making": this  fails  the  plain  English
           test.


      iii) This passage continues:

                 "To this extent, the position of your children .....  [both
                 named] ...  have  been  considered  in  the  light  of  the
                 requirements incumbent on the Home Office as defined  under
                 section 55 of the 2009 Act, section 11 of the Children  Act
                 2004 and also in the light of the Supreme Court  ruling  in
                 the case of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4".

           This passage betrays a fundamental misunderstanding of the  duty
           contained in section 55(1).  Its language belongs  to  a  planet
           distant from that of section 55.

       iv) Furthermore,  the  suggestion  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
           decisions considered this statutory duty to have been  performed
           by carrying out "checks" relating to the children has  no  basis
           in fact: there is no evidence that no such checks  were  carried
           out.


        v) The confusion and misconception relating to the  statutory  duty
           in play are further compounded by the invocation of what was, in
           the context, an entirely irrelevant statutory  provision  namely
           section 11 of the Children Act 2004.

      The conclusion that there was a wholesale  failure  to  discharge  the
      duty of ensuing that the best interests of the child (not  children  -
      another glaring error) concerned would be a primary  consideration  is
      inescapable.  The  signal  infirmities  in  this  passage  also  impel
      inexorably to the further conclusion that there was a  breach  of  the
      freestanding duty enshrined in section 55(3) of the 2009 Act  to  have
      regard to the Secretary of State's published guidance. I refer to, but
      do not reproduce, the relevant passages in JO and Others  (Section  55
      Duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517, at [6] - [13].


   7) I add that there was no submission on behalf of the Secretary of State
      that the breaches of section 55 readily identifiable in  the  impugned
      decision were not material.  Having regard to the terms of  regulation
      18A of the 2006 Regulations, it is conceivable that this argument  may
      be canvassed in a suitable future  case,  which  will  permit  a  more
      intense  examination  of  the  interaction  between  section  55   and
      Regulation 18A.  However, this issue does not fall to be determined in
      this appeal.

A Declaratory Order?

   8) To summarise, I have found two significant public law  aberrations  in
      the impugned decision.  In considering  the  appropriate  disposal  of
      this challenge, it is necessary to balance  these  findings  with  the
      Applicant's inability, in  making  the  original  application  to  the
      Secretary of State, to satisfy the identity card/passport  requirement
      of Regulation 18A(1)(a).  Given this  failure,  a  quashing  order  is
      plainly inappropriate since the impugned decision  is  sustainable  on
      this basis.  However, this analysis does not impel inexorably  to  the
      conclusion that the appropriate order is one  simply  dismissing  this
      application.


   9) The central question which arises in these circumstances is whether it
      is appropriate to make a declaration in  the  exercise  of  the  power
      conferred on the Upper Tribunal by section 15(1)(d) of the  Tribunals,
      Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (which continues to use  the  language
      "declaration").  This prompts some  reflection  on  the  contours  and
      function of declaratory relief in judicial review proceedings.


  10) A declaratory judgment is a formal judicial statement pronouncing upon
      the existence or non-existence of a legal state of affairs.  It is  to
      be contrasted with an executory, in  other  words  coercive,  judgment
      (see Zamir and Woolf, The Declaratory Judgment, 4th Edition, paragraph
      1.02).  The declaratory judgment has been  described  as  "as  old  as
      judicial history" (Borchard, Declaratory Judgments, 2nd Edition  1941,
      p 87 et seq).  Following a period of some quiescence, the  declaratory
      order (or declaration, as it was formerly known) was re-energised in a
      series of decisions establishing that this remedy could be obtained in
      civil proceedings against the Crown and other public bodies.  See, for
      example, the historic decision of Ridge v  Baldwin  [1964]  AC  40  in
      which the House of Lords granted the  relief  of  declaring  that  the
      dismissal of the Appellant, a  police  officer,  was  null  and  void.
      During this era, reinforced  by  other  memorable  decisions  such  as
      Anisminic v Foreign Compensation  Commission  [1969]  2  AC  147,  the
      availability of the declaratory order in private  law  coexisted  with
      the prerogative orders available against public bodies in public  law.
      The declaration achieved particular prominence  as  a  result  of  the
      landmark  reforms  of  judicial  review  effected  in  1977   by   the
      introduction of the new Order 53 of the Rules  of  the  Supreme  Court
      (now Part 54  of  the  Civil  Procedure  Rules).   This  extended  the
      remedies available via the prerogative orders by  adding  those  of  a
      declaration, an injunction and, in limited circumstances, damages.


  11) The declaratory order is  the  most  flexible  and  versatile  of  the
      remedies available in judicial review proceedings.  In common with all
      such  remedies  the  judicial  decision  whether  to  grant  it  is  a
      discretionary one. It is frequently not the claimant's remedy of first
      choice, given the sharper cutting edge of a quashing  order  (formerly
      certiorari) or a mandatory order (formerly  mandamus).   However,  its
      value and utility  should  not  be  underestimated.   Furthermore,  in
      common with all of the orders  available  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      judicial review proceedings, it can be granted on the  Tribunal's  own
      initiative where the circumstances are considered appropriate.

  12) As decisions such as R (Macrae) v Herefordshire DC [2012] EWCA 457, at
      [31] and [40] and R v Investors Compensation Scheme, ex  parte  Weyell
      [1994] QB 749, at  767H  illustrate,  victory  in  substance  for  the
      claimant is not a necessary prerequisite to this order  issuing.  This
      is consistent with the educative and corrective function  of  judicial
      review, one of its multiple uses and values.  Notably, the declaratory
      order has been the remedy granted in cases where there is a  challenge
      to ministerial or departmental guidance and advice:  see  for  example
      Laker Airways v Department of Trade [1977] QB 643 and Gillick  v  West
      Norfolk and Wisbech Area Health Authority [1986] AC 112.   Turning  to
      the sphere of immigration law, a declaratory order is,  in  principle,
      available in proceedings in which a  question  arises  concerning  the
      vires or legality  of  a  ministerial  instruction  ("IDI")  given  to
      Immigration Officers under the Immigration Act 1971 (section 4 (1) and
      Schedule 1, paragraph 1).

  13) A brief reflection on the remedy granted in a recent landmark decision
      belonging to the field of immigration and asylum law  is  instructive.
      In Detention Action v  First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber), Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber),  and  Lord
      Chancellor [2015] EWHC 1689 (Admin), the Administrative Court made  an
      order quashing the Fast Track Rules contained in the Schedule  to  the
      Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) Rules 2014.  The effect of this Order was to  extinguish  the
      Rules summarily. The contrast with a declaratory order is interesting.
      If the Court had, in the exercise  of  its  discretion,  opted  for  a
      declaratory order, namely an order declaring the Rules ultra vires and
      unlawful, the Rules would have survived.  This illustrates  the  sharp
      difference between these two forms of remedy.

  14) Finally, I draw attention to the recent decision of the Supreme  Court
      in Hunt v North Somerset Council [2015] UKSC 51.  There the  Appellant
      was unsuccessful in his judicial review challenge at  first  instance.
      On appeal, while two substantive issues were determined in his  favour
      no relief was granted.  On further appeal to the  Supreme  Court,  the
      Appellant contended that the  Court  of  Appeal  should  have  made  a
      declaration that the Respondent had failed in its  relevant  statutory
      obligations.  The opinion of Lord  Toulson,  with  whom  all  Justices
      concurred, contains the following passage, in [12]

           "... in circumstances where a public body has  acted  unlawfully
           but where it is not appropriate to make a mandatory, prohibitory
           or quashing order, it will usually be appropriate to  make  some
           form of declaratory order to reflect the  court's  finding.   In
           some cases it may be sufficient to make no order  except  as  to
           costs; but simply to dismiss the claim when  there  has  been  a
           finding  of  illegality  is  likely  to  convey   a   misleading
           impression and to leave  the  claimant  with  an  understandable
           sense of injustice".

      The immediately following words are also of note:

            "That said, there is no 'must' about making a declaratory  order
..."

      In short, both the decision whether to grant relief and the  selection
      of the  appropriate  remedial  order  are  matters  lying  within  the
      discretion of  the  court  or  tribunal  concerned.   This  discretion
      extends to making an order which has not been  specifically  requested
      by the claimant.

  15) In the present case, I have found that the impugned  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State is vitiated by a  breach  of  both  of  the  duties
      enshrined in Section 55 of the 2009 Act: see [6] supra.  This  is  the
      second of two substantial flaws in the decision.  In the  exercise  of
      my  discretion,  I  have  concluded  that  a  declaratory   order   is
      appropriate.  In particular, I am satisfied that this order will serve
      a useful function in  the  public  interest,  particularly  given  the
      misgivings expressed by this Tribunal about the  quality  of  decision
      making in children's cases generally and the approach to  the  section
      55 duties in practice: see JO (section 55 duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT
      517 (IAC) and MK (section 55  -  Tribunal  options)  [2015]  UKUT  223
      (IAC).  Thus the order is designed to have an impact beyond the narrow
      confines of the present  case.   Furthermore,  since  future  decision
      making involving these parties is eminently  predictable,  this  order
      will provide  guidance  and  education  to  the  Secretary  of  State,
      minimising the possibility of any repetition  of  either  of  the  two
      public law misdemeanours identified in this judgment.   A  declaratory
      order will also provide suitable vindication to the Applicant, marking
      the fact that his challenge has successfully exposed  two  substantial
      flaws in the Secretary of State's decision.

Order

  16) Accordingly, there will be a declaration in the following terms:

           The Upper Tribunal declares that in making the decision  of  the
           Secretary  of  State  dated  28  November   2013   whereby   the
           Appellant's application for a derivative  residence  card  under
           the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  was
           refused there was a failure to discharge the duties enshrined in
           section  55(1)  and  (3)  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
           Immigration  Act  2009  and  an  unlawful  assessment  that  the
           Applicant is not the direct relative or legal  guardian  of  the
           child concerned."


  17) I consider that by virtue of and in response this declaratory order it
      will now be incumbent upon the Secretary of State  to  reconsider  the
      impugned decision and to make a fresh one, mindful and  respectful  of
      the Tribunal's assessment and given the undisputed assertion that  the
      Appellant's passport is now available.  This will clearly have  to  be
      taken into account.

Costs and Permission to Appeal


  18) The Applicant has succeeded on two grounds and the  general  principle
      that costs follow the event applies.  It matters not that  the  remedy
      is of  the  declaratory  variety.  Thus  I  award  costs  against  the
      Respondent.

  19) The Respondent  has  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.  I  am  not
      satisfied that this  decision  involves  any  point  of  principle  of
      novelty  or  elevated  importance.   Moreover,  the  application   for
      permission to appeal is in substance rooted in the misconception  that
      the impugned decision has been quashed. This is not the effect of  the
      declaratory order. In addition, the application misrepresents  (again)
      the statutory language.  Permission to appeal is refused accordingly.








                       [pic]
            Signed:


                       The President, The Hon Mr Justice McCloskey


        Dated:    23 July 2015





























Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).

