
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Samir Boukhatem) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department FCJR [2013] UKUT 00464 (IAC)


|Heard at Field House                 |Judgment sent               |
|On 27 June 2013                      |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                      The QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF
                              SAMIR BOUKHATEM)
                                                                   Applicant

                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the applicant:     Ms G. Ward, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co.,
                    solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr R. Harland, instructed by Treasury Solicitor

                                  JUDGMENT

Introduction

1. The applicant challenges as Wednesbury unreasonable  the  decisions  made
   by the respondent on 17 July and 25 August 2012 and 21 June 2013 refusing
   to treat the applicant's submissions as a fresh claim within the  meaning
   of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

2. The applicant is a citizen of Algeria who was born on 22 April 1984.   He
   arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 September 2001 and applied for  asylum
   about ten days later.  His asylum application was refused and his  appeal
   before Immigration Judge M.A. Khan was dismissed in  19  September  2002.
   An application was made for permission to apply to the Upper Tribunal for
   reconsideration to the Tribunal.  That was refused on 4 November 2002.

3. On 25 November 2002 a letter was sent  to  the  applicant  notifying  him
   that his asylum claim had been finally determined and that he  no  longer
   qualified for financial support under s. 95 of the Immigration and Asylum
   Act 1999. Temporary support was to be provided until 30 November 2002 and
   he would be permitted to remain in his  accommodation  until  5  December
   2002. The letter continued :

      "You must now leave the United Kingdom. Help and advice  on  returning
      home can be obtained from the Immigration  Office  dealing  with  this
      case, or the immigration service... alternatively help and advice  for
      asylum seekers and those whose asylum claim has been refused who  wish
      to return home voluntarily can  be  obtained  from  the  International
      Organisation for Migration."

The letter of 27 November 2002

4. It is not clear whether receipt of this letter prompted  the  applicant's
   representative to write a letter dated 27 November 2002 which said:

      "We wish to make a fresh application  on  behalf  of  our  client  and
      hereby apply on his behalf to be granted leave to remain on an  asylum
      basis.  The appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
      Algeria and suffered a great deal of  persecution  in  Algeria  before
      fleeing the country for the safety of his life."

5. Given that the fact that the applicant's asylum claim  had  been  finally
   determined a few days before when his application to appeal  against  the
   determination of Judge Khan  had  been  refused  and  his  appeal  rights
   exhausted, there could be nothing within this letter that amounted  to  a
   fresh claim. No suggestion was made that there was to be a further  human
   rights claim but, insofar as it dealt with circumstances that  post-dated
   a decision made a few days  before,  there  could  not  be  the  remotest
   prospect of a fresh claim succeeding.  It  is,  therefore,  difficult  to
   understand how in these proceedings so much attention has been paid to  a
   letter which carries so little weight and has so little significance.  It
   was not a fresh claim. However, on that scant  foundation,  it  was  said
   that the decision made on 17 July 2012 was a  response  to  it  following
   some 9 � years later. By this device it was sought to  argue  that  there
   had been a delay of such scandalous proportion that the applicant  should
   benefit from the  weight  of  judicial  authority  directed  against  the
   Secretary of State when an appellant or applicant has been the victim  of
   inexcusable delay. However,   as Judge Jordan said  when  he  granted  an
   adjournment to pursue the application for judicial review, the letter  of
   27 November 2002 ("the 2002 letter") was in reality  a  'non-letter'  and
   provided no basis for enhancing the applicant's claim under Article 8.

6. That does not, of course,  mean  that  the  passage  of  time  which  has
   occurred since November 2002 and the relevant  decisions  should  not  be
   examined. The fact that over 10 years has elapsed since  the  applicant's
   rights under the Refugee Convention were determined (at which  point  the
   applicant could have been removed) inevitably required an examination  as
   to whether removal would violate the applicant's human  rights.  However,
   the delay is not properly categorised as arising from a  failure  on  the
   part of the respondent over a period of more  than  9  years  to  make  a
   decision upon an asylum claim or upon further submissions  sufficient  to
   amount to a fresh claim under paragraph 353 based upon the 2002 letter.

7. Since the matter was last before the Upper Tribunal,  the  disclosure  of
   documents has revealed that the applicant's solicitors  wrote  a  further
   letter on 6 January 2003 to follow-up the 2002 letter. In  it,  City  Law
   Practice sought a Self-Completion Questionnaire at a time when this  form
   was used to initiate an original claim for  asylum.  No  details  of  any
   asylum claim are mentioned even in summary form and no human rights claim
   is mentioned. This letter does not,  therefore,  provide  any  basis  for
   asserting years later that the respondent  was  under  an  obligation  to
   reach a decision upon it.

8. Pausing there, the applicant knew that his asylum claim  had  failed  and
   that he was required to leave.  The 2002 letter could provide him with no
   basis for believing that he had a further right to  remain  or  that  the
   letter of 25 November 2002  which  had  told  him  that  he  should  make
   arrangements to leave had been annulled or cancelled.  Had the respondent
   in 2002, made a decision on the 'claim' in the 2002  letter  for  further
   leave to remain that application would  have  been  doomed  to  fail;  it
   contained no basis for further leave.

9. Much energy has been expended upon seeking to analyse the actions of  the
   applicant and  the  respondent  in  the  years  that  followed.   It  may
   therefore be helpful to provide a summary of events:

                                 CHRONOLOGY

 2003 onwards    The respondent  maintains  that  the  applicant  failed  to
                 maintain contact with respondent.
24 June 2004     The applicant is arrested  when  seeking  to  open  a  bank
                 account with a document to which he was not  entitled.   On
                 admitting responsibility, he  received  a  police  caution.
                 There is then an issue as  to  whether  the  applicant  was
                 served with an IS96 requiring him  to  report  on  28  June
                 2004.
28 June 2004 onwards
                 There is no doubt that the applicant thereafter  failed  to
                 report but, if he knew nothing of the requirement to do so,
                 his failure cannot be held against him.
29 April 2010    The respondent sent a letter to the applicant's last  known
                 address. The letter was returned on  13  May  2010  as  the
                 applicant had moved.  The applicant relies upon this as  an
                 acknowledgment that his case was in a backlog of old asylum
                 cases and the case would be considered  by  the  CRD.   The
                 letter seeks further documentation.
25 October 2010  The applicant's representatives write  to  the  respondent,
                 containing a letter from the Applicant's friend. (1)
25 January 2011  The applicant's representatives write  to  the  respondent.
                 (2)
28 April 2011    The applicant's representatives write  to  the  respondent.
                 (3)
19 May 2011 The applicant's representatives write to the respondent. (4)
15 August 2011   The applicant's representatives write  to  the  respondent.
                 (5)
22 September 2011      The applicant's representatives seek judicial  review
                 requiring the respondent to reach a decision in the  legacy
                 programme raised in the 29 April 2010 letter.
16 March  2012     First  application  for  judicial  review  requiring  the
                 respondent to make a decision.  No mention is made  of  the
                 2002 letter.
17 July 2012     A decision  is  made.   The  representations  are  refused,
                 thereby rendering judicial review no longer necessary.

10. This chronology raises a series of issues concerning the  responsibility
   for the delays that arose  in  handling  the  case  but  two  things  are
   certain.  The applicant remained notwithstanding the fact that he knew he
   had no substantive right  to  remain  as  a  failed  asylum-seeker.   The
   respondent took no action to remove the applicant.

The treatment of delay at law - the legacy cases and paragraph 395C

11. This issue of delay arises in two distinct ways within  the  compass  of
   the applicant's Article 8 case.  First, the applicant raises the specific
   delay-related point identified in Hakemi & Ors v SSHD [2012]  EWHC  1967.
   Second, there is the more general delay issue referred to in EB  (Kosovo)
   v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41.

12. In Hakemi & Ors v SSHD, Burton J was considering the fact  that  by  the
   end of 2006, there was a massive and unmanageable backlog of asylum/human
   rights applications, by which the Home Office  was  overwhelmed.  500,000
   outstanding applications received prior to 5 March 2007 were  transferred
   to the Casework Resolution Directorate ("CRD") which endeavoured to grant
   or refuse leave to remain by July 2011. By July 2011 there was a rump  of
   some 116,000 cases, consisting in part of 18,000 still active  cases  and
   in a "controlled archive" of some 98,500 cases. The active cases and  the
   controlled archive were transferred, in July 2011, to  a  new  body,  who
   were to resolve them.   The  legacy  process,  over  its  five  years  of
   operation, resulted in considerably more grants than refusals  but  there
   was no amnesty.

13. The CRD was to consider the  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Immigration
   Rules but by reference to paragraph 395C, which states:

      "Before a decision to remove under section 10 is given, regard will be
      had to all the relevant factors  known  to  the  Secretary  of  State,
      including:
      (i) age;
      (ii) length of residence in the United Kingdom;
      (iii) strength of connections with the United Kingdom;
      (iv) personal history, including  character,  conduct  and  employment
      record;
      (v) domestic circumstances;
      (vi) previous criminal record and the nature of any offence  of  which
      the person has been convicted;
      (vii) compassionate circumstances;
      (viii) any representations received on the person's behalf."

14. Chapter 53 of the Enforcement Instructions and Guidance ("EIG")  was  at
   all material times the published guidance as  to  'relevant  factors'  in
   paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules:

      "53. Extenuating Circumstances
      It is the policy of the Agency to remove those persons found  to  have
      entered the United Kingdom unlawfully unless it would be a  breach  of
      the Refugee Convention  or  ECHR  or  there  are  compelling  reasons,
      usually of a compassionate nature, for not doing so in  an  individual
      case.
      53.1.1 Instructions on applying paragraphs 364 to 368 and 395C of  the
      Immigration rules
      Before  a  decision  to  remove  is  taken  on  a  case,   the   case-
      owner/operational staff must consider all known relevant factors (both
      positive and negative). It is important  to  cover  the  compassionate
      factors in the transcription of the interview...
      53.1.2 Relevant Factors in paragraph 395C.
      (i) The consideration of relevant factors needs to be taken as a whole
      rather than individually, for example, the length of residence may not
      of itself be a factor,  but  it  might  when  combined  with  age  and
      strength of connections with the UK.

      For those not meeting the long residence requirements elsewhere in the
      immigration  rules,  the  length  of  residence  is  a  factor  to  be
      considered. In general, the longer a person has lived in the  UK,  the
      stronger their ties will be with the UK. However, more  weight  should
      be attached to the length of time a child has spent in the UK compared
      to an adult."

15. Prompted no doubt by the  emerging  case  law,  the  EIG  drew  a  clear
   distinction between the accrual of time in the United Kingdom  which  was
   attributable to the applicant and those periods which were caused by  the
   Secretary of State.


      "(ii)  Residence  accrued  as  a  result  of  non-compliance  by   the
      individual
      Where there is evidence of an attempt by the individual to  delay  the
      decision making process, frustrate removal  or  otherwise  not  comply
      with any requirements imposed upon them, then this will weigh  against
      the individual.


      (iii) Residence accrued as a result of delay by UKBA
      Case law  has  established  that  there  are  particular  contributory
      factors  involving  delay  that  need  to  be  present  before  it  is
      considered significant enough to grant  leave.   These  include  cases
      where:
            . an application has been outstanding for over 2 years; and
            . no decision has been  received  from  the  UK  Border  Agency
              during that time; and
            . the individual has been making progress enquiries during that
              time;
            . in the meantime the delay has meant that they have  built  up
              significant private or family life or the delay has  resulted
              in considerable hardship.


      (iv) In addition to the foregoing, provided that none of  the  factors
      outlined in 'Personal History'  weigh  against  the  individual,  then
      caseowners should also place weight  on  significant  delay  in  cases
      where, for example:


        [Non-family cases]  where  delay  by  UKBA  has  contributed  to  a
        significant period of residence. Following an individual assessment
        of the prospect of enforcing  removal,  and  where  other  relevant
        factors apply, 4-6 years may be considered significant, but a  more
        usual example would be a period of residence of 6-8  years".   (The
        "delay" here is not delay for which the defendant  is  responsible,
        e.g. by way of delaying in dealing with the initial  consideration,
        refusal (if such it be)  and  appeal,  but  'delay'  by  virtue  of
        passage of time.)"

16. Mr Forshaw, Assistant Director of UKBA, in an email of 29  October  2010
   wrote that:


        "... as the 395C exercise requires a holistic evaluation  of  cases
        based on a range of factors - both positive and negative - "

 When the active cases were transferred from CRD some  required  an  urgent
 decision. An email from Mr Forshaw, dated 31st August  2011,  stated  with
 regard to them,


        "the most appropriate way to deal with these cases is to apply  the
        following criteria under paragraph 395C ... use the lowest limit of
        4 years' residency for single applicants ... use the lower limit of
        3 years' residency for families".

17. Rule 395C simply sets out factors which must be considered.  Chapter  53
   did not affect or fetter such considerations, or  change  them.  It  gave
   guidance by way of a very broad spectrum for residence (in the case of  a
   single applicant, such as the claimants in Hakemi) of 4 to 8  years.  Six
   years was a half-way point between 4 years and 8 years. It was  submitted
   this developed into practice or policy, "all things being  equal"  (words
   drawn from a statement of Mr Forshaw) that  six  years'  residence  would
   result in a grant of leave, and this  practice  or  policy  was  said  to
   amount to a change or an alteration of a substantive criterion for  leave
   to remain.

18. Burton J found that there  was  no  change  in  Rule  395C,  but  simply
   discussion and guidance in relation to  the  factors  to  be  taken  into
   account, always subject to what Mr Forshaw called the holistic approach.

19. The training slides prepared by the defendant for the  training  of  the
   Caseworkers involved with the CRD contained the following passage:

        "The individual's personal history will  be  particularly  relevant
        where residency has been built up as a result of the person evading
        enforcement action, as it would not be appropriate for a person  to
        benefit from refusing to co-operate with the Home  Office.  However
        the strength of the connections that the person has established and
        any  compassionate  circumstances   should   still   be   carefully
        considered ... An individual's lawful employment  history  and  how
        they have supported themselves and/or  their  family  during  their
        stay in the UK may also  be  relevant  to  consideration  of  their
        personal history. Similarly the  individual's  effort  to  actively
        press for resolution of their immigration status will add weight to
        any delays suffered. A person who has actively attempted to resolve
        their status through requesting progress reports, for example, will
        have a stronger case than someone who has simply taken advantage of
        the delay and not made any contact or attempt to  regularise  their
        position."

20. In Chapter 53 there was express reference to  "Residence  accrued  as  a
   result of delay by UKBA" with reference to HB (Ethiopia)  v  SSHD  [2006]
   EWCA Civ 1713.  There was no room for a claim that the  defendant  should
   be regarded as culpable in  respect  of  "failing  to  enforce  removal".
   Burton J continued:

        "If there had been culpable delay by the defendant in dealing  with
        the initial asylum or human rights application, then that would  be
        taken into account, as [counsel] accepts. But once the  application
        has been dealt with and all rights  of  appeal  extinguished,  then
        what has occurred is that the failed asylum seeker has not left the
        jurisdiction, as he plainly ought to  have  done,  not  having  any
        leave to remain, while the defendant has not taken  any  steps,  or
        been so overwhelmed with the backlog that it  has  been  unable  to
        take steps, to enforce that obligation of the failed applicant. The
        'delay' is simply the same  as  the  passage  of  time,  which,  of
        course, was inevitably being considered in  the  Legacy  Cases.  If
        anything, such passage of time would be  held  against  the  failed
        applicant, if he or she has, for example,  failed  to  comply  with
        reporting requirements, or acted with deception: see the passage in
        Chapter 53, part of which has already been recited in paragraph  29
        above:


        "Caseowners must also take account of  any  evidence  of  deception
        practised at any stage in the process, attempts  to  frustrate  the
        process (for example, failure to attend interviews, supply required
        documentation), whether the individual has maintained contact  with
        the UK Border Agency, as  required,  and  whether  they  have  been
        actively pressing for resolution of their immigration  status.  The
        caseowner must assess all evidence of compliance and non-compliance
        in the round. The weight placed on periods of absconsion should  be
        proportionate to the length of compliant residence in the  UK.  For
        example, additional weight should be placed on lengthy  periods  of
        absconsion which form a significant proportion of the  individual's
        residence in the UK."

21. Three of the claimants in Hakemi were close to the  6-year  period  when
   Mr Forshaw accepted that "all things being equal" they would be likely to
   have been granted  leave,  but  in  each  case  the  Secretary  of  State
   concluded that all things  were  not  equal.  For  example,  one  of  the
   claimants never had an arguable asylum claim at all. (He had  lied  about
   the country he came from and the ill-treatment  he  had  alleged  he  had
   suffered there.)

R (on the application of Fatima Mohammed) v SSHD

22. In R (on the application of Fatima Mohammed) v  SSHD  [2012]  EWHC  3091
   (Admin) Mr Stephen Morris  QC  sitting  as  a  Deputy  High  Court  Judge
   considered three principal grounds for judicial review: (i) the  claimant
   was still awaiting a decision on consideration  of  her  case  under  the
   legacy programme; (ii) (which was in reality the same point  as  that  in
   (i)) the case should be  stayed  pending  further  consideration  of  the
   claimant's case as the Secretary of  State  had  as  yet  considered  the
   claimant's case and (iii) in any event, the defendant's decision,  in  so
   far as discretionary leave to remain under paragraph  395C  was  refused,
   should be quashed as being Wednesbury unreasonable or in some  other  way
   unfair or unlawful because the defendant had failed to consider or  apply
   the policy or practice applicable to those who have been resident  for  a
   long time and in particular for more than 6 years. Related  to  this,  it
   was said that there has been inconsistency in decision-making.

23. The Deputy Judge found that the claimant could not have understood,  and
   did not understand, it to mean that her application remained outstanding.
    The Secretary of  State's  correspondence  did  not  give  rise  to  any
   legitimate expectation of a further decision.  However, the  main  thrust
   of the challenge was that the decision letter was Wednesbury unreasonable
   on the basis that the defendant failed, or  failed  adequately,  to  take
   account of the fact that, at the time, the claimant had been resident  in
   the United Kingdom for 10 years and 1 month  and  thereby  the  defendant
   failed properly to apply paragraph 395C as expanded upon in Chapter 53 of
   the EIG. In particular, she failed  to  give  sufficient  weight  to  the
   length of the claimant's residence and in particular failed to apply  her
   own guidance applicable in a case where residence exceeded 6  years:  (a)
   there was an internal "6 year" benchmark or practice which the  defendant
   failed to apply; (b) the defendant failed to apply the policy  on  length
   of residence in Chapter 53 and (iii)  there  had  been  inconsistency  of
   treatment of length of residence in different cases.   The  Deputy  Judge
   continued:

      "Whilst not entirely clearly drafted, in my judgment,  the  effect  of
      paragraph 53.1.2 EIG is that weight is to  be  placed  on  significant
      periods of residence and that  guidance  is  then  given  as  to  what
      periods of residence are to (or may) be considered to be  significant;
      and in a case such as the claimant's a period of 6 to 8  years  is  or
      may be considered to be significant. Plainly such a significant period
      of residence is to weigh as a factor operating against removal.  These
      are the instructions given to the caseworkers and which in my judgment
      the caseworker in the CRD in the present case should have  consciously
      taken  into  account...There  is  no  evidence  that  the   claimant's
      residence of more than 10 years was weighed in the balance as being  a
      significant factor. There is nothing in the decision letter itself  to
      suggest to the contrary, and the external material referred  to  above
      does not establish that it  was  considered...It  is  important  in  a
      legacy case such as this where a long period of residence  is  plainly
      liable to be a  factor  of  weight,  and  where  the  defendant's  own
      guidance indicates that it is, that it is considered by  the  decision
      maker."

Recent decisions upon the Hakemi  jurisdiction  -  DM,  Re  Judicial  Review
[2013] ScotCS CSOH 114

24. Since we heard the appeal, further decisions  have  been  made  shedding
   light on Hakemi principles in the context of a claim for judicial review.
   In DM, Re Judicial Review [2013] ScotCS  CSOH  114  (9  July  2013)  Lord
   Doherty considered the case of a petitioner who had come  to  the  United
   Kingdom in 1998 and claimed asylum. His asylum claim was refused;  on  15
   December 2000 he became appeal rights exhausted.  In the meantime he  had
   married a British citizen in August 1998 and  on  12  December  2001  was
   granted leave to remain for one year on  account  of  his  marriage.  The
   marriage collapsed.  The petitioner made no further application for leave
   to remain when his leave expired  on  12  December  2002.  He  became  an
   overstayer. He did not contact the authorities until  29  May  2009  when
   solicitors wrote applying for  discretionary  leave  on  the  basis  that
   removing him would breach his Article 8 ECHR right to  private  life  and
   that he had a right "to have his case considered/reconsidered in light of
   the policy as announced by the Secretary of State in July 2006 in respect
   of case resolution".

25. The Secretary of State did not reach  a  decision  on  the  petitioner's
   representations of 29 May 2009 until 14  November  2011.  Having  made  a
   decision in accordance with the factors contained in paragraph 395C,  the
   Secretary of State rejected the petitioner's claim for  leave  to  remain
   and concluded  removal  was  proportionate.  On  appeal,  the  First-tier
   Tribunal allowed his appeal, resulting in the grant on 31 August 2012  of
   discretionary (not indefinite) leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
   until 30 August 2015.

26. It was said that the  29  May  2009  representations  should  have  been
   answered by 19 July 2011, but were not responded  to  until  14  November
   2011 and the decision to refuse to grant the petitioner Indefinite  Leave
   to Remain was unlawful.  It was submitted on the petitioner's behalf that
   the various statements amounted to a promise that legacy  cases  such  as
   the petitioner's would be decided within five years of 25 July 2006; that
   there had been a  practice  that  persons  granted  leave  to  remain  on
   paragraph 395C considerations were granted Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain;
   that the promise had given rise to  a  legitimate  expectation  that  the
   petitioner's case would be decided within that period which, had it been,
   would have resulted in the grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain.

27. Lord Doherty was not persuaded that any of the  statements  relied  upon
   by the petitioner constituted a promise that all legacy  cases  would  be
   dealt with within five  years  of  25  July  2006.  The  statements  were
   aspirational  only:  a  clear  declaration  of  an  objective,  and   the
   expression of determination to achieve it.  However, it was not, and  was
   not intended to be, a binding undertaking to those with legacy claims.

28. The petitioner therefore failed to establish that  prior  to  July  2011
   there was a practice of granting Indefinite Leave to Remain in rule  395C
   cases which was so unambiguous, so widespread, so well-established and so
   well-recognised as to carry a commitment to  legacy  claimants  that  its
   continuance was assured and that  their  cases  would  be  determined  in
   accordance with it.  From 20 July 2011 the clear policy in rule 395C non-
   removal cases was to grant discretionary leave to remain for up to  three
   years.  But, even if on 24 July 2011 the respondent had decided  on  rule
   395C grounds not to remove the petitioner, he would not have been granted
   Indefinite Leave to Remain.  Further, there was no obligation  to  decide
   legacy cases in accordance with the law, policy and practice  applied  by
   the CRD when it was operational nor  was  there  a  commitment  that  its
   continuance was assured and cases would  be  determined  by  CRD  or  the
   respondent in accordance with it.

29. There is nothing within the decision in DM that provides  the  applicant
   with any purchase in his claim for judicial review.  Rather  the  reverse
   in that it demonstrates the limitations that exist upon applications  for
   judicial review advanced on the basis that the  Secretary  of  State  was
   required to make a decision and (a) was required to make a decision at  a
   particular time and/or (b) in a manner that was consistent with  historic
   policies that were no longer applicable.

Okonkwo (legacy/Hakemi; health claim) [2013] UKUT 00401 (IAC)

30. In Okonkwo (legacy/Hakemi; health claim) [2013] UKUT 00401 heard  on  23
   July 2013, the President and Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson decided that

      "i) It may be unfair for the Secretary of State to fail to apply   the
      terms of a policy to a case that fell within the terms of  the  policy
      when it was in existence: Hakemi and others [2012] EWHC 1967  (Admin),
      and Mohammed [2012] EWHC 3091 Admin  considered.


      ii)  Chapter 53 of the EIG Instructions  as in force December 2011 did
      not mean that any adult who had lawfully resided in  the  UK  for  six
      years had an expectation of discretionary  leave  to  remain  applying
      former rule 395 C together with the policy then in force."

31. In August 2011 the appellant and her husband applied  for  discretionary
   leave to remain outside the Rules. They relied on the  length  of  lawful
   residence of Mrs Okonkwo (over  5  years)  and  the  fact  that  she  had
   received a kidney transplant in the United Kingdom and  the  consequences
   that removal would have upon her health.  There was a prompt reply to the
   application made on 29 September 2011 in which  the  Secretary  of  State
   refused the application  for  an  extension  of  stay.  Her  counsel,  Mr
   Medhurst, argued that a consideration of rule 395C would have had to take
   into account EIG Chapter 53 as in force on 8 December 2011. The  decision
   of the Administrative Court in Mohammed [2012] EWHC 3091 Admin made plain
   that a failure to apply those  instructions  to  a  decision  where  they
   should previously have been applied  could  make  a  subsequent  decision
   conspicuously unfair, and those instructions required in the normal  case
   that  a  person  who  had  been  resident  for  six  years  to  be  given
   discretionary leave to remain.

32. The proper meaning of the instructions in EIG Chapter 53 was central  to
   this submission but the panel concluded  Mr  Medhurst  had  misunderstood
   them. By the time the case came before the Judge, it was clear that  that
   no lawful removal  decision  had  yet  been  made  and  despite  previous
   regrettable uncertainty in the law, there was no obligation  in  law  for
   the Secretary of State to make decisions to remove at the same time as  a
   decision to refuse leave to remain.

33. Further 53.1.2 of the EIG referred to 'Residence accrued as a result  of
   delay by UKBA' and that they were  created  partly  in  response  to  the
   decisions of the higher courts that delay by the Home  Office  can  be  a
   significant  factor  in  the  assessment  of   whether   removal   is   a
   proportionate interference with human rights. Reliance  was  placed  upon
   the words, 'Any other case where delay  by  UKBA  has  contributed  to  a
   significant period of residence...4-6 years may  be  significant,  but  a
   more usual example would be a period of 6-8 years'.  It was  argued  that
   the appellant has been here for six years and there  had  been  delay  in
   making a decision on her  case  between  August  2011  and  October  2012
   thereby entitling her to qualify  for  exceptional  leave  on  length  of
   residence alone.

34. The panel disagreed.  Mrs Okonkwo's residence until August 2011 was  not
   because of any delay by the Home Office, but was  a  consequence  of  the
   progress of her studies and the post-study work experience  rule.   There
   was no delay by the Home Office  in  any  decision-making  following  the
   August 2011 application. There was a prompt refusal in September 2011 and
   following appeal further decisions in March 2012 and October  2012  based
   on assertions of contentious issues of law. The factual predicate for the
   operation of the policy did not exist.

35. The proper meaning of the EIG was that, in the case of  adults  with  no
   children, residence of between four to  eight  years  may  be  considered
   significant but that was residence following an initial assessment of the
   prospect of removal. Removal was only considered in  September  2011  and
   decisions to remove were made in March 2012 and October  2012  against  a
   background of appeals and the clarification of a  complex  area  of  law.
   Thus, there was no delay of two, three  or  four  years,  that  were  the
   relevant periods needed under the instructions.

36. Although it is always a relevant factor, pure length of residence  alone
   has never been a decisive consideration in  immigration  decision-making.
   Accordingly, the centre piece of the applicant's claim to unfairness fell
   away.

R (ex p. Julius Labinda Che) [2013] EWHC 2220

37. In R (on the application of Julius Labinda  Che)  v  SSHD   [2013]  EWHC
   2220 (Admin) (26 July 2013) Mr C M G  Ockelton,  Vice  President  of  the
   Upper Tribunal (sitting as a Deputy  High  Court  Judge)  considered  the
   application for judicial review of a person whose asylum claim  had  been
   refused in a letter dated 17 October 2006. On 30 March 2007 the Secretary
   of State made a decision to give directions for his removal as an illegal
   entrant. On 12 June 2007 his appeal against that decision was  heard  and
   dismissed principally because the claimant's claim was  disbelieved.  His
   appeal rights were exhausted on 23 November 2007. He had  never  had  any
   leave to be in this country, and did not depart after  the  dismissal  of
   his asylum claim. In 2009 his  representative  made  further  submissions
   enlarged on 19 March 2010 which the defendant answered by a  decision  of
   19 April 2011.   The  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  the  further
   submissions were not significantly different from the material which  has
   previously been considered and did not amount  to  a  fresh  claim.   The
   claimant was told he had no basis of  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
   should make arrangements to leave the United Kingdom without delay.

38. A letter dated 31 July 2011 was crucial to the claimant's case.   In  it
   the Secretary of State told the claimant's representative that, in  March
   2011, the UK Border Agency had  completed  its  internal  review  of  all
   outstanding legacy cases and that the claimant's case had  been  reviewed
   but no final decision had yet been made.

39. The claim for judicial review alleged a failure  both  to  consider  the
   claimant's case under the legacy  policy  and  a  failure  to  grant  the
   claimant leave to remain.  It was  said  that  the  defendant  unlawfully
   delayed in making a decision: the  letter  of  31  July  2011  created  a
   legitimate expectation that a decision would be made shortly and  it  was
   unreasonable for the defendant to delay making the  decision.   Secondly,
   the delay had a substantial adverse effect. The evidence of the  policies
   and practices of those making legacy decisions in the period  soon  after
   31 July 2011 suggested that if a decision had been made at that  time  it
   would have been a grant of leave. (The argument  that the  decision  made
   on 30 May 2012 was inadequately reasoned and failed to take into  account
   the submissions that have been made about the  claimant's  situation  was
   roundly rejected.)

40. Mr Ockelton said the creation  of  the  CRD  was  for  the  purposes  of
   review, and in order to divide those who were  entitled  to  remain  from
   those who ought to be  removed.   Further,  the  policies  and  practices
   applied to the decision of individual cases were no different from  those
   which would be applied to any other cases that shared the same facts.  In
   the group of those who waited for a long time for a decision following  a
   claim for asylum, it could properly be said that it was the Secretary  of
   State's own inactivity that had enabled them to develop a  personal  life
   in the United Kingdom and to build up relationships  here.  Even  in  the
   case of those whose appeal rights were exhausted,  the  general  lack  of
   enforcement enabled such situations to develop, even if they  should  not
   have been allowed to do so. The inclusion of a case within  the  'legacy'
   gave no additional expectation of a grant of leave.

41. In those cases  in  which  the  claimant  complained  that  he  had  not
   received a 'legacy  decision'  granting  him  leave  to  remain,  it  was
   conventionally argued, amongst other things, that the  claimant  had  not
   had a 'legacy decision' and was therefore still awaiting one which,  with
   luck, would be  a decision granting leave.

42. Mr Ockelton decided that it was 'wholly unarguable' in  cases  in  which
   the claimant has had a notification that he was not to be  granted  leave
   but was to be removed, that he had not  had  a  decision  in  this  case.
   Although he was not a person who has yet actually been removed, his  case
   has been reviewed, he had  had  his  legacy  decision,  and  the  removal
   process, which had to start with such a notification, had begun.  Such  a
   person was not therefore awaiting a decision which  the  judicial  review
   proceedings were said to be seeking: decision-makers had completed  their
   task and only those charged with arranging the mechanics of  removal  had
   any further work to do on his  case.  The  claimant  had  no  perceptible
   entitlement  to  another  decision.   He  had  made  no   further   valid
   submissions and none was outstanding.

43. Nor did he have a legitimate expectation derived from the letter  of  31
   July 2011 since such an  expectation  arose  from  a  promise  which  was
   'clear, unambiguous, and devoid of relevant qualification'. In  order  to
   assess this, it was necessary to look to see what, on a fair  reading  of
   what was said, was reasonably to be understood by the person to whom  the
   words were expressed. Reliance on any promise was not essential,  but  if
   there has been reliance, that would be relevant in  deciding  whether  it
   was open to the authority to go back on the promise which would be one of
   the factors to bear in mind when deciding whether a change of policy or a
   revocation or abandonment of the promise could be justified in the public
   interest.

44. Whist the 31 July 2011 letter on its face did  amount  to  a  clear  and
   unequivocal representation that the claim was outstanding, the assessment
   of any expectation legitimately arising from the letter had to be made in
   the context of the recipient's knowledge. The claimant and his solicitors
   knew perfectly well that all the outstanding submissions  that  had  been
   validly made had been dealt with in the decision of 19 April  2011.  They
   knew that, contrary to what had been said in the letter,  the  claimant's
   case was not one in which the Secretary of State had  not  been  able  to
   come  to  a  final  decision.  The  decision  had   been   reached,   and
   communicated; all that was awaited was removal.  Mr Ockelton continued:

           "40. Nothing to which the claimant has  pointed  indicates  that
           the legacy programme involved any system of repeated  review  of
           cases in which no further (valid) submissions had been made.  It
           is thus somewhat difficult to understand what it  is  said  that
           the claimant's expectation was. It cannot have been  that  there
           would be a new decision based on submissions made after 19 April
           2011, because no submissions had been validly  made  after  that
           date."

45. His claim for judicial review fell to be dismissed.

The Hakemi point and the changes in the Immigration Rules

46. There was no such thing as a legacy policy.  Rather,  the  legacy  cases
   were a process by which guidance was offered  to  caseowners  as  to  the
   implementation of the Immigration Rules  and,  in  particular,  paragraph
   395C.  Paragraph 395C, however, was deleted from the respondent's  policy
   by a change in the Immigration Rules introduced on 13 February 2012 by HC
   1733.  The decisions challenged in the proceedings  for  judicial  review
   are decisions made on 17 July and 25 August 2012 and 21 June 2013.  It is
   clear that the Secretary of State is entitled to change her policies  and
   apply those changed policies to decisions made  after  the  changes  were
   introduced, notwithstanding the fact that, at the  date  of  application,
   the applicant met the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  then  in
   force, Odelola v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 308.  Further, the Court of  Appeal
   roundly  rejected  the  contention  that,  in  such  circumstances,   the
   Secretary of State had a duty to consult with  applicants  prejudiced  by
   the changes, R (on the application of Rahman, Abbassi and Munir)  v  SSHD
   [2011] EWCA Civ 814, a decision which was found to be  'plainly  correct'
   in the words of Lord Dyson in the Supreme Court,  (with  whom  the  other
   Judges of the Supreme Court agreed): Munir & Anor, R (on the  application
   of) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32).

47. Nevertheless, if during a period  when  the  former  policy  existed,  a
   claimant was able to establish that he was entitled to a decision and the
   delay was occasioned by the respondent with the result that the  decision
   post-dated the 13 February 2012 change in the Rules, it may  be  open  to
   the claimant to establish the delay has prejudiced him such as to  render
   the respondent's actions unlawful. Here, however, the applicant  made  no
   application that required the respondent to reach  a  decision  upon  it.
   There was, therefore, no relevant delay. The passage of time relied  upon
   by the applicant did not, therefore, cause him to be  prejudiced  because
   he never stood to  benefit  from  a  decision  made  in  more  favourable
   circumstances.

48. Further, the  applicant  cannot  rely  upon  any  inconsistency  in  the
   respondent's decision-making by identifying that some in the  applicant's
   position  were  granted  leave  whilst,  in  similar  circumstances,  the
   applicant was not. As the applicant was not entitled to a  decision,  the
   treatment of those that were so  entitled  is  irrelevant.  Even  if  the
   applicant were able to establish (which has not been  shown)  that  other
   applicants  were  granted  leave  whilst  others  were   not,   such   an
   inconsistency in the decision-making cannot benefit the applicant who had
   no right to a decision.

49. It is the inevitable consequence of these decisions that  the  applicant
   has no claim to be entitled to the benefit of the  legacy  cases.   There
   can, therefore, be no viable claim that the  applicant  is  permitted  to
   advance before the First-tier Tribunal that  this  right  should  be  the
   foundation of a fresh claim that removal would violate his human  rights.
   The respondent was not required to consider the fresh  claim  as  one  to
   which the  Hakemi  legacy  programme  applied.   Nor  was  she  therefore
   required to consider what a First-tier Tribunal Judge would make of  such
   a  claim  in  the  context  of  an  Article  8  claim  because  no   such
   consideration could arise.

50. It  follows  from  this  that  the  time  and  energy  expended  on  the
   attribution of blame for  the  delay  may  appear  irrelevant.   However,
   whilst the principles in Hakemi may no longer apply, the  attribution  of
   fault (or, perhaps, more accurately, an assessment of the impact that the
   applicant's continued presence in the United Kingdom has on his Article 8
   claim) is necessary in reaching a  conclusion  as  to  whether,  applying
   anxious scrutiny, the applicant establishes he has a fresh claim  with  a
   realistic prospect of success before the First-tier Tribunal.

The treatment of delay at law - EB (Kosovo)

51. There is a second way in which delay is  material.   In  EB  (Kosovo)  v
   SSHD [2008] UKHL 41 Lord Bingham of Cornhill  when  dealing  with  delay,
   identified its significance in Article 8 claims:


       "13.  In Strbac v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]
        EWCA Civ 848, [2005] Imm AR 504, para 25, counsel for the applicant
        was understood to contend, in effect, that if the  decision  on  an
        application for leave to enter or remain was made after the  expiry
        of an unreasonable period of time, and  if  the  application  would
        probably have met with success, or a greater chance of success,  if
        it had been decided within a reasonable time, and if the  applicant
        had in the meantime established a family life in this  country,  he
        should be treated when the decision is ultimately made  as  if  the
        decision had been made at that earlier time. For reasons  given  by
        Laws LJ, the Court of Appeal rejected this submission, for which it
        held Shala v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 233, [2003] INLR  349  to  be  no
        authority. While I consider that Shala was correctly decided on its
        facts, I am satisfied that the Court of Appeal was right to  reject
        this submission.
     1. It does not, however, follow  that  delay  in  the  decision-making
        process  is  necessarily  irrelevant  to  the  decision.  It   may,
        depending on the facts, be relevant  in  any  one  of  three  ways.
        First, the applicant may during the period  of  any  delay  develop
        closer personal and social ties and establish deeper roots  in  the
        community than he could have shown earlier. The longer  the  period
        of the delay, the likelier this is to be true. To the  extent  that
        it is true, the applicant's claim under article 8 will  necessarily
        be strengthened. It is unnecessary to elaborate  this  point  since
        the respondent accepts it.
     1. Delay may be relevant in a second, less obvious, way...
     1. Delay may be relevant, thirdly, in reducing the weight otherwise to
        be accorded to  the  requirements  of  firm  and  fair  immigration
        control, if the delay is shown to be the result of a  dysfunctional
        system  which  yields  unpredictable,   inconsistent   and   unfair
        outcomes. In the present case the appellant's cousin,  who  entered
        the country and applied for asylum  at  the  same  time  and  whose
        position is not  said  to  be  materially  different,  was  granted
        exceptional leave to remain, during the two-year  period  which  it
        took the respondent to correct its erroneous decision to refuse the
        appellant's application on grounds of non-compliance. In  the  case
        of JL (Sierra Leone), heard by the Court of Appeal at the same time
        as the present case, there was a somewhat similar pattern of facts.
        JL escaped from Sierra Leone with her half  brother  in  1999,  and
        claimed asylum. In 2000 her claim was refused on  grounds  of  non-
        compliance. As in the appellant's case this decision was erroneous,
        as the respondent recognised eighteen  months  later.  In  February
        2006 the half brother was granted humanitarian protection. She  was
        not. A system so operating  cannot  be  said  to  be  "predictable,
        consistent and fair as between one applicant  and  another"  or  as
        yielding "consistency of treatment between one  aspiring  immigrant
        and another". To the extent that this is shown to  be  so,  it  may
        have a bearing on the proportionality of removal, or  of  requiring
        an applicant to apply from out of country. As Carnwath LJ  observed
        in Akaeke v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA
        Civ 947, [2005] INLR 575, para 25:
           "Once it is accepted that unreasonable delay on the part of  the
           Secretary of State is capable of being a relevant  factor,  then
           the weight to be given to it in the particular case was a matter
           for the tribunal"."

52. In the context of this appeal, the effect of delay has not  resulted  in
   an unlawful inconsistency as between those whose claims had been  treated
   at an earlier stage and those dealt with later.  This is not,  therefore,
   a case of a dysfunctional system yielding unpredictable, inconsistent  or
   unfair outcomes as  between  various  individuals  or  classes  of  them.
   Rather, the delay can only be seen in the context of the first  type  and
   the effect it has had, if any, on the development of closer personal  and
   social ties and the establishment of deeper roots in the  community  than
   were there earlier.

Paragraph 353B

53.  Although paragraph 395C has been removed from the Immigration Rules,  a
   different formulation of principle or  policy  is  now  to  be  found  in
   paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules:


      "Exceptional Circumstances

      353B. Where further submissions have been made and the decision  maker
      has established whether or not they amount  to  a  fresh  claim  under
      paragraph 353 of these Rules, or in cases with no outstanding  further
      submissions whose appeal rights have  been  exhausted  and  which  are
      subject to a review, the decision maker will also have regard  to  the
      migrant's:


           (i) character, conduct and associations including  any  criminal
           record and the nature  of  any  offence  of  which  the  migrant
           concerned has been convicted;
           (ii) compliance with any conditions  attached  to  any  previous
           grant of leave to  enter  or  remain  and  compliance  with  any
           conditions of temporary  admission  or  immigration  bail  where
           applicable;
           (iii) length of time spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  spent  for
           reasons beyond the migrant's control after the human  rights  or
           asylum claim has been submitted or refused; in deciding  whether
           there are exceptional circumstances which mean that removal from
           the United Kingdom is no longer appropriate."

54. The combination of  factors  identified  here  (the  applicant's  appeal
   rights had been exhausted; he had no outstanding further submissions; the
   absence of a grant of leave to remain;  compliance  with  any  conditions
   attached to a previous grant of leave or temporary admission; time  spent
   in the United Kingdom for reasons beyond the migrant's control) gravitate
   against the applicant, rather than in support of him.

55. Paragraph 353B, therefore, offers little to the applicant as  a  spring-
   board from which to advance a fresh claim before a Judge.

The broader principle

56. Overlaying these cases is the general principle adumbrated in R (on  the
   application of FH & Others) v SSHD [2007] EWHC 1571  (Admin),  Collins  J
   in the case  of  a  claimant  whose  human  rights  claim  has  not  been
   determined  and  has  been  outstanding  for  some  5  years.   In   such
   circumstances, he treated the claim as more akin to an initial claim  and
   thus fell into what had properly to be regarded as an exceptional case:


      "It follows from this judgment that claims  such  as  these  based  on
      delay are unlikely, save in very exceptional circumstances, to succeed
      and are likely to be regarded as unarguable. It is only if  the  delay
      is so excessive as to be regarded as manifestly  unreasonable  and  to
      fall outside any proper application of the policy or if  the  claimant
      is suffering some particular  detriment  which  the  Home  Office  has
      failed to alleviate that a claim might be entertained by the court."

The responsibility for the delay

57. The applicant's presence in the United Kingdom  from  the  date  of  his
   arrival on 8 September 2001 until 25  November  2002  was  spent  by  the
   applicant pursuing an unmeritorious claim  on  the  basis  of  which  the
   applicant failed to establish he had any substantive right to remain.  On
   25 November 2002, he was (reasonably) told to leave and he did not do so.
    Thereafter, he remained without leave and in the sure knowledge that  he
   should not be here.  For the reasons we have given, the  'non-letter'  of
   27 November 2002 and the follow-up letter of 6 January 2003 does  nothing
   to strengthen the applicant's position vis-�-vis the Secretary  of  State
   or the strength of public interest in favour of removal.

58. The respondent maintains that the period  from  January  2003  until  24
   June 2004, the date on which he was arrested when attempting  to  open  a
   bank account which he was not entitled to do, was time during  which  the
   applicant failed to maintain contact with the respondent.  Whether he was
   maintaining contact with the respondent or not is largely immaterial, the
   applicant knew he should leave  whilst  he  was  seeking  to  secure  his
   continued (unlawful) presence in the United Kingdom by creating as normal
   a life  as  possible  by  using  the  banking  system.   Nothing  in  the
   applicant's conduct  operates  to  minimise  or  marginalise  the  public
   interest in removal.

59. At the time of his arrest, the respondent maintains that  the  applicant
   was served with the IS96 notifying him that he was liable to  immigration
   detention and requiring him to report.  The applicant  says  not.   What,
   however, cannot be in doubt is that the applicant's  arrest  and  caution
   provided him with no basis for asserting a substantive right  to  remain.
   Nothing was done which the applicant could construe as strengthening  his
   status as one who was liable to be removed because his asylum  claim  had
   been refused and who had been told to leave and who  had  no  substantive
   right to remain under the Immigration Rules.

60. The IS96 at [C318] was addressed  to  the  applicant  at  Consert  Road.
   However, it is also known that the applicant was  personally  encountered
   by immigration officials. There is evidence of a second IS96 and this may
   account for the generation within the Home Office files of an address  in
   Northumberland Avenue Reading on 25 June 2004, [C178].   The  information
   can only have come from the applicant.  This suggests that the  applicant
   received the IS96 or was informed of  its  contents  but  it  is  largely
   immaterial since he could have no basis for thinking he had any right  to
   remain.

61. The respondent categorises the applicant  as  an  absconder  because  he
   failed to report when he was  required  to  do.   The  record  at  [C170]
   clearly demonstrates he did not report, indeed, the applicant accepts it.
    However, the material is equivocal and not easy to  understand.   Print-
   outs from the Home Office computer records show a series of addresses  in
   Peterborough,  Reading  and  Peckham.   The  information  upon  them   is
   difficult to explain without a narrative.  Suffice it  to  say  that  the
   evidence of what the Home Office knew of the applicant's whereabouts  and
   what the respondent was told by the applicant is equivocal.   We  do  not
   consider it necessary to categorise the applicant as an absconder or that
   such a classification assists in assessing the fresh claim.

62. Ms Ward submitted that where there are issues of fact to be resolved  in
   a fresh claim, it is impossible for the Secretary  of  State  to  second-
   guess what a First-tier Tribunal Judge may find as a fact and, therefore,
   the applicant is entitled to have his fresh claim determined by a  Judge.
   We reject that submission.  It would have the  effect  of  requiring  the
   Secretary of State to treat any fresh material or submissions as true for
   the purposes of paragraph 353.  She is not required to  do  so.   It  was
   open to the Secretary of State to reach the conclusion that the applicant
   had absconded but to be alive to the possibility that a Judge may take  a
   different view in the assessment of the facts.  In the  context  of  this
   claim we are satisfied that these relatively minor issues on the facts do
   not  preclude  the  Secretary  of  State  from  reaching  a   sustainable
   conclusion that the claim would fail  before  a  Judge  applying  anxious
   scrutiny.    Our reasons for so doing lie in the factors over which there
   can be no, or little, dispute.

63. It is accepted that there was  no  contact  after  25  June  2004  until
   communication was  resumed  in  2010,  a  period  of  6  years.  That  is
   sufficient for our purposes to classify the applicant as a person who was
   content to let sleeping dogs lie without taking active steps  to  conceal
   his presence.

64. The communication revived following the letter of  29  April  2010  (see
   below) in which the  respondent  acknowledged  the  applicant  was  in  a
   backlog.  For the reasons  we  have  stated,  there  was  no  outstanding
   decision to be made.  The letter was sent to the applicant's  last  known
   address.  He was not apparently living there.

65. In October 2010, the  application's  representatives  took  up  cudgels.
   The submissions are supported by  a  letter  from  the  applicant  and  a
   friend.  The applicant's letter [C13] speaks of the applicant learning  a
   lot about life and culture in England and speaking  fluent  English.   He
   referred to good friends who had assisted him financially and to adapt to
   the community and of his doing good things  within  the  community.   The
   friend's letter is a character reference on behalf of  the  applicant:  a
   good and helpful man whom everybody likes.  As Mr  Harland  pointed  out,
   these are a long way away from a viable Article 8 claim.

66. In the period October 2010 to August 2011, a  period  just  short  of  a
   year  there  is  sustained  and  active  pressure  by   the   applicant's
   representatives to seek a response.  This is not provided until  17  July
   2012 when the submissions are refused.

67. It is thus possible to  discern  periods  in  the  latter  part  of  the
   chronology when the applicant's representative was  pursuing  the  matter
   with some vigour but the underlying claim that was being pursued was  one
   without substance, relying in large part on the  respondent's  own  view,
   found in the letter of 29 April 2010, that this was a legacy case.

68. It is not permissible, as a matter of law, for  the  applicant  to  rely
   upon the respondent's failure to remove him, even if the respondent  knew
   of the applicant's whereabouts.  It was open to the Secretary of State to
   treat the period between 2002 and 2010 as a period during which the delay
   was not attributable to failure on her part such as to reduce the  effect
   of the public interest in removal.  The respondent  was  not,  therefore,
   required to consider the fresh claim on the basis that the weight  to  be
   attached to the public interest in maintaining immigration control should
   be significantly discounted by her own actions or failings in the  course
   of events since 2002.

69. It was open to the respondent to treat the  applicant  as  one  who  had
   failed to leave at the conclusion of  his  asylum  appeal  and  had  then
   disappeared.  However, if the applicant had not  avoided  making  contact
   with  the  immigration  authorities  (we  would  not  necessarily  regard
   maintaining contact with NASS as the  same  since  NASS  and  the  Border
   Agency were two distinct organisations), it was open to the respondent to
   treat the applicant as one who had not  actively  pursued  a  substantive
   right to remain.

The respondent's letter of 29 April 2010

1. On 29 April 2010, the respondent wrote to the applicant  [B68-70]  at  an
   address in Northumberland Avenue, Reading informing him that the CRD  was
   responsible for the applicant's case. There was, of course, no such  case
   since the 2002 letter was neither a claim for asylum nor a  fresh  claim.
   It could not become one because the respondent, through  inadvertence  or
   error, saw fit to call it one. The applicant and his representative could
   have been in no doubt that there was no  claim  since  nothing  had  been
   asserted as the basis for one.  In  the  letter,  the  respondent  sought
   information about the applicant's case.

2. It is also accepted that the applicant was not  living  at  that  address
   when the letter was sent out.  At C202 there is an extract from the  Home
   Office files that on 29 April 2010  a  letter  was  returned  undelivered
   because the applicant was not living at that address.  At [C206] there is
   a  letter  from  Alan  Sweetzer  who  was   visiting   the   address   in
   Northumberland Avenue Reading which belonged to his deceased  cousin  and
   came across the letter of 29 April 2010 addressed to the  applicant.   It
   categorically confirmed the applicant had never lived  at  that  address.
   The writer does not say how he was able to say this 'categorically' since
   he neither owned nor, apparently, lived at the address.   He  might  have
   been able to do so if he had visited his cousin regularly  and  knew  the
   house intimately but we just do not know.

3. Nevertheless, there came a  time  when  the  applicant's  representatives
   became aware of the April 2010 letter and the fact that the Secretary  of
   State was treating the applicant's case  as  falling  within  the  legacy
   programme.

The proceedings for judicial review

70. As we have pointed out, the initial claim for  judicial  review  was  to
   compel the Secretary of State  to  reach  a  decision  under  the  legacy
   programme.  Initially, no mention was made of the November 2002 letter.

71. Since the applicant became  aware  of  the  November  2002  letter,  the
   applicant has consistently sought to advance the application for judicial
   review on the basis of the respondent's failure to reach a decision for 9
   � years amounts to a violation of his human rights:

           i) Grounds, 2 March 2012 [B.42]
          ii) Letter before action [B20, paragraph 2, unnumbered]
         iii) Grounds, 28 September 2012, paragraph 19
          iv) Renewal of the application for permission, 16  January  2013,
              paragraph 9
           v) Amended grounds 12 April 2013, paragraph 19

72. For the reasons we have given, reliance on the letter of  November  2002
   does not give rise to a viable claim that there has  been  delay  on  the
   part of the respondent such as to enhance the  applicant's  prospects  of
   success.  If there has been delay, it is of the  type  identified  in  EB
   (Kosovo) as associated with  the  passage  of  time  and  the  inevitable
   strengthening of the Article 8 claim:   'the  applicant  may  during  the
   period of any delay develop closer personal and social ties and establish
   deeper roots in the community than  he  could  have  shown  earlier...the
   longer the period of the delay, the likelier this is to be  true.'   This
   is the simple operation of a developing private life  by  reason  of  the
   passage of time.  The fresh claim, as now advanced, only has traction  as
   an Article 8 claim.

The Vine report

76. When Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted an adjournment, he  did  so  in
   part because counsel then instructed by the appellant wished to rely upon
   a report provided by the Chief Inspector, Mr John Vine, in 2012.  In  the
   event, this was not made the subject of further  submissions  before  us.
   The substance of the Chief Inspector's report was that, in  his  opinion,
   claimants had a reasonable expectation that their cases would be  decided
   by July 2011. His inspection of the UK Border Agency's handling of legacy
   asylum and migration cases which took place between March and  July  2012
   found that the issue of delay was treated differently by case owners  and
   that,

         "Staff told  [the  inspectors]  that  significant  levels  of  non-
         compliance were not taken into account when deciding to grant leave
         if the applicants could demonstrate some form of compliance  within
         the last twelve months.   This  view  was  supported  by  our  file
         sampling."

77. Whatever this might mean  in  the  context  of  other  applications  for
   judicial review, it can have no relevance to the applicant's position  or
   upon any claimants who did not have  an  outstanding  application  either
   under the legacy programme or at all. In any event, the Chief Inspector's
   opinion cannot amount to a legitimate expectation in public law terms.

The evidence of private life

78. Ms Ward submits that the applicant had entered the United Kingdom  as  a
   minor and has spent his entire adult life  here.   He  is  now  aged  29.
   Whilst this is true, it remains the fact that he spent the first 17 years
   in Algeria and his presence in the United Kingdom does not entitle him to
   remain under the Immigration Rules by reference  to  the  length  of  his
   stay, nor has there been a time when it has done so.

79. The quality of the private life that the applicant  has  developed  has,
   however, not been stated in any great detail.  It was said on his  behalf
   in relation to family and private life in the grounds that were submitted
   on 25 October 2010

      "...our client does not have a family  life  in  the  UK  but  he  has
      developed a strong network of close friends with whom he has a  strong
      relationship."

80. The October 2010  submissions  were  supported  by  a  letter  from  the
   applicant and a friend.  The applicant spoke of learning a lot about life
   and culture in England and speaking fluent English and  having  good  and
   supportive friends.  The friend's letter spoke of the applicant as a good
   and helpful man whom everybody likes.

81. At D12 in his statement of evidence form  in  support  of  his  original
   asylum claim, when asked for any other reasons why it he wished to remain
   in the  United  Kingdom,  the  applicant  stated  that  he  was  then  in
   Peterborough and attending college. He said that he was  very  happy  and
   that, from time to time, he went to Social Services  where  he  sometimes
   helped them in interpreting either Arabic or French.

82. These are the glimpses provided by the applicant of  the  nature,  scope
   and extent of his private life in the United Kingdom. They are the normal
   examples of an individual living in a community. There is nothing to  say
   that they cannot be replicated in another community.

The failure to meet the requirements of the conditions for Article 8 in  the
Immigration Rules.

83. Originally, the respondent discounted the applicant's  Article  8  claim
   because it did not meet the requirements of the new Rules which  required
   the applicant to establish a presence in the United Kingdom of  20  years
   which he could not, of course, do.  In MF (Article 8 - new rules)  [2012]
   UKUT 393 (IAC) the Tribunal identified the need to apply a pure Article 8
   consideration where an applicant has failed under the new  Rules,  albeit
   the new Rules provided a useful insight into the respondent's view of the
   proportionality of removal.

84. As a result, the respondent produced a  supplementary  letter  dated  21
   June 2013 which fully responds to the applicant's Article 8 claim in  its
   widest sense.  However, such an approach may not have been necessary.

85. In Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Sales J said:

      "It is only if, after doing that, there remains an arguable case  that
      there may be good grounds for granting leave  to  remain  outside  the
      Rules by reference to Article 8 that it will be necessary for  Article
      8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under  the  new  rules  to
      require the grant of such leave.
      The only slight modification I would make... is to say that  if  after
      the process of applying the new rules and finding that the  claim  for
      leave to remain under them fails, the relevant  official  or  tribunal
      judge considers it is clear that the consideration under the Rules has
      fully addressed any family life or private life issues  arising  under
      Article 8, it would be sufficient simply to say that; they  would  not
      have to go on, in addition, to consider the case separately  from  the
      Rules. If there is no arguable case that there may be good grounds for
      granting leave to remain outside the Rules by reference to Article  8,
      there would be no point in introducing full separate consideration  of
      Article 8 again after having reached a decision on application of  the
      Rules."

86. This point became academic with the service of the  letter  of  21  June
   2013.

87. The fresh claim that the Secretary of State  was  required  to  consider
   was a claim based on simple presence since 2001.   It  was  open  to  the
   Secretary of State to  treat  the  applicant's  presence  in  the  United
   Kingdom as without  lawful  justification.   Neither  the  November  2002
   letter nor the follow-up letter of January 2013 altered  the  quality  of
   the applicant's presence in the United Kingdom.  There was nothing in the
   contact that the respondent had with the applicant in 2004  that  altered
   the nature  of  the  applicant's  presence.   The  recognition  that  the
   applicant was part of a legacy programme in the respondent's letter of 29
   April 2010 gave rise to no additional substantive rights.  The  applicant
   was not entitled to a decision under paragraph 395 by  the  time  it  was
   deleted. There was no Hakemi claim that the applicant could advance.   In
   these circumstances the Secretary of State  was  entitled  to  treat  the
   applicant as one whose mere presence in the United Kingdom since 2001 did
   not confer on him a  right  to  claim  that  removal  would  be  unlawful
   pursuant to the terms of Article 8.  The quality of the private  life  of
   the applicant as disclosed in the material before  the  respondent  shows
   little that demands protection  from  removal.   The  applicant  has  not
   formed relationships or had children or created a business that would  be
   jeopardised by removal.  The public interest in the  applicant's  removal
   has not been significantly weakened  by  failures  on  the  part  of  the
   respondent.  There was  no  unconscionable  delay  on  the  part  of  the
   Secretary of State.  There were no factors which  should  be  treated  as
   undermining the weight to be attached to  immigration  control.     There
   was scant evidence of a developed private life.

88. This was the claim that the Secretary of State was required to  consider
   when applying paragraph 353.  Whilst  his  claim  had  arisen  since  the
   asylum claim was dismissed  in  2002,  the  Secretary  of  State  had  to
   consider whether a First-tier Tribunal Judge  applying  anxious  scrutiny
   would conclude that the time spent in the United Kingdom  was  sufficient
   to render removal proportionate  under  Article  8  given  there  was  no
   substantive  right  to  remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules  (past  or
   present).

89. The Secretary of State was entitled to reach  the  conclusion  that  the
   passage of time in the United Kingdom was not sufficient to  establish  a
   right to remain and, accordingly, that removal was disproportionate.   It
   was open to her to conclude that a First-tier Tribunal Judge would take a
   similar view.

Conclusions

90. The Secretary of State adopted a  correct  approach  to  Article  8  and
   paragraph 353 in the combined decisions of 17 July and 25 August 2012 and
   21 June 2013 and reached a decision that cannot be classified as perverse
   or irrational or Wednesbury unreasonable.

DECISION

      The application for judicial review is dismissed.
      The applicant has 7 days from service of the judgment upon him to file
      and serve reasons why he should not pay the respondent's costs and the
      respondent is, within  7  days  thereafter,  to  file  and  serve  her
      response.  Costs will then be determined on  the  papers  not  earlier
      than 7 days thereafter.





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                 Appendix 1

                           REASONS FOR ADJOURNMENT

 1. The applicant is a citizen of Algeria who was born on  22  April  1984.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 September 2001  and  applied  for
    asylum about ten days later.  His asylum application was refused and in
    due course the application was made the subject of an appeal which came
    before Immigration Judge M A Khan.  The decision that he reached was on
    the basis of a claim that had been put forward by  the  applicant  that
    his family had been subjected to incessant  raids  over  a  substantial
    period of time, that those raids occurred as  often  as  two  or  three
    times a week and that on an occasion in July  2001,  when  his  brother
    returned from military service, the terrorists  attacked  and  murdered
    him.  The Immigration Judge rejected those matters.  He did not  accept
    that there had been any such terrorist  attacks  upon  the  applicant's
    premises and he did not accept that the applicant left Algeria  with  a
    well-founded fear of persecution.

 2. I recite those facts because  of  what  then  happened  in  2002.   The
    decision of the judge was promulgated and an application was  made  for
    permission to apply to the Upper Tribunal for  reconsideration  to  the
    Tribunal.  That was refused on 4 November 2002.  There  then  followed,
    after less than a fortnight, a letter  dated  27  November  2002  which
    said:

         "We wish to make a fresh application on behalf of  our  client  and
         hereby apply on his behalf to be granted  leave  to  remain  on  an
         asylum basis.  The appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution
         in Algeria and suffered a great  deal  of  persecution  in  Algeria
         before fleeing the country for the safety of his life."

   3. There is simply nothing in the application that was  made  for  asylum
      which was not  comprehensively  covered  by  the  Immigration  Judge's
      determination which had been made a couple of weeks before.   It  does
      not amount in  any  way  to  even  foreshadowing  a  fresh  claim.   I
      described it in the course  of  argument  as  a  'non-letter'  and  in
      particular it does not give any basis for the subsequent argument that
      was advanced in the grounds of challenge that there  was  therefore  a
      nine and a half year delay until the decision was made  which  is  the
      subject of these judicial review proceedings, a decision  made  on  17
      July 2012.


   4. What then happened was that nothing happened.  The applicant  did  not
      leave the United Kingdom but nor was it said that he failed to  comply
      with any restrictions on his ability to remain in the United  Kingdom.
      It is not said for example that he absconded  or  that  he  failed  to
      report.  However, on 24 June 2004, he was  subsequently  arrested  and
      received a police caution for attempting to open a bank account  using
      a forged French passport.  That was determined by way of caution  only
      but it prompted the service of a notice  upon  him  requiring  him  to
      report.  Within a matter  of  three  days,  he  failed  to  report  as
      required and absconded.  He did not then present himself.  He did  not
      come to the attention of the authorities until about October 2010  and
      that was curiously enough as a result of being prompted to respond  to
      a letter that was  sent  to  his  solicitors  by  the  Border  Agency.
      Thereafter the  applicant's  representatives  took  up  cudgels  in  a
      meaningful way and, from 29 October 2010 until 5  October  2011,  they
      wrote at regular intervals requiring a response.  In the course of the
      correspondence that ensued the Secretary  of  State  appears  to  have
      acknowledged that the letter that was provided on 27 November 2002 was
      a fresh claim although how that could have been done is  difficult  to
      see.


   5. The grounds insofar as they are material before me  press  on  with  a
      claim that there was a significant delay on the part of the respondent
      and that the delay covered a period of nine and a half years.  For the
      reasons that I have given I do  not  accept  that  this  was  even  an
      arguable point to adopt as far as a fresh claim  was  concerned.   The
      argument put forward in the grounds, based on EB (Kosovo) [2008]  UKHL
      41 is not remotely arguable within the confines of paragraph  353  and
      the decision in WM (DRC) [2006] EWCA Civ 1495.  The delay arises  only
      between 29 October 2010 and  5  October  2011,  when  the  applicant's
      representatives wrote at regular intervals requiring  a  response  and
      did not receive one. I will say no  more  at  this  stage  about  this
      because it can properly be put over to the adjourned hearing.

   6. The issue however that requires more detailed argument arises from the
      case of Hakemi v SSHD [2012] EWHC 1967 in  the  Administrative  Court.
      It is perhaps surprising that I was not provided with a copy  of  that
      decision but it is mentioned in paragraphs 26 and 27  of  the  grounds
      and it is those paragraphs which are  the  subject  of  the  grant  of
      permission  to  amend  the  grounds  of  application.   In  particular
      reference is also made in paragraph 27  to  a  policy  guidance  which
      states that  Ministers  approved  a  revised  guidance  allowing  case
      workers to consider granting permission to stay to applicants who  had
      been in the United Kingdom for six to eight years rather than the  ten
      to twelve years that applied at the  start  of  the  backlog  clearing
      process.

   7. Mr Williams, on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  relies  upon  the
      decision of Mr Steven Morris QC sitting as a Deputy High  Court  Judge
      in the case of Mohammad  v  SSHD  [2012]  EWHC  3091.   He  relies  in
      particular on the passage at paragraph 71 that it was  'not  arguable'
      that there was a policy that leave would be granted on the basis of  a
      sufficiently  long  period  of  residence  alone.   However,  in   the
      paragraphs that follow he refers to chapter 53 of the guidance and the
      setting out of various policy considerations.

   8. In addition, Mr Nathan on behalf of the applicant refers to a document
      that the Secretary of  State  has  not  so  far  considered  being  an
      inspection of the UK Border Agency's handling  of  legacy  asylum  and
      migration cases which took place between March and July 2012 in  which
      it was found that the issue of delay was treated differently  by  case
      owners and that,

         "Staff told  [the  inspectors]  that  significant  levels  of  non-
         compliance were not taken into account when deciding to grant leave
         if the applicants could demonstrate some form of compliance  within
         the last twelve months.   This  view  was  supported  by  our  file
         sampling."

   9. Quite what that means in the context of an application of this  nature
      or what its effect might be, is yet to be determined.  However it does
      appear that there is  an  arguable  issue  as  to  whether  these  are
      policies as such and what the 'legacy policy' in particular meant  for
      a case like the applicant's.  It  is  for  that  reason  that  I  have
      permitted the adjournment.

  10. I am bound to say that the  quality  of  the  private  life  that  the
      applicant has alleged he enjoys has  not  been  stated  in  any  great
      detail.  It was said on his behalf in relation to family  and  private
      life in the grounds that were submitted on 25 October 2010

         "...our client does not have a family life in the  UK  but  he  has
         developed a strong network of close friends  with  whom  he  has  a
         strong relationship."


The difficulty with that submission is that  whilst  it  is  almost  totally
devoid of any meaning in the context of an Article  8  claim,  reference  is
made on page 1 of the  letter  to  enclosing  a  short  statement  from  the
applicant and a friend dated 7 October 2010,  which  I  have  not  seen  and
which has not been produced.  These documents may develop the  private  life
claim somewhat more but the claim does  not  commence  from  a  particularly
promising start.   Nevertheless  there  remains  the  need  to  give  fuller
consideration to the point that is referred to under the  general  guise  of
Hakemi and this will be developed in due course by  the  directions  that  I
have given.
