

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

HA (Article 24 QD) Palestinian Territories [2015] UKUT 00465 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle Building, Glasgow              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 28 May 2015                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                                     HA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


 Representation

Appellant:    Mr J Bryce of Counsel, instructed by McGill and Co.,
                  Solicitors

Respondent:       Mr J Komorowski, of Counsel, instructed by the Advocate
General

 i) Article 24 of the Qualification Directive does not confer a substantive
    right of residence in the Member State concerned.  Rather, its function
    is to determine the modalities whereby a right of  residence  otherwise
    existing is to be documented.


ii) The Procedures  Directive  is  a  truly  adjectival  instrument  of  EU
    legislation.  It does not create any substantive rights in the realm of
    asylum or subsidiary protection.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. The origins of this appeal lie in a decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary  of  State")
    dated 14 January 2014, whereby  it  was  determined  that  the  further
    representations made on behalf of the Appellant, who is aged  30  years
    and  originates  from  the  so-called  Palestinian  National  Authority
    ("PNA") - viz the territory (or territories) of  Palestine  -  did  not
    constitute a fresh claim under paragraph 353 of the Immigration  Rules.
    The First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") dismissed the  Appellant's  ensuing
    appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was refused initially.  This  was
    challenged by an application for judicial review which was the  subject
    of formal consensual resolution documented  by  a  joint  minute,  duly
    endorsed by the Lord Ordinary on 14  August  2014,  agreeing  that  the
    application for permission  to  appeal  gives  rise  to  the  following
    important point of principle:

         Where an asylum seeker was last habitually resident in  country  A,
         can he establish an entitlement to a residence permit in the United
         Kingdom solely by reason of the risk  of  harm  he  would  face  if
         returned to country A, notwithstanding that the Secretary of  State
         intends not to remove him to country A but to country B instead?

    The Vice President of the Upper Tribunal on 15 September  2014  granted
    permission to appeal.

FACTUAL MATRIX

 3. The facts belonging to the matrix bearing on the question of law to  be
    determined are uncontentious.  The Appellant entered the United Kingdom
    unlawfully in November 2007 and  claimed  asylum.    The  Secretary  of
    State refused his claim in  March  2010  and  the  ensuing  appeal  was
    dismissed on 20 May 2010.  Events thereafter included  a  petition  for
    judicial review, which was dismissed; further  representations  to  the
    Secretary of State, which were rejected; an appeal, in the  context  of
    which  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  withdrawn;   further
    representations on behalf of the Appellant; and  a  reconsideration  of
    the Appellant's case by the Secretary  of  State,  culminating  in  the
    further decision dated  14  January  2014  (hereinafter  the  "impugned
    decision").  By the impugned decision the Secretary of State determined
    that this was not a fresh claim under paragraph 353 of the  Immigration
    Rules and that the Appellant did not qualify for leave to remain  under
    paragraph 276 ABE.

 4. The PNA is the Appellant's country of origin. Prior to  his  advent  to
    the United Kingdom he had lived in Syria with his family.  There he and
    his  family  were  granted  refugee  status  and  the   Appellant   had
    employment.  His asylum claim in the United Kingdom was based  upon  an
    asserted fear of persecution in  the  event  of  compulsory  return  to
    Syria. As appears from the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (the  "FtT"),  the  directions  which  the  Appellant  was  challenging
    proposed to remove him to the PNA.  For this reason it was conceded  on
    his  behalf  that  the  asserted  fear  of  persecution  in  Syria  was
    irrelevant. The Judge recorded the Appellant's case  in  the  following
    terms:

         "The thrust of the Appellant's claim, as pleaded before me, is that
         the Appellant has a well founded fear of persecution because of his
         race, because he will be turned away from  the  [PNA]  and  refused
         entry to the Palestinian occupied territories ....


         The Appellant does not complain that he will be persecuted  by  his
         own people, nor by the Israelis  within  the  Palestinian  occupied
         territories. The thrust of the Appellant's claim is that  he  seeks
         economic enhancement and a peaceful  life,  not  that  he  requires
         protection."

    The appeal was dismissed on all  grounds.   This  is  the  only  extant
    judicial decision in the history of the Appellant's case.

THE ISSUES

 5. The Appellant challenged the Secretary of State's most recent  decision
    of 14 January 2014 by appeal to the FtT.  In [13] of the  determination
    the Judge helpfully reproduces the grounds of appeal:

         "The Appellant being formerly  habitually  resident  in  Syria  and
         stateless is entitled to refugee protection.  He faces a real  risk
         of serious harm for a Convention reason, namely imputed  opposition
         to the Syrian state on account of his Palestinian origin."

    The grounds referred to Articles 2 and 3 of the Refugee Convention  and
    Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.   The   appeal,   as
    presented, is recorded in the Judge's formulation of the submissions of
    the Appellant's representative:


         "Mr Stevenson submitted that throughout there had been  a  critical
         and fundamental flaw in consideration of the Appellant's claim.  He
         stated that Palestinians could be returned to Palestine but only if
         they had been  habitually  resident  there.  This  comes  from  the
         Qualification Directive itself ....


         Whilst  the  Appellant  was  likely  to  be  outside  the   Refugee
         Convention because he could not show he left for reasons  out  with
         his control, he did  fall  within  subsidiary  protection,  Article
         15(c) ......


         It is the country of habitual residence which  was  relevant.   The
         Respondent could not deposit the Appellant in Gaza as it is  not  a
         country.  If this was accepted then  the  Appellant  qualified  for
         subsidiary protection.  There may well  be  credibility  issues  as
         noted by the Immigration Judge in the determination of the previous
         appeal but this did not take away the fact that the Appellant was a
         habitual resident of Syria."


    The FtT rejected these arguments, in the following terms:


         "...  There is the  fundamental  difficulty  that  this  appeal  is
         against a decision to remove [the Appellant] to Palestine,  not  to
         Syria.....


         I do not  think  I  can  find  that  the  Appellant's  hypothetical
         situation if removed to  Syria  entitles  him  to  humanitarian  or
         subsidiary protection when there is no proposal to remove him there
         ....


         His protection case is to be measured against removal to Palestine,
         not against removal to Syria, which is not proposed.   He  has  not
         shown that he qualifies for protection against that outcome."

    The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum and Article  15(c)
    subsidiary protection was dismissed.  The FtT also dismissed his appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and Article 8  of  the  ECHR.    We
    interpose at this juncture the observation that it is  not  in  dispute
    that the Appellant falls within the definition in Article 2(e)  of  the
    Qualification Directive, having regard to the  evidence  pertaining  to
    the conditions prevailing in Syria.

CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

 6. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Bryce formulated the central argument in
    concise  and  focused  terms.   The  Appellant's  case  rests  on   two
    provisions of the Qualification Directive.  The first is Article  2(e),
    which provides:

         "For the purposes of this Directive .....


         (e)  'Person eligible for  subsidiary  protection'  means  a  third
             country national or a stateless person who does not qualify as
             a refugee but in respect of whom substantial grounds have been
             shown for believing that the person concerned, if returned  to
             his or her country of origin, or in the case  of  a  stateless
             person, to his or her country or  former  habitual  residence,
             would face a real risk of suffering serious harm as defined in
             Article 15, and to whom Article 17(1) and (2)  do  not  apply,
             and is unable or, owing  to  such  risk,  unwilling  to  avail
             himself or herself of the protection of that country."

         By Article 2(f):

         "'Subsidiary protection status' means the recognition by  a  Member
         State of a third country national or a stateless person as a person
         eligible for subsidiary protection."

    The second limb of the Appellant's case is founded on Article 24(2)  of
    the Directive which under the rubric "residence permits" provides:


             "As soon as possible after the status has been granted, Member
             States shall issue to beneficiaries of  subsidiary  protection
             status a residence permit which must be valid for at least one
             year and renewable,  unless  compelling  reasons  of  national
             security or public order otherwise require."


    The  Appellant's  case,  in  a  nutshell,  is  that  he  qualifies  for
    subsidiary protection under Article 2(e) and, accordingly, is  entitled
    to a residence permit under Article 24(2).

 7. In support of his argument Mr Bryce prayed in  aid  a  passage  in  the
    opinion of Lord Hope in Regina (ST) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department  [2012]  UKSC  12.   The  appeal  turned   mainly   on   the
    interpretation of the word "lawfully" in  Article  32  of  the  Refugee
    Convention, which prohibits the expulsion by contracting  states  of  a
    "refugee lawfully in their territory",  save  on  grounds  of  national
    security or public order.  The Supreme Court held that lawful presence,
    in this context, had to be determined in accordance with the  municipal
    law of the contracting state.  As a result, the consideration that  the
    Appellant had not been given leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and, indeed, was deemed not to have entered the country at all,
    was determinative.  As a result, the  Appellant  could  not  claim  the
    protection of Article  32.   The  argument  of  Mr  Bryce  invoked  the
    following passage in the opinion of Lord Hope, at [45]:

         "This case is not subject to the provisions of  the  [Qualification
         Directive] ...  [which] ... goes further in some respects that  the
         Refugee Convention because, for example, it  requires  a  residence
         permit to  be  issued  as  soon  as  possible  where  an  applicant
         qualifies as a refugee: Article 24(2) ....


         Its  provisions  are  of  interest,  because  they  show  that  the
         principle which [the Appellant]  was  urging  upon  this  Court  is
         undergoing a process of development among the Member States of  the
         European Union."

    As Lord Hope further made clear, the argument that Article  32  of  the
    Refugee Convention should be construed by reference to  the  provisions
    of the Qualification Directive was rejected.

 8. The Appellant's case also draws  attention  to  certain  provisions  in
    Chapter  III  of  the  Procedures  Directive   [2005/85/EC]   and,   in
    particular, the language in  Article  23  ("the  basic  principles  and
    guarantees of Chapter  II");  the  specific  procedures  identified  in
    Article 24; the provisions in Article 25 relating to  declaring  asylum
    applications inadmissible; and, in particular, the "safe third  country
    concept" enshrined in Article 27, which provides:

        "(1) Member States may apply the safe third  country  concept  only
        where the competent authorities are satisfied that a person seeking
        asylum will be treated in accordance with the following  principles
        in the third country concerned:


               a) life and liberty are not threatened on account  of  race,
                  religion, nationality, membership of a particular  social
                  group or political opinion;
               b) the principle of non-refoulement in accordance  with  the
                  Geneva Convention is respected;
               c) the prohibition of removal, in violation of the right  to
                  freedom from torture  and  cruel,  inhuman  or  degrading
                  treatment  as  laid  down  in   international   law,   is
                  respected; and
               d) the possibility exists to request refugee status and,  if
                  found  to  be  a  refugee,  to  receive   protection   in
                  accordance with the Geneva Convention.


     2)  The application of the safe third country concept shall be subject
        to rules laid down in national legislation, including:


               a)  rules requiring a connection between the person  seeking
                  asylum and the third country concerned on  the  basis  of
                  which it would be reasonable for that  person  to  go  to
                  that country;
               b)   rules  on  the  methodology  by  which  the   competent
                  authorities  satisfy  themselves  that  the  safe   third
                  country concept may be applied to a particular country or
                  to a particular applicant. Such methodology shall include
                  case-by-case consideration of the safety of  the  country
                  for a particular applicant and/or national designation of
                  countries considered to be generally safe;
               c)  rules in accordance with international law, allowing  an
                  individual  examination  of  whether  the  third  country
                  concerned is safe for a particular applicant which, as  a
                  minimum, shall permit  the  applicant  to  challenge  the
                  application of the safe  third  country  concept  on  the
                  grounds that he/she would be subjected to torture, cruel,
                  inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.


        (3) When implementing a decision  solely  based  on  this  Article,
        Member States shall:


               a) inform the applicant accordingly; and
               b) provide him/her with a document informing the authorities
                  of the third country, in the language  of  that  country,
                  that the application has not been examined in substance.


        (4) Where the third country  does  not  permit  the  applicant  for
        asylum to enter its territory,  Member  States  shall  ensure  that
        access to a  procedure  is  given  in  accordance  with  the  basic
        principles and guarantees described in Chapter II.

    The argument developed by Mr Bryce also touched on Articles 1 and 18 of
    the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European  Union  (the  "Lisbon
    Charter").  Article 1 provides:


          "Human  dignity  is  inviolable.   It  must  be   respected   and
    protected."

     Article 18 provides:

         "The right to asylum shall be guaranteed with due respect  for  the
         rules of the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 and the Protocol  of
         31  January  1967  relating  to  the  status  of  refugees  and  in
         accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community."

 9. On behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Komorowski  submitted  that
    although a person's status as a refugee depends on whether he would  be
    at risk in his country of origin, whether he can be  lawfully  expelled
    will normally depend on the proposed country of  destination.   It  was
    submitted  that  this  principle  operates  under  both   the   Refugee
    Convention and the ECHR and  that  it  has  not  been  altered  by  the
    Qualification Directive.  It is not in dispute  that  if  the  proposed
    country of destination were Syria the Appellant would fall  within  the
    definition in Article 2(e) of  the  Directive,  having  regard  to  the
    evidence pertaining to the conditions prevailing there.   Mr Komorowski
    also submitted that the only express prohibition is that which  forbids
    non-refoulement and contended that what is not expressly prohibited  is
    permitted.  Article 21 does not  enlarge  Article  33  of  the  Refugee
    Convention, which enshrines the  prohibition  against  non-refoulement.
    This prohibition relates to "the frontiers  of  territories  where  his
    life or freedom  would  be  threatened  on  account  of  [a  Convention
    Reason]."  Article 33, it was argued, does not preclude  certain  types
    of expulsion. Mr Komorowski further drew attention to other measures of
    EU Legislation in highlighting the suggested limitations of Article  24
    of the Qualification Directive.

10. In resolving these issues we consider  it  important  to  identify  the
    overarching  purposes  of  the  Qualification  Directive.   These   are
    identifiable in certain of its recitals.  First, per recital (1):

         "A common policy on asylum,  including  a  Common  European  Asylum
         System, is a constituent part of the European Unions  objective  of
         progressively establishing an area of freedom, security and justice
         open to those  who,  forced  by  circumstances,  legitimately  seek
         protection in the Community."

     Next, recital (6) provides:

         "The main objective of this Directive  is,  on  the  one  hand,  to
         ensure  that  Member  States  apply   common   criteria   for   the
         identification  of  persons  genuinely  in  need  of  international
         protection and, on the other hand, to ensure that a  minimum  level
         of benefits is available for these persons in all Member States."

         [Our emphasis.]

    By recital (10), the Directive respects the provisions of  the  Charter
    generally and, "in particular", Articles 1 and 18.


    Finally, by recital (25):


         "It is necessary to  introduce  criteria  on  the  basis  of  which
         applicants for international protection are  to  be  recognised  as
         eligible for subsidiary protection. Those criteria should be  drawn
         from international obligations under human rights  instruments  and
         practices existing in Member States."

    We consider that this recital contemplates in  particular  the  Refugee
    Convention and the ECHR.


11. We consider that a guarantee  against  refoulement  only,  rather  than
    expulsion generally,  is  consistent  with  other  EU  legislation,  in
    particular the  Procedures  Directive.  We  are  satisfied  that  these
    various measures of European law co-exist harmoniously, We further hold
    that Article 24 of the Qualification Directive does  not  establish  an
    independent right of residence in the Member State concerned.   Rather,
    it is confined to the formalities of confirming a right of residence to
    those who qualify for such right.   Its function is  to  determine  the
    modalities whereby a right of residence otherwise  existing  is  to  be
    documented.  Its real purpose is to ensure the practical exercise of  a
    right where such right already exists.  This is achieved  by  providing
    that a residence permit must  be  issued  "as  soon  as  possible",  by
    prescribing its minimum duration (one year) and by stipulating that  it
    be renewable.

12. As regards the Procedures Directive,[1] we draw attention to,  firstly,
    its full title:

         "Council Directive 2005/85/EC on minimum standards on procedures in
         Member States for granting and withholding refugee status."

         Recital (4) states:

         "The minimum standards laid down in this Directive on procedures in
         Member States  for  granting  or  withdrawing  refugee  status  are
         therefore a first measure on asylum procedures."

              [Emphasis added.]

         By recital (5):

         "The main objective of this Directive is  to  introduce  a  minimum
         framework  in  the  Community  on  procedures  for   granting   and
         withdrawing refugee status."

              [Our emphasis.]

    We consider it unnecessary to elaborate by reference to the substantive
    provisions of the Directive.  It may be said that the stand out word in
    this instrument, consistent with its full title, is  "procedures".   In
    our  judgment  this  is  a  truly  adjectival  instrument  of  European
    legislation.  It is concerned  fundamentally  with  the  processes  and
    mechanisms to be applied in the determination of  asylum  applications.
    It is, in a sense, the handmaiden of the substantive measures which  it
    serves and facilitates.  We are satisfied that it does not  create  any
    substantive rights in the realm of  asylum  or  subsidiary  protection.
    The Appellant's case focuses on  substantive  rights  only.   Thus  the
    Procedures Directive does not advance the Appellant's case in any way.

13. We further conclude that the relatively  open  textured  provisions  of
    Articles 1 and 8 of the Lisbon Charter add nothing to  the  Appellant's
    case.  As regards Article 1, the issue in this appeal  is  not  whether
    the Appellant is entitled to  have  his  human  dignity  respected  and
    protected.  There is no evidential basis for finding that  this  right,
    enshrined in  Article  1,  will  be  infringed  in  the  event  of  the
    Appellant's return to the PNA.  As regards Article  18,  the  issue  in
    this appeal is  not  whether  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  asylum.
    Rather, as appears from [5] above, the case which he made on appeal  to
    the FtT was that he qualifies for subsidiary protection  under  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  We would add, in any event, that
    in our  judgment  Article  18  of  the  Charter  does  not  extend  the
    substantive provisions of the Refugee Convention and its Protocol.

14. There is no issue in this appeal relating to the  treatment  which  the
    Appellant can expect to receive in the event of being returned to  PNA.
    For this reason we consider that the various decisions relating to  the
    Palestinian territories, the most recent whereof is HS  (Palestinian  -
    Return to Gaza) Palestinian Territories CG [2011] UKUT  124  [IAC],  do
    not bear on the issues.  While we are conscious that the effect of some
    of  the  decisions  belonging  to  this  field  is  that  the  occupied
    Palestinian territories do not have the status in international law  of
    a state and do not control their own borders, we fail to see  how  this
    promotes the Appellant's case, which encompasses a concession  that  he
    will not be at risk of proscribed  treatment  in  the  event  of  being
    repatriated to the PNA.

CONCLUSION

15. We refer to the question of law formulated by the  Lord  Ordinary,  set
    out in [2] of this decision.  For the reasons elaborated above we would
    answer this question in the negative.  We find no error of law  in  the
    decision of the FtT and dismiss this appeal accordingly.

Postscript

    We note from the further information provided post-hearing  that  there
    have been approximately 200 enforced repatriations to the PNA from  the
    United Kingdom during the past ten years.











                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                                10 July 2015


                                      -----------------------
[1] There is now a recast Procedures Directive  (Directive  2013/32/EU)  but
the United Kingdom has not opted into that Directive.

