

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the  application  of  Marie)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00464 (IAC)


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 6th January 2015                           |                             |
|And subsequent to written submissions         |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF

                              DEBBIE ANN MYRIE

                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Mr P Saini, counsel, for the applicant (instructed by Greenland lawyers
LLP)
Mr W Hansen, counsel, for the respondent (instructed by Treasury Solicitor)


                                  JUDGMENT

   1. The applicant applied for leave to remain on the basis of her  Article
      8 ECHR rights to family and private life such application having  been
      made on either 7th March 2012 or 2nd May 2012 when she was in  the  UK
      unlawfully as an overstayer.


   2. On 2nd April 2014 Jeremy Baker  J  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey
      granted the applicant permission to bring a  judicial  review  of  the
      decision of the respondent dated 28th June 2013 refusing to grant  her
      leave to remain in the following terms:



             1.   The applicant is a 36 year old Jamaican  National  called
             Debbie Ann Myrie who was born on 23 September 1977  and  spent
             the first 32 years of her life in Jamaica. On 6 March 2009 she
             entered the United Kingdom on a  visit  visa  valid  until  24
             April 2009. At the end of that  period  she  remained  in  the
             United Kingdom without permission for a period of three years.
             2.   On either 7 March or 2 May 2012 the applicant applied for
             leave to remain on the basis of her Article 8 ECHR  rights  to
             family and private life. The application contained details  of
             her life in the United Kingdom, namely that she lived with her
             sister and her family which comprises four nieces and nephews,
             the elder two of whom she had looked after for  a  significant
             period of time when they were younger and had been  living  in
             Jamaica, the younger two of whom she  had  helped  look  after
             while she had been living in the United Kingdom. She also said
             that she was in a long term relationship.
             3.   The application was considered by the Secretary of  State
             for the Home Department who refused it in a decision dated  28
             June 2013. The Secretary of State set out that under  Appendix
             FM of the Immigration Rules the applicant did not  qualify  as
             someone who had  either  a  sufficient  period  of  continuous
             residence in the United Kingdom, nor was  she  satisfied  that
             the applicant had no ties with Jamaica. Furthermore,  she  did
             not accept  that  there  were  any  exceptional  circumstances
             requiring her to consider the matter further under  Article  8
             outside the Rules.
             4.   On 1 October 2013  the  applicant  sought  permission  to
             apply for judicial review of the decision of the Secretary  of
             State on the basis that the respondent had failed to take into
             account that the applicant had no ties with Jamaica,  and  the
             best interests of her nieces and  nephews.  That  application,
             albeit out of  time,  was  considered  and  refused  by  Upper
             Tribunal Judge Allen on 28 January 2014. Any request for  oral
             renewals were ordered to be filed within three days.  Although
             the request filed on 4 February 2014 is out of  time  we  have
             considered it.
             5.   It is apparent that unless compelling circumstances exist
             an applicant's Article 8 rights are  to  be  considered  under
             Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules -  Nagre  v  SSHD  [2013]
             EWHC 720 (Admin), SSHD v Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640  (IAC)  and
             Shahzad [2014] UKUT 85 (IAC).
             6.   Mr Saini, who appears on behalf of the applicant, asks us
             to look at the letter  of  refusal  dated  28  June  2013  and
             submits that whilst the  respondent  appears  to  engage  with
             considerations  such  as  the  relatively  brief   period   of
             residence in the UK and  the  unlikelihood  of  the  applicant
             having lost ties with Jamaica where she has spent most of  her
             life, it did not refer to the family life which the  applicant
             states that she  enjoys  with  her  sister  and  her  sister's
             children. He refers us to Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74  which
             indicates  that  the  interests  of  children  are  a  primary
             consideration under Article 8 and argues that the Secretary of
             State has omitted to consider this aspect of  the  applicant's
             family life or, if she had done so, she has failed to give any
             reasons for its failure to persuade her to grant the applicant
             leave to remain.
             7.   Ms Paterson, who appears on  behalf  of  the  respondent,
             highlights the long period of  time  that  the  applicant  had
             spent in Jamaica, the comparatively short period of  time  she
             spent in the United Kingdom and the inherent  unlikelihood  of
             the applicant not retaining ties with Jamaica. She  refers  us
             to Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ  31  and  submits  that  in
             relation to older children an  enhanced  degree  of  emotional
             relationship is required to be established if family  life  is
             said to exist between them and an adult. She submits that this
             was not a factor which was  particularly  highlighted  by  the
             applicant. Furthermore, although there  was  no  reference  to
             this matter in the refusal letter, there was  a  reference  to
             exceptional circumstances from which it can  be  implied  that
             the Secretary of State gave due consideration to this matter.
             8.   A further point has been raised  in  the  course  of  the
             hearing by Mr Saini and he seeks permission to amend the claim
             form to include it in the grounds. He has referred us  to  the
             "Statement  of  Changes  in  the   Immigration   Rules"   with
             particular reference to  the  date  of  their  implementation,
             namely:
                  "However, if an application for entry clearance, leave  to
                  remain or indefinite leave to remain has been made  before
                  9 July 2012 and the application has not been  decided,  it
                  will be decided in accordance with the Rules in force on 8
                  July 2012."
             Mr  Saini  submits  that  this  provision   means   that   the
             applicant's application for leave to remain ought to have been
             considered under the old, rather than the new rules.
             9.   In response Ms Paterson acknowledges  that  this  may  be
             correct. However she submits that this would not have made any
             difference to the ultimate result, as the same decision  would
             have been reached under either set of rules.
             10.  On any view the likelihood of the applicant being able to
             establish that she had no ties with Jamaica was poor, and this
             was a matter which we can  ascertain  was  considered  by  the
             respondent. However, although  the  applicant's  assertion  of
             family life was not based upon her relationship with  children
             of her own, but those of her sister, we are not in a  position
             to assess her prospects of establishing family life,  on  this
             basis, as so poor that it did not require consideration by the
             respondent, and we are not able to satisfy ourselves that this
             matter was given due  consideration  by  the  respondent  when
             making the  decision  to  refuse  leave  to  remain.  Thus  we
             consider  that  the  applicant  has  an  arguable  public  law
             challenge to this decision.
             As we are giving permission for this ground to be  argued,  we
             will also allow the applicant to amend her grounds to  include
             the matter raised during the course of the hearing  concerning
             the correct rules under which the applicant's application  for
             leave to remain  should  have  been  considered.  As  this  is
             acknowledged to be a matter which is arguable,  we  will  also
             grant permission on that ground.


   3. The respondent, after permission to bring a judicial review  had  been
      granted for the above reasons then made  two  further  decisions:  the
      first on 24th July 2014 and the second on 30th October 2014. Mr  Saini
      says that his instructions are  that  neither  of  those  letters  was
      received by his instructing solicitors until they were served attached
      to the respondent's detailed grounds of defence which,  he  confirmed,
      had been received by the applicant's solicitors on 3rd November 2014.


      Preliminary issue


     4. Before me Mr Saini raised a preliminary issue namely that these two
        letters were


             "unlawful supplementations of the original Refusal Letter" and
             that "Whilst the Defendant does  not  explicitly  concede  the
             error in the previous decision letter, her supplementation  of
             that cursory letter is an  obvious  and  unlawful  attempt  to
             inflect (sic) rationality  and  reasoning  into  the  decision
             under  challenge  by  way  of  supplementation.  However   the
             decision under challenge itself remains prima facie unreasoned
             and contrary to the above mentioned jurisprudence."


     5.  He submits that the two letters cannot form part of the claim  and
        the respondent cannot  be  permitted  to  perfect  her  reasons  by
        supplementation  and  embellishment.  All  that  is  permitted   is
        elucidation. He submitted that the Secretary of State should either
        have defended the  original  decision  or  offered  settlement  and
        reconsideration and then, in the light of any  further  information
        received, reconsidered the decision.


     6. In support of his submission Mr Saini relies upon  Ermakov,  R  (on
        the application of) v Westminster City Council [1995] EWCA  Civ  42
        which was upheld in Lanner Parish Council, R  (on  the  application
        of) v The Cornwall Council & Anor [2013] EWCA Civ 1290.  He  relied
        further upon R (on the application of Kerr) v  Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department IJR [2014] UKUT  493  (IAC).  He  submitted
        that the two letters had plainly been  drafted  with  the  judicial
        review claim in mind (after permission had been granted); that  the
        fact that they had been drafted at all was highly  suggestive  that
        they were an attempt  to  cure  the  unlawfulness  visible  in  the
        original decision and that they are "beyond the ambit and scope  of
        this judicial review claim and should be  excluded  from  the  UT's
        assessment of the decision under challenge entirely.

     7. Mr Hansen submitted that the July and October letters accorded with
        established practice and elucidated  and  elaborated  the  original
        decision. He submitted that they did not  fundamentally  alter  the
        original decision and that it was not at  all  unusual  to  cure  a
        potential lack of reasoning by the production  of  a  supplementary
        letter. He submitted that the July and October letters did not fall
        foul of Ermakov and should be considered as part  of  the  decision
        making.  He  submitted   that   Ermakov   relied   upon   statutory
        construction requiring reasons to be given at the relevant time and
        the reasons given in that case were contradictory  amounting  to  a
        fundamental alteration whereas in the instant case the  letters  do
        not fundamentally alter the decision but  elucidate  and  elaborate
        the original decision. He relied upon Kerr to support his position.
        If the July and October letters were a part of the  decision,  then
        the litigation is at an end; if they are not then they  go  to  the
        question of remedy. But he retained as his primary submission,  the
        two letters were a part of the decision process.


     8. I granted a short adjournment to enable both parties to bring to my
        attention any other case law upon which they sought to rely,  given
        the late notification of this preliminary issue. On  resumption  of
        the hearing I was provided with R (on the application of Hafeez)  v
        Secretary of Sate for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 1342 (Admin),
        Ahmed v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC  300
        (Admin) and R (on the application of Masuma Rahman) v Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department IJR [2014] UKUT 00374 (IAC) and heard
        further submissions.

     9. Following those submissions I held that the two letters were not  a
        part of the decision making process and thus  did  not  go  to  the
        legality of the original decision. I indicated that I would give my
        reasons  for  reaching  this  decision  in  my  final  judgment.  I
        indicated  that,  obviously  subject  to  hearing  submissions,  my
        initial view was that the original letter was unlawful and that the
        July and October letters  went  to  the  remedy  available  to  the
        applicant. I indicated that if I were to find this to be the case I
        considered it appropriate, because of the particular  circumstances
        of this case and the very recent instructions received by Mr  Saini
        for the hearing before  me  and  the  failure  of  the  applicant's
        solicitors to take her instructions on the July and October letters
        despite having had them  at  least  since  3rd  November  2014,  to
        adjourn for written and oral submissions on the issue of remedy. Mr
        Hansen objected to this proposed course of action. In the  event  I
        reserved my decision.

    Reasons for finding that the July and October letters are not  part  of
    the decision as a whole

    10. In Ermakov, the applicant arrived in the UK and applied for housing
        under the homelessness provisions. He was refused with reasons. The
        applicant challenged that decision by way of  judicial  review  and
        the respondent filed evidence setting out different reasons for its
        decision from those originally given. The Court of Appeal  held  at
        [2], [3] and [4]:
             "The court can and, in appropriate case, should admit evidence
             to  elucidate,  or,  exceptionally,  correct  or  add  to  the
             reasons; but should ...... be very cautious about doing so.  I
             have in mind cases where, for example, an error has been  made
             in  transcription  or  expression,  or   a   word   or   words
             inadvertently omitted, or where the language sued  may  be  in
             some way lacking clarity. These examples are not  intended  to
             be exhaustive, but rather to reflect my view that the function
             of  such  evidence  should  generally   be   elucidation   not
             fundamental  alteration,   confirmation   not   contradiction.
             Certainly there seems to me to be no warrant for receiving and
             relying on as validating the decision evidence -  as  in  this
             case - which indicates  that  the  real  reasons  were  wholly
             different from the stated  reasons.  It  is  not  in  my  view
             permissible to say, merely because the applicant does not feel
             able to challenge  the  bona  fides  of  the  decision-maker's
             explanation as to the real  reasons,  that  the  applicant  is
             therefore not prejudiced and  the  evidence  as  to  the  real
             reasons can be relied upon. This is because, first, I  do  not
             accept that it is necessarily the case that in that  situation
             he is not prejudiced; and, secondly, because in this class  of
             case, I do not consider that it is necessary for the applicant
             to show prejudice before he  can  obtain  relief.  Section  64
             requires a decision and at the same time reasons;  and  if  no
             reasons (which is the reality of a case such as  the  present)
             or wholly deficient reasons  are  given,  he  is  prima  facie
             entitled to have the decision quashed as unlawful.
             [3] There are, I consider, good policy reasons why this should
             be so. The cases emphasise that the purpose of reasons  is  to
             inform the parties why they have won or lost and  enable  them
             to assess whether they have  any  ground  for  challenging  an
             adverse decision. To permit wholesale amendment or reversal of
             the stated reasons is inimical to this purpose ...
             [4]  While it is true, as Schiemann J recognised in  ex  parte
             Shield, that judicial review is  a  discretionary  remedy  and
             that relief may be refused in cases  where,  even  though  the
             ground of  challenge  is  made  good,  it  is  clear  that  on
             reconsideration the decision would be the same, I  agree  with
             Rose J's comments in ex parte Carpenter that, in  cases  where
             the reasons stated in the decision letter have been  shown  to
             be manifestly flawed, it should only be  in  very  exceptional
             circumstances that relief should be refused on the strength of
             reasons  adduced  in  evidence  after  the   commencement   of
             proceedings. Accordingly, efforts to  secure  a  discretionary
             refusal of relief by  introducing  evidence  of  true  reasons
             significantly different form the stated reasons  are  unlikely
             to succeed."

    11. The Court of Appeal in Lanner held [64]:


             "Save in exceptional circumstances, a public authority  should
             not be permitted to adduce evidence which directly contradicts
             its own official records  of  what  it  decided  and  how  its
             decisions were reached ..."



    12. In Kerr, UTJ Jordan found that in the original decision the subject
        of challenge was unlawful. That was not  however  the  end  of  the
        matter because the respondent had, at the same time as  filing  the
        skeleton  argument,  also  served  the  applicant  with  a  further
        decision stating that it was supplemental and  should  be  read  in
        conjunction  with  the  original  decision.  Mr  Biggs,   who   was
        representing the applicant in that case  made,  it  seems,  similar
        submissions to those made by Mr Saini in the  instant  case  namely
        that it was expressed to be a supplementary letter, did not contain
        an admission that the earlier decision was wrong and was  withdrawn
        and was unlawful in accordance  with  the  principles  set  out  in
        Ermakov. UTJ Jordan held [14], [15], [16], [17]:


             "14. The principles set out in Ermakov have no application  in
             the present case. They were directed towards the lawfulness of
             an earlier statutory  decision.  Such  a  decision  cannot  be
             remedied by what is said later. In this case  I  have  already
             made a finding that the decision of March 2013 is unlawful. It
             was unlawful and remains unlawful and will always be unlawful.
             Nothing that is said in the  decision  of  10  September  2014
             alters the lawfulness of the earlier decision. Indeed the very
             fact that it was thought necessary to provide  another  letter
             strongly suggests that the earlier decision was deficient  and
             required the consideration of additional material.
             15.  The relevance of the  letter  of  10  September  2014  is
             focussed upon the remedy that the  Tribunal  affords  when  an
             earlier decision is found to be unlawful but is followed by  a
             later  decision.  If  the   later   decision   is   a   lawful
             consideration of all the factors that the decision  maker  was
             required to consider but failed to  consider  in  the  earlier
             decision and omits consideration of all those factors that the
             decision maker was required to omit, the later  decision  will
             be a lawful one. This does not alter the status of the earlier
             decision.....
             16.  This is a necessary corollary of its  determination  that
             the earlier decision was unlawful. If the earlier decision  is
             quashed, it would normally be appropriate to direct  that  the
             respondent makes a fresh and lawful  decision.  If  however  a
             fresh and lawful decision has already been made, there  is  no
             point  in  requiring  a  further  decision  which  would,   of
             necessity, replicate what has already been decided..."


    13. In Ahmed it seems from [8]  that  the  decision  originally  issued
        adverse to the claimant  in  that  case  had  been  reviewed  after
        permission was granted and  in  [14]  there  is  reference  to  the
        claimant, in  the  light  of  that  later  letter,  "refining"  his
        arguments. There does not appear to have been a submission that the
        later letter (and it is not  clear  whether  it  was  described  as
        supplementary or not) either formed part of the decision process or
        part of the assessment of remedy or should be ignored as  unlawful.
        I do not take this judgment as authority in support of  either  the
        applicant or the respondent in the instant case.


    14. In Hafeez the claimant was granted permission to judicially  review
        a  September  2012  decision  and,  subsequent  to  that  grant  of
        permission the respondent issued a further decision  in  July  2013
        which is described  as  "amounting  to  a  reconsideration  of  the
        Claimant's position". The  claimant  in  that  case  unsuccessfully
        argued that the 2012 decision was unlawful. He submitted  that  the
        2013 decision should be ignored as irrelevant. It is not clear from
        the judgment on what basis that submission was  made  but  in  [35]
        Green J held:

             "As to the 2013 Decision the Claimant does not explain why the
             analysis set out therein is unlawful. There is no  explanation
             as to why it does not cure the defect in the earlier decision,
             and on its face it does precisely that.  Further,  as  to  the
             objection as to the admissibility of arguments on the part  of
             the Defendant based upon the new decision it would in my  view
             be wholly unrealistic to ignore the 2013 Decision.  It  is  an
             integral part of the facts of this case. It has been in  force
             for approaching 10 months. Had this judicial review  proceeded
             exclusively upon the basis  of  the  2012  Decision  then  the
             Claimant would have had a stronger case for contending that it
             contained sufficient errors to be quashed and for  the  matter
             to be remitted to the SSHD to be re-taken. In such  a  case  I
             would have been required to consider  whether  there  was  any
             utility in remitting the matter. In this regard  I  could  not
             sensibly have ignored the existence of the 2013 decision,  nor
             the fact that it lay unchallenged."


       In [36] Green J said:


             "...the 2012 decision was  withdrawn  and  the  2013  decision
             substituted in its place and this was correct and has not been
             challenged."


       It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  from  the  judgment  exactly  what
       submissions were made to Green J but it  does  appear  that  in  any
       event the original decision was withdrawn  and  another  substituted
       rather than the  2013  decision  being  treated  as  elucidating  or
       supplementing. This is  also  therefore  of  no  assistance  to  the
       instant case.


    15. In Masuma Rahman the  applicant  was  granted  permission  on  27th
        January 2014.  The  respondent  issued  a  "supplementary  decision
        letter" of 18th March 2014 and it appears from [1] of the  judgment
        that it was not contested that  it  formed  part  of  the  decision
        process and should be  taken  in  to  account  in  determining  the
        lawfulness of the decision the subject of challenge.  In  [24]  UTJ
        Allen stated:

                  "It is clear that the application could not succeed  under
                  the  Immigration  Rules  and  they  have  been  considered
                  adequately in a combination of the two  decision  letters,
                  as regards family life under the Rules  and  private  life
                  under the Rules. The first letter did not address  private
                  life but that  deficiency  was  addressed  in  the  second
                  letter. In the first letter it was  concluded  that  there
                  were no  exceptional  circumstances  which  might  warrant
                  consideration of a grant of leave outside the Rules.  More
                  detailed   consideration   was   given   to    exceptional
                  circumstances in the  second  decision  and  the  approach
                  there accords with the guidance in authorities such as  MF
                  Nigeria and Nagre."

        Again the circumstances of that case are not as in this case. There
        was no point taken either  that  the  lawfulness  of  the  original
        decision  should  be  considered  prior  to  consideration  of  the
        supplementary letter or  that  the  supplementary  letter  went  to
        remedy or should be ignored completely.


    16. I agree with UTJ Jordan that Ermakov is of no relevance in  a  case
        such as this where an immigration decision is subject to  challenge
        and then supplementary letters are issued either after the issue of
        the claim form or after the grant  of  permission.  These  are  not
        cases where the requirement to give reasons is laid down by statute
        and thus any subsequent decisions made or reasons given may fail to
        comply with statutory requirements.


    17. Both the July letter  and  the  October  letter  are  expressed  as
        supplemental and to  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  original
        decision of 28 June 2013. In many cases, there may be an acceptance
        that that is so and the wording of the letters may be such that the
        additional letters are what could be called a "combined  decision".
        Or the respondent may withdraw the first decision  and  remake  it.
        But, as in Kerr, a subsequent  letter  or  decision  does  not  and
        cannot make the first decision lawful unless they are read together
        as one and the same decision.


    18. The two letters in question in the instant  case  were  not  served
        upon the applicant, through her solicitors, until after  permission
        had been granted (2nd April 2014)  and  even  then  not  until  the
        respondent's detailed grounds of defence were served (3rd  November
        2014). The approach in this case should be as  in  Kerr  namely  to
        address the question of whether the decision  under  challenge  was
        lawful or not. If not then that is  the  end  of  the  matter  -  a
        subsequent lawful decision cannot render lawful a decision that was
        not lawful. Considerations of pragmatism in immigration proceedings
        require letters  issued  subsequent  to  either  the  issue  of  an
        application for  permission  or  the  grant  of  permission  to  be
        admitted into consideration. To refuse to do  so  would  result  in
        unnecessarily  repetitive,  proceedings  that   would   result   in
        inordinate  delay,  lack  of  certainty  for   an   applicant   and
        significantly increased costs to no avail. In this case  there  was
        no application to amend the grounds seeking permission (other  than
        the amended grounds of claim which were  served  immediately  after
        the grant  of  permission).  I  have  not  heard  argument  on  the
        relevance of the subsequent letters to remedy but  have  considered
        their content for the purpose of only  determining  the  extent  to
        which they addressed new  issues  or  were  merely  elucidating  an
        existing decision because it seems to me that  to  ignore  them  is
        inappropriate.


    19. In summary therefore I am  satisfied  that  the  July  and  October
        letters are not part of the original decision but their content  is
        relevant to the issue of remedy.

   The lawfulness of the original decision


    20. I have, therefore, taken no account of the July and October letters
        in reaching my decision  as  to  the  lawfulness  of  the  original
        decision


    21. The applicant complains that the decision of the respondent firstly
        ignored  and/or  failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to  her
        asserted family life with her adult sister, nieces and nephews  and
        failed to give adequate or any consideration to the best  interests
        of the children in the light of her  relationship  with  them;  and
        secondly  failed  to  consider  the  application  under  Article  8
        simpliciter as opposed to under the rules in force  from  9th  July
        2012. She relies in particular upon the children having lived  with
        her whilst they and she were in Jamaica and the stated  close  bond
        between them and her both in  Jamaica  and  in  the  UK  which  she
        asserts is comparable to a maternal relationship.

    22. Mr Hansen submits that although the decision was brief, there was a
        significant lacuna in the evidence produced to the respondent as to
        the years or months  the  applicant  spent  with  the  children  in
        Jamaica and the detailed nature of the relationship  she  has  with
        them in the UK. The applicant had been an overstayer for  a  number
        of years  and  it  was,  he  said,  inevitable  that  even  if  the
        respondent  had  referred  in  detail  to  the   content   of   the
        application, the outcome would have been the same given the paucity
        of material before  the  Secretary  of  State  when  she  made  her
        decision.

    23. The decision did not engage with the specific matters  put  forward
        by the applicant which did not fall into the generality  of  claims
        made  of  family  life  or  private   life   which   involves   the
        interrelationship between the applicant  and  her  sister  and  her
        sister's children. There  were  letters  from  the  children  which
        indicated a close bond and it behoved the respondent  to  at  least
        engage with the scenario put forward.

    24. I am satisfied that the original decision  was  unlawful.  However,
        for the reasons already given, as indicated as a  provisional  view
        at the hearing, I do not  quash  the  decision.  I  invite  written
        submissions by both parties  together  with  any  application  with
        regard to costs to be filed within 21 days of this  judgment  being
        sent. If either party wishes to make oral submissions they  are  to
        notify the Tribunal within 7 days of this judgement being sent  and
        a hearing will be listed on the earliest convenient date.








      Submissions


    25. I received written submissions as  to  remedy  from  both  parties.
        Neither requested an oral hearing.


    26. The applicant submits that having found  the  decision  dated  28th
        June 2013 to be unlawful, the respondent would need to show why the
        case was 'very exceptional' such that the reasons  adduced  in  the
        letters of 24th July 2014  and  30th  October  2014  justified  the
        applicant being denied relief and costs. The applicant submits that
        the production of not merely one but two further decisions  without
        warning and without giving the applicant the opportunity to provide
        further and additional evidence/representations renders the process
        unpredictable and unfair. The applicant maintains that  the  second
        and  third  decisions  'remain  unlawful  in  and  of  themselves'.
        Attached to the written submissions was an itemised bill.


    27. The two later letters were produced after the grant  of  permission
        and after  the  service  of  the  amended  grounds  of  claim.  The
        respondent submits that when the two later letters are  taken  into
        account, the applicant has been lawfully refused further  leave  to
        remain.  In particular she submits that she was  entitled  to  deal
        with the application in the first  instance  by  reference  to  the
        Immigration Rules and thereafter that insofar as any  consideration
        was  required  outside  the  Rules  then  such  consideration   was
        contained in the two later letters.


    28. The applicant has not identified any matters that have not now been
        considered by the respondent on the basis of the evidence that  was
        before her and simply asserts that the later two  decisions  remain
        unlawful. Although the applicant asserts that they  have  not  been
        admitted into evidence,  they  plainly  exist  and  there  must  be
        consideration whether they are relevant  as  to  remedy  given  the
        discretionary nature of judicial review.


    29. The later two decisions consider and engage with the  evidence  and
        information that had been placed before the respondent. They do not
        'cure' the first decision of its unlawfulness but  plainly  address
        all the matters that had  previously  not  been  addressed  by  the
        respondent.

    30. Judicial review is a discretionary remedy. It  is  plain  from  the
        later two letters that the applicant's case has now been considered
        and  the   representations/evidence   she   submitted   have   been
        considered. In the light of my findings at [28] and [29] above this
        claim must fail.


    31. In so far as costs are concerned I have  carefully  considered  the
        competing interests of the parties. I note that  although  the  two
        later letters were dated July and October 2014 they were not served
        on the applicant until service of the detailed grounds  of  defence
        namely 3rd November 2014. The applicant has, by the  production  of
        the two later letters achieved full consideration  of  application,
        which is no more than she could have expected had those  two  later
        letters not been produced.


    32. I therefore order that the respondent pay the applicant's costs  up
        to and including the date of service of  the  detailed  grounds  of
        defence and three weeks thereafter in  a  sum  to  be  agreed;  the
        applicant to pay the respondent's costs thereafter in a sum  to  be
        agreed. In default of agreement the Tribunal will  determine  costs
        on receipt of submissions limited to 3 pages of A4. The parties are
        on notice that costs sanctions may arise from unreasonable  failure
        to reach agreement.

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker                       Date
