



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Matthew) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department FCJR [2013] UKUT 00466 (IAC)


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 July 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                                  the Queen
                            on the application of
                                   Matthew

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:

For the Applicant:     Mr P. Turner, Counsel, instructed by Ferani Taylor
For the Respondent:    Mr Z. Malik, Counsel, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor


                                  JUDGMENT

Introduction

1.   The applicant applies for judicial review to challenge the decision  of
    the respondent on 31 July 2012 not to treat her representations made on
    6 December 2011 as a fresh asylum or human rights  claim,  pursuant  to
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  It is common ground that  this
    decision of the respondent was supplemented by means of a letter  dated
    8 March 2013 and that this supplementary letter also falls  within  the
    ambit of the applicant's grounds of challenge.

2.   Permission to bring judicial review proceedings was  refused  by  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Latter  on  6  September  2012  but  granted  on  oral
    reconsideration  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Warr  on  7  March   2013.
    Paragraphs 6 to 11 of Judge Warr's decision serve as a  useful  summary
    of the background:-

         "6.  The applicant has a lengthy immigration history having arrived
             on 27th July 1998 as a visitor and her stay was extended as  a
             student until 28th February 2001.


         7.   Thereafter her stay in the United  Kingdom  has  been  without
             leave.  She has, however, made repeated applications  for  her
             stay to be regularised.


         8.   The applicant initially relied on her marriage to  Mr  Matthew
             in March 2003 and there was an appeal before Immigration Judge
             Brown on 24th May 2007 where the  judge  found  the  appellant
             could not succeed under  the  rules  or  the  then  prevailing
             policy (there being minimal if any evidence  of  a  subsisting
             marriage) and he dismissed the appeal under  Article  8.   The
             applicant's marriage ended in divorce on 8th May 2008.


         9.   The appellant had a relationship meanwhile with Mr Jones  whom
             she married on 31 January 2009.  Prior  to  the  marriage  her
             case was considered as an unmarried partner of Mr Jones.   The
             respondent refused her application for leave to remain on that
             basis and that decision was unsuccessfully  challenged  before
             Immigration Judge Simpson on 5th  December  2008.   The  judge
             found that he could attach little weight  to  the  applicant's
             evidence and treated what she said with considerable  caution.
             The appeal failed under the rules and Article 8.


         10.  There was an unsuccessful attempt to  challenge  the  decision
             and an unsuccessful judicial review application  following  an
             application based on the  appellant's  marriage  to  Mr  Jones
             which took place after Judge Simpson's decision.


         11.  The applicant's representatives made  an  application  on  6th
             December 2011.  It was submitted  that  matters  "had  plainly
             moved on" since the decision of Judge Simpson and the  parties
             were now married and in a durable relationship and it would be
             unreasonable for Mr Jones, a British citizen, to live with the
             applicant in Jamaica due to the ill-health of his mother.  The
             applicant  had  a  daughter   who   lived   in   Belfast   and
             grandchildren who suffered from autism."

Immigration Judge J Simpson's determination

3.    The  following   paragraphs   of   Immigration   Judge   J   Simpson's
    determination are of relevance:-

         "8.  I accept the Appellant has established family life.  She lived
             for about 2 years with her aunt and for an uncertain period of
             time with her husband.  She is now in a new relationship  with
             Mr Jones which has  currently  lasted  15  months.   There  is
             nothing special about her relationship  with  her  aunt  which
             appears  to  be   a   normal   reasonably   close   aunt/niece
             relationship.   Her  relationship  with  her  cousin  is  more
             distant.  She has no children.  I treat her relationship  with
             Mr Jones as being her closest one and it would be  this  which
             would be most affected if she were to return  to  Jamaica.   I
             accept she has no family remaining  in  Jamaica  to  whom  she
             could turn for support.  She is a mature woman aged 37 who has
             taken advantage of some education and training in the UK.  She
             asserts she has never been unemployed or drawn  benefits  from
             which I infer she has not encountered  difficulty  in  finding
             employment.  She will take these skills  and  experience  with
             her to Jamaica which should  assist  her  to  find  employment
             there.  There are no health problems.  Following the breakdown
             of her marriage the Appellant found accommodation for herself,
             which she shares with another woman and now Mr Jones.   I  see
             no reason why she should not find accommodation for herself in
             Jamaica.  It will be a matter for Mr Jones to  decide  whether
             he wishes to accompany the Appellant  to  Jamaica  whilst  she
             makes a settlement application.  If he prefers to remain  here
             there is no  reason  why  he  cannot  provide  her  with  some
             financial support.   They  will  be  able  to  communicate  by
             telephone or electronic means and there is no  reason  why  Mr
             Jones cannot visit Jamaica.


         9.   The relationship with Mr Jones is comparatively  new  and  has
             not yet stood the test of time.  He  merely  lodges  with  the
             Appellant in a house in respect of which he is not  a  tenant.
             He espouses that at some time in  the  future  he  expects  to
             enter into a tenancy jointly with the Appellant and that  they
             hope to marry.  There  will  be  nothing  to  stop  them  from
             marrying in Jamaica if  that  remains  their  wish,  following
             which a marriage application can be made.


         10.  Whilst I accept that requiring  the  Appellant  to  return  to
             Jamaica will be an interference with her right to respect  for
             family  life  and  perhaps  also   to   private   life,   such
             interference will be in pursuit of a  legitimate  aim  by  the
             Respondent namely to maintain  effective  immigration  control
             which invokes the principle of proportionality.  In this event
             I have to balance the rights of the Appellant with the  public
             interest.  I take into account that  the  Appellant  has  been
             less than frank in her evidence from which  I  infer  she  has
             attempted to add greater weight to the strength  and  duration
             of her relationship with Mr Jones than is in fact the case.  I
             also take into account the other factors mentioned  above  and
             conclude the Respondent's refusal of leave to  remain  is  not
             disproportionate.


         11.  I was referred to the case of Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 but the
             facts of that case are very different  from  this  one.   This
             Appellant is not being asked to return to a place where she or
             Mr Jones are likely to be  at  risk  and  there  is  no  child
             involved.   I  have  also  taken  into   account   the   other
             authorities cited by Ms Delany."

The submissions of 6 December 2011

4.   The submissions made by the  applicant's  solicitors  enclosed  witness
    statements  from  the  applicant  and  Mr  Jones,  a  letter  from  the
    applicant's mother-in-law, a letter from the applicant's daughter,  and
    various other letters of support, including from clergy at  the  church
    where the applicant and her husband worship and  from  the  applicant's
    adult children, who are resident in the United Kingdom. There was  also
    a letter from Mr Jones's GP, concerning Mr Jones's mother.

5.  The following passages from the solicitor's submissions  letter  are  of
    particular relevance to the present proceedings:-

         "We say that matters have plainly moved on since  the  decision  of
         the immigration judge in December 2010.  Firstly our client married
         Mr Jones on 31 January 2009.  They have been living together now as
         man and wife for just under 3 years.  We say it is plain  that  the
         relationship is a loving and durable one, having been in  existence
         for over 4 years.  It is clear, we say, that the  earlier  concerns
         expressed by the previous immigration judge have  been  allayed  by
         the passage of time.


         It is our position that in this case it would  be  unreasonable  to
         expect our client and Mr Jones  to  relocate  to  Jamaica....   The
         reason for this is simply, Mr Jones is the carer of his mother, Mrs
         Joan Jones.  Mr Jones had a brother, his brother  and  he  used  to
         share responsibility for looking  after  his  mother.   Sadly,  his
         brother died in 2010.  Since his brother's death Mr Jones has  been
         the primary carer for his mother in fact  the  applicant  has  also
         played an important part in the care provided to Mrs Jones  as  can
         be seen from the witness statement submitted.


         It is clear that to compel Mr Jones to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
         would deprive his mother of the familial support  she  enjoys  from
         him and indeed the applicant.  There is nobody else other than  the
         state to whom she could turn, we say in those circumstances  it  is
         plainly unnecessary and indeed unlawful  for  him  to  relocate  to
         Jamaica.  We would also draw your attention to  the  fact  that  Mr
         Jones is a British citizen, United Kingdom is his home, he  has  no
         family in Jamaica, no work in Jamaica, no house in Jamaica  and  is
         not rich.


         We also say that it would be unnecessary and therefore unlawful  to
         compel our client to return to Jamaica and make an application from
         abroad.  We say this, as given her previous immigration history, it
         is likely that any application made from abroad  will  be  refused.
         If such an application was refused it would need to  be  challenged
         by way of an appeal and we understand that this is a  long  process
         that is likely to result in a separation between husband  and  wife
         for a considerable period of time.  Our client  has  no  family  or
         friends to whom she could turn to in Jamaica, Mr Jones would not be
         able to remain in Jamaica while she made the application because of
         course he would be required in United Kingdom  to  look  after  his
         mother.


         Our client also has a daughter  in  the  United  Kingdom  ...  [Mrs
         Shirley] who lives in Belfast, a person present and settled in  the
         United Kingdom she has 3 children ... you will see from the  letter
         of support from Mrs Shirley that the applicant enjoys  family  life
         with her and her children.  You will see from the letter of support
         that Mrs Shirley considers that her mother's removal would  have  a
         deleterious effect on her children."

The respondent's decision letters

6.   In the decision letter of 31 July 2012, the respondent said this:-

         "Although your client claims to have been in a relationship with Mr
         Jones since 2007, prior to her marriage to him on 31 January  2009,
         she had not had valid leave to remain since 28 February 2001.   She
         therefore  does  not  satisfy  the  requirement  R-LTRP.1.1.(b)  of
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


         Furthermore, your  client's  relationship  was  considered  by  the
         Immigration Judge who heard her appeal on 5 December 2008 and found
         in paragraph 8 of the appeal determination...[see [3] above].


         Your client became  appeal  rights  exhausted  in  March  2009  but
         continues to submit applications and representations to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom on the basis that have already  been  considered
         and rejected before.  Moreover, your client married Mr Jones  after
         her appeal was dismissed when both were aware that  their  marriage
         would not give your client a lawful right to remain in  the  United
         Kingdom as the Immigration Judge had clearly found in paragraphs  9
         and 10 of the determination '... He espouses that at  one  time  in
         the future he expects to enter into  a  tenancy  jointly  with  the
         appellant and that they hope to marry.  There will  be  nothing  to
         stop them from marrying  in  Jamaica  if  it  remains  their  wish,
         following which a marriage application can be made ...'


         The Immigration Judge gave consideration to Chikwamba and stated in
         paragraph 11, 'I was referred to the case of Chikwamba [2008]  UKHL
         40 but the facts of that case are very  different  from  this  one.
         This Appellant is not being asked to return to a place where she or
         Mr Jones are likely to be at risk and there is no child involved.'


         Consideration has also been given to the case of Beoku-Betts v SSHD
         [2008].  The House of Lords considered the extent to which  Article
         8 rights for family members who are not party to proceedings should
         be considered.  However, it is not accepted that your client's case
         falls within the remit of this judgment  ...  Your  client  and  Mr
         Jones made the decision to continue their relationship knowing that
         she had no right to continue living here, and  that  there  may  be
         interference with the relationship should she  have  to  return  to
         Jamaica and Mr Jones makes  the  decision  not  to  accompany  her.
         Although it is claimed that Mr Jones would not be able to accompany
         your client to Jamaica as he would not be able to leave his mother,
         she would be able to approach  the  local  authorities  and  social
         services for care and support.  Mr Jones would therefore be free to
         accompany your client and the couple continue their family life  in
         Jamaica.   It  is  therefore   considered   that   there   are   no
         insurmountable obstacles to your client  and  Mr  Jones  continuing
         their family life abroad.  Alternatively, Mr Jones can support  any
         application she makes for return  here  while  he  remains  in  the
         United Kingdom to look after his mother.


         ...


         The remaining points raised in  your  submissions,  taken  together
         with the material previously considered in the determination, would
         not have created a realistic prospect of success."

7.   One of the grounds of challenge in the current proceedings is that  the
    letter of 31 July 2012 addressed the issue of Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    solely by reference to the application of the current Immigration Rules
    (which came into force on 9 July 2012), instead of  adopting  the  "two
    stage" approach which the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber
    had held to be required, in the cases of MF (Article  8  -  new  rules)
    [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) and Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013]  UKUT
    45 (IAC).  The supplementary decision of 8 March 2013 was a response to
    this criticism.  The following paragraphs are relevant:-

         "9.  The Upper Tribunal in Izuazu (Nigeria) [2013]  UKUT  45  (IAC)
             and MF (Nigeria) [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) decided that where  a
             claimant does not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
             Rules it remains necessary for the Tribunal  to  carry  out  a
             separate additional  assessment  of  Article  8  applying  the
             criteria established by current case law.  As our letter of 31
             July 2012 makes clear it is  not  accepted  that  your  client
             meets the Immigration  Rules  and  there  are  no  exceptional
             circumstances which would make  refusal  of  your  application
             unduly harsh.  While, with respect, we do not believe it to be
             necessary or appropriate to undertake the two-stage assessment
             identified by the Tribunal, it is acknowledged that the  First
             Tier Tribunal is bound by those decisions.  Accordingly,  when
             considering whether or not your case is clearly unfounded,  at
             present it is necessary to consider whether that  claim  would
             be bound to fail before an Immigration Judge if  the  criteria
             established by existing case law are applied.  For the reasons
             set out in this letter it is considered that it would be.


         10.  Your client arrived in the United Kingdom  on  27  July  1998.
             She was granted six months leave to enter as a visitor.  On 18
             January 1999, she submitted an application for leave to remain
             as a student.   Leave  was  granted  until  31  January  2000.
             Further leave as a student was subsequently granted  until  28
             February 2001.  Your client then disappeared.   She  submitted
             an out of time application on 05 June 2002.  On 08  June  2002
             her application was rejected because  your  client  failed  to
             complete the correct form and her application  was  not  fully
             completed.  She also failed to supply any documents in support
             of her application.  She married a Mr  Victor  Matthew  on  12
             March 2003 and submitted an application for leave to remain as
             a spouse on 23 July 2004.  Again,  your  client's  application
             was rejected on 14 August 2004 because she completed the wrong
             form.  She submitted a further application for leave to remain
             as a spouse on 23 August 2004 which was refused  with  an  in-
             country right of appeal.  Her appeal lodged on 20  April  2007
             was dismissed on 14 June 2007.


         11.  In August 2007, your client began a  relationship  with  a  Mr
             Neil  Jones.   On  04  September  2007,   she   submitted   an
             application for leave to remain as an unmarried partner.  Your
             client  failed  to  submit  the  relevant  documents  and  her
             application  was  rejected.   On  27  October  2007,  she  re-
             submitted the application.  Her application was refused on  27
             October 2008 with a right of appeal.  Her appeal was dismissed
             on 10 December 2008.  Request for a review  of  the  dismissal
             was refused on 15 January and 09 March 2009.  Your client  and
             Mr Victor Matthew were divorced on 08 May 2008.


         12.  Your client married Mr Neil  Jones  on  31  January  2009  and
             resubmitted an application for leave to remain as a spouse  of
             a settled person on 21 April 2009.  She  was  refused  because
             she only made a partial payment of the fee.  Your client  then
             submitted an application for  leave  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules on the 26 May 2009.  Her application for  leave  outside
             the rules was made void as on the same day she  reapplied  for
             leave as a spouse of a settled person.  On  14  October  2010,
             your client's application was refused.


         13.  On 12 November 2010, your  client  lodged  a  judicial  review
             claim.   Her  further  representations  were  refused  on   21
             December 2010.  The judicial review application was refused on
             18 February  2011.   Her  permission  to  an  Oral  permission
             hearing was refused on 16  November  2011.   You  submitted  a
             human rights claim relying on your letter  dated  06  December
             2011.  A full account of your client's human rights have  been
             duly considered and refused in our letter dated 31 July 2012.


         14.  It is accepted that your client's removal would interfere with
             her private life in a sufficiently serious  enough  manner  to
             engage  Article  8(1).   However,  her  removal  would  be  in
             accordance with the law and would pursue a legitimate  aim  of
             maintaining immigration control.


         15.  It is acknowledged that your client's claim to  have  remained
             in the UK without leave to remain.  It  is  also  acknowledged
             that she is in a relationship with Mr Neil  Jones  since  2007
             but she had not had valid leave to remain  since  28  February
             2001.


         16.  It is noted that your client has her daughter and her children
             in the UK and they play a big part in her  life.   She  mainly
             spends time with the daughter and  her  grand-children  during
             the  holidays.   However,  it  is  noted  that  many  families
             maintain long distance  relationships  and  her  grandchildren
             will have the support of their mother following your  client's
             return to Jamaica.  As notified in our refusal letter dated 31
             July 2012, there are modern methods of communication that your
             client  and  her  family  can  rely  on  to   maintain   their
             relationship.  Her  daughter  was  born  in  Jamaica  and  her
             grandchildren can also visit her in Jamaica.


         ...


         24.  After taking all the above into account, it is considered that
             your client's claim to remain on the basis of Article 8  after
             having considered your claim in  light  of  MF  (Nigeria)  and
             Izuazu remains clearly unfounded.


         ...


         30.   Consideration  has  been  given  to  whether  these   further
             submissions, taken together  with  the  previously  considered
             material, create a realistic prospect  of  success  before  an
             immigration judge.


         31.  In all circumstances it is not considered that the decision to
             remove your client prejudices her private or any  family  life
             in a manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of  the
             fundamental  right  protected  by  Article  8.   There  is  no
             presumption of family or private life in the UK, it depends on
             the circumstances on each particular case.


         32.  After  taking  all  of  the  above  into  account  and  having
             reconsidered your client's claim in light of MF (Nigeria)  and
             Izuazu it is not considered that there is any  need  to  demur
             from the conclusion expressed in  our  previous  letters  that
             your client should be removed from the UK, and that to  effect
             the removal would not be in breach of Article 8.


         33.  For the reasons set out above, it is considered that there  is
             no realistic prospect that  your  client's  submissions  will,
             when  taken  together  with  all  the  previously   considered
             material, lead an immigration judge to decide that your client
             should  be  allowed  to  stay  in  the  United   Kingdom   and
             accordingly  it  does  not  amount  to  a  fresh  claim  under
             paragraph 353.  It has further been considered  whether  there
             is a realistic prospect of an immigration  judge,  considering
             the fresh material  in  light  of  the  previously  considered
             material, and applying the rule of anxious  scrutiny,  finding
             that there would be a  real  risk  that  your  client's  human
             rights would be breached on return to Jamaica.   It  has  been
             concluded that there is not, and that  the  material  do  not,
             there create a realistic prospect of success.


         34.  Having considered  the  matter  from  the  perspective  of  an
             immigration judge, taking all the evidence in  the  round  and
             giving appropriate weight to  the  issues,  the  Secretary  of
             State considers that your client's further submissions do  not
             create a realistic prospect of success before  an  immigration
             judge, notwithstanding their rejection  by  the  Secretary  of
             State."


The law

8.   The relevant law concerning judicial review of  a  respondent's  "fresh
    claim" decision is most conveniently articulated  in  the  judgment  of
    Buxton LJ in WM (DRC) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1495:-

         "11. First, has the Secretary of State asked  himself  the  correct
             question? The question is not whether the Secretary  of  State
             himself thinks that the new claim is  a  good  one  or  should
             succeed, but whether there  is  a  realistic  prospect  of  an
             adjudicator, applying the rule of anxious  scrutiny,  thinking
             that  the  applicant  will  be  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of
             persecution on return ... The Secretary  of  State  of  course
             can, and no doubt logically should, treat his own view of  the
             merits as a starting-point for that enquiry; but it is only  a
             starting-point in the consideration  of  a  question  that  is
             distinctly different from the exercise  of  the  Secretary  of
             State making up his  own  mind.  Second,  in  addressing  that
             question, both in respect of the evaluation of the  facts  and
             in respect of the legal conclusions to  be  drawn  from  those
             facts, has the Secretary of State satisfied the requirement of
             anxious scrutiny? If the court cannot be  satisfied  that  the
             answer to both of those questions is  in  the  affirmative  it
             will have to grant an application for review of the  Secretary
             of State's decision."


Discussion

9.   As well as the grounds  of  application,  the  applicant's  case  finds
    expression in a detailed written skeleton argument of Mr Turner,  which
    he supplemented in oral submissions on 18 July.  The respondent's  case
    is set out in her detailed grounds of defence, to which Mr Malik  spoke
    at the hearing.  Having considered the  respective  arguments  and  the
    relevant materials, my findings are as follows.

(a) A whirligig case?

10.   For  the  respondent,  Mr  Malik  sought  to  categorise  the  present
    proceedings as, in the words of Ward LJ:-

         "... one of those whirligig cases where an asylum  seeker  goes  up
         and down on the merry-go-round leaving one wondering when the music
         will ever stop.  It is a typical  case  where  asylum  was  refused
         years ago but endless fresh claims clogged the process  of  removal
         ... it is time the  music  stopped  and  the  merry-go-round  stops
         turning." (TM v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]
         EWCA Civ 9; [1], [40]).

     Mr Malik submitted that,  in  the  present  case,  the  respondent  had
    considered the applicant's circumstances and submissions on a number of
    occasions and had, to date, made at least six adverse  decisions,  from
    March 2007 to March 2013.

11.    It is, I consider, abundantly plain that Ward LJ was not in  any  way
    attempting to lay down a legal test or other identifying mechanism,  in
    describing the application before the Court of Appeal  as  a  whirligig
    case. To treat his words in this way is likely to obscure, rather  than
    illuminate, the proper analysis of cases involving paragraph 353 of the
    Immigration Rules.

12.   Paragraph 353 makes express provision for  cases  where  the  "further
    submissions" are not "significantly different from  the  material  that
    has  previously  been   considered".    Submissions   "will   only   be
    significantly different if the content:

         (i)  had not already been considered; and


         (ii) taken together with the previously considered material created
             a realistic prospect of success, notwithstanding its rejection
             ..."

13.  If the  same  submissions  are  made,  paragraph  353(i)  will  not  be
    satisfied and the respondent need go no further.  It is also correct to
    state that the respondent can bring the process to  an  end  by  making
    removal directions.  Judicial review proceedings  launched  against  or
    otherwise in the wake of such  directions  will  not  necessarily  stop
    those directions from being carried out.

14.  But, the longer an individual remains in the UK, the more likely it  is
    that that individual's Article 8 rights,  whether  in  the  private  or
    family life  aspect,  will  change  in  character,  compared  with  the
    position when his or her case was last tested by  means  of  appeal  or
    judicial review.  That is, in a  nutshell,  precisely  the  applicant's
    argument in  the  present  case.   Through  Mr  Turner,  the  applicant
    contends that matters have, indeed, moved on  since  Immigration  Judge
    Simpson's determination, and also since the judicial review proceedings
    of 2011 (in which she was unsuccessful).

(b) The MF issue: what is the proper ambit of an Article 8 consideration?

15.  Despite the emphasis placed by both sides on this issue, I consider  it
    can be disposed of briefly.  Although, in the light of the judgment  of
    Sales J in R (Nagre) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin),  there  is  scope  for  argument  that,  in  a
    particular case, any  failure  to  examine  Article  8  otherwise  than
    through the prism of the Immigration Rules may be immaterial,  in  that
    no arguable case exists for reaching a different conclusion on  Article
    8, outwith those Rules, the respondent in the present case chose in the
    supplementary decision of 8 March 2013 to address Article 8 in its  own
    terms.  The respondent rightly acknowledged that, whether or not MF and
    Izuazu are ultimately found to be correct in holding that the new Rules
    are not dispositive of Article  8  issues,  Judges  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal can be  expected  in  the  meantime  to  follow  those  cases.
    Accordingly, in  assessing  whether  the  appellant  has  a  reasonable
    prospect  of  success,  it  is  clearly  right  to  assume   that   the
    hypothetical judge would look outside the confines of  the  Immigration
    Rules, in determining whether the appellant's removal would violate her
    Article 8 rights or those of relevant family members.

(c) Which Immigration Rules?

16.  Another issue which featured in argument, but which I  consider  to  be
    immaterial, is whether the  respondent  was  correct  to  approach  the
    submissions by reference to the "new" Immigration Rules or whether,  as
    Mr Turner contends, she  should  have  applied  paragraph  284  of  the
    previous Rules, concerning the requirements to be met in the case of  a
    spouse of a person present and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Mr
    Turner contends that the applicant's submissions of  December  2011  in
    effect constituted an application which, since it was made  before  the
    coming into force of the new Rules on 9 July 2012, fell  by  virtue  of
    the transitional provisions to those Rules to be considered  under  the
    "old" Rules, including paragraph 282.

17.  As  it  happens,  I  agree  with  Mr  Malik  that  this  submission  is
    misconceived.  The transitional provisions apply  only  in  respect  of
    applications made before 9 July.  The submissions of December 2011  did
    not constitute such an application. The reason I consider the matter to
    be immaterial is as follows.  Whether "old" paragraph 282 or  "new"  R-
    LTRP.1.1(b)  of  Appendix  FM  applies,  it  is   manifest   that   the
    respondent's decision of 31 July 2012 raises only a single issue, which
    is present in both the "old" and the  "new"  Rules:  namely,  that  the
    applicant lacks valid leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Mr  Malik
    suggested that this was not, in fact, the only reason why the applicant
    might not meet the requirements of the Rules.  He asserted there was no
    evidence  to  indicate   that   the   maintenance   and   accommodation
    requirements of the  Rules  could  be  met.   There  is  not,  however,
    anything in the materials, including the previous applications made  by
    the  applicant  and  involving  Mr  Jones,   that   accommodation   and
    maintenance have ever been an issue.  Mr Jones works as a builder  and,
    whilst Immigration Judge Simpson noted that Mr Jones was, in late 2008,
    effectively a lodger, it  is  sufficiently  clear  that  the  issue  of
    accommodation is not one which can properly be said to be  amongst  the
    reasons  why  the  respondent  concluded  that  the  applicant  has  no
    realistic prospect of success before a hypothetical judge.

(d) Failure to engage with the submissions  concerning  the  subsistence  of
    the applicant's marriage

18.  I find the applicant has shown that the respondent has not,  in  either
    of her letters, employed the requisite anxious scrutiny in  respect  of
    the submissions made to her in December 2011.  My first reason concerns
    the issue of the applicant's marriage to Mr Jones.   As  we  have  seen
    from the determination of Immigration Judge Simpson, he  found  at  [9]
    that the applicant's relationship with Mr Jones "is  comparatively  new
    and has not yet stood the test of time".  The submissions  of  December
    2011, made three years after  the  judge  wrote  those  words,  plainly
    demonstrate that the marriage is still subsisting and genuine.  That is
    attested not only by the parties  to  it  but  also  by  various  third
    parties.  Neither of the respondent's letters recognises this important
    point.  On the contrary, the letter of 31 July 2012, having noted  that
    the applicant could not satisfy the relevant Immigration Rules  because
    she has had no valid leave to remain, went on immediately to state that
    "your client's relationship was considered by the Immigration Judge who
    heard her appeal on 5 December 2008".   There  is  no  hint  in  either
    letter of engagement with [9] of the Immigration Judge's determination,
    which recorded what the judge plainly considered to be a highly salient
    feature of the applicant's Article 8 case, as it then was.

(e) The rights of others: Beoku-Betts v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 39

19.  The decision letters are also,  I  find,  legally  deficient  in  their
    approach to the Article 8 rights of those who would be affected by  the
    applicant's removal from the United Kingdom.  The  letter  of  31  July
    2012 stated in terms that the applicant's case did not fall within "the
    remit of" the judgments in Beoku-Betts.  On its face, that statement is
    a remarkable one.  The passage which follows appears to  indicate  that
    the reason for the respondent's stance is that  Mr  Jones  married  the
    applicant  knowing  that  her  position  in  the  United  Kingdom   was
    precarious.  But that did not mean Mr Jones's Article 8  rights  should
    not  be  considered;  merely  that  there  might  be  reasons   why   a
    hypothetical judge would nevertheless conclude that those rights  would
    not be violated by the applicant's removal.

20.  It may be said that this criticism of the  letter  is  unjustified  and
    that the respondent was doing  no  more  than  applying  a  "shorthand"
    approach; she did not need to set out matters in the way  I  have  just
    described.  However, the risk in truncating proper  processes  is  that
    the decision-maker ignores salient matters.

21.   I consider that this is precisely what has  happened  in  the  present
    case.  One of the ways in which matters had "moved  on",  according  to
    the applicant, was that Mr Jones's brother, who had formerly cared with
    Mr Jones for their 85 year old mother, had sadly died, with the  result
    that the sole carers were now Mr Jones and  the  applicant.   A  letter
    from Mr Jones's GP put the matter in  terms  of  the  deceased  brother
    having been the sole carer, with Mrs Jones now being  "fully  dependent
    on [Mr Jones]".  The  letter  concluded:  "She  currently  refuses  any
    social services input.  I do not feel it  is  currently  safe  for  [Mr
    Jones] to leave his mother for any time".

22.  There is no hint of engagement in the letter of 31 July 2012  with  the
    Article 8 rights of Mrs Jones.  All that is said about her is that "she
    would be able to approach her local authorities and social services for
    care and support in the event that Mr Jones accompanied  the  applicant
    to Jamaica".  I do not consider that this exiguous comment  constitutes
    anxious scrutiny, as regards the Article 8 rights of the relevant third
    parties.  In this regard, the supplementary letter provides no  support
    for the respondent.

(f) Insurmountable obstacles

23.  In the letter of 31 July, almost immediately after  the  short  passage
    relating to Mrs Jones and the fact that the applicant and  her  husband
    would be able to continue their family life in Jamaica,  we  find  this
    sentence: "It is therefore considered that there are no  insurmountable
    obstacles to your client and Mr Jones  continuing  their  family  [sic]
    abroad".   Mr  Turner  criticised  the  reference  to   "insurmountable
    obstacles", contending that it is indicative of an incorrect legal test
    being applied by the respondent.

24.  Mr Malik's response to this was two-fold.  First, he drew my  attention
    to the judgment in Nagre, where  Sales  J  considered  the  concept  of
    "insurmountable obstacles" in the context of the new Immigration Rules:-



         "[42]    I consider that the Strasbourg guidance does indicate that
             in a  precarious  family  life  case,  where  it  is  only  in
             'exceptional' or 'the  most  exceptional'  circumstances  that
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation  of  Article  8,  the  absence   of   insurmountable
             obstacles to  relocation  of  other  family  members  to  that
             member's own country of origin to continue their  family  life
             there  is  likely  to  indicate  that  the  removal  will   be
             proportionate for the purposes of Article 8.  In order to show
             that, despite the practical possibility  of  relocation  (i.e.
             the absence of insurmountable obstacles  to  it),  removal  in
             such a case would nonetheless be disproportionate,  one  would
             need to identify other non-standard and particular features of
             the case of a compelling nature to show that removal would  be
             unjustifiably harsh."

25.  As I understood  Mr  Turner's  submissions,  he  took  issue  with  the
    treatment of the concept of "insurmountable  obstacles"  in  Nagre,  as
    compared with that of the Upper Tribunal in MF.  However, I do not find
    it is necessary for me to consider whether there is, in reality, a real
    tension between those cases.  Both MF and Nagre are, I consider, at one
    on the following point; namely, that the question of whether there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to relocation of a family abroad  is  not  the
    determining issue of whether removal of a family member would or  would
    not violate Article 8.  In the present case, I find that the  reference
    to "insurmountable obstacles" in the relevant paragraph of the 31  July
    decision letter, coming at the end of a number  of  considerations  and
    coupled with the word "therefore" makes it plain that the writer of the
    letter  was,  in  fact,  using  "insurmountable   obstacles"   as   the
    determining factor.  The decision  is,  accordingly,  flawed  for  this
    reason.

(g) The "Chikwamba" principle

26.  In Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]  UKHL
    40 the House of Lords considered the interplay between  Article  8  and
    the Secretary of State's policy, expressed through  Immigration  Rules,
    that those seeking leave to enter or remain on the basis of marriage or
    other relationships should obtain entry clearance, by applying  for  it
    whilst they are outside the United Kingdom.  For some  time  after  the
    House of Lords' decision, there was uncertainty as to the scope of  the
    principle articulated in the  leading  judgment  of  Lord  Brown.   The
    uncertainty was comprehensively addressed by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Hayat  (Pakistan)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1054.  The following passages are taken from the  judgment  of
    Elias LJ:-

         "11.     Lord Brown accepted that the maintenance  and  enforcement
             of immigration control was a legitimate aim. However,  he  was
             unpersuaded by the argument, accepted by Laws LJ  in  Mahmood,
             that others required to apply from abroad would feel it unfair
             if persons like the appellant who also fell within the  policy
             were permitted to have their cases  determined  without  first
             returning home. Consistency of treatment was not such a virtue
             that it dictated an unthinking enforcement of the policy. Lord
             Brown identified a  different  justification  for  the  policy
             (paras 41-42):


                  "Is not the real rationale  for  the  policy  perhaps  the
                  rather different one of deterring people  from  coming  to
                  this country in the first place  without  having  obtained
                  entry clearance and to do so by subjecting  those  who  do
                  come to the very substantial  disruption  of  their  lives
                  involved in returning them abroad?


                  Now I would certainly not say that such an objective is in
                  itself necessarily objectionable. Sometimes, I accept,  it
                  will  be  reasonable  and  proportionate  to   take   that
                  course....."


         12.  He then identified situations where  the  enforcement  of  the
             policy would  be  appropriate,  such  as  where  a  claimant's
             immigration history was poor, as in Ekinci. He also identified
             factors which might have  a  bearing  on  whether  the  policy
             should be implemented. For example, it would be relevant  that
             an applicant who had arrived illegally had good reason  to  do
             so, such as where he has a genuine asylum claim; in an Article
             8 family claim the prospective length and degree of disruption
             involved  in  requiring  the  applicant  to  return  would  be
             material; and it would be legitimate  to  enforce  the  policy
             where the entry clearance officer abroad was better placed  to
             investigate the claim.


         13.  Moreover, Lord Brown emphasised that the routine dismissal  of
             Article 8 cases on this basis was not consistent with a proper
             respect for Article 8 rights, and nor did  it  make  sense  in
             administrative terms (para 44):


                  "I am far from suggesting  that  the  Secretary  of  State
                  should routinely apply this policy in all but  exceptional
                  cases. Rather it  seems  to  me  that  only  comparatively
                  rarely, certainly  in  family  cases  involving  children,
                  should an article 8 appeal be dismissed on the basis  that
                  it would be proportionate and  more  appropriate  for  the
                  appellant to apply for  leave  from  abroad.  Besides  the
                  considerations already mentioned, it should  be  borne  in
                  mind that the 1999 Act introduced  one-stop  appeals.  The
                  article 8 policy instruction is  not  easily  reconcilable
                  with the new streamlined approach. Where a  single  appeal
                  combines (as often it does) claims both for asylum and for
                  leave  to  remain  under  article  3  or  article  8,  the
                  appellate authorities would necessarily  have  to  dispose
                  substantively of the asylum and article 3 claims.  Suppose
                  that these fail.  Should  the  article  8  claim  then  be
                  dismissed so that it can  be  advanced  abroad,  with  the
                  prospect of a later, second section 65 appeal if the claim
                  fails  before  the  ECO  (with  the  disadvantage  of  the
                  appellant then being out of the  country)?  Better  surely
                  that in most cases the article 8 claim be decided once and
                  for all at the initial stage. If it is well-founded, leave
                  should be granted. If not, it should be refused."


         14.  In this case it was held that the  removal  of  the  applicant
             with her child to the  harsh  and  unpalatable  conditions  of
             Zimbabwe would cause a grave disruption to  the  family  which
             was not justified simply by invoking the mantra that rules are
             to be obeyed. There has to be good reason  for  enforcing  the
             policy and there was none in this case. Lord Brown  held  that
             in the longer term no one doubted that  the  family  would  be
             allowed to live together and accordingly,  on  the  particular
             facts he concluded that her removal would violate her  Article
             8 rights.


         ...


         17.  In Chikwamba the Article 8 claim was particularly strong.  But
             in my view it is clear from paragraph 44 of his judgment  that
             Lord Brown's objection  to  the  routine  enforcement  of  the
             policy was not limited to such cases. His observation  that  a
             one-stop appeal process should generally be adopted is equally
             valid where the claim might appear to be weak. It is true that
             the enforcement of the policy is  likely  to  be  particularly
             futile  where  entry  clearance  will  ultimately  be  granted
             because it is requiring a temporary disruption of family  life
             for no good purpose. To that extent, a preliminary  assessment
             that the substantive merits are  strong  may  be  relevant  to
             determining whether the policy should be enforced or not.  But
             often the merits will not be clear until a careful  assessment
             of the facts is made, and the dogmatic adherence to policy may
             in those cases too be  a  disproportionate  interference  with
             Article 8 rights.


         18.  It may at first blush seem odd that Article 8  rights  may  be
             infringed by an  unjustified  insistence  that  the  applicant
             should return home to make  the  application,  even  though  a
             subsequent decision to refuse the application  on  the  merits
             will not. The reason is that once  there  is  an  interference
             with family or private life, the decision maker  must  justify
             that interference. Where what is relied upon is an  insistence
             on complying with formal procedures that may  be  insufficient
             to justify even a temporary  disruption  to  family  life.  By
             contrast, a full  consideration  of  the  merits  may  readily
             identify features which justify a refusal to  grant  leave  to
             remain.


         ...


         26.  ... If it is clear  there  is  a  good  claim,  it  should  be
             granted; if not, it should be  dismissed.  Chikwamba  provides
             that at least where Article 8 is engaged, the  decision  maker
             should not, absent some good reason, fail to engage  with  the
             merits  and  dismiss  the  claim  on  the  ground   that   the
             application should be made from abroad."

27.  Having considered a number of Court  of  Appeal  authorities  concerned
    with the application of Chikwamba, Elias LJ summarised  the  principles
    as follows:-

         "30.     In my judgment, the  effect  of  these  decisions  can  be
             summarised as follows:


             a)   Where  an  applicant  who  does  not  have  lawful  entry
                  clearance pursues an Article 8 claim, a dismissal  of  the
                  claim on the procedural ground that  the  policy  requires
                  that the applicant should have made the  application  from
                  his home state may (but not necessarily will) constitute a
                  disruption of family or private life sufficient to  engage
                  Article  8,  particularly  where  children  are  adversely
                  affected.


             b)   Where Article 8 is engaged, it will be a disproportionate
                  interference with family or private life to enforce such a
                  policy unless, to use the language of Sullivan  LJ,  there
                  is a sensible reason for doing so.


             c)   Whether it  is  sensible  to  enforce  that  policy  will
                  necessarily  be  fact  sensitive;  Lord  Brown  identified
                  certain potentially relevant factors  in  Chikwamba.  They
                  will  include  the  prospective  length  and   degree   of
                  disruption of family life and whether other members of the
                  family are settled in the UK.


             d)   Where Article 8 is  engaged  and  there  is  no  sensible
                  reason for enforcing the policy, the decision maker should
                  determine the Article 8 claim on its  substantive  merits,
                  having regard to  all  material  factors,  notwithstanding
                  that the applicant has no lawful entry clearance.


             e)   It will be a very rare case where it is  appropriate  for
                  the  Court  of  Appeal,  having  concluded  that  a  lower
                  tribunal has disproportionately interfered with Article  8
                  rights in enforcing the policy, to  make  the  substantive
                  Article 8 decision  for  itself.  Chikwamba  was  such  an
                  exceptional case. Logically the court  would  have  to  be
                  satisfied that there is only  one  proper  answer  to  the
                  Article 8 question before substituting its own finding  on
                  this factual question.


             f)   Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter  the  way  the
                  courts should approach substantive  Article  8  issues  as
                  laid down in such well known cases as Razgar and Huang.


             g)   Although the cases do  not  say  this  in  terms,  in  my
                  judgment if the Secretary of State has no sensible  reason
                  for requiring the application to be  made  from  the  home
                  state, the fact that he has failed to  do  so  should  not
                  thereafter carry any weight in the substantive  Article  8
                  balancing exercise."

28.  Returning to the facts of the present case, the respondent's letter  of
    31 July 2012 said this:-

         "The Immigration Judge also gave  consideration  to  Chikwamba  and
         stated in paragraph 11, 'I was referred to the  case  of  Chikwamba
         [2008] UKHL 40 but the facts of that case are very  different  from
         this one.  This Appellant is not being asked to return to  a  place
         where she or Mr Jones are likely to be at  risk  and  there  is  no
         child involved.'"

         The same passage from the judge's determination is  repeated  later
    in the same letter, in the context of the applicant's private life.

29.    It is apparent that the decision of  31  July  2012  is  citing  with
    approval the Immigration Judge's observations  on  Chikwamba.   In  the
    light of Hayat, it is plain that this is an error.  It is evident  from
    what I have said earlier about the absence of any  challenge  regarding
    maintenance  and  accommodation  that,  in  the  light  of  Hayat,  the
    Chikwamba  principle  was,  in  law,  an  issue  that  needed   to   be
    substantively addressed by the respondent.  I find  that  she  has  not
    done so.  This is in  no  way  to  find  that  proper  engagement  with
    Chikwamba by the respondent would, at the end of the  day,  compel  the
    respondent to grant the applicant a fresh right of appeal,  still  less
    grant her leave to remain.  But, by the same token, it cannot  be  said
    that  this  error  on  the  part  of  the  respondent  is   necessarily
    immaterial.  The respondent needed to address in  terms  whether  there
    were, on all the facts of the present case (including those relating to
    Mr Jones's mother), sound reasons for requiring the applicant to return
    to Jamaica to make an entry clearance application; and then  to  assess
    how the hypothetical judge might view the issue.  None of this has been
    done.

30.  In his submissions on this matter, Mr Malik  advanced  the  interesting
    proposition that  the  respondent  did  not  err  in  relation  to  the
    Chikwamba principle because her case  was  that  the  applicant  should
    leave  the  United  Kingdom  on  a  permanent  basis.   However,   that
    submission ignores the following sentence in the letter of 31 July:-

         "Alternatively, Mr Jones can support any application she makes  for
         return here while he remains in the United Kingdom  to  look  after
         his mother."

     The submission also ignores the  fact  that,  even  if  that  were  the
    respondent's stance, it might not be how the hypothetical  judge  would
    approach the case.

(h) Use of "clearly unfounded"

31.  Mr Turner  criticised  the  following  passages  in  the  supplementary
    letter of 6 March 2013:-

         "Accordingly, when considering whether or not your case is  clearly
         unfounded, at present it is  necessary  to  consider  whether  that
         claim would be bound to fail before an  Immigration  Judge  if  the
         criteria established by existing case law  are  applied.   For  the
         reasons set out in this letter it is considered that it would be.


         ...


         After taking all the above into account, it is considered that your
         client's claim to remain on the basis of  Article  8  after  having
         considered your claim in light of MF (Nigeria) and  Izuazu  remains
         clearly unfounded."


32.  These passages indicate that the writer  of  the  supplementary  letter
    was  using  the  language  of  certification  in  section  94  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, rather than the test  for
    the purposes of paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  is
    whether  there  is  a  "realistic  prospect  of  success"  before   the
    hypothetical judge.  Although these passages do nothing to  support  Mr
    Malik's submissions that the decision  letters  contain  the  requisite
    anxious scrutiny, I do not find that they constitute  discreet  reasons
    for quashing those decisions.  The "clearly unfounded" test, if it  was
    in truth applied, is a more challenging one for the respondent than the
    test under paragraph 353.   In  any  event,  at  paragraph  30  of  the
    supplementary letter the correct test is set out.

(i) A question of weight? Tesco Stores Ltd v  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Environment [1995] 1WLR 759

33.  Mr Malik submitted that the  applicant's  criticisms  of  the  decision
    letters amounted to no more than disagreements with the weight that the
    respondent  had  chosen  to  place  on  various  issues,  such  as  the
    relationship between Mr Jones and his mother, and  that  the  applicant
    had therefore not shown that the decisions were irrational.  It was not
    enough, according to Mr Malik, to say that a  judge  could  come  to  a
    different view.

34.  Mr Malik prayed in aid the Tesco  Stores  case.   This  involved  rival
    applications for planning permission to build superstores  in  or  near
    the town of Whitney.  On appeal to the Secretary of State,  the  latter
    allowed the appeal by Tesco's rival developer, against the  refusal  of
    planning permission to that developer, and dismissed  Tesco's  planning
    application.  Those decisions were upheld by the House of Lords,  which
    found that planning obligations offered under section 106 of  the  Town
    and Country Planning Act 1990 (namely, an offer by  Tesco  to  build  a
    link road) was a material consideration to which regard should  be  had
    under section 70(2) of that Act; but that the weight  to  be  given  to
    such an obligation was a matter entirely within the discretion  of  the
    decision-maker.  At [13] Lord Hoffman said that:-

         "The law has always made a clear distinction between  the  question
         of whether something is a material  consideration  and  the  weight
         which it should be given.  The former is a question of law and  the
         latter is a question of planning  judgment,  which  is  entirely  a
         matter for the planning  authority.   Provided  that  the  planning
         authority has regard to  all  material  considerations,  it  is  at
         liberty  (providing  that  it  does  not  lapse   into   Wednesbury
         irrationality) to give them whatever weight the planning  authority
         thinks fit or no weight at all.  The  fact  that  the  law  regards
         something as a material consideration therefore  involves  no  view
         about the part, if any, which it should play in the decision-making
         process.


         ...
         17.  Little weight or no weight


         Finally I should notice a  subsidiary  argument  of  Mr  Vandermeer
         [leading  counsel  for  Tesco].   He  submitted  that  a   material
         consideration must be given  some  weight,  even  if  it  was  very
         little.  It was therefore wrong for the Secretary of State,  if  he
         did accept that the offer was a material consideration, to say that
         he would give it no weight at all.   I  think  that  a  distinction
         between very little weight and no weight  at  all  is  a  piece  of
         scholasticism which would do the law no credit.   If  the  planning
         authority ignores a material consideration because it has forgotten
         about it, or because it wrongly thinks that the law or departmental
         policy ... precludes it from taking it into account,  then  it  has
         failed to have regard to a  material  consideration.   But  if  the
         decision to give that consideration no weight is based on  rational
         planning grounds, then the planning authority is entitled to ignore
         it."

35.  The proposition that, as a general matter, the weight to be given to  a
    particular piece of evidence or other factor is for the person or  body
    charged with  making  the  decision,  is  uncontroversial.   It  is  as
    important a principle in the immigration field, as it  is  in  that  of
    planning.  There are, however, two reasons why the  Tesco  Stores  case
    does not assist the respondent.  The first is that, for the  reasons  I
    have given, the respondent has not had regard to all relevant  matters.
    She has, for example, had no regard at all to the Article 8  rights  of
    Mr Jones's mother and to the related evidence of  the  GP.   It  cannot
    properly be said that, just because the decision letter makes reference
    to the mother, the respondent must be taken to have been aware  of  her
    Article 8 rights  but  to  have  decided  to  give  them  "no  weight".
    Ignoring  relevant  Article  8  issues  or  approaching   them   on   a
    misconceived basis (for example, as identified  above  in  relation  to
    Beoku-Betts) cannot be categorised as an issue  of  weight.   Contrast,
    however, the handling of issues in the  context  of  a  proportionality
    balancing exercise where, of course, the principle articulated  in  the
    Tesco Stores case  will  have  direct  application.  In  striking  that
    balance, the weight to be given to a particular matter will  ordinarily
    be for a judicial decision-maker to determine.

36.  This brings us to the second problem with  Mr  Malik's  submission.  It
    ignores a  fundamental  aspect  of  the  "fresh  claim"  jurisprudence,
    articulated in WM (DRC), whereby a distinction  is  drawn  between  the
    respondent's own views on an asylum or  human  rights  matter  and  the
    question of how that matter is likely to be viewed  by  a  hypothetical
    judge.  As Buxton LJ said at [11] of WM (DRC):-

         "The Secretary of State of  course  can,  and  no  doubt  logically
         should, treat his own view of the merits as  a  starting-point  for
         that enquiry; but it is only a starting-point in the  consideration
         of a question that is distinctly different from the exercise of the
         Secretary of State making up his own mind."

37.  For these reasons, I find that Mr  Malik's  reliance  on  Tesco  Stores
    carries the respondent's case nowhere.

Decision

I grant the applicant's  application  for  judicial  review.   I  quash  the
respondent's decisions contained in the letters of 31 July 2012 and 8  March
2013.  I am minded to order that the respondent shall  pay  the  applicant's
costs.  Any representations to the contrary must be put in  writing,  so  as
to be received no later than 14 days after service of this judgment.






                               Signed
                               [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane

