
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 March 2015                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

       THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
              MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                          NASROLAH AMIRTEYMOUR (1)
                  TAWA TIJANA & RADEEYAH OLAMIDE JAMIU (2)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             GENTJANA IZVIRA (1)
                                 HF & AN (2)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For Mr Amirteymour:             Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by EU
Migration Services
For Ms Tijana and Miss Jamiu:   Mr K Mak, Solicitor, MKM
For Ms Izvira:             Ms C Fielden, Counsel, instructed by Abbott
solicitors
For Ms HF and Ms AN:            Mr Eaton, Counsel, instructed by Hoole & Co
solicitors
For the Secretary of State:         Mr Shilliday, Presenting Officer



    Where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served  and
    where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,  an  appellant  cannot
    bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in an appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations. Neither  the  factual  matrix  nor  the  reasoning  in  JM
    (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application to appeals  of  this
    nature.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Introduction

 1. These appeals have  been  heard  together  as  they  raise  a  question
    relating to the right of appeal under regulation 26 of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").  The
    question is: can a Human Rights challenge to removal be brought in such
    an appeal  when  no  notice  under  section  120  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") has  been  served  and
    where no EEA decision to remove has been made?

    The parties

 2. As these appeals come before us as a result of grants of permission  to
    the Secretary of State in two cases, and to the opposing parties in the
    other cases, we refer to the Secretary of State as the  respondent  for
    the sake of clarity, and to the other parties as claimants.

    Outline of the appeals



    Appeal 1 - Mr Amirteymour

 3. Mr Amirteymour is a citizen of the USA. He has a daughter aged 9 who is
    a British Citizen. His application for a residence card as confirmation
    of his right of residence as  her  primary  carer  was  refused  on  21
    February 2014. His appeal against that  decision  was  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the basis that he did not meet the  requirements
    of the EEA Regulations and on the basis that his removal would  not  be
    in breach of article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    ("ECHR").  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

    Appeal 2 Tijana & Olumide

 4. Ms Tawa Tijana is the mother of Miss Olumide. Ms Tijana is a citizen of
    Nigeria as is her daughter but she has  a  younger  daughter,  Roheemot
    Koffi who is a French Citizen.  The appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was against a decision by the respondent of 18 July 2013 to  refuse  to
    issue residence cards to Ms Tijana and Miss Olumide respectively as the
    primary carer of an EU national and as the dependant of such a  person.
    The appeal was dismissed on the basis that the requirements of the  EEA
    Regulations were not met; permission to appeal was sought on the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal had not addressed  the  ground  of  appeal
    that removal of the claimants would be in breach of article 8 ECHR.

    Appeal 3 - Izvira

 5. Ms Izvira is a citizen of Albania who appealed against the respondent's
    decision of 3 July 2013 to refuse to issue her with  a  residence  card
    confirming her right of residence as the primary  carer  of  a  British
    Citizen child.  Her appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  at  first
    unsuccessful but, following an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  it  was
    remitted to the First-tier. Her appeal was then dismissed on the  basis
    that she did not meet the requirements of the EEA Regulations, but  was
    allowed  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds.  The  respondent  was   granted
    permission to appeal against that decision; there is no cross-appeal.

    Appeal 4 - HF and AN

 6. Ms HF is the mother of Ms AN who is  a  minor.  Both  are  citizens  of
    Gambia.  On 25 October 2013  the  respondent  revoked  their  residence
    cards which had confirmed their right of residence as  the  spouse  and
    dependant of an EEA national who had been exercising Treaty Rights  and
    refused  to  issue  them  with  residence  documents  confirming  their
    retained rights of residence as the former spouse and child of  an  EEA
    national who had been exercising Treaty Rights here. Their appeals were
    dismissed under  the  EEA  Regulations,  but  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed their appeals on article 8 ECHR  grounds.  The  respondent  was
    granted permission to appeal on all grounds; there is no  cross-appeal.
    There is in place in respect of this appeal an anonymity order made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.

    Points common to all the refusal letters

 7. The refusal letters in the individual cases did not expressly tell  the
    appellants to leave, but did advise them that if they did  not  do  so,
    they might be subject to removal action.  They  also  stated  that  the
    Immigration Rules now set out the requirements for those seeking  leave
    to enter or remain on the basis of their right to respect  for  private
    or family life by defining the criteria to be  fulfilled  in  order  to
    qualify for this right to  remain.   It  is  also  stated  that  anyone
    wishing to rely on family or private life  established  in  the  United
    Kingdom under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  must   make  an
    application using the relevant prescribed form and upon payment of  the
    relevant fee.  There is also an express reminder that  the  application
    has been assessed solely on the basis of the EEA Regulations.

 8. It is to be noted that in none of  these  appeals  did  the  respondent
    serve a notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act.

The Hearing

 9. These appeals were, as can  be  seen  from  the  consideration  of  the
    individual facts of the application set out below, directed to be heard
    together at different stages.  The respondent  has  been  permitted  to
    amend her grounds of appeal (where she is the appellant) to  include  a
    reference to FK (Kenya) v SSHD [2010] EWCA  Civ  1032.   We  asked  the
    parties to serve written submissions on that decision after the hearing
    on 31 March 2015 which was confined to oral submissions.

    The Respondent's case

10. The respondent submitted that an appellant may only pursue  grounds  of
    appeal which are related to the  underlying  decision  under  challenge
    and, as  refusals  of  residence  documents  do  not  require  detailed
    consideration of article 8 ECHR  matters,  the  extent  to  which  ECHR
    matters can be considered within an EEA appeal will be  limited.    She
    submitted that it is established law, relying on  Patel  and  others  v
    Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  72  and  AS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1469, that when the  Secretary  of
    State has chosen not to serve a section  120  notice  an  appellant  is
    restricted  to  the  scope  of  his  original   application.   As   the
    consideration of  an  application  for  a  residence  document  and  an
    assessment  of  whether  an  applicant  enjoys  article  8  rights  are
    inherently different, an appellant cannot raise article 8 ECHR  matters
    within the scope of his appeal.

11. The respondent accepted that limited human rights considerations may be
    raised in an EEA appeal, but only to the extent  that  the  failed  EEA
    application may place the appellant at risk  of  removal.,  that  being
    limited,  pursuant  to  JM  (Liberia)  [2006]   EWCA   Civ   1402,   to
    consideration of any issues which would follow from the likely  removal
    of the appellant from the United Kingdom. That, it is submitted, is not
    is not an exception to the first submission above.

12. The respondent submitted also that when considering whether  a  removal
    of an appellant would entail a breach of the ECHR, the Tribunal  should
    first ask whether the removal  of  the  appellant  is  likely.  We  do,
    however, note that the ground of appeal set out in section 84  (1)  (g)
    of the 2002 Act requires a consideration of removal as a consequence of
    an immigration decision, not whether it is likely. She submits that  is
    not the case as the respondent is  not  currently  considering  removal
    directions and, here, had  invited  the  submission  of  an  article  8
    application which would have a suspensive effect.

13.  In  addition,  the  respondent  further  submitted  that  there  is  a
    distinction between the  detailed  provisions  for  the  protection  of
    article 8 rights set out in the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and the
    much more limited consideration permissible under section 84 (1) (g) of
    the 2002 Act which, it is said, does not permit an appellant to advance
    detailed, rule-based arguments which should properly be pursued under a
    separate application under the relevant Rules.

14. In addition, the respondent submitted that the  statutory  jurisdiction
    of the Tribunal in EEA cases does not permit consideration  of  matters
    relating to the Rules, the grounds of appeal in sections 84 (1) (a) and
    84 (1)(f)  being  unavailable  in  an  EEA  appeal.   Accordingly,  the
    Tribunal's duties pursuant to section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998
    require it to note that the respondent has established within the Rules
    a detailed regime for consideration of Article 8 matters.

15. The respondent submitted that JM (Liberia) can be distinguished as  all
    the claimants here are overstayers. Unlike the appellant in that  case,
    there are no adverse consequences to the claimants from not being  able
    to raise article 8 in an appeal; there  is  and  has  been  nothing  to
    prevent them from making an application under the Immigration Rules  at
    any stage. That requirement is not, it is  submitted,  disproportionate
    and a fee-waiver can be requested.

16. It is also submitted that,  contrary  to  the  claimant's  submissions,
    paragraph GEN 1.9 of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  does  not
    permit Human Rights claims to be raised in  an  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations

17. The respondent does accept, however, that the  situation  is  different
    where a "one-stop" notice has been served pursuant to  section  120  of
    the 2002 Act.

    The Claimants' case

18. The claimants' case as set out in their  skeleton  arguments  and  oral
    submissions can be summarised as follows. It is submitted that, relying
    on JM Liberia a proper construction of section 84 (1) (g) of  the  2002
    Act requires a wide interpretation, and that a full right of appeal  on
    article 8 issues is permitted, as was held in  Ahmed  (Amos;  Zambrano;
    reg 15A (3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs) [2013] UKUT 00089 (IAC), the  appeals  to
    the Court of Appeal in that matter (reported as NA  (Pakistan)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 995 and as SSHD v NA (Pakistan) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  140)
    not  disputing  that  interpretation.  It  is  further  submitted  that
    Lamichhane v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
    260 can be distinguished both on its facts and in light  of  Patel  and
    Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  72
    which, it is submitted, is authority for a wider interpretation of both
    sections 85 (2) and 120 of the 2002 Act. It is also  submitted  that  a
    proper construction of section 85 (4) permits  article 8 to  be  raised
    in an EEA appeal, an appellant being entitled by virtue of the right of
    appeal under the EEA regulations to rely  on  any  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal set out in section 84 (1) of the 2002 Act.

19. It is also submitted that, contrary to  the  respondent's  submissions,
    paragraph GEN 1.9 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules does permit a
    human rights claim made in the notice of appeal in an appeal under  the
    EEA Regulations to be considered.

20. It is submitted also that human rights grounds may be considered in  an
    EEA appeal even if they have not been raised  with  the  respondent  as
    part of the application, given that EU law asserts that  it  recognises
    the importance of ECHR rights, the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
    European Union overlapping substantially with the ECHR. Further, and in
    the alternative, the respondent is failing in her duty with respect  to
    article 8 as imposed by section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

21. With regard to the option of being able to make  an  application  under
    the Immigration Rules, it is submitted that this is  not  a  sufficient
    alternative given the disproportionate cost of doing so, and  the  lack
    of any right of appeal under the Rules if leave to remain is refused.

22. In reply to the respondent's skeleton argument, the claimants,  relying
    primarily on Mr Biggs's skeleton argument, noted that  it  is  accepted
    that article 8 ECHR grounds can be raised in an appeal under regulation
    26 of the EEA Regulations, even if these had not been relied upon  when
    making an application giving rise  to  the  EEA  decision,  and  it  is
    submitted that the effect of a refusal to  issue  documents  under  the
    2006 Regulations places an  appellant  in  the  same  position  as  the
    appellant in JM (Liberia) who had been refused a  variation  of  leave.
    It is also submitted that article 8 issues are quite separate from  the
    substance of an EEA decision.

23. The claimants also submitted that  the  respondent's  proposition  that
    there need only be a "light  touch"  review  is  inconsistent  with  JM
    (Liberia) and that once the ground set out in section  84  (1)  (g)  is
    relied upon, the Tribunal is to conduct  a  full,  article  8  analysis
    which, it is said, involves a consideration  of  whether  the  proposed
    interference is in accordance with the law, a question  which  requires
    an analysis  of  the  Rules  which  are  material  to  proportionality.
    Further, it is submitted that paragraph GEN 1.9 (a) (iii) of the  Rules
    applies such that, in any event, no formal  application  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds is required.

The Legislative Framework

24. Our analysis of the law is based on the  provisions  in  force  at  the
    dates of the hearings before the First-tier Tribunal. There  have  been
    substantial changes to the appeal  rights  under  the  EEA  Regulations
    which took effect on  6  April  2015.  These  changes  are  subject  to
    transitional provisions set out in  regulation  6  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) (Amendment) Regulations (SI 2015/694)  to  the
    effect that the changes to paragraphs 26 and Schedules 1 and 2  of  the
    EEA Regulations have no effect in relation to an appeal against an EEA
    decision where that decision was taken before 6th April  2015.   It  is
    important to recognise that the principal Act, the Immigration Act 1971
    places EEA nationals in a separate  position  from  those  who  require
    leave to enter and remain.  For  convenience,  we  have  assembled  all
    relevant statutory provisions in Schedule 1 to this judgment.


Discussion


  25. In all of these cases, the action of the respondent has been to refuse
      to  issue  documentation  sought  as  confirmation  of  the  right  of
      residence under EU law.  She has not taken action to remove any of the
      claimants, but has reminded them that they have no right to  be  here,
      and has advised them that if they wish to remain here  on  some  other
      basis, then the appropriate applications  should  be  made  using  the
      correct application forms  and  procedure,  and,  on  payment  of  any
      appropriate fee.




  26. As can be seen from section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971, there is  a
      distinct difference drawn in the system of immigration control between
      those who require leave to enter and those who do not. By operation of
      section 7 of the 1988 Act, those having a right  to  enter  or  reside
      under European Law do not (absent any exclusion or deportation  order)
      require leave to enter or remain. A right to enter or remain (and  the
      conditions placed on that) depends on an action taken by the Secretary
      of State or an Immigration Officer. In contrast, a right to  enter  or
      reside under European Law does not.  The issue of a grant of leave  to
      enter or remain by the Secretary of State is, unless it  is  withdrawn
      or otherwise  nullified  by  her  subsequent  actions,  determinative.
      However, the issue of confirmatory documentation under EU law  is  not
      determinative of a right. While  it  may  be  indicative,  it  is  not
      conclusive. The right to reside confirmed by a  registration  document
      valid for five years does not confer the  right  to  remain  for  five
      years if the holder ceases to exercise Treaty rights.  Possession of a
      residence  card  is  not  a  condition  precedent  to  accessing   and
      benefiting from the associated  rights  that  flow  from  a  right  of
      residence conferred by European Law.



  27. That is not to say that the mechanisms  for  considering  applications
      and enforcement are separate. There is in the case  of  the  latter  a
      reliance on the existing statutory scheme, a person who no longer  has
      a right of residence under EU  law  becoming  once  again  subject  to
      immigration  control  (see  also  paragraph  5  of  the  Rules).   The
      respondent did not set up an entirely separate system  for  both,  but
      equally did not enact that a decision to  issue  a  document  (or  the
      acquisition of a right or residence under EU law) was a grant of leave
      under the Immigration Act 1971.



  28. The distinction between the Rules and the EEA regulations is expressly
      made at the beginning of the Rules of which paragraph 5 provides:


       Save where expressly  indicated,  these  Rules  do  not  apply  to  a
       European Economic Area (EEA) national or the family member of such  a
       national who is entitled to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  by
       virtue of the provisions of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
       Order 1994. But an EEA national or  his  family  member  who  is  not
       entitled to rely on the provisions of that Order is covered by  these
       Rules.
       Save where expressly indicated, these Rules do  not  apply  to  those
       persons who are entitled to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  by
       virtue of the provisions of the 2006 EEA Regulations But  any  person
       who is not entitled to rely on the provisions of those Regulations is
       covered by these Rules.



  29. Although it was not the case in the past, the scope of the Rules  made
      under the 1971 Act now covers claims for protection under the  Refugee
      Convention and the Human  Rights  Convention.  There  are,  under  the
      Rules, specific provisions as to how, for example, a  claim  that  the
      applicant or applicants must be granted leave to remain on  the  basis
      of human rights, primarily Article 8 ECHR. That  is  achieved  through
      the use of specified forms and by operation of  paragraph  34  of  the
      Rules, as well as the various Immigration Fees Orders and  Regulations
      which require a prescribed form accompanied by a fee.



  30. A right of residence under EU law (which includes a derivative  right)
      is thus of a different legal  species  from  a  grant  of  leave.  The
      exercise of the former does not require an act  to  be  taken  by  the
      Secretary of State. There is no  requirement  to  obtain  a  residence
      document and there are, under law, no  penalties  for  not  doing  so.
      While we accept that in many cases where documentation  is  sought  as
      confirmation of the rights of a non-EEA national under EU law  it  may
      be difficult to  assert  those  rights  absent  such  a  document,  we
      conclude that  the  possession  of  a  residence  document  is  not  a
      compulsory prerequisite. We reject Mr Biggs' arguments, unsupported by
      authorities or sufficient evidence, to the contrary. The  position  of
      those requiring is leave is  entirely  different.  The  possession  of
      valid leave, if required under the law, is a compulsory  prerequisite.
      There is no right of residence or access to the rights flowing from  a
      grant of leave until and unless it is granted.



  31. Rights granted under EU law and  leave  granted  under  the  Rules  or
      Immigration Acts are conceptually and legally distinct.  Any assertion
      of a right to leave to remain or under the Human Rights  Act  is  thus
      made on a different juridical basis. But that is not to say  that  the
      mechanisms for decision making and enforcement are entirely distinct.



  32. Turning to the appeals structure within the EEA Regulations, there  is
      under regulation 26, as set out above, an  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, against an EEA decision as defined in regulation  2  of  the
      EEA Regulations which  provides,  so  far  as  is  relevant  to  these
      appeals, as follows:


         "EEA decision  means"  a  decision  under  these  Regulations  that
         concerns -
           (a) a person's entitlement to be admitted to the United Kingdom;
           (b) a person's entitlement to be issued with or have renewed, or
           not to have revoked, a registration certificate, residence card,
           derivative residence card, document certifying permanent
           residence or permanent residence card;
           (c) a person's removal from the United Kingdom; or
           (d) the cancellation, pursuant to regulation 20A, of a person's
right to reside in the
           United Kingdom .



  33. There is no appeal against a decision  that  an  EEA  national  (or  a
      member of the family of  such  a  person)  has  no  right  to  reside,
      although a finding on  that  issue  will  invariably  be  required  in
      assessing whether a decision of  the  type  in  (b)  or  (c)  will  be
      necessary.



  34. A clear  distinction  is  drawn  here  between  a  decision  regarding
      documentation  and  a  decision  to  remove.  That  follows  both  the
      structure of the Citizenship Directive and the  EEA  Regulations  (see
      regulations 19 and  20).  Unlike  decisions  regarding  documentation,
      decisions to remove are also subject to specific procedural safeguards
      (see articles 30 and 31 of the Citizenship Directive).


  35. The right of appeal under Regulation 26 is  subject  to  a  number  of
      qualifications set out in regulations 26(2) to  26  (5)  and  also  at
      regulation 27 where the right of appeal from within the United Kingdom
      is limited. These restrictions are not relevant to these appeals.

  36. We turn next to Schedule 1, paragraph 1 of the EEA  Regulations  which
      provides that certain of the provisions of the 2002 Act have effect in
      relation to an appeal under the regulations as if (emphasis added)  it
      were an appeal against an immigration decision under section 82(1)  of
      that Act.  That is not the same as providing that an EEA  decision  is
      an immigration decision under the 2002 Act which could have been done.
       It was thus evidently not the intention so do to.



  37. The clear intent is to provide that the provisions  of  the  2002  Act
      apply to something which is clearly not an immigration decision  under
      the 2002 Act and in fact is not a decision of the type made under  the
      1971 Act. The fact that section 84 (1) (d) permits EEA  rights  to  be
      raised in an appeal against that decision does not alter that.



  38. It is notable that the permissible grounds of appeal  against  an  EEA
      decision expressly exclude grounds (a)  and  (f)  indicating  a  clear
      intent that questions  arising  under  the  Rules  cannot  be  raised,
      consistent with the two-fold system described above.



  39. That raises a significant issue. Since July 2012, when Appendix FM and
      paragraph 276ADE were incorporated into the Rules, much of the  system
      for consideration of Human Rights, in particular  article  8,  is  now
      operated under the Rules. The changes and the new regime is summarised
      by Underhill LJ in Singh & Khalid [2015] EWCA Civ 74) at [1]:
    1. These two  appeals  concern  aspects  of  the  changes  made  to  the
       Immigration Rules by a Statement of Changes (HC 194)  promulgated  on
       13 June 2012 and taking effect from 9 July 2012,  and  by  a  further
       Statement of Changes (HC 565) promulgated on  5  September  2012  and
       taking effect the following day. The changes were  multifarious,  but
       we are concerned only with those addressing the approach to be  taken
       to applications for leave to enter or  remain  on  the  basis  of  an
       applicant's private or family life. I set out the relevant changes in
       detail below, but it will be convenient to give an  overview  at  the
       start. I will refer to the Rules incorporating the changes made by HC
       194 as "the new Rules" and  to  the  previous  version  as  "the  old
       Rules".
    1. Under the old Rules leave to enter or remain as a family member of  a
       person settled in the UK was regulated by Part 8, which  is  entitled
       "Family Members". There was no recognition of a  right  to  enter  or
       remain on grounds of  private  life  as  such,  but  Part  7  ("Other
       Categories") did provide for leave  to  remain  on  grounds  of  long
       residence. If an applicant could not establish a right to  remain  on
       the basis of one of the particular provisions in those  parts,  which
       were tightly defined, they could seek to rely on the right to respect
       for private and family life derived, via the Human Rights  Act  1998,
       from article 8 of the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights.  Such
       applications were generally referred to as being  made  "outside  the
       Rules".
    1. The new  Rules,  by  contrast,  contain  express  provision,  by  new
       provisions inserted into Parts 7 (principally a new paragraph 276ADE)
       and 8 (principally a new "Appendix FM"), for applications made on the
       grounds of private or family  life.  It  remains  the  case  that  an
       applicant may seek to rely on article 8 in  a  case  falling  outside
       these new provisions, but the intention was that the new Rules  would
       properly reflect its requirements in the generality of cases, so that
       it should only be exceptionally that an applicant would have a  valid
       claim under article 8 which fell outside their scope: I  set  out  at
       para. 10 below the Secretary of State's explanation of her  intention
       at paragraph GEN 1.1 of Appendix FM. It is now settled that the right
       course in any case where an applicant relies on his or her private or
       family life is to proceed by considering first whether  leave  should
       be granted under the relevant provisions of the new Rules and only if
       the answer is no to go on to consider article 8  in  its  unvarnished
       form (the so-called "two-stage approach"):  see  the  line  of  cases
       which includes Izuazu  (Article  8  -  new  Rules) [2013]  UKUT  45
       (IAC) and R  (Nagre)  v  Secretary  of   State   for   the   Home
       Department [2013] EWHC 7200 (Admin) to which I will  have  to  refer
       more fully below. Thus article 8 claims "outside the Rules" are still
       possible, though the scope for their operation is reduced.

  40. The scope of "outside the rules" considerations  has  thus  been  much
      reduced. There is a clear intention that, so far  as  is  practicable,
      consideration of article 8 is to be carried out under the  Rules.  The
      respondent is entitled under the 1971 Act to put forward rules to that
      effect. It is also a clear policy established by  the  requirement  to
      make applications on Human Rights grounds using prescribed  forms  and
      paying the relevant fees. There is, we accept, a partial exception  to
      that by operation of GEN 1.9 of Appendix FM of the Rules, and we  turn
      to that in due course.




  41. While we accept that the area covered by the Rules  now  covers  areas
      previously dealt with by means of policies, if they  were  covered  at
      all, the fact that the area has expanded to  cover  almost  all  areas
      covered by article 8 is not in principle a good reason effectively  to
      ignore the clear provisions preventing  it  being  argued  in  an  EEA
      appeal that the decision was not in accordance with the Rules.  It  is
      not suggested that, for example, appellants could argue that they  met
      the requirements for leave to remain as Tier 4 Student  migrants,  or,
      formerly, the long residence rules.



  42. Any consideration by a court of article 8  issues  must  now  commence
      with a consideration under the Rules, yet that is  an  analysis  which
      could not be carried out in an EEA appeal, given that the  grounds  of
      appeal  prohibit  an  analysis  of  whether  a  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the Rules. While, arguably, a consideration of article
      8 "outside the Rules" might  not  fall  at  that  hurdle,  it  not  an
      analysis that could properly be conducted; it  would  be  an  entirely
      artificial task to assess the article 8 issues "outside the rules."



  43. We now turn to paragraph GEN 1.9 of the Rules which, as at the date of
      these appeals were lodged and decided, provided:

       GEN.1.9. In this Appendix:
         (a) the requirement to make a valid application will not apply when
         the Article 8 claim is raised:
           (i) as part of  an  asylum  claim,  or  as  part  of  a  further
           submission in person after an asylum claim has been refused;
           (ii) where a migrant is in immigration detention;
           (iii) where removal directions have been set pending an imminent
         removal;
           (iv) in an appeal; or
           (v) in response to a (one stop) notice issued under section  120
           of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  And
         (b) where the Article 8 claim is raised in any of the circumstances
         specified  in  paragraph  GEN.1.9.(a)  or  is  considered  by   the
         Secretary of State  under  paragraph  A277C  of  these  rules,  the
         requirements of paragraphs R-LTRP.1.1.(c) and  R-LTRPT.1.1.(c)  are
         not met.




  44. It is submitted by the claimants that this permits  Article  8  to  be
      considered in an appeal when no formal application has been  made.  We
      do not accept that applies in an appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations.
      Paragraph GEN 1.9 is a provision of the Rules, not statute. It  cannot
      alter the effect of the EEA  Regulations  which  make  it  clear  that
      section  84  (1)  (a)  does  not  apply.   Further,   the   claimants'
      interpretation of GEN 1.9 (iv) proceeds on  the  basis  that  "appeal"
      extends beyond an appeal  against  a  decision  under  the  Rules.  We
      consider that cannot be its natural meaning.




  45. Appendix FM begins:
       This Appendix applies to applications under this  route  made  on  or
       after 9 July 2012 and to applications under Part 8 as set out in  the
       Statement of Changes laid  on  13  June  2012  (HC  194),  except  as
       otherwise set out at paragraphs A277-A280.

  46. In this context, the requirement to  have  made  a  valid  application
      simply disapplies  the  requirement  to  have  done  so  from  various
      provisions within Appendix FM,  for  example  at  R-LTRP.1.1  It  does
      nothing more.




  47. In effect, the claimants' argument  must  be  that  the  human  rights
      appeals they raise are cases  outside  the  Rules  as  otherwise  they
      cannot raise the issue, given that section 84 (1) (a) does not apply.



  48. The grounds set out within section 84 of the 2002 act at  sections  84
      (1) (c) and 84 (1) (g) permit human rights to be raised but  what  the
      Tribunal is  entitled  to  consider  in  assessing  these  grounds  is
      qualified by operation of section 85 to 87 of the 2002 Act.




  49. We accept that the ground of appeal set out in section 84 (1)  (c)  is
      theoretically available in EEA appeals, but is of little assistance to
      an appellant challenging a decision with respect to documentation.  In
      such a case, the appellant is only entitled to the document if he  has
      established the relevant right of residence under EU law; a successful
      claim that he cannot be  removed  pursuant  to  article  8  could  not
      entitle him to the document, as it could not  give  rise  to  a  right
      under EU law.




  50. Turning to section 84 (1) (g) as applied by  Schedule  1  of  the  EEA
      Regulations, we note that it  is  concerned  with  a  situation  where
      removal is as a consequence of  the  immigration  decision,  a  phrase
      given a wide interpretation by the Court of Appeal  in  JM  (Liberia).
      That was not a case which concerned the EEA regulations; it  concerned
      a situation whereby an appellant's application for leave to remain had
      been refused. As a consequence of that, if unsuccessful in an  appeal,
      he would no longer have leave to remain. In  these  appeals,  however,
      the claimants did not have leave  to  remain  at  the  time  of  their
      applications. The decisions made to refuse  residence  cards  did  not
      alter their status.  Accordingly, neither the factual matrix  nor  the
      reasoning in JM (Liberia) has  any  application  to  appeals  of  this
      nature. It is in that context that we turn to consider the  parameters
      within which the Tribunal can consider appeals.




  51. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is limited by sections 85  -  87.  Of
      particular relevance are the provisions of section 85 of the 2002  Act
      which were considered in detail in AS (Afghanistan) in which the Court
      of Appeal held that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to  consider  the
      new matters in the absence  of  a  section  120  notice  (per  Stanley
      Burnton LJ in Lamichhane at [1]).  In Lamichhane, after analysing  the
      various provisions, Stanley Burnton  LJ  (with  whom  Lewison  LJ  and
      Maurice Kay LJ  agreed)  addressed  the  question  "May  the  Tribunal
      consider additional grounds advanced by an appellant if no section 120
      notice has been served, and if so is it under a duty to  do  so?"  and
      concluded [41]:



         41.   I  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  Secretary   of   State's
         contentions as to the effect of section 85(2) are well-founded, and
         an appellant on whom no section 120 notice has been served may  not
         raise before the Tribunal any ground for  the  grant  of  leave  to
         remain different from that which was the subject of the decision of
         the Secretary of State appealed against. The answer to question (c)
         above is No.



  52. Of relevance also to these appeals is the conclusion reached at [43]:



      43. In my  view,  section  85(2)  is  a  statutory  extension  of  the
      jurisdiction of the tribunal in  cases  in  which  there  has  been  a
      statement made by the appellant under section 120. It follows that the
      Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider or to rule on "any matter ...
      which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in section 84(1)
      against the decision appealed against" if there has  been  no  section
      120 notice, and  therefore  no  statement  under  that  section.  This
      conclusion is consonant with my conclusion as to the effect of section
      96(1) as it now is. If it were otherwise, an appellant might not  know
      whether he could raise any new ground in his appeal until the  hearing
      of his appeal, and the test in section 96(1)(c) becomes unworkable.




  53. The application of sections 85 - 87 of the 2002 Act was considered  at
      length in Patel v SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  72.  The  court  did  not  refer
      expressly to Lamichhane although that decision was considered  by  the
      Court of Appeal below in Patel v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 741 which  chose
      to follow it. The issue in the appeal to the Supreme  Court  in  Patel
      was whether the  Secretary  of  State's  failure  to  make  a  removal
      decision at the same time as or shortly after the decision  to  refuse
      leave to remain was unlawful (per Lord Carnwath JSC in Patel  (SC)  at
      [3]). It cannot therefore be argued that the decision  in  the  latter
      disapproves of the decision in Lamichhane.



  54. Lord Carnwath JSC  stated at [41]-[44]:
    41 The broader approach of the  majority  seems  to  me  to  gain  some
    support from the scheme of section 3C  ,  under  which  (as  is  common
    ground) the initial application for leave to remain, if made  in  time,
    can later be varied to include wholly unrelated grounds without turning
    it into a new application or prejudicing the temporary right to  remain
    given by the section. Thus the identity of the application  depends  on
    the substance of what is applied for, rather  than  on  the  particular
    grounds or rules under which the application  is  initially  made.  The
    same approach can be applied to the decision on that  application,  the
    identity or "substance" of which in the context of  an  appeal  is  not
    dependent on the particular grounds first relied on.
    42 It is of interest that, at an earlier stage,  the  broader  approach
    seems to have accorded with the reading of those responsible within the
    Home  Office  for  advice  to  immigration  officers.  The  Immigration
    Directorate's Instructions, issued in September 2006, noted that it was
    not possible under  section  3C  to  make  a  second  application,  but
    continued:
       "On the other hand, it  is  possible  to  vary  the  grounds  of  an
       application already made, even by introducing  something  completely
       new. A student application can be varied so as to  include  marriage
       grounds. If an application is varied before a decision is made,  the
       applicant will be required to complete the necessary prescribed form
       to vary his application. If an application is varied post  decision,
       it would be open to the applicant to submit further  grounds  to  be
       considered at appeal ...Once an  application  has  been  decided  it
       ceases to be an application and there is no longer  any  application
       to vary under section 3C(5). So any new information will fall to  be
       dealt with during  the  course  of  the  appeal  rather  than  as  a
       variation of the original application." (para 3.2 emphasis added)
    43 The same approach is supported by the current edition of Macdonald's
    Immigration Law & Practice 8th ed (2010) para 19.22 (under the heading
    "The tribunal as primary decision maker"). The only implicit criticism
    made of the majority approach in AS is that it did not go far enough.
    They observe that even without a section 120 notice the tribunal should
    be free to consider any matter -
       "... including a matter arising after the decision which is relevant
       to the substance of the decision regardless of whether a one-stop
       notice has been served. The 'substance of the decision' is not the
       decision maker's reasoned response to the particular application or
       factual situation that was before it but is one of the immigration
       decisions enumerated in section 82 and a 'matter' includes anything
       capable of supporting a fresh application to the decision maker..."
    Whether or not such an extension of the majority's reasoning can be
    supported, that passage indicates that the broader approach in itself
    is not controversial.
    44 In the end, although the arguments are finely balanced, I prefer the
    approach of the majority in AS . Like Sullivan LJ, I find a broad
    approach more consistent with the "coherence" of this part of the Act.
    He noted that the standard form of appeal, echoing the effect of the
    section 120 notice, urged appellants to raise any additional ground at
    that stage, on pain of not being able to do so later, and observed:
       "...it seems to me that appellants would have good reason to
       question the coherence of the statutory scheme if they were then to
       be told by the AIT that it had no jurisdiction to consider the
       additional ground that they had been ordered by both the Secretary
       of State and the AIT to put forward." (para 99)

  55. The observations of Lord Carnwath JSC are, as Lord Mance and the other
      JJSC observed at [62] obiter, but  they  also  favoured  the  majority
      view, adding at [65]:




         65.  The majority approach in AS does not mean that  section  85(2)
         enables an appellant, who has sought leave to remain, to go outside
         the  scope  of  a  leave  to  remain  application  by   adding   or
         substituting an appeal under a different  head  of  section  82(2),
         e.g. by asserting a wrongful refusal of entry  clearance  or  of  a
         certificate of entitlement: see sections 82(2)(b) or (c)). To  that
         extent, it seems to me that the majority approach is  not  open  to
         the criticism that it amounts to re-reading section 85(2) as if  it
         used the words "against a decision of  a  kind  listed  in  section
         82(2)" or omitted the words "against the decision appealed against"
         altogether.



  56. We respectfully agree and would add that there is  nothing  either  in
      this decision or, for that matter, the decision of the Court of Appeal
      in Patel (reported as Patel v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  741)  which  casts
      doubt on the decision of the Court of Appeal in Lamichhane.



  57. The primary submission with respect to section 85 (4), developed by Mr
      Biggs but relied upon by all the claimants, is that in an appeal under
      regulation 26 of the EEA Regulations, section 85 (4) of the  2002  Act
      is applicable, and thus entitles them to raise human rights arguments.
      Mr Biggs relies on the quotation from Macdonald's  Immigration  Law  &
      Practice set out in the quotation of Lord Carnwath's opinion  set  out
      above as authority for the  proposition  that  in  these  appeals  the
      "substance of the decision" which has to be considered "is one of  the
      immigration decisions enumerated in section 82",  and  that  this,  by
      operation of Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulation includes a  decision  in
      respect of a residence document.



  58. That argument is, we consider flawed.  Schedule 1 applies the relevant
      sections of the 2002 Act  as  if  the  decision  were  an  immigration
      decision under section 82 (1) of the 2002 Act;  it  does  not,  as  we
      noted above, make it such a decision, nor do we discern either in  the
      case law to which we have been  referred  or  in  the  scheme  of  the
      legislation, any reason to take that approach. On the contrary;  there
      is a clear policy of keeping decisions in respect  of  EU  law  (other
      than in cases of enforcement) outside the scheme of the 1971 Act.



  59. Mr Biggs seeks to rely on AS in support of his argument sat [2]  where
      Arden LJ said:



         We are concerned with grounds other than human  rights  grounds  or
         grounds for seeking asylum. It is accepted that they can be  raised
         in any event.



  60. This does not, however, assist his submissions. The appeal in AS arose
      from  decisions  to  refuse  leave  to  remain.  Those  were   clearly
      immigration decisions within section 82 (1); both appellants had  been
      served with notices under section 120 of the 2002 Act.  The  substance
      of the decision was inevitably a refusal of leave to remain.




  61. That is not to say that section 85 (4) has no effect in an EEA appeal.
      It permits a Tribunal to take into account evidence that an  appellant
      is entitled to a residence card on a basis other than  that  on  which
      the application was made or another type of card. For example,  if  by
      the time of an appeal, an appellant asserting a right of residence has
      accumulated five years' lawful residence and is  thus  entitled  to  a
      document as confirmation of permanent residence; a  student  may  have
      taken up employment; the EEA spouse  may  have  divorced  the  non-EEA
      national appellant. The underlying substance - a  right  of  residence
      under EU law - remains the same, but it  arises  through  a  different
      route or routes.



  62. Neither in Patel in the Court of Appeal, or in the Supreme  Court  nor
      in Lamichhane, AS, or JM (Liberia) had the appellants initially sought
      confirmation of rights under EU law. The analysis in the cases is thus
      inextricably linked with the concept of leave  under  the  Immigration
      Acts (see for example the discussion regarding section 3C (4)  of  the
      1971 Act in AS) which, for the  reasons  set  out  above  is  entirely
      distinct from a decision to issue a residence card.



  63. A person asserting rights under EU law is not in the same position  as
      a person seeking leave to remain, nor is  he  in  the  position  of  a
      person refused leave if confirmation of the right is denied.  Many  of
      the difficulties faced  by  an  individual  in  the  position  of  the
      appellant in JM (Liberia) do not apply here. We are not satisfied that
      an EEA national who had not, by definition, required leave  to  enter,
      could commit an offence under section 24 of the Immigration Act  1971.
      Further, the claimants here did not have leave to remain and would not
      be in worse a position  than  before  the  decision.   There  is  also
      nothing in the  legislation  which  prevents  an  EEA  national  or  a
      dependant  thereof  from  applying  for  leave  to  remain  under  the
      Immigration Rules at any stage either before applying for a  residence
      document, contemporaneously with it, or subsequently.  Section  3C  of
      the 1971 Act simply does not apply when what is under consideration is
      an application for a residence document.



  64. Further, we note that in Patel in the Court of Appeal  Stanley  Burton
      LJ observed [53]-[54]:
      53 Fourthly, I consider that the court  in  Mirza  was  over-impressed
      with the argument  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  deal  very
      promptly with the question of a removal direction, as a  person  whose
      leave to remain has expired will be committing a criminal  offence  by
      remaining in the UK. Where a person  makes  an  extension  application
      after his or her leave to remain has expired, section 3C of  the  1971
      Act would not apply, so that such a person commits a criminal  offence
      notwithstanding the  fact  that  he  or  she  has  made  an  extension
      application. Thus, many people to whom  the  reasoning  in  Mirza  and
      Sapkota would apply would be in breach of  the  criminal  law  anyway.
      Further, again applying the reasoning in  those  two  cases,  in  many
      instances where the decision whether to make a removal direction could
      be made after the refusal of the  extension  application,  the  person
      concerned will be committing a crime, because the effect of section 3C
      of the 1971 Act will either not apply (as  there  will  have  been  no
      appeal), or the time for  appealing  will  have  expired,  before  the
      removal direction will have been given.
      54 In any event, the disadvantage to a person of  having  his  or  her
      remaining in the UK being criminalised can easily be overstated.  Most
      obviously, at least in many cases (but, I  accept,  not  in  all)  the
      problem can be rectified by the person concerned  voluntarily  leaving
      the UK. Further, the mere fact that a person is illegally  in  the  UK
      does not prevent him or her exercising any rights of appeal against  a
      refusal of an  extension  application  or  the  making  of  a  removal
      direction.

  65. In the appeal against refusal of  residence  documents  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal in Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano;  reg  15A  (3)(c)  2006  EEA  Regs)
      [2013] UKUT 00089 (IAC) which went on appeal to the Court of Appeal in
      both NA (Pakistan)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  995   and  SSHD  v  NA
      (Pakistan)  [2015] EWCA Civ 140 it is evident that no issue was  taken
      by the Court of Appeal as to the jurisdiction to consider human rights
      arguments. The issues before it, and the primary basis  on  which  the
      appeal was allowed in the Upper Tribunal, relates to EU  law  and  the
      Court of Appeal made a  preliminary  reference  to  the  ECJ.  In  the
      circumstances, we do not consider that this decision is authority  for
      the proposition that the principles in JM  (Liberia)  apply  to  these
      appeals.



  66. As noted above, we received written submissions on the decision of the
      Court of Appeal in FK (Kenya)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  1302.   We  do  not,
      however, consider  that  it  is  of  much  assistance.   As  Mr  Biggs
      submitted, it appears that JM (Liberia) was not cited to the Court  of
      Appeal, and the court  did  not  specifically  address  the  issue  of
      jurisdiction. While Sullivan LJ appears to doubt whether the  Tribunal
      should have considered the impact of a future removal, his  views  are
      obiter.



  67. In all of these appeals, the application made was, in substance,  that
      the claimant had a right  of  residence  under  EU  law  and  was,  in
      consequence, entitled to a residence card  as  confirmation  of  this.
      They now wish to advance an entirely new case: that they are  entitled
      to stay on the basis that any removal of them  would  be  contrary  to
      their rights pursuant to article 8 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.
      That they could never as a result of an appeal on that  ground  obtain
      the residence card they initially sought cannot be ignored.  There  is
      fundamental difference between asserting a right to  remain  under  EU
      law (and thus not requiring leave  under  the  Immigration  Acts)  and
      asserting an entitlement to leave to remain because one is subject  to
      that requirement. It is, in reality, entirely inconsistent.



  68. As Mr Biggs and the other claimants' representatives submitted,  these
      appeals concern derivative rights.  Whether  the  rights  in  question
      accrue  to  the  non  EEA  nationals  requires  consideration   of   a
      hypothetical removal of that individual.  But care  has  to  be  taken
      analysing how the right of residence arises. In Sanneh v  SSWP  [2015]
      EWA Civ 45 the Court held that the right accrues automatically; it  is
      not dependant on  a  decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State  (see  in
      particular Elias LJ  at  [170]).   The  decision  being  made  by  the
      Secretary of State is therefore still whether to issue  documentation;
      it is not whether to remove the parent.



  69. There is, therefore, no real distinction to be made here  between  the
      issue of documentation as confirmation of a derivative right and as  a
      right under EU  law.   There  has  been  no  decision  to  remove  the
      applicant, nor is there any indication that this will occur.



  70. We do not, therefore, consider that  JM  (Liberia)  applies  to  these
      appeals. We remind ourselves of what was said in Patel  at  [62]  (see
      above). An application made for a residence document  as  confirmation
      of an existing right and an application based on a claim that  removal
      would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under the  Human
      Rights Convention are entirely different. To permit an appellant to do
      so would be precisely what the Supreme Court says section 85 (2)  does
      not permit - the raising of an entirely different head of  application
      outside the scope of the initial application.



  71. It is evident that, prima facie, the parent of a British Citizen child
      who is the sole carer may also seek leave to remain under Appendix  FM
      of the Immigration Rules. There is, we consider,  nothing  to  prevent
      such an application being made contemporaneously with  an  application
      for a residence card.



  72. While we note the submission that a requirement to make an application
      and pay a fee is disproportionate,  this  is  without  substance.  The
      Secretary of State is unarguably entitled to charge  for  applications
      for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules, and if  an  applicant
      is destitute, he can apply for a fee waiver. There is  no  element  of
      discrimination in such a case, as what is  being  asserted  is  not  a
      right under EU law, but under domestic law; no submission was made  to
      us that there is any relevant "social advantage"  in  play  such  that
      Regulation 492/2011 is engaged.



  73. We have considered whether the effect of paragraph GEN 1.9 of Appendix
      FM would permit the making of a human rights claim within  an  appeal.
      We consider for the reasons given above that  it  cannot.  The  issues
      here are the jurisdiction of the Tribunal as constituted  by  statute;
      provisions of the Rules cannot alter that.



  74. Drawing these observations together, we conclude that not only is  the
      claimants' case possible only on a contorted reading of the  statutory
      provisions and the decision letters, there is no need for it to be. If
      they believe that they are entitled under EU law  to  confirmation  of
      that, the EEA appeal allows them  to  say  so.  If  they  are  not  so
      entitled, they are no different from anyone else in the same  position
      - an overstayer who can make a human rights application which  may  or
      may not be successful. The making of an unsuccessful  EEA  application
      cannot rationally put them in a different position. The refusal of the
      application  leaves  them  in  the  same  position   as   before   the
      application, that is, an overstayer.  The removal, if  it  occurs,  is
      not in consequence of the decision: it is as a result of overstaying.

75. For these reasons, we conclude that, where no notice under section  120
    of the 2002 Act has been served and where no EEA decision to remove has
    been made, an appellant cannot in an appeal under the  EEA  Regulations
    bring a Human Rights challenge to removal.

  76. Our conclusions with respect to the individual appeals are set out  in
      Schedule 2.






SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

   1.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  appeal  of  Mr
      Amirteymour did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law  and  we
      uphold it.




   2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeals  of  Ms  Tijana
      and Ms Jamiu did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  and  we
      uphold them.



   3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal of Ms Izvira did
      involve the making of an error of law and we set it aside.  We  remake
      the appeal by dismissing it on all grounds.



   4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeals of  HF  and  AN
      did involve the making of an error of law and we set them  aside.   We
      remake the appeals by dismissing them on all grounds.




    Signed                              Date:    28 July 2015







    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                Schedule 1 - Relevant legislative provisions



 1. Section 3 provides:



       3.- General provisions for regulation and control.

       (1) Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act, where a person
       is not a British citizen:

         (a) he shall not enter the United Kingdom unless given leave to  do
         so in accordance with the provisions of, or made under, this Act;

         (b) he may be given leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  (or,  when
         already there, leave to remain in the United Kingdom) either for  a
         limited or for an indefinite period;

 2. This is subject to the provisions of section 7 of the  Immigration  Act
    1988:

       7.- Persons exercising  Community  rights  and  nationals  of  member
       States.

       (1) A person shall not under the principal Act require leave to enter
       or remain in the United Kingdom in any case in which he  is  entitled
       to do so by virtue of an enforceable EU right  or  of  any  provision
       made under section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972.

       (2) The Secretary of State may by order made by statutory  instrument
       give leave to enter the United Kingdom for a limited  period  to  any
       class of persons who are nationals of member States but who  are  not
       entitled to enter the United Kingdom as mentioned in  subsection  (1)
       above; and any such order may give leave subject to  such  conditions
       as may be imposed by the order.

       (3) References in the principal Act to limited  leave  shall  include
       references to leave given by an order under subsection (2) above  and
       a person having leave by virtue of such an order shall be treated  as
       having been given  that  leave  by  a  notice  given  to  him  by  an
       immigration officer within the period specified in paragraph 6(1) of
       Schedule 2 to that Act.

 3. These provisions are mirrored in Schedule  2  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    which are made pursuant to section 109 of the 2002 Act.



    1.- Leave under the 1971 Act

    (1) In accordance with section 7 of the Immigration Act 1988, a person
    who is admitted to or acquires a right to reside in the United  Kingdom
    under these Regulations shall not require leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom under the 1971 Act during any period in which he has a right to
    reside under these Regulations but such a person shall require leave to
    remain under the 1971 Act during any period in which he does  not  have
    such a right.

    (2) Subject to sub-paragraph (3), where a person has leave to enter or
    remain under the 1971 Act which  is  subject  to  conditions  and  that
    person also has a  right  to  reside  under  these  Regulations,  those
    conditions shall not have effect for as long as  the  person  has  that
    right to reside.

    (3) Where the person mentioned in sub-paragraph  (2)  is  an  accession
    State national subject to worker authorisation working  in  the  United
    Kingdom during the accession period and the document endorsed  to  show
    that  the  person  has  leave  is  an  accession  worker  authorisation
    document, any conditions to which that leave is subject restricting his
    employment shall continue to apply.




   4. Section 82 of the 2002 Act provides:

    82 Right of appeal: general

    (1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a person he may
    appeal [to the Tribunal] 1 .

    (2) In this Part "immigration decision" means-

    (a) refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,

    (b) refusal of entry clearance,

    (c) refusal of a certificate of entitlement under section 10 of  this
    Act,

    (d) refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in  the  United
    Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the person has no leave to
    enter or remain,

    (e) variation of a person's leave to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom if when the variation takes effect the person has no  leave  to
    enter or remain,

    (f) revocation under section 76 of this Act of  indefinite  leave  to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom,

    (g) a decision that a person is to be removed from the  United  Kingdom
    by way of directions under  section  10(1)(a),  (b),  (ba) or (c) of
    the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  (c.  33) (removal  of  person
    unlawfully in United Kingdom),

   5.  Section 84 of the 2002 Act provides;

    84 Grounds of appeal

    (1) An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration decision must
    be brought on one or more of the following grounds-

        (a) that the decision is not in accordance with immigration rules;

        (b) that the decision is unlawful by  virtue  of  [...] 1 [Article
        20A of the Race Relations (Northern Ireland) Order 1997] 2 [ or by
        virtue of section 29 of the Equality Act 2010 (discrimination in the
        exercise of public functions etc) so far  as  relating  to  race  as
        defined by section 9(1) of that Act] 3 ;

        (c) that the decision is unlawful  under section  6 of  the Human
        Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to  act  contrary  to
        Human Rights Convention) as being incompatible with the  appellant's
        Convention rights;

        (d) that the appellant is an EEA national or a member of the  family
        of an EEA national and the decision breaches the appellant's  rights
        under the Community Treaties in respect of entry to or residence  in
        the United Kingdom;

        (e) that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law;

        (f) that the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have  exercised
        differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules;

        (g) that removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
        consequence of the immigration  decision  would  breach  the  United
        Kingdom's obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  would  be
        unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998 as  being
        incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights.

    (2) In subsection (1)(d) "EEA national" means a national of  a  State
    which is a contracting party to the Agreement on the European  Economic
    Area signed at Oporto on 2nd May 1992 (as it has effect  from  time  to
    time).

    85 Matters to be considered

    (1) An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall be treated
    by the Tribunal as including an appeal against any decision in respect
    of which the appellant has a right of appeal under section 82(1).

    (2) If an appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement under section
    120 , the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised in the  statement
    which constitutes a ground of  appeal  of  a  kind  listed  in section
    84(1) against the decision appealed against.

    (3)  Subsection  (2)  applies  to  a  statement  made   under section
    120 whether the statement was made before  or  after  the  appeal  was
    commenced.

    (4) On an appeal  under  section  82(1), 83(2) or 83A(2) against  a
    decision the Tribunal may consider evidence  about  any  matter  which
    it thinks relevant to the substance of the decision, including evidence
    which concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision.

    (5) But subsection (4) is subject to the exceptions in section 85A.

   6. The EEA Regulations provide in respect of appeal rights as follows:

    26.- Appeal rights

    (1) Subject to the following paragraphs of this  regulation,  a  person
    may appeal under these Regulations against an EEA decision.

    (2) If a person claims to be an EEA national, he may not  appeal  under
    these Regulations unless he produces a valid national identity card  or
    passport issued by an EEA State.

    (2A) If a person claims to be in a durable  relationship  with  an  EEA
    national he may not appeal under these Regulations unless he produces-

         (a) a passport; and

         (b) either-

         (i) an EEA family permit; or

         (ii) sufficient evidence to satisfy the Secretary of State that  he
         is in a relationship with that EEA national.

    (3) If a person [ to whom paragraph (2) does not apply] 3 claims to be
    a family member who has retained the right of residence or  the  family
    member or relative of an EEA national he may  not  appeal  under  these
    Regulations unless he produces-

    (a) a passport; and

    (b) either-

         (i) an EEA family permit;

         (ia) a qualifying EEA State residence card;

         (ii) proof that he is the family  member  or  relative  of  an  EEA
    national; or

    (iii) in the case of a person claiming to be a family  member  who  has
    retained the right of residence, proof that he was a family  member  of
    the relevant person.

    (3A) If a person claims to be a person with a derivative right of entry
    or residence he may not  appeal  under  these  Regulations  unless  he
    produces a valid national identity card issued by an  EEA  State  or  a
    passport, and either-

         (a) an EEA family permit; or

         (b) proof that-

            (i) where the person claims to  have  [a  derivative  right  of
            entry or residence as a result of] 8regulation 15A(2), he is a
            direct relative or guardian of an EEA national who is under the
            age of 18;

            (ii) where the person claims to have  [a  derivative  right  of
            entry or residence as a result of] 8regulation 15A(3),  he  is
            the child of an EEA national;

            (iii) where the person claims to have [a  derivative  right  of
            entry or residence as a result of] 8regulation 15A(4), he is a
            direct relative or guardian of the child of an EEA national;

            (iv) where the person claims to have  [a  derivative  right  of
            entry or residence as a result of] 8regulation 15A(5) , he is
            under the age of 18 and is a dependant of a  person  satisfying
            the criteria in [(i) or (iii);] 9

            (v) where the person claims to have a derivative right of entry
            or residence as a result of regulation 15A(4A), he is a direct
            relative or guardian of a British citizen.

    (4) A person may not bring an  appeal  under  these  Regulations  on  a
    ground certified under paragraph (5) or rely on such  a  ground  in  an
    appeal brought under these Regulations.

    (5) The Secretary of State or an  immigration  officer  may  certify  a
    ground for the purposes of paragraph (4) if it has been considered in a
    previous appeal  brought  under  these  Regulations  or  under section
    82(1) of the 2002 Act 11.

    (6) Except where an appeal lies to  the  Commission,  an  appeal  under
    these Regulations lies to the [First-tier Tribunal] 12 .

    (7)  The  provisions  of  or  made  under  the  2002  Act  referred  to
    in Schedule 1 shall have effect for the purposes of an  appeal  under
    these Regulations to the [First-tier Tribunal] 12 in accordance  with
    that Schedule.

   7. Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations provided, at the relevant  time,  as
      follows:

       The following provisions of, or made under, the 2002 Act have effect
       in relation to an appeal under these Regulations to the First-tier
       Tribunal as if it were an appeal against an immigration decision
       under section 82(1) of that Act:
       section 84(1), except paragraphs (a) and (f);
       sections 85 to 87;
       section 105 and any regulations made under that section; and
       section 106 and any rules made under that section




   8. Section 120 of the 2002 Act provides:

    120 Requirement to state additional grounds for application

    (1) This section applies to a person if-

         (a) he has made an application to enter or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, or

         (b) an immigration decision within the meaning of section  82 has
         been taken or may be taken in respect of him.

    (2) The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may by  notice  in
    writing require the person to state-

         (a) his reasons for wishing  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom,

         (b) any grounds on which he should be permitted to enter or  remain
         in the United Kingdom, and

         (c) any grounds on which he should not be removed from or  required
         to leave the United Kingdom.

    (3) A statement under subsection (2) need not repeat reasons or grounds
    set out in-

         (a) the application mentioned in subsection (1)(a), or

         (b) an application to which the immigration decision  mentioned  in
         subsection (1)(b) relates.



          Schedule 2 - Decisions relating to the individual appeals



Amirteymour



   1. Mr Amirteymour is a citizen of the United States of America born on  8
      November 1956.  He and his former wife are originally from Iran  where
      they married in 2003; their daughter was born in the United Kingdom on
      11 October 2005.  The appellant has visited the UK to see his daughter
      twice a year since 2005, entering as a visitor. It appears that he has
      been living her permanently since 2013 albeit  without  leave  in  any
      capacity. He sees his daughter 2-3 times a week but she does not  live
      with him.




   2. On 14 August 2013, the claimant requested  a  residence  card  on  the
      basis that he is the primary carer of his daughter who  is  a  British
      Citizen.  That application was refused on 21  February  2014  for  the
      reasons set out  in  a  letter  of  that  date.  In  that  letter  the
      respondent noted that the claimant wished to rely on family or private
      life, but advised him that he would need to make a  separate,  charged
      application  using  the  appropriate   form.    The   refusal   letter
      acknowledges  the  duty  imposed  by  section  55  of   the   Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and that the duty  is  discharged
      by acting on concerns the respondent identifies regarding the  welfare
      of children. Finally, the refusal letter notes that the  appellant  is
      not required to the leave the United Kingdom if he can demonstrate  he
      has a right to reside, but that  he  ought  to  make  arrangements  to
      leave.  No section 120 notice was served.



   3. The grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  aver  that  the
      respondent's decision was:



   a) Not in accordance with the Rules;

   b) Not in accordance with the law;

   c) In breach of rights conferred by the Community Treaties;

   d) Unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998;

   e) Not in the daughter's best interests which require him to  be  allowed
      to remain; and,

   f) A disproportionate interference with the claimant's article 8 rights.




    It is also averred that a discretion under the rules should  have  been
    exercised differently.




   4. The appeal was heard by First-tier tribunal Judge I Ross who dismissed
      it under the EEA Regulations and under article 8 ECHR  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 17 November 2014 which records [6] that the  claimant's
      counsel indicated that no claim  was  to  be  pursued  under  the  EEA
      regulations and that the appeal would proceed  only  under  article  8
      grounds.




   5. Judge Ross found that:

   a) the refusal to issue a residence card did not involve an  interference
      with family life sufficiently severe to engage article 8 [13];

   b) the principle established in Chikwamba SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40  did  not
      apply to this case [19];

   c) section 117B of the  2002  Act  was  not  relevant  as  there  was  no
      suggestion that the appellant would be removed from the United Kingdom
       [21].




   6. The claimant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
      grounds that Judge Ross erred:-




   a) In concluding that the respondent's decision did not engage article  8
      [1];

   b) In not treating the child's best interests as a primary  consideration
      [2];

   c) In not adopting the correct procedure with respect to article  8  [3];
      and,

   d) In concluding that section 117B of the 2002 Act was not engaged [4].




   7. On 15 January 2015 permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
      granted, it being observed that it was arguable that the judge  should
      not have considered article 8.




   8. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  do  not  challenge  the
      findings made in respect of the EEA Regulations. We have concluded for
      the reasons set out above that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
      to consider a ground which  is  different  from  the  subject  of  the
      decision under  appeal.  The  judge  should  not  in  this  case  have
      considered whether the decision was contrary to the  claimant's  human
      rights, as he had no jurisdiction so to do. It follows that any  error
      in his consideration of article 8 and the application of section  117B
      of the 2002 Act could not be material. On the basis we  consider  that
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error of law and we uphold it.






    Tawa Tijani & Radeeyah Olamide Jamiu


 1. Ms Tijani is a citizen of Nigeria who entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2004 and overstayed. She is the mother of Ms Jamiu who was born  on  23
    January 2008.  A second daughter, Roheemot Motunrayo Jamiu Grace  Koffi
    was born on 16 June 2009 who is a French national as is her father.  Ms
    Tijani is not and has never been married to him. There is also, it  now
    transpires, a third child, who is  named  in  later  documents  but  in
    respect of whom  it  appears  that  no  application  was  made  to  the
    respondent.


 2. On 20 July 2012, an application was made for the claimants to be issued
    with a residence card on the basis of the  decision  in  Zambrano;  the
    application also raises  article  8  and  the  duties  imposed  on  the
    respondent by section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009. That application was refused on 18 July 2013, the  respondent
    concluding that the requirements of Regulation 15A (2) had not been met
    as there was no evidence that neither the principal appellant  nor  her
    EEA national daughter had sufficient funds.


 3. As in the other appeals before us, the refusal letters  made  it  clear
    that consideration had been given only to the EEA Regulations; that  no
    removal decision had yet been made; and, that if the  claimants  wished
    to make an application for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules,
    this would need to be made by  means  of  the  correct  form  and  upon
    payment of the correct fees.


 4. An appeal was lodged on the grounds that the respondent  had  erred  in
    concluding that there were insufficient funds; had failed  to  consider
    whether the EEA national child would be unable to remain in the  United
    Kingdom if the primary carer were required to  leave,  and  the  effect
    would be to force an EEA national who cannot be required to  leave  the
    United Kingdom to reside outside the EU.


 5. In the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  30  June  2014,  Ms
    Tijani's case was that as she  received  920  per  month  from  rental
    income from property left to her in Nigeria, transferred to her through
    the bank account of a friend, Ms Oladapo-Solo and receives 300 a month
    from her sister who lives in the USA,  that  she  did  have  sufficient
    funds. It was also her case that she did have  in  place  comprehensive
    sickness insurance.


 6. In its determination  promulgated  on  14  July  2014,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sets out why it was not satisfied that Ms Tijani  was  receipt
    of the rental income claimed [9]-[11], why it was  not  satisfied  that
    she receives money from her  sister  [12]-[13],  and  why  it  was  not
    satisfied that there was a health insurance policy  in  placed  [14]  -
    [17]. There was no consideration of article 8 ECHR.


 7. The claimants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    grounds that the First-tier Tribunal erred:


      a) In finding that the insurance premiums were not paid,  contrary  to
         the evidence;
      b) In setting too high a standard of proof in assessing if the parties
         were self-sufficient;
      c) By failing to engage with the grounds of appeal and submission made
         with  respect  to  article  8  and  section  55  of  the   Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009;
      d) Failing to consider whether, in  effect,  the  EEA  national  child
         would be taken out of the EU.


 8. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted on 7 November 2014.


 9. It is, to say the least, unfortunate that Mr  Mak's  skeleton  argument
    proceeds [5] on the basis that article 8 had been raised in a   section
    120 notice and positively states [6] that this had  been  served.  Only
    before us did he admit that no such notice had been served. Of  further
    concern is that the skeleton argument appears to proceed on  the  basis
    that there were only two children, yet it is now  accepted  that  there
    are three.



  10. As we have concluded for the reasons set out above that  the  Tribunal
      does not have jurisdiction to consider a  ground  which  is  different
      from the subject of the decision under  appeal,  the  failure  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal to consider this issue was incapable of  affecting
      the outcome.



  11. The other grounds are equally  without  merit.  Contrary  to  what  is
      averred, the First-tier Tribunal sets out in adequate detail  [9]-[11]
      why it did not accept the account given of the funds being transferred
      to Ms Tijana, noting specifically the lack of evidence that the  funds
      were transferred into Mrs Oladapo-Solo's account from Nigeria  and  at
      [10] an apparent inconsistency in the Ms Tijana saying she has no bank
      account yet there  being  cheques  deposited  in  her  name.  Further,
      adequate and sustainable reasons were given  [12]  and  [13]  why  the
      Tribunal did not accept that Ms Tijana was receiving 300 a month from
      her  sister.   In  the  circumstances,  the  Tribunal  was  manifestly
      entitled to conclude that there were insufficient funds available  and
      thus  any  error  with  respect  to  whether  there   was   in   place
      comprehensive sickness insurance cannot have affected the outcome.



  12. It is wholly unarguable that  the  Zambrano  principle  is  applicable
      here.  That case was concerned with children who would effectively  be
      compelled leave the  territory  of  the  European  Union;  it  is  not
      authority for the proposition that that there is a  derived  right  of
      residence for the parents of children effectively compelled to live in
      another EEA state. The EEA Regulations at reg. 15A (4A) establish that
      in order to obtain a card as confirmation of a right of residence,  it
      would need to be shown that the EEA national child could not reside in
      another EEA state. There was insufficient evidence to  show  that  the
      child could not live in the state  of  her  nationality  or  that  her
      mother and half-siblings could not join her there, and thus it  cannot
      be argued that the requirements of the regulations were in fact met.



  13. On the basis we consider that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      did not involve the making of an error of law and we uphold it.





Izvira



   1. Ms Izvira is a citizen of Albania who is married to a British Citizen.
      They have three children born in 2004, 2011 and May 2014 who are  also
      British Citizens. The oldest has significant health needs  as  he  has
      cerebral palsy.




   2. The claimant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor  and  overstayed.
      On 13 March 2012 she applied for a residence card as  confirmation  of
      her right of residence as the  primary  carer  of  a  British  Citizen
      child, the son born in 2011. That application pursuant  to  regulation
      15A (4A) was refused on the basis that the  appellant  had  not  shown
      that she was a primary carer as she had not  shown  that  the  child's
      father, Altin Izvira, was not in a position to care  for  the  British
      Citizen child. The refusal letter  records  that  the  respondent  has
      considered her duties under section 55 but advised the appellant  that
      She is, however, warned that she should now make arrangements to leave
      and that if she does not do so, her departure may be enforced. She  is
      also again informed that she can make an application to UKBA and  that
      her entitlement to remain in the UK has been assessed  solely  on  the
      basis of the EEA Regulations.




   3. The appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Beach in  a  determination  promulgated  on  24  December  2013.
      Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted.  In a decision
      dated 14 April 2014, the Upper Tribunal held that the  decision  under
      the EEA regulations did not involve the making of an error of law  but
      that the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of article 8 had involved
      the making of an error of law,  and  remitted  it  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to make a fresh decision on the article 8 issue only.



   4. On 11 July 2014, the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal on article
      8 grounds, concluding amongst other things that it  would  be  in  the
      best interests of all the British Citizen children that  their  mother
      and father continue to live in the United Kingdom with them, and  that
      the interference that would be caused to the  claimant's  family  life
      would be disproportionate.




   5. The respondent sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on
      the basis that the FtTJ had attached undue weight to the interests  of
      the children; had erred by  misapplying  the  decisions  in  Chikwamba
      [2008] UKHL 40 and Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402; and,  in  failing  to
      direct himself in line with Gulshan (article 8 - new rules  -  Correct
      approach) Pakistan [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.   Those  grounds  were  later
      amended to include the ground that the First-tier Tribunal had not had
      jurisdiction to consider Human Rights. There is no cross-appeal



   6. Given our conclusion that the Tribunal does not have  jurisdiction  to
      consider a ground which is different from the subject of the  decision
      under appeal, the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  considering
      whether the decision was contrary to the claimant's human  rights,  as
      it had no jurisdiction so to do.  It  follows  that  in  allowing  the
      appeal on article 8 grounds, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  did
      involve the making of an error of law and we set it aside.



   7. As the only basis on  which  it  was  pursued  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  was  on  the  basis  that  the  decision   amounted   to   a
      disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's  rights   under
      article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and there is no jurisdiction
      to consider that issue, it follows that the appeal must be dismissed.






HF & AN

 1. These claimants are  mother  and  daughter.  They  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 3 March 2009 and 11 June 2010 respectively to join  the  SG,
    an EEA national as his spouse and dependent child. On 23 November  2010
    they were granted Residence Cards valid for 5 years on that  basis.  On
    18 October 2012 Ms F left her husband due to domestic  violence;  their
    marriage was dissolved on 8 January 2013. Ms F has, since  then,  given
    birth to another child, F; Mr G is not the father.

 2. On 22 March 2013, the claimants applied for permanent  residence  cards
    as confirmation  of  Ms  F  and  her  daughter's  right  to  remain  in
    accordance  with  regulation  10  of   the   EEA   Regulations.   Those
    applications were refused as the respondent was not satisfied that Ms F
    met the requirements of either regulation 10 (5) or regulation 10  (6).
    The respondent also revoked their Residence Cards which had been issued
    in November 2010 on the basis that Ms F and her daughter no longer  met
    the requirements of the EEA Regulations.

 3. As with in the other appeals before us, the  refusal  letters  made  it
    clear that consideration had been given only to  the  EEA  Regulations;
    that no removal decision had yet been made; and, that if the  claimants
    wished to make an application for leave to remain under the Immigration
    Rules, this would need to be made by means of the correct form and upon
    payment of the correct fees.

 4. On appeal, in a determination promulgated on 10 April 2014, the  First-
    tier Tribunal found that Ms F did meet the requirements  of  regulation
    10 (5) but, as she had conceded [21] that she had  not  been  employed,
    self-employed or self-sufficient since her divorce  became  final,  she
    did not meet the requirements of regulation 10 (6) and so did not  meet
    the requirements of the  EEA  Regulations.  The  appeal  was,  however,
    allowed pursuant to article 8.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that,  in
    allowing the appeal pursuant to article  8,  the  judge  had  erred  in
    failing first to consider whether the requirements of  appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules had been met, and further, in failing properly to
    explain why the  cases  were  exceptional.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on 19 May 2014 and the matter then came before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Hanson who permitted the  respondent  to  amend  her  grounds  to
    include a challenge asserting that the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    have the jurisdiction to entertain  an  article  8  application  in  an
    appeal against an EEA decision.  There is no cross-appeal.



   6. Given our conclusion  the  Tribunal  does  not  have  jurisdiction  to
      consider a ground which is different from the subject of the  decision
      under appeal, the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  considering
      whether the decision was contrary to the appellant's human rights,  as
      it had no jurisdiction so to do.  It  follows  that  in  allowing  the
      appeal on article 8 grounds, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  did
      involve the making of an error of law and we set it aside.



   7. As the only basis on  which  it  was  pursued  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  was  on  the  basis  that  the  decision   amounted   to   a
      disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's  rights   under
      article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and there is no jurisdiction
      to consider that issue, it follows that we must remake the  appeal  by
      dismissing it.



   8. We maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.












