

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

BM (false passport) DRC [2015] UKUT 00467 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination promulgated    |
|on 23 July 2015                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

       The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President of the Upper Tribunal
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan


                                   Between

                                     BM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




Representation

Appellant:    Ms S Naik, of Counsel, instructed by McGarvey Immigration  and
                  Asylum Practitioners

Respondent:       Mr D Blundell, of Counsel, instructed  by  the  Government
                  Legal Department

The mere fact that an asylum claimant utilised a false passport  or  kindred
document in departing  the  DRC  will  not  without  more  engage  the  risk
category specified in [119(iv)] of BM and Others  (Returnees:  Criminal  and
Non-Criminal) DRC CG [2015] 293 (IAC).  The  application  of  this  guidance
will be dependent upon the fact sensitive context of  the  individual  case.
The Tribunal will consider, inter alia, the likely  state  of  knowledge  of
the DRC authorities pertaining to the person in question. A person  claiming
to belong to any of the risk categories will not be at risk  of  persecution
unless likely to come to the attention  of  the  DRC  authorities.  Thus  in
every case there will be an intense focus  on  matters  such  as  publicity,
individual prominence, possession of  a  passport,  the  standard  emergency
travel document arrangements (where  these  apply)  and  how  these  matters
impact on the individual claimant.


                                  ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1.  The  consideration  of  this  Appellant's  appeal  in  BM  and  Others
    (Returnees:  Criminal  and  Non-Criminal)  DRC  CG  [2015]  293   (IAC)
    (hereinafter "the Country Guidance decision") was  incomplete  for  the
    reason specified in [111] thereof.  This foreshadowed a further hearing
    in order to complete the determination of this Appellant's appeal.

 2. Such hearing has now been conducted.  It entailed  oral  evidence  from
    the Appellant, the  reception  of  a  new  witness  statement  and  the
    consideration of Counsel's submissions, both  written  and  oral.   The
    framework within which  this  supplementary  decision  is  provided  is
    shaped by [119(iv)] of the Country Guidance decision:

         "The DRC authorities have an interest in certain types of convicted
         or suspected offenders, namely those  who  have  unexecuted  prison
         sentences in DRC or in respect of whom there are unexecuted  arrest
         warrants or who supposedly committed an offence, such  as  document
         fraud,  when  departing  DRC.   Such  persons  are   at   risk   of
         imprisonment for lengthy periods and, hence,  treatment  proscribed
         by Article 3 ECHR."


    This passage, with appropriate  editing,  is  to  be  applied  to  this
    Appellant in the following way:


         "The  DRC  authorities  have  an  interest  in  certain  types   of
         ...............     suspected     offenders,      namely      those
         ...................... who supposedly committed an offence, such as
         document fraud, when departing DRC."



 3. It is this Appellant's case that he travelled from DRC  to  the  United
    Kingdom using a false passport.  There is no evidence that  conduct  of
    this kind constitutes the  offence  of  document  fraud,  or  something
    kindred, under the domestic laws  of  DRC.   However,  the  appeal  was
    conducted on an  assumption  to  this  effect.   Having  no  basis  for
    rejecting this assumption, we shall proceed accordingly.   We  consider
    that two basic questions fall to be addressed:

     i) Did this Appellant, as  he  claims,  employ  a  false  passport  in
        departing DRC and travelling to the United Kingdom?


    ii) If "yes", does [119(iv)] of the Country Guidance decision apply  to
        him?


    As this formulation makes clear, the second question does not arise  if
    the first is answered in the negative.

The Appellant's Case

 4. Our overview of the relevant parts of the evidence is as  follows.   We
    begin with the asylum screening interview, conducted on 26  July  2013,
    the transcript  whereof  records  the  Appellant's  assertion  that  he
    travelled to the United Kingdom by air from DRC, arriving  on  12  July
    2013, in possession of "a borrowed passport that the agent gave  me  to
    travel here in the name of [XY].   The  DOB  1977.   It  was  a  French
    passport."  He repeated this in response to a later question.

 5. The Appellant's substantive asylum interview followed soon  thereafter,
    on 05 August 2013.  He claimed that he departed DRC from N'djili (which
    we construe from other evidence as Kinshasa) Airport,  accompanied  and
    assisted by an agent.  He described in some detail  his  receipt  of  a
    passport from the agent and the instructions given to him  in  relation
    thereto.  He asserted that following arrival in the United Kingdom  the
    agent escorted him to the "Home Office Building", explaining  that  the
    Appellant should go there to claim protection.

 6. In the context of pursuing his asylum  appeal,  the  Appellant  made  a
    statement dated 21 October 2013.  This contains the following  material
    passage:

         "My brother in law brought a man to the house who took  me  to  the
         airport and we arrived on a plane to the United  Kingdom,  arriving
         on 12 July 2013. The man provided me with a passport and told me to
         follow him through immigration control.  He took the passport  from
         me outside the airport.  The same day he took  me  to  Croydon  and
         pointed out the building to claim asylum ......"

    For the purposes of this appeal hearing, the Appellant  made  a  second
    written statement, wherein he recounts:


         "When I got to the airport, I was given the French passport by [the
         agent]. He told me to memorise the name on the passport and not  to
         be afraid. ....  [He] gave me the plane  ticket  which  I  used  to
         travel .....


         When we arrived at the airport  in  the  United  Kingdom  .....   I
         showed the passport to the Immigration Officer .....


         Once I  was  through  immigration  control  [the  agent]  took  the
         passport from me .....


         I used the false document because even if I had  obtained  a  valid
         passport from the DRC I did not think I would have been able to get
         a visa to the UK. A French passport allowed me to travel to the UK.
          Because I am French speaking I thought  I  could  convince  people
         that I am a French national. I think I was given a French  passport
         and not a Belgium one because there are many people in the DRC with
         Belgium passports and the immigration authorities might be able  to
         more easily detect  a  false  Belgium  passport  because  they  are
         relatively common .....


         When I arrived in the UK I did not claim asylum at the  airport.  I
         was afraid that because I had a false document  that  I  would  get
         into trouble.  If I am returned to the DRC the authorities will  be
         aware that I have  never  had  a  passport  of  my  own.  If  I  am
         questioned upon return about how I left the DRC they will  be  able
         to ascertain that no one of my name left Kinshasa  Airport  on  the
         day I left.  I will have to tell the truth about  how  I  left  the
         country and how I used a false passport to do this."

    We interpose at this juncture an observation.  This statement is  dated
    17 June 2015  and  was  generated  approximately  two  weeks  following
    promulgation of the Country Guidance decision. It remained in abeyance,
    however, until the morning of the reconvened hearing on  23  July  2015
    when an application was made to admit  it  in  evidence.   Taking  into
    account the public law overlay of immigration appeals, we did not  find
    the  explanation  proffered  for  the  timing   of   this   application
    satisfactory.  Based on the explanation given, this  witness  statement
    would have been suppressed but for the pre-hearing intimation on behalf
    of the Secretary of State that the Appellant's claims relating  to  the
    use  of  a  false  passport  were  disputed.   This  was  not  entirely
    unexpected, since it was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that there
    had been no finding or concession in his favour on this  issue  in  the
    Secretary of State's decision or otherwise.



 7. The next piece of the evidential jigsaw is  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT").  It is apparent from the text that the
    passport  issue  did  not  feature  at  this   stage.    However,   the
    determination  contains  findings  relating  to  the  gravamen  of  the
    Appellant's asylum claim, which is that he was tortured and ill treated
    by agents of the DRC State because of his politically active support of
    an anti-government party, the UDPS.  The Secretary of State  found  the
    essence of the Appellant's claim to be a fabrication and  the  FtT  did
    likewise.  In thus concluding, the Tribunal stated:

         "The sole issue to be determined with  regard  to  the  Appellant's
         asylum account is credibility .....


         We find after considering all the evidence ....  that we can safely
         discount any possibility of  the  Appellant's  asylum  story  being
         true."


    The uncompromising terms  of  this  rejection  are  striking.    It  is
    followed by the FtT's reasons for thus concluding.   One  of  the  core
    reasons was that  a  document  which  formed  the  centrepiece  of  the
    Appellant's  case  was  a  fabrication.   Other  reasons   related   to
    identified discrepancies in the  Appellant's  accounts.   We  need  not
    elaborate on them at this juncture.

 8. The Appellant gave evidence to this Tribunal.  His examination in chief
    was confined to the formal adoption of his witness  statements.   Cross
    examination focused on a single issue.  He confirmed that  in  evidence
    to the FtT he claimed to have been ill treated by the DRC  authorities.
    Next, he acknowledged his awareness that the FtT  had  disbelieved  his
    claims.  He further confirmed that  he  was  maintaining  these  claims
    unabated.


 9. Having regard to what was ventilated at the hearing, we  consider  that
    there are two main issues, both factual, to be addressed.  The first is
    the Appellant's claim that he made use of a false  travel  document  to
    facilitate his departure from the DRC and his ensuing travel and  entry
    to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  second  concerns  the  procedures  and
    arrangements in force for the provision of emergency  travel  documents
    ("ETDs") to DRC nationals being  repatriated  by  compulsion  to  their
    country of origin.

Consideration and Conclusions

10. The primary submission of Mr Blundell on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State  is  encapsulated  in  the  following  passage  in  his  skeleton
    argument:

         "BM has been found wholly incredible.  The entirety of his  account
         of arrest, detention and ill treatment has been disbelieved.  There
         is accordingly no reason why he would have needed to  use  a  false
         passport to leave the DRC.   Using a false passport to  gain  entry
         to the United Kingdom, on the other hand, remains  consistent  with
         the presentation  of  a  false  account  of  persecution  since  it
         perpetuates the (false) suggestion  that  BM  needed  to  use  such
         documentation to escape persecution."

    The riposte of Ms  Naik  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  had  two  main
    elements.  First, it was submitted that the Appellant's claims relating
    to the use of a false passport did not form a core part of  his  asylum
    application but,  rather,  constituted  a  "separate"  issue.   It  was
    suggested that the impugned decision of the Secretary of State supports
    this construction.  Second, it was submitted that, from the outset, the
    Appellant has been consistent in his false passport claim.

11. We take our cue from the findings of the FtT.  By  those  findings  the
    core of the Appellant's assertions underpinning his  asylum  claim  has
    been  rejected  -  and  in  swingeing  terms.   Having  regard  to  the
    Appellant's screening  and  substantive  asylum  interviews  (rehearsed
    above), about which there is no issue,  we  consider  that  his  claims
    relating to all aspects of  his  interaction  with  an  agent  and  his
    departure from and travel to the United Kingdom formed  integral  parts
    of his  asylum  application.   They  are  elements  of  a  whole.   The
    suggestion  that  they  should  be  in  some  way  detached  from   the
    allegations of ill treatment is, in our judgment, as  unsustainable  as
    it is unrealistic.  True it is that the Appellant has  been  consistent
    in his false passport claims and assertions.  However, we consider that
    this does not avail him. We acknowledge the  possibility  that  whereas
    there is an uncompromising judicial  finding  that  the  Appellant  has
    fabricated elements of his asylum claim going to its  very  foundation,
    he might be telling the truth about the false passport.   However,  the
    mendacity of which he has been found guilty  is  so  profound  that  we
    consider that it taints the entirety of his story.


12. Furthermore, in his recent statement  the  Appellant  acknowledges  the
    possibility that he could have obtained a valid passport to travel from
    the DRC.  This undermines still further his ill treatment claims,  and,
    simultaneously, weakens his  false  passport  claim.  Finally,  in  his
    evidence to this Tribunal, the Appellant has persisted in  advancing  a
    case  which  the  FtT  found  to  be  wholly  mendacious.  If  he   had
    acknowledged these  fabrications,  his  prospects  of  persuading  this
    Tribunal of the truth of his false passport claim would have  improved.
    However, he chose to perpetuate a fabrication.  In doing so, he  sought
    to mislead  and  deceive  this  Tribunal.   The  conclusion  that  this
    deception infects the entirety of his story follows readily.  For  this
    combination of reasons, we find that his claim that he departed the DRC
    and travelled to the United  Kingdom  using  a  false  passport  to  be
    fabricated.


13. The second issue, also a factual one, to which we now turn  relates  to
    the procedure for the grant of an ETD to  DRC  nationals  who  are  the
    subject of enforced return to their country of origin.  We directed  an
    agreed statement of facts pertaining to this issue and  this  was  duly
    produced. It is appended to this decision. Clearly, if our  finding  in
    relation to the Appellant's false passport claim had been favourable to
    him, this further evidence would have had a bearing on the question  of
    whether he belongs to the risk category identified in [119(iv)] of  the
    Country Guidance Decision.


14.    In brief compass, the "ETD" process has the following main  elements
    and features:

     i) The Home Office does not provide information to the DRC authorities
        about when or how any of its nationals departed the DRC.


    ii) A returning DRC national must apply for an ETD.  This  entails  the
        completion of a laissez-passer  form,  which  contains  a  question
        asking when  the  person  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.    The
        application is made to the DRC in London.

   iii) The ETD application is accompanied  by  a  Home  Office  submission
        letter; passport size photographs; the  aforementioned  application
        form; the applicant's personal details;  any  supporting  evidence;
        and supplementary evidence, such as an expired passport or  driving
        licence.

    iv) ETD applicants are interviewed by a DRC official who questions  the
        person concerned about when and how they left  the  DRC  and  about
        their passport.

    The joint response of the parties' representatives also drew  attention
    to the most recent Country Information and Guidance Report (July  2015)
    and, specifically, paragraphs 5.1.1 and 5.1.2, together with Annexes  Q
    to T thereof.  We note that in Annex  N  there  is  an  instance  of  a
    repatriated DRC national being questioned by a DGM official at Kinshasa
    Airport  about,  inter  alia,  "............  how  he  had   originally
    travelled to the UK ....."


15. In cases where there is a finding by a Tribunal that the appellant used
    a false passport or travel document when departing the DRC, it will  be
    necessary to give effect to the  above  evidence  (or  any  further  or
    updated  relevant  evidence)  in  applying  [119](iv)  of  the  Country
    Guidance decision.  This exercise does not fall to be conducted in  the
    present case in light of our finding that this Appellant's  claim  that
    he deployed a false passport in  leaving  the  DRC  is  a  fabrication.
    Building upon this finding, we  further  find  that,  as  a  matter  of
    probability,  there  was  nothing  irregular  about  this   Appellant's
    departure from the DRC and, in particular, it was effected by  the  use
    of a valid passport. In his  second  witness  statement  the  Appellant
    claims that if questioned upon  return  he  will  have  to  inform  DRC
    officials of "the truth about how I left the country and how I  used  a
    false passport to do this".  Giving effect  to  our  principal  finding
    above,  we  consider  that  this  scenario  is   highly   unlikely   to
    materialise.  Predictively,  the  most  likely  scenario  is  that  the
    Appellant will not be questioned thus.  We  consider  the  second  most
    likely scenario to be that in the event of  being  questioned  he  will
    tell the truth, as we have found this to be, there  will  be  no  self-
    incrimination and he will not be at risk of detention  and,  consequent
    thereon, treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.

16. Finally, we address briefly the outworkings of [119(iv)] of the Country
    Guidance decision.  At the hearing we suggested to both parties that in
    cases where it is established -  whether  by  proof  to  the  requisite
    standard or by concession - that the asylum claimant utilised  a  false
    passport or kindred document  in departing DRC this will  not,  without
    more,  trigger  [119(iv)]  of  the  Country  Guidance  decision.   This
    analysis, we suggested, is clear from the words  "suspected  offenders"
    and "who supposedly committed an offence, such as document fraud,  when
    departing DRC".  Neither representative dissented from  this  analysis.
    The country guidance on this discrete issue is, of necessity, broad and
    general in nature, having regard  particularly  to  the  evidence  upon
    which it is based.  Its application to a given asylum claimant will  be
    dependent upon the fact sensitive context  of  their  individual  case.
    Predictably, one of the enquiries for the primary decision  maker  and,
    on appeal, the FtT,  in  every  case,  will  be  the  likely  state  of
    knowledge of the DRC authorities pertaining to the person in  question.
    All necessary findings of fact  and/or  evaluative  assessments  and/or
    predictions relating to this issue will be made on the basis of primary
    evidence  and  sustainable  inferences   from   primary   evidence   or
    concessions.  Fundamentally, a person claiming to belong to any of  the
    risk categories will not be at risk of persecution unless he or she  is
    likely to come to the attention of the  DRC  authorities  upon  return.
    Thus in every case there will be an intense focus on  matters  such  as
    publicity,  individual  prominence,  possession  of  a  passport,   the
    standard ETD arrangements where they apply and how these matters impact
    upon the individual claimant. We emphasise that this is not intended to
    operate as an exhaustive list.


Decision

17. We dismiss this Appellant's appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.












                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                                30 July 2015




