
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         MK (best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 31 October 2011                   |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                                                   MK

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms T White, Counsel, instructed by Ali Sinclair
Solicitors

 i) The best interests of the child is a broad notion  and  its  assessment
    requires the taking into account and weighing up  of  diverse  factors,
    although in the immigration context the most important  of  these  have
    been identified by the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4,
    the Court of Appeal in AJ (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 and by the Upper
    Tribunal in E-A (Article 8 -best interests  of  child)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00315 (IAC).

ii)  Whilst an important part of ascertaining what are the  best  interests
    of the child is to seek to discover the child's own  wishes  and  views
    (these being given due weight in accordance with the age  and  maturity
    of the child) the notion is not a purely subjective one and requires an
    objective assessment.

iii) Whilst consideration of the best interests of the child is an  integral
    part of the Article 8 balancing exercise (and not something apart  from
    it), ZH (Tanzania) makes clear that it is a  matter  which  has  to  be
    addressed first as a distinct inquiry. Factors relating to  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of effective immigration control  must  not
    form part of the best interests of the child consideration.

iv) What is required by consideration of the best interests of the child is
    an "overall assessment" and it follows that its nature and outcome must
    be reflected in the  wider  Article  8(2)  proportionality  assessment.
    Consideration of the best interests of the child cannot be reduced to a
    mere yes or no answer to the question of whether removal of  the  child
    and/or relevant parent is or is not  in  the  child's  best  interests.
    Factors pointing for and against the best interests of the child  being
    to stay or go must not be overlooked.

 v) It is important when considering a child's education to have regard not
    just to the evidence relating to any short-term disruption  of  current
    schooling that will be caused by any removal but also to that  relating
    to the impact  on  a  child's  educational  development,  progress  and
    opportunities in the broader sense.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The respondent [hereafter "the claimant"] is a citizen  of  India.  On
    22 June 2004 he applied in Mumbai for entry clearance as a  visitor  to
    the UK for just one week, to be accompanied by his wife  and  daughter,
    H. They  were  subsequently  granted  six  months'  leave  as  visitors
    arriving in the UK on 25 August 2004.  They did not leave the UK by the
    date their leave expired  but  overstayed.  On  9  September  2005  the
    claimant's wife gave birth to their second daughter, T.   On  30  April
    2009 the claimant applied for indefinite leave to  remain.  On  8  July
    2010 and then again on 21 January 2011 the appellant, the Secretary  of
    State (hereafter "the SSHD") refused  that  application.  The  claimant
    appealed.  In a determination notified on 8 April 2011  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Immigration Judge Hedworth) decided to allow  his  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds. The SSHD was successful in obtaining a grant of
    permission to appeal, bringing the matter before us.

2.    The judge's reasons for allowing the appeal are set out at  paragraphs
    35-59. At paras 35-44 he explained why he  considered  the  parents  to
    have a poor immigration history and why he considered that  they  could
    re-establish their life in India at a reasonable standard of living. At
    para 44 he turned to the issue of the children's best interests in  the
    light of the guidance given in LD (Article 8 - best interests of child)
    Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) and in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4.  At
    para 51 he stated that the youngest child, T, would have no  difficulty
    in readjusting to life and school in India. At para 53  he  found  that
    the claimant's children would have access to good  education  in  India
    and that it was "frankly unlikely" that they knew little or no Gujerati
    but in any event there would be no  linguistic  barriers  for  them  in
    India. Having at para 52 given his own assessment of H  as  a  "bright,
    enthusiastic girl, well-liked in school and an asset to it" and in para
    54 having noted the contents of H's own letter to the  court,  he  then
    turned to the letter of 16 March 2011 from  the  head  teacher  of  H's
    primary school and to the family GP's letter of 24  February  2011.  At
    paras 56-59 the judge stated:

         "56.   I bear in mind that both these  men  are  professionals  and
             therefore do not and can not lightly set  aside  their  views.
             Both may be said to have the parent's interests at  heart  too
             as much as those of the children. But the reality is that both
             men who have known [H] for a long  time  fear  that  her  best
             interests would not be served if she  was  taken  out  of  the
             system and life in which she has  now  become  imbedded.  [The
             head teacher] uses the words 'highly  detrimental',  Dr  Sinha
             'very  detrimental',  when  referring  to  the  education  and
             development of [H] and her sister.


         57.      My reluctance not  to  immediately  adopt  the  view  that
             removal of [H] would be detrimental is perhaps tainted by what
             I find with regard to her  parents'  immigration  history  and
             behaviour. But this innocent child cannot be held responsible.
             To some extent the delay by the respondent in  processing  the
             application made in April 2009 does not help either.


         58.      I answer the first four questions framed in Razgar in  the
             positive. The ultimate question is proportionality. With  some
             hesitation, which  I  must  resolve  in  favour  of  the  best
             interests  of  [H],  I  find  on  balance  that  it  would  be
             disproportionate for  [H]  to  have  to  leave  the  UK  as  a
             consequence of  her  parents  and  her  younger  sister  being
             removed in order that  the  Secretary  of  State's  legitimate
             prerogative and right to regulate and control  immigration  to
             the UK be maintained and achieved.


         59.      The UK would be in breach of its obligations under Article
             8 (private life) with respect to H] if she was removed at this
             time. Her situation and circumstances  of  family  life  under
             Article 8 would be breached if her parents and younger  sister
             were removed. The realty is that [H's] father, the  appellant,
             and mother both with  a  deceitful  and  dreadful  immigration
             history benefit from their  daughter's  Article  8  rights  to
             private life."

3.    The SSHD's grounds of appeal contended that the judge  had  failed  to
    show he considered the significance for  his  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the child of his finding that  none  of  the  family  were
    lawfully settled or are British citizens; the fact that there would  be
    no linguistic barriers to the children obtaining  education  in  India;
    the fact that he had found the claimant and  his  wife  would  have  no
    difficulty in re-establishing their family life in India; and the  fact
    that their youngest daughter would have no problem in  re-adjusting  to
    life and school  in  India.  In  addition  it  was  submitted  that  in
    attaching great weight to the assessments by H's head  teacher  and  GP
    that it would seriously disrupt her education in the  UK  if  she  were
    required to return to India, the judge had failed to take into  account
    that the right to education under Protocol 1 of the ECHR is a qualified
    right or to factor in his own  acceptance  that  the  Indian  education
    system  was  good.   It  was  also  argued  that  in   conducting   the
    proportionality exercise the judge had failed to weigh in  the  balance
    the claimant's "appalling immigration history".

4.    In advance of the hearing the claimant's solicitors submitted  further
    documents including further letters from H's  head  teacher,  dated  21
    July 2011 and 20 October 2011 respectively,  a  letter  from  the  head
    teacher of T's school and school reports for 2010/2011 for both  H  and
    T.

5.    At the hearing Ms White did not call any oral evidence  but  submitted
    a skeleton argument.

6.    The crux of Ms Tanner's submissions for the SSHD was  that  the  judge
    had erred in treating the eldest child's educational  circumstances  in
    the UK as effectively a "trump card" when deciding the Article 8 claim.
     So far as the likely position of the claimant and his family on return
    to India was concerned, they were a middle class family, there  was  no
    suggestion that the two children would not receive a good education  in
    India: language was not a problem.   As  regards  the  judge's  finding
    about disruption to H's education, he had failed  to  explain  why  the
    disruption would be detrimental to her  educational  development.   The
    contents  of  the  eldest  child's  private  life  in  this  case   was
    essentially confined to  school  activities  and  friends  made  in  or
    through school.  H was not yet a teenager with a developed social  life
    outside school or family. Although she had lived here  six  years,  she
    had spent her first five years  in  India.   The  judge  had  erred  by
    failing to attach weight to the fact that the claimant and  his  family
    were neither in the UK with lawful permission nor British citizens.

7.    In  amplifying  her  skeleton  argument  Ms  White  for  the  claimant
    submitted that  the  judge  had  not  made  any  material  error.   His
    reasoning was consistent with the principles outlined by  the  Tribunal
    in E-A (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC).  He had looked at the  evidence
    as a whole. He had conducted a fact sensitive enquiry and  in  relation
    to H was clearly impressed by the fact that she was a very bright child
    who had benefited enormously from her UK education.   He  had  properly
    attached weight to the two reports on H by her head teacher and GP.  It
    was open to the judge to find that it would be  detrimental  to  uproot
    her "from the system and life in which she has  now  become  embedded".
    The judge had applied the guidance given by the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) and by the Tribunal in LD.  In EM (Zimbabwe) CG [2011]  UKUT
    98 (IAC) at paragraph 308(vi) the Tribunal had made clear that the  key
    ZH (Tanzania) principles applied even when there was no British citizen
    or settled person involved.  Contrary  to  the  SSHD's  assertion,  the
    judge had not treated the best interests  of  the  child  as  "the"  as
    opposed to "a" primary consideration.  The judge had  clearly  ascribed
    negative weight to the claimant's "appalling immigration history".  The
    judge had addressed the significance  of  the  known  facts  about  the
    Indian education system and had carefully  refused  to  consider  there
    would be any linguistic obstacles to the two children continuing  their
    education in India. The judge was also careful to differentiate between
    the situation of the two children, clearly regarding the elder  child's
    greater maturity as making a significant difference.  By identifying  a
    serious disruption in the oldest child's education the judge made plain
    he meant her being uprooted from her current schooling.

8.    In her skeleton argument Ms  White  said  that  the  judge  submitted,
    inter alia, that the oldest child's best  interests  pointed  one  way,
    that other factors pointed the other but that  balancing  "one  against
    the other he came down in favour of her best interests".   In  sum,  Ms
    White submitted, the SSHD's grounds were a complaint  about  respective
    weight the judge attached to various factors whereas matters of  weight
    were for the judge.

9.    The panel asked Ms White what it was to make of the fact that  one  of
    the two professionals whose opinion the  judge  appeared  to  rely  on,
    namely the family GP and Dr Sinha, had appeared, at least in  part,  to
    attribute the likely detrimental effect on the two  girls'  studies  if
    they were returned to India to the claimant's family having come to the
    UK  to  escape  "enormous  family  strife"  and   "very   hostile   and
    confrontational relationships with their families in  India."   In  his
    determination the judge had found that the claimant's claims about such
    family hostilities to be without foundation.  She  submitted  that  the
    judge had based himself first on the head teacher's reports and so  the
    doctor's letter was not the only source and it was  only  one  of  many
    things he weighed in the balance.  There was no reason  to  think  that
    the judge had failed to differentiate between what Dr Sinha  attributed
    to family strife and what he saw as the children's best interests.  The
    judge's assessment stood independently of the  doctor's  concern  about
    family strife.

10.   The panel also asked Ms White to identify what  the  judge  considered
    to be  the  factors  relevant  to  the  best  interests  of  the  child
    assessment and whether he had shown he had made an "overall assessment"
    in line with the guidance given in ZH (Tanzania). Had the judge reduced
    almost everything to the factor of educational  disruption?   Ms  White
    replied that it would be wrong to demand of a judge's  determination  a
    formal structured approach; one had to look at the determination  as  a
    whole, not just the last two paragraphs.   It  was  sufficiently  clear
    that the judge had considered in the round  a  range  of  factors  when
    making the best interests of the child assessment and in  the  case  of
    the eldest child, "education" was in fact a broad umbrella covering not
    just her schooling but her social ties with fellow pupils  and  outside
    groups. The judge had rightly focussed in H's development  of  her  own
    personality and identity: H was a gifted child.  The determination  was
    not perverse or otherwise flawed in law.

11.   We asked the parties to address us on their  respective  positions  in
    the event that we decided the judge had materially erred  in  law.   Ms
    Tanner asked us to proceed to re-make  the  decision  and  dismiss  the
    appeal.  A proper assessment of the best interests  of  the  child  and
    consideration of  the  Article  8  proportionality  assessment  pointed
    strongly to dismissal of the  appeal.  It  appeared  the  children  had
    grandparents in India.  The further elapse of time since the judge  had
    heard the appeal in March did not significantly impact on the Article 8
    assessment. The seven years policy was no longer in existence.

12.   Ms White urged us  to  take  cognisance  of  the  further  documentary
    evidence  relating  to  both   children's   schooling   and   excellent
    educational progress and to find that to consider removing  the  family
    now, when both children were embarking on a new school year was plainly
    disproportionate, especially given that the judge had  found  in  March
    that their appeal had been successful and they had got  on  with  their
    lives on that basis.

Relevant cases

13.   In deciding this case we have been greatly assisted  by  a  number  of
    recent decisions. The most important is the Supreme Court  judgment  in
    ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC  4  published  on  1  February  2011.  Other
    decisions include: Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348; SSHD v Rahman [2011]
    EWCA Civ 814; MD (Ivory Coast) [2011] EWCA  Civ  989;  AJ  (India)  and
    others v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1191; and a number of Tribunal  decisions
    including  LD (Article 8 best interests of the child)  Zimbabwe  [2010]
    UKUT 278 (IAC); EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2011]  UKUT  98
    (IAC), and  E-A (Article 8-best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT
    00315(IAC. We have also looked at R (on the application of TS)  v  SSHD
    [2010] EWHC 2614 (Admin) 26 October 2010)  and  Tinizaray,  R  (on  the
    application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2011]
    EWHC 1850 (Admin). We also take account, as we are obliged to do by s.2
    of the Human Rights Act, of Strasbourg jurisprudence dealing with  best
    interests of the child  questions  in  the  context  of  expulsion  and
    exclusion cases; in particular  Neulinger  and  Shuruk  v.  Switzerland
    [GC], no. 41615/07, � 135,  ECHR  2010 and  Case  of  Nunez  v  Norway
    no.55597/09 [2011] ECHR 1047 (28 June 2011). This is not an  exhaustive
    list and in the nature of the subject-matter it is likely there will be
    new cases relatively frequently.

14.   In AJ (India), which  reflects  the  Court  of  Appeal's  most  recent
    analysis of the subject, Pill LJ wrote:

         "43.  Before expressing final  conclusions  I  make  the  following
             general comments, in addition  to  those  made  in  paragraphs
             above.
             (a)       As Baroness Hale stated  at  paragraph  33  in  ZH,
                  consideration  of  the  welfare  of  the  children  is  an
                  integral part of the  Article  8  assessment.  It  is  not
                  something apart from  it.  In  making  that  assessment  a
                  primary consideration is the best interests of the child.
             (b)       The absence of a reference to section 55(1)  is  not
                  fatal to a decision. What matters is the substance of  the
                  attention given to the "overall wellbeing" (Baroness Hale)
                  of the child.
             (c)       The welfare of children was a factor  in  Article 8
                  decisions prior to  the  enactment  of  section  55.  What
                  section 55 and the guidelines do, following Article  3  of
                  UNCRC, is to highlight the need  to  have  regard  to  the
                  welfare and interests of children  when  taking  decisions
                  such as the present. In an  overall  assessment  the  best
                  interests of the child are a primary consideration.
             (d)       The primacy of the interests of the child  falls  to
                  be considered in the  context  of  the  particular  family
                  circumstances, as well as the need to maintain immigration
                  control.
          1.     The facts in the  present  case  were  considered  by  the
             Immigration Judge, in a manner whereby he  was  treating  the
             best interests of the child as a  primary  consideration.  D's
             age was such that there could be no consultation with him,  as
             required in the guidance with older children,  nor  are  other
             considerations suggested to be relevant. It is  not  suggested
             that there are medical or  other  needs  which  point  towards
             continued residence in the United Kingdom. "
15.   In LD (a case predating ZH (Tanzania) but cited with  approval  in  AJ
    (India)) Blake J referred to Article 3 of the UNCRC and also stated in
    paragraph 26:
         "26.     Very weighty reasons are needed to  justify  separating  a
             parent from a minor child or a child from a community in which
             he or she had grown up and lived for most of her  life.   Both
             principles are engaged in this case."
16.   In EM the Tribunal wrote at para  308(vi):  "Even  where  neither  the
    children nor the parents has the  status  of  a  British  citizen,  the
    welfare of the children is a primary  consideration  in  administrative
    action affecting their future and accordingly the balance of  competing
    interests under Article 8 must reflect this factor as  a  consideration
    of the first  order,  albeit  not  the  only  one  (see  LD...  and  ZH
    (Tanzania) ...."). At para 308(viii), in the context of considering the
    Article 8 proportionality assessment, the Tribunal added that:


         "In the absence of any other policy guidance from the Secretary  of
         State, it remains legitimate for Immigration Judges  to  give  some
         regard to the previous policy that seven years residence by a child
         under 18 would afford a basis for regularising the position of  the
         child and parent in the absence of conduct reasons to the  country,
         in making a judicial assessment of whether removal is proportionate
         to the legitimate aim having regard to the best  interests  of  the
         child."


17.   In E-A (Article 8  -best  interests  of  child)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
    00315(IAC) the head note to the decision states:


          i) The correct starting point in considering the welfare and best
             interests of a young child would be that it  is  in  the  best
             interests of a child to live with and be brought up by his  or
             her parents, subject to  any  very  strong  contra-indication.
             Where it is in the best interests of a child to live with  and
             be brought up by his or her parents, then the child's  removal
             with his parents does not involve  any  separation  of  family
             life.


         (ii)      Absent  other  factors,  the  reason  why  a  period  of
             substantial  residence  as  a  child  may  become  a   weighty
             consideration in the balance of  competing  considerations  is
             that in the course of such time roots are put  down,  personal
             identities are developed, friendships are formed and links are
             made with the community outside the family unit. The degree to
             which these elements of private life are forged and  therefore
             the weight to be given to the passage of time will depend upon
             the facts in each case.


         (iii)    During a child's very early years,  he  or  she  will  be
             primarily focused on self and the caring parents or  guardian.
             Long residence once the child is likely to  have  formed  ties
             outside the family is likely to have greater impact on his  or
             her well-being.


         (iv)    Those who have their families with them during a period of
             study in the UK must do so in the light of the expectation  of
             return.


         (v)      The Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 was  not
             ruling that the ability of a young child to readily  adapt  to
             life in a new country was an irrelevant  factor,  rather  that
             the adaptability of the child in each case  must  be  assessed
             and is not a conclusive consideration on its own.

 Legal principles: best interests of the child

18.   At this juncture we need to clarify several  points  concerning  cases
    involving best interests of the child consideration/assessment  in  the
    context of  Article  8  expulsion  cases.  The   jurisprudence  of  the
    European Court of Human  Rights  (ECtHR)  has  long  treated  the  best
    interests of the child as a primary consideration in the assessment  of
    proportionality,  but  the  UK's  lifting  in  2008  of   its   general
    reservation relating to immigration matters under  the UN Convention on
    the Rights of the Child (UNCRC), the coming into force  of s.55 of  the
    2009 Act, the guidance given by the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania)  and
    the Court of Appeal in AJ (India) have combined to lend  the  principle
    more prominence in our country; and courts and  tribunals  are  perhaps
    only at the beginning of mapping in more detail  its  consequences  for
    different  types  of  immigration  situations  involving  children  and
    expulsion measures. That said, in addition to the guidance  already  to
    hand, it is possible to identify several matters of principle.

19.    First of all it is clear from the judgments of their lordships in  ZH
    (Tanzania) (Lords Hope, Brown, Mance and Kerr expressing full agreement
    with the reasoning of Baroness Hale) that whilst consideration  of  the
    best interests of the child is  an  integral  part  of  the  Article  8
    balancing exercise (and not something apart from it), it  is  a  matter
    which has to be addressed first and as a distinct stage of the inquiry.
    The decision maker has first to make a  decision  on  what  is  in  the
    overall best interests of the child and only  then  to  assess  whether
    those interests are outweighed by countervailing factors such as  those
    concerned with  the  rights  and  freedoms  of  others,  the  effective
    maintenance of immigration control, prevention of crime, etc  (Baroness
    Hale, para 33, Lord Hope, para 44, Lord Kerr para 46).  The  underlying
    rationale must be that unless, when children are concerned, the Article
    8 proportionality assessment is conducted in this way there is  a  risk
    of the best interests of the child consideration  wrongly  taking  into
    account extraneous  factors  such  as  the  parents'  poor  immigration
    history.

20.    Second, whilst an important part of ascertaining what  are  the  best
    interests of the child is to seek to discover the  child's  own  views,
    these being given due weight in accordance with the age and maturity of
    the child (Article 12 UNCRC), this notion is not  a  purely  subjective
    one and the decision-maker has to come to an objective view as to  what
    it is reasonable to expect of a child (Baroness Hale,  paras  29,  34);
    This is reflected in the UKBA statutory guidance (cited in  AJ  (India)
    at para 16) that "Children should  be  consulted  and  the  wishes  and
    feelings of children  taken  into  account  wherever  practicable  when
    decisions affecting them are made, even though it will  not  always  be
    possible to reach decisions with which the child  will  agree...".  The
    need for an objective approach arises  not  simply  because  a  child's
    interests will not always be the same  as  their  parent(s),  but  also
    because the consideration of their best interests requires a  judgement
    to be made on a rational basis taking into account all relevant factors
    and not just on the basis of how these matters  are  perceived  by  the
    child and/or parent(s).

21.    Third,  the  initial  stage  -  the  best  interests  of  the   child
    consideration - is not to be approached as a simplistic or reductionist
    exercise. Baroness Hale refers approvingly to the position taken by the
    UNHCR in para 1.1 of its Guidelines on Determining the  Best  Interests
    of the Child (May 2008)  that  "[t]he  term  'best  interests'  broadly
    describes the well-being of the child". Para 1.1 goes on to state  that
    "such  well-being  is   determined   by   a   variety   of   individual
    circumstances, such as the age, the level of maturity of the child, the
    presence  or  absence  of  parents,   the   child's   environment   and
    experiences". In this UNHCR document and  other  sources  on  which  it
    draws, the best interests of the child consideration is to be  seen  to
    require a broad-ranging inquiry and to encompass  multifarious  factors
    including the  child's  need  for  security,  continuity  of  care  and
    affection and the opportunity to form long term  attachments  based  on
    mutual trust and respect. As stated by the  same  UNHCR  Guidelines  at
    para 3, "[t]he result of the best interest of the  child  determination
    must take account of the full range of the child's  rights,  and  hence
    consider a variety of factors. The best  interests  of  the  child  are
    rarely determined by a single, overriding factor".  We are aware  there
    have  been  suggestions  that  decision-makers  might  benefit  from  a
    checklist relating to the welfare of the  child  akin  to  that  family
    court judges are required to take into  account  under  s.1(3)  of  the
    Children Act 1989. However, it seems to us that the guidance  given  in
    ZH (Tanzania) has already accomplished  the  task  of  identifying  the
    factors which require particular attention in cases in  which  children
    are affected by expulsion measures. At para 29 Baroness Hale says  this
    about best interests of the  child  consideration  in  the  immigration
    expulsion context:


         "Applying, therefore, the approach  in  Wan  [Wan  v  Minister  for
         Immigration and Multi-cultural  Affairs  [2001]  FCA  568]  to  the
         assessment of proportionality under Article 8(2), together with the
         factors identified in Strasbourg, what is encompassed in the  "best
         interests of the child"? As the UNHCR says, it  broadly  means  the
         well-being of the child. Specifically as Lord Bingham indicated  in
         EB (Kosovo), it will involve asking whether  it  is  reasonable  to
         expect the child to live in another country. Relevant to this  will
         be the level of the child's integration in  this  country  and  the
         length of absence from the other country, where and with  whom  the
         child is to live and the arrangements for looking after  the  child
         in the other country; and the strength of the child's relationships
         with parents or other family members which will be severed  if  the
         child must move away."


22.   At para 30 Baroness Hale adopts  the  identification  in  Wan  of  the
    following matters as relevant: the intrinsic importance of  citizenship
    of the host country (where the child has this) and its connection  with
    lifestyle; the degree of social and linguistic disruption of children's
    childhood as  well  as  loss  of  homeland;  the  loss  of  educational
    opportunities; resultant isolation from the normal contacts of children
    with their other parent and that other parent's family. She sees  these
    considerations as particularly important "in assessing the overall well-
    being of the child", as does Lord Hope who refers at  para  40  to  the
    "overall assessment of what was in the child's best interests".

23.   There is in our view a fourth point of principle that can be  inferred
    from the Supreme Court's judgments in ZH  (Tanzania).  As  the  use  by
    Baroness Hale and Lord Hope of the adjective "overall" makes clear, the
    consideration of the best interests of the child involves a weighing up
    of various factors. Although the conclusion of the  best  interests  of
    the child consideration  must  of course provide a yes or no answer  to
    the question, "Is it in the best interests of the child for  the  child
    and/or the parent(s) facing  expulsion/deportation  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom?"', the  assessment  cannot  be  reduced  to  that.  Key
    features of the best interests  of  the  child  consideration  and  its
    overall balancing of factors, especially  those  which  count  for  and
    against an expulsion decision, must be kept in mind when turning to the
    wider proportionality assessment of whether or not the factors relating
    to the importance of maintaining immigration control etc.  cumulatively
    reinforce or outweigh the best interests of  the  child,  depending  on
    what they have been found to be.

24.   The need to keep in mind the "overall"  factors  making  up  the  best
    interests of the child consideration must not be downplayed. Failure to
    do so may give rise to an error of law although, as  AJ  (India)  makes
    clear, what matters is not so much the form of the inquiry  but  rather
    whether there has been substantive consideration of the best  interests
    of the child. The  consideration  must  always  be  fact-sensitive  and
    depending  on  its  workings-out   will   affect   the   Article   8(2)
    proportionality assessment in different ways. If, for example, all  the
    factors weighed in the best interests of the child consideration  point
    overwhelmingly  in  favour  of  the  child  and/or  relevant  parent(s)
    remaining in the UK, that is very likely to mean that only very  strong
    countervailing factors can outweigh it. If, at the other  extreme,  all
    the  factors  of  relevance  to  the   best  interests  of  the   child
    consideration (save for the child's and/or  parent(s)  own  claim  that
    they want to remain) point  overwhelmingly  to  the  child's  interests
    being best served by him returning with his parent(s) to his country of
    origin ( or to one of his parents being expelled leaving him to  remain
    living here), then very little by way of countervailing  considerations
    to do with immigration control etc. may be necessary in order  for  the
    conclusion to be drawn that the decision appealed against  was  and  is
    proportionate.

25.   We would add a further point, in the light of Ms White's  reliance  on
    EM (Zimbabwe). Her submission sought to argue  that  the  Tribunal  had
    made clear in that case that British citizenship and issues of leave to
    remain in the UK were not relevant to the best interests of  the  child
    consideration.  We  do  not  understand  the  Tribunal  in  EM  to   be
    enunciating any such proposition. Rather they seek to remind the reader
    that such factors do not negate the need for a best  interests  of  the
    child consideration. Whilst ZH  (Tanzania)  makes  clear  that  factors
    relating to immigration control are extraneous to  such  an  assessment
    and whilst  factors  relating  to  citizenship  and  stay  are  clearly
    relevant to immigration control, the attributes of citizenship (in this
    case Indian citizenship) and permission to stay (in  this  case  wholly
    lacking) may well be relevant to assessment of the  best  interests  of
    the child as well. Thus in the claimant's case the fact that he and the
    children are  Indian  citizens  demonstrates  that  they  have  another
    country to go to and one in which, absent special  circumstances,  they
    can legitimately  expect  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  that  country's
    citizenship. As regards permission to stay in the UK or lack of it, the
    fact that a parent or child has had lawful permission to remain in  the
    UK may well be relevant in assessing the extent  to  which  the  parent
    and/or child is to be regarded as integrated. Care needs to be taken to
    ensure that consideration of such factors is not elided  with  concerns
    about the public interest in the maintenance of  effective  immigration
    control,  but  it  is  quite  clear  from  leading   cases,   including
    ZH(Tanzania), that factors such as citizenship and  immigration  status
    can sometimes strengthen, sometimes weaken, the argument that the  best
    interests of the child lie in remaining in the UK. That indeed  appears
    to be at the heart of Pill LJ's assessment of the appellant SP  in  the
    AJ (India) case at para 41:


         "The facts in the present case were very different  from  those  in
         ZH. The child was two years old at the time of the decision. He had
         not started school or  formed  ties  with  anyone  other  than  his
         parents. He had no leave to remain in the UK nor  was  her  or  his
         parents of UK citizenship. He would be moving with his parents to a
         country with which his parents were familiar.  His  best  interests
         would clearly be served by remaining with his parents wherever they
         may be."

Our assessment

Decision to set aside

26.   We must first address whether the FTT judge materially erred  in  law.
    We have no hesitation in finding that he had. It is  clear  that  in  a
    number of paragraphs leading up to para 53 the judge identified several
    factors relevant to consideration of the best interests of  the  child,
    including that there was no reason to think that the family would  face
    difficulties on return or that the children would not be able to access
    good and easily available schooling in  India  and  that  the  youngest
    child's education would not be disrupted. The judge had also identified
    that there were no cultural or linguistic obstacles in the way  of  the
    children adapting to life in India.  Thus  up  to  this  point  in  his
    determination (i.e. immediately prior to para 53,  where  he  addresses
    the letters from the head teacher and family GP), on his  own  analysis
    all the factors  considered  pointed  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children being, in Pill  LJ's  words  in  AJ  (India)  "remaining  with
    [their] parents wherever they may be". Yet in what then  follows  there
    is nothing to indicate that these factors were weighed in  the  overall
    balance. Having noted that the head teacher felt  that  to  remove  the
    children  would  be  highly  detrimental   to   their   education   and
    development, the judge simply states that nevertheless, as  regards  H,
    "this innocent child cannot be held responsible" and  that  "[t]o  some
    extent the delay by the respondent in processing the  application  made
    in April 2009 does not help either". There is nothing to indicate  that
    he factored into the equation his earlier finding that there  was  good
    education readily available in India to both  children  or  that  there
    were no linguistic or cultural barriers to their living back  in  India
    with their parents. In other words, instead of  an  overall  assessment
    the judge reduced his balancing to consideration of two  factors  which
    were treated as decisive in themselves.

27.   Further, when one turns to the judge's apparent conduct of  the  wider
    Article 8 balancing  exercise  in  para  53  onwards,  whilst  properly
    identifying  the Secretary of State's "legitimate prerogative and right
    to regulate and control immigration" there is again nothing to indicate
    that the judge kept in  mind  several  other  highly  relevant  factors
    pointing to the children's best interests being unimpaired by return to
    India: the accessibility of good  schooling  there,  the  lack  of  any
    obstacles to the parents re-establishing their own working lives there,
    the lack of any accepted evidence as to  family  difficulties  and  the
    lack of any  linguistic  and  cultural  barriers.  The  assessment  was
    reduced in stark terms to  one  simply  about  the  importance  of  not
    disrupting the present education of H versus the  public  interests  in
    immigration control. The judge was perfectly entitled to  consider  H's
    situation in terms of her  right  to  respect  for  private  life,  but
    without any reasoning to indicate at least in outline why none  of  the
    factors previously identified as being relevant to the  proportionality
    of interference with that private life mattered, it  is  impossible  to
    safely  conclude  that  the  judge  properly  carried  out  the   wider
    proportionality assessment either.

28.   An additional error, not insignificant in our view,  was  the  judge's
    decision to attach clearly significant  weight  to  the  report  by  Dr
    Sinha, without noting that he had earlier rejected the doctor's premise
    that the family were likely to  face  family  strife  on  return.  This
    rather highlights the judge's general failure to follow through on  his
    own earlier findings. We shall return to  this  matter  below,  but  in
    short we are unable to accept Ms White's submission  that  somehow  the
    GP's evaluation of  the  issue  of  disruption  to  H's  schooling  was
    severable from his evaluation of the existence of family strife back in
    India. The judge clearly attached significant weight to this GP  letter
    (as well as to the report  from  the  head  teacher)  yet  that  letter
    treated the family strife context as relevant to its own evaluation  of
    the children's best interests.

Re-making of the decision

29.   Having found that the judge materially erred in law we set  aside  his
    decision. Both parties indicated that in the event we found a  material
    error of law they were content for us to re-make the  decision  on  the
    basis of the evidence and  submissions  now  before  us,  including  of
    course the  further  evidence  submitted  relating  to  the  children's
    schooling.

30.   Neither party disputes  the judge's primary findings of facts and,  as
    regards his rejection of the claimant's claim that he  and  his  family
    faced a real risk on return of adverse attention as a result of  family
    hostilities, the claimant did not seek to cross-appeal that, nor did Ms
    White seek before us to re-open this matter. Subject to  that  proviso,
    the issue for us is what legal assessment we are to make of  the  facts
    as found, supplemented as they are by further documents relating to the
    children's schooling.

31.   Like the  FTT  judge  we  accept  that  the  claimant  has  shown  the
    existence of an Article 8(1) protected right. Since  the  claimant  and
    his family faced removal to India together there was no  disruption  of
    their family life and the principal right affected was  the  claimant's
    and his family's right to respect for  private  life.  It  was  not  in
    dispute that the decision under appeal amounted to an interference with
    that right. Hence we can move straightaway to consider the Article 8(2)
    assessment.

Best interests of the child consideration

32.   We consider first as an integral part of the Article 8 (2)  assessment
    the best interests of the two children involved. We  note  that  whilst
    this consideration must focus  on  factors  specific  to  each  of  the
    children (encompassing obviously the family context) the order in which
    we deal with factors is not  crucial  -  see  AJ  (India),  para  31  -
    although we think it  sensible,  before  going  on  to  consider  other
    factors, to begin with the  evidence  we  have  of  what  the  children
    themselves think and feel and then move on to the family context.

Children's perspective
33.   H, the eldest child, was born on 1  November  1999  and  so  has  just
    turned 12. She has been in the UK since 25  August  2004.  The  younger
    daughter, T, was born here in the UK on 9 September 2005 and has  never
    lived anywhere else. We do not have in this case much by way of  direct
    evidence from either of the children and Ms White did not seek to  call
    them to give evidence before us. H had written a personal letter to the
    First-tier Tribunal in which she said: "I have been told by my  parents
    that we may have to return to India. However, I do not want  to  return
    to India. I will miss my friends. Back home I have no friends and  will
    take a very long time to settle in. Also I will not able to cope up  in
    Indian studies as they are very strict. So please can we stay  here  in
    England with my BFFs and school." [We are unclear what "BFFs" means but
    we understand it may stand for "Best Friends Forever".]

34.   Ms White was content otherwise that we should understand H's  and  T's
    wishes and feelings concerning the decision under appeal to  have  been
    conveyed  by  what  their  parents  and   their   school   and   health
    professionals have said about them (subject to the proviso noted  above
    at para 30).

35.   Whilst considering the best interests of  the  child  as  an  integral
    part of the Article 8 assessment we are mindful of  the  fact  that  it
    requires  an  "overall  assessment"  and  in  that  context  it  is  of
    particular importance that this excludes extraneous factors relating to
    immigration  control  and  the  immigration  history  of  the   child's
    parent(s): the latter are not to be taken  into  account  in  the  best
    interests of the child assessment: see above, para 19.

Family context
36.   In this case we would observe that, like the SP and  E-A  cases,  this
    case is one in which it can clearly be said to be in the best interests
    of both children to live with and be brought up by their parents  (that
    was also what the FTT judge found at para 51). There  is  no  issue  of
    separation: the whole family goes or the whole family  stays;  that  is
    fully agreed by the SSHD and the claimant. That means in this case that
    if removed, the return of the claimant and his family would not involve
    any disruption of  their  family  life.  Further,  the  unexceptionable
    finding of the judge, with which we fully agree, is  that  the  parents
    themselves would not face any significant  difficulties  on  return  to
    India (which might impact on their children's well-being). As the judge
    noted at para 44, "[b]oth are  sufficiently  well  educated  and  urban
    enough to achieve a  reasonable  standard  of  living  in  India,  even
    without, if that is really so, sibling or parental support. Both are in
    their mid-30s and have spent all their lives in India until arrival  in
    the UK in 2004". Noting what Baroness Hale states  in  para  29  of  ZH
    (Tanzania), we observe that there is no evidence either of there  being
    any other family members in the UK (whose ties with the children  might
    be severed).

Citizenship etc
37.   Like their parents, both children are Indian citizens,  and,  if  they
    return to India, have a legitimate expectation of being able  to  enjoy
    the benefits such citizenship confers on those who live in India.

Cultural, religion, traditions
  38. It is not suggested in this case that the  children's  upbringing  has
      divorced either of them from the culture, religion  or  traditions  of
      their parents. The primary school report for 2010/2011 notes  that  "T
      is aware of her culture and beliefs, and enjoyed talking to  the  rest
      of the class about them. She also has a  developing  respect  for  the
      culture  and  beliefs  of   others,   and   enjoys   celebrating   the
      differences". The claimant's claim that he and his family  would  face
      family strife has not been accepted. And he has   not  suggested  that
      they have broken with the type of life they lived when in  India  They
      appear to be a family,  like  many  other  ethnic  minority  families,
      seeking to strike a balance between  maintaining  their  home  country
      (Indian) values and adjusting to British culture and traditions.


Health
  39. Regarding health, it is not suggested that any member  of  the  family
      has any health  difficulties  and  indeed  Dr  Sinha's  letter  of  24
      February 2011 confirms as much.


Language
40.   Regarding language, Ms White did not ask us to take a  different  view
    from that of the FTT judge who stated at para 53 that "The claim by the
    [claimant] that his daughters know little or no Gujerati I find frankly
    unlikely. In any case there need be no  linguist[ic]  barriers  as  the
    medium of instruction in large numbers of schools in India is  English.
    The claimant's wife, a Hindu, benefited from a  Convent  education;  it
    accounts for her good standard of English".

Education-related matters
41.   When it comes to the subject of education in the context of Article  8
    we must consider a child's educational development and also  the  issue
    of any "loss of educational opportunities" (para 30 of ZH  (Tanzania)),
    so as to pay proper regard to how his or her  educational  progress  is
    likely to be affected in a broad sense and not just in the  short-term.
    That entails in this case having regard not only to the children's past
    and present educational setting but also  to  the  educational  setting
    likely to confront them if returned  to their  country  of  origin  (in
    this case,  India).

 42.  Regarding education in India, it is not suggested  that  the  children
    would not be able to receive a proper  education  there.  Although  the
    eldest daughter said she had found her school there strict, neither she
    nor her parents on her  behalf  suggested  that  this  meant  that  the
    quality of the education there was wanting. And in any event we see  no
    reason to take a different view from the FTT judge in considering  that
    for the claimant and his family there would be  ready  access  to  good
    standard education.

43.    So far as education in the UK is concerned, it is clear that  if  the
    children were to be allowed to remain they would have every prospect of
    continuing to receive an excellent education. It is H's (and we  assume
    T's) and her parents' view that to remove  her  to  India  would  cause
    significant  disruption  to  her  education.  Other  evidence  we  have
    includes the two reports from Head Teacher and Dr  Sinha,  two  further
    letters from the head teacher reiterating his previous view and further
    school reports relating to both children.

44.   Dealing first with  Dr  Sinha's  assessment  of  the  children's  best
    interests in relation  to  schooling,  we  are  unable  to  attach  any
    significant weight to it. Ms White has sought to persuade  us  that  Dr
    Sinha's  assessment   that   both   children's   education   would   be
    significantly  disrupted  was  made  independently  of    concerns   he
    expressed about the children and their parents  being  likely  to  face
    family strife back in India. We are unable to accept  that  submission.
    The doctor's letter of 24 February 2011, which explains he has been the
    family GP for 6 years, stated:

         "On a personal note, I am  aware  that  the  family  came  to  this
         country from India amidst enormous family  strife  from  respective
         parents due  to  personal  and  cultural  differences  between  the
         families. This has resulted in a very hostile  and  confrontational
         relationship with their families in India. This has  resulted  [in]
         enormous mental strain and generalised  anxiety  in  [the]  parents
         which has affected their general mental state.


         By returning to India they are extremely concerned for  both  their
         own and their children's safety - as a result of  imminent  threats
         and possible violence  from  their  own  families  in  India.  Both
         children, T and H are both attending local  schools.  I  understand
         they are excellent in their studies and are amongst the top in  the
         class.  Returning  to  India  at  this  stage  would  have  a  very
         detrimental effect upon their studies in a culture that is  largely
         alien to them."


         Further to this, it would be very difficult for them to  cope  with
         the family strife that waits the family in  India.  These  children
         have no contact at all with their  [grand]  parents  and  returning
         home at this stage (in  these  circumstances)  is  most  likely  to
         affect their mental state."

45.   It seems to us that  the  doctor's  concerns  about  the  danger  from
    exposure to family  strife  were  closely  linked  to  his  finding  of
    significant disruption to the children and  that,  since  his  concerns
    about the former were  properly  found  by  the  judge  to  be  without
    foundation, this significantly lessens the weight we can attach to  his
    opinion about the latter.

46.   The other main independent assessment we have of the  children's  best
    interests comes from professionals involved in their schooling.

47.   In a letter of 21 July 2001, which is in very  similar  terms  to  the
    letter he wrote on 16th March 2011 (which was before the FTT judge) the
    head teacher notes that H had been at her primary school since  October
    2004 and is a popular child who has a wide circle of friends. She is  a
    high achiever, a member of the school council and has attended numerous
    after-school  clubs  including  the  debating  society  where  she  has
    represented in borough  wide  events.  At  the  start  of  the  present
    academic year she had been appointed as school ambassador - responsible
    for showing visitors around the school. His letter further describes  T
    as being currently a reception pupil who like her sister is  a  popular
    child and a hard worker. Both girls, he states,  are  well  settled  in
    school and have excellent attendance records  and  both  have  achieved
    above national expectations. "As a school, who knows the  family  well,
    we feel that to remove them from everything  they  know,  are  familiar
    with and have contributed to would be not only  highly  detrimental  to
    the education and development of H and T but would impact negatively on
    a family that are clearly very settled  and  achieving  so  much".   We
    note, however, that as is the nature of children's schooling H has  now
    moved on from primary to secondary school. A  20  October  letter  from
    that school confirms that H  has  been  a  student  with  them  from  5
    September 2011.

48.   There is also a letter from Melanie Watkins, Young  Artists  Programme
    Coordinator, the Prince's Drawing School dated 2 March 2011 noting that
    H was nominated for only one of a few places by her primary  school  to
    join this club, which she attends once a week, receiving  tuition  from
    professional artists as well as attending  holiday  courses  throughout
    the past year. The latter describes H's excellent progress and positive
    presence in class.

49.   We also note that when H attended the FTT hearing in March  the  judge
    said that H "struck me as being a composed,  polite  and  well  behaved
    child. From the multitude of school reports and certificates copied  in
    the [claimant's] bundle it is clearly  a  fact  that  H  is  a  bright,
    enthusiastic girl well liked in school and an asset to it."

50.   Drawing the various items  of  evidence  relating  to  the  children's
    education together, we would observe first of all that the head teacher
    also considered that to remove T, the younger daughter, would be highly
    detrimental to her education and development,  which  is  of  course  a
    finding that was not accepted by the judge  and  is  one  that  on  the
    evidence we do not accept either.  She is of an adaptable age  and,  as
    already noted, will not find education in India to pose any  linguistic
    or cultural obstacles.

  51. Secondly we observe that the head teacher's letters focus very much on
      the impact of H's removal from the point of view of her current school
      situation [as it then was] and his appraisal of how that would  impact
      on H. He seeks to identify the position for a child who has been in an
      English school for a number of years  who  has  become  familiar  with
      English-style curricula and  has  also  begun  to  develop  some  ties
      outside the family, such ties having  relevance  to  the  child's  own
      identity and development. That is not a criticism;  indeed   it  would
      have been odd if he had sought to give his opinion about education  in
      India, as he  does  not  purport  to  have  any  expertise  about  the
      standards of schooling in that country. Given, however,  that we  know
      that in fact H and her younger sister would be able to receive (in the
      FTT judge's words) education that was "good and readily available,  be
      it at some cost", the head teacher's references  to  "disruption"  and
      "detriment" have to be read in context. We do not seek to suggest that
      the head teacher would say the same thing about every pupil of similar
      age. We can envisage he might take a different view  of  a  child  the
      same age as H who, let us say, had not progressed or settled  well  in
      school; but the fact that he is prepared to make  such  an  evaluation
      irrespective, it seems, of the relative degree of  likelihood  of  the
      children being able to continue with  education  at  a  good  standard
      abroad, lessens its value to us as evidence of their  best  interests.
      Of course (in answer to Ms White's point), the  head  teacher  is  not
      expected to have to make a  rounded  assessment,  looking  at  factors
      overall. However, we do. Our own assessment is that whilst there would
      be disruption in the children's education caused by removal to  India,
      it would be temporary. We appreciate that H herself  thinks  it  would
      take a long time to settle back there -  that is a very understandable
      reaction -  but viewed objectively all the evidence indicates that she
      is a bright, enthusiastic girl who would find it  relatively  easy  to
      adapt and adjust, and to make new friends, as she has done during  her
      school life here  and  is  presently  doing,  seemingly,  at  her  new
      secondary school.


Residence -links outside family
52.   We next look at residence and links outside the  family.  In  E-A  the
    Tribunal noted that:


         "(ii)  [A]bsent  other  factors,  the  reason  why  a   period   of
             substantial  residence  as  a  child  may  become  a   weighty
             consideration in the balance of  competing  considerations  is
             that in the course of such time roots are put  down,  personal
             identities are developed, friendships are formed and links are
             made with the community outside the family unit. The degree to
             which these elements of private life are forged and  therefore
             the weight to be given to the passage of time will depend upon
             the facts in each case.


         (iii)  During a child's  very  early  years,  he  or  she  will  be
             primarily focused on self and the caring parents or  guardian.
             Long residence once the child is likely to  have  formed  ties
             outside the family is likely to have greater impact on his  or
             her well being."

53.   In this case it is clear that both  children,  although  H  much  more
    than T,  have begun to develop links with  the  community  outside  the
    family, albeit in both cases such links are confined to ones formed  in
    the context of school life. We would accept that whilst H is  still  of
    an age where her primary focus is on her  parents,  the  ties  she  has
    developed through school have gone beyond  the  school  gate  and  have
    involved her in meeting school students and teachers from elsewhere and
    for the past year she has attended a debating society which is involved
    in borough-wide events and she has also been attending drawing  classes
    which have brought her into contact with  local  professional  artists.
    Nevertheless such ties as H has formed cannot be said  to  be  deep  or
    extensive and have essentially been school-based.

Conclusion on best interests of the children

54.   Considering these factors  overall  we  do  not  find  that  the  best
    interests of either of the children would  lie  in  remaining  anywhere
    else than with their parents and that their parents can  reasonably  be
    expected to return to India. The family are Indian  citizens  and  have
    cultural, religious and linguistic ties with India. We  recognise  that
    both girls have adapted well to school life (and in T's  case  she  has
    never known life in a different society) but equally we recognise  that
    both appear to be bright, outward-going  and  adaptable  and  there  is
    every reason to consider that the qualities nurtured  in  them  by  the
    primary school  would  again  come  to  the  fore  once  they  commence
    education in India. We recognise that H much more  than  T  has  formed
    ties beyond the school gate but they  have  been  formed  either  as  a
    school pupil  or  they  are  of  relatively  limited  scope.  Even  her
    participation in drawing classes is part of a programme open to  pupils
    of her school and whilst we do not underestimate the value  to  her  of
    contact with professional artists there is again no reason to  consider
    that, if she and her parents so wished, similar contact  could  not  be
    made with professional  artists in India. We do not find that it  would
    be contrary to their best interests to have to  return  to  India  with
    their parents.

55.   Even had we considered that H's best interests  lay  in  remaining  in
    the UK, that would not have been an unqualified  conclusion.  It  would
    have been in the context of a balanced assessment in which  there  were
    many factors pointing to her best interests being to  return  to  India
    but the balance of competing  factors  pointing  to  her  staying.  Our
    assessment, that is to say, would have been relatively finely  balanced
    and we would have had to reflect that  when  moving  on  to  the  wider
    balancing exercise within Article 8.

The wider proportionality assessment

56.   We now turn to that wider Article 8 assessment.   We  carry  over  the
    result of our findings on the best interests of the child, which, as we
    have explained, saw little other than some short-term disruption of the
    children's education as a factor pointing in favour of their remaining,
    this being outweighed by several factors, including the availability of
    good education in India, the  family's  Indian  nationality  and  their
    cultural, religious and linguistic links with India.

57.   The further factors that have to be considered in the wider  balancing
    exercise are concerned, of  course,  with  the  claimant's  immigration
    history and the unlawful immigration status of his wife  and  children.
    We take as our starting point the judge's own findings on that history.
    The FTT judge did not simply find them to  be  overstayers  (deliberate
    overstaying is a criminal offence under the Immigration Act  1971);  he
    also considered there were aggravating circumstances relating to  their
    intentions: "With hindsight it is quite clear that the  [claimant]  and
    his wife had from the outset no genuine intention merely to  visit  the
    UK for a week and then return to their native  India."  The  judge  was
    satisfied that the couple were persons who had "financial means and the
    stability of a settled life in India - career and  family  life"  (para
    36). In addition the judge did not accept the claimant's  account  that
    he had come to the UK against a backdrop of his having been disowned by
    his family for having married without parental consent into a different
    caste and, shortly after their arrival  in  the  UK,  when  his  father
    passed away, his mother having disinherited  him.  Nor  did  the  judge
    accept that the claimant's father had been ill for some time before  he
    came to the UK or that that was a reason for the visit. In  each  claim
    he and his wife have made  to  the  authorities  they  have  sought  to
    maintain the same fiction as to  their  family  circumstances.  In  the
    judge's assessment these considerations meant that the claimant and his
    wife have a "deceitful and dreadful immigration history".

58.   On the other hand, there is  no  issue  in  this  case  of  any  other
    criminal conduct on the part of the claimant or his family. Nor  do  we
    see any reason to differ from the head teacher's  assessment  that  the
    family have made and continue to make a positive contribution to  their
    school and local community. There is no evidence  that  they  have  had
    recourse  to  public  funds  in  order  to  maintain  and   accommodate
    themselves. The claimant has worked to ensure he  made  ends  meet  and
    would, if allowed to stay, be offered a job at a local supermarket.

59.   We note that there was a delay of sorts in the respondent arriving  at
    a decision on the claimant's case: he had applied on 30 April 2009  for
    ILR based  on  long  residence  and  the  former  7  year  policy.  The
    respondent did not refuse this application until 8 July 2010 and  again
    on 21 January 2011. However, bearing in mind the guidance given  in  EB
    (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 we do not consider this period - 13 months  for
    the first decision - to add much to the  overall  balance  of  relevant
    factors, especially as the claimant's  representatives  wrote  on  more
    than   one   occasion   submitting   further   evidence   and   further
    representations (see e.g. letter of 7 June 2010 and 1 July 2010).

60.   A further factor to be considered is the  family's  situation  in  the
    light of the former Home  Office  policy  DP/069/99  (and  before  that
    DP5/96), which was withdrawn with effect from 9 December 2008.  It  has
    been a consistent part of the  claimant's  submission  that  the  whole
    purpose of the policy was not to uproot families with children who  had
    spent a formative  part  of  their  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    identifies that a child who has spent a substantial part of his life in
    the UK should not be removed. In refusing  this  application  the  SSHD
    highlighted the fact that the children were still young enough to adapt
    to life in India and the fact that the family had remained in breach of
    immigration control and  the  5  and  6  years  spent  in  the  UK  was
    insufficient.

61.    It is not in dispute - and in any event it is a matter of law -  that
    the SSHD was entitled to withdraw that policy, on the  basis  that  its
    maintenance was inimical to her immigration policy: see SSHD  v  Rahman
    [2011] EWCA Civ 814 para 43.  Nor (leaving aside exceptions such as the
    14 year along residence rule) do we consider  it  arguable  that  where
    there is ordinary evasion or avoidance of immigration rules a  claimant
    can establish a legitimate expectation of qualifying  under  a  policy,
    certainly in respect of one that has been withdrawn (ibid, para  45).We
    take into account as well that the guidance given at para 308 (viii) in
    EM (Zimbabwe) contains  an  important  proviso  relating  to  "conduct"
    reasons.

62.   Considering matters in the round, whilst we accept that  the  children
    are not to blame for their parents' conduct, we view the latter's  poor
    immigration  history  as  adding  significant  weight  to  the  factors
    weighing against the family's claim to remain in the UK.  Even  had  we
    accepted the judge's view that in the years since 25  August  2004  the
    parents and their children had become "embedded" in the  UK,  we  would
    still have attached very significant weight to the  fact  that  on  the
    given facts both parents sought to make their family life here, and  to
    school their children here, in full knowledge  that  their  immigration
    status was precarious and that they had no  legitimate  expectation  of
    being allowed to integrate. They are not British citizens nor have they
    ever been settled within the meaning of the Immigration Acts.

63.   For the above reasons:

    The FTT materially erred in law and its decision is set aside.
    The decision we re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.


Signed      [pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
Immigration and Asylum Chamber



