
        [pic]
IAC-fH-kh-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

     Idezuna (EEA - permanent residence) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00474 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 October 2011                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P D KING

                                   Between

                               Iza Tom Idezuna

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer

   1)    Typically, the focus in EEA appeals involving family members is  on
      either or both (i)  the  nature  of  the  relationship  with  the  EEA
      national/Union citizen; and (ii)  the  question  of  whether  the  EEA
      national/Union citizen has been exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  UK
      over the  relevant  period.  What  constitutes  the  relevant  period,
      however, may  be  a  matter  requiring  particular  consideration  and
      sometimes a family member may  have  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
      residence on the basis of historical facts.  In the present case,  for
      example,  once  the  appellant  had  established  that  his  wife  was
      exercising Treaty rights for five continuous years since the  date  of
      marriage (and before he was divorced), then (subject to (d) below)  he
      was from that date someone who had  a  right  of  permanent  residence
      which could not be broken by absence from the UK unless in  excess  of
      two years.


   2)   Continuous residence in the UK  of  the  applicant/appellant  family
      member is an essential requirement for  proving  permanent  residence:
      see regulation 15(1)(b) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 and Article 16(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC).

   3)    Whilst often it may not be in dispute that the  applicant/appellant
      family member has been in the UK during the relevant period,  that  is
      not something that can be taken  for  granted  and  it  may  sometimes
      become necessary on appeal for the tribunal judge to make a finding on
      the matter based on the evidence.   If  it  has  not  previously  been
      raised by the respondent, however, procedural fairness  dictates  that
      an appellant must be afforded a proper opportunity to  deal  with  the
      issue.

   4)    When assessing whether the applicant/appellant  family  member  has
      resided in the UK continuously for  the  purposes  of  qualifying  for
      permanent residence, it must be recalled that regulation 3(2)  of  the
      2006  Regulations  provides  that   continuity  of  residence  is  not
      affected by (a) periods of absence from the United  Kingdom  which  do
      not exceed six months in total in any year;  (b)  periods  of  absence
      from  the United Kingdom on military service; or (c) any  one  absence
      from the United Kingdom not exceeding twelve months for  an  important
      reason such  as  pregnancy,  childbirth,  serious  illness,  study  or
      vocational training or an  overseas  posting  (Article  16(3)  of  the
      Directive is to similar effect).


   5)    Once a right of permanent residence has been acquired,  it  can  be
      lost only through the absence from the host Member State "for a period
      exceeding  two  consecutive  years"  (regulation  15(2)  of  the  2006
      Regulations; Article 16(4) of the Directive).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  On 23 April 2004 he  had  married
a Portuguese citizen, Ms DN, and had been issued with a residence card  upon
marriage as a family  member  of  an  EEA  national,  which  expired  on  13
September 2009.  The couple were divorced on 15 March 2010.  Shortly  after,
on 18 May 2010, the appellant applied for a residence card  as  confirmation
of his right to reside permanently in the UK.  The respondent  refused  that
application on 15 November 2010 on the  basis  that  there  was  a  lack  of
evidence to show either (i) that the appellant's  ex-spouse  was  exercising
Treaty rights on the termination of the  marriage,  contrary  to  regulation
10(5)(a) and (6) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2006 (as would be necessary for him to  qualify  for  a  retained  right  of
residence);  or  (ii)  that  he  had  resided  in  accordance   with   those
Regulations for a continuous period of five years  (as  would  be  necessary
for him to qualify for permanent residence  under  regulation15(1)(f)).  The
appellant appealed.  In a determination notified following a  hearing  on  4
January 2011 the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration Judge  Herlihy)  dismissed
his appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision.   The  IJ  considered  the
appellant could  not  qualify  because  it  had  not  been  shown  that  the
appellant's  ex-spouse  was  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the   5   years
immediately  preceding  the  divorce.   The  IJ  also  concluded  that   the
appellant had not shown that he lived  in  the  UK  continuously  since  the
marriage. The appellant was successful in obtaining a grant of permission.

2. In a decision dated 30 September 2010 the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  (Judge
Storey) decided that the First-tier Tribunal had  materially  erred  in  law
and its decision was to be set  aside.   The  IJ  had  been  wrong  to  have
focused exclusively on the  appellant's  circumstances  in  the  five  years
immediately preceding his divorce (i.e. between 15 March 2005 and  15  March
2010) and had wrongly considered  therefore  that  he  could  only  show  he
qualified for   permanent  residence  if  able  to  establish  that  he  had
acquired a retained right of residence.  The  IJ  had  failed  to  recognise
that the appellant's ex-spouse had been in the UK exercising  Treaty  rights
unbrokenly from the date of the marriage until the  date  of  divorce  (para
8.5) which was a period longer than five  years.   Following  the  Court  of
Justice ruling in Lassal (European citizenship) [2010] C-162/09 (07  October
2010) the IJ should have identified periods capable of qualifying  a  person
for a right of permanent residence under Directive 2004/38/EC  as  including
periods commencing before 30 April 2006, when  the  Directive  entered  into
force.  That  being  the  case,  the  appellant  had  acquired  a  right  of
permanent residence on 23 April 2009, i.e. five years after the  couple  had
married.  It was accepted that  during  that  period  the  appellant's  then
spouse was in the UK exercising Treaty  rights  continuously.   It  was  not
necessary for the couple to establish that  during  this  period  they  were
cohabiting, only that both were present in the UK:  see  PM  (EEA  -  spouse
-"residing with") Turkey [2011] UKUT 90 (IAC).  Hence  the  IJ  should  have
recognised that the appellant had an alternative route  for  qualifying  for
permanent residence separate from whether he  met  the  requirements  for  a
retained right of residence.

3. We turn to a matter not dealt with in the set-aside decision. On  further
analysis it seems to us that there was a further error on the  part  of  the
First-tier Tribunal.  The IJ appears to have dismissed the  appeal  for  the
additional reason that the appellant  had  not  shown  he  was  continuously
present in the UK, yet had not afforded him any opportunity to address  this
additional point.

4. Having set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision, UTJ Storey decided  it
was not possible to remake the decision  there  and  then  as  the  Tribunal
lacked evidence to establish whether or not,  in  addition  to  meeting  the
above requirements (relating to the exercise  by  the  ex-spouse  of  Treaty
rights for five continuous years from the date of marriage),  the  appellant
could show that during the relevant period he had himself been  continuously
present in the UK and in fairness he had to be afforded  an  opportunity  to
address the matter.

5. At the hearing the appellant gave evidence.  He said that he  had  stayed
in the UK continuously from the date of his marriage until the date  of  his
divorce, except for two short periods  in  2006,  one  in  October  when  he
travelled to the Netherlands  and  the  other  between  29  October  and  17
December when he went back to Nigeria  on  the  death  of  his  father.   In
support of his oral evidence he produced his Nigerian passport covering  the
relevant period which  showed  stamps  confirming  his  claimed  periods  of
absence.  He also produced a large lever arch file of documents relating  to
his presence in the UK during the period from March 2003 until the  present.
 It included a tenancy agreement, bank  accounts,  credit  card  statements,
telephone bills, Inland Revenue documents (including P60s) and a  number  of
documents relating to courses of study.  It is unnecessary to summarise  the
file's contents any further because having perused it Ms  Tanner  said  that
the respondent  now  fully  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  established
continuous presence in the UK over the  relevant  period  and  that  she  no
longer opposed the appellant's appeal.

6. In light of this concession it unnecessary for us to  say  anything  more
about the appellant's particular case, other than we are satisfied  that  on
23 April 2009 he had acquired a permanent right of residence and he has  not
since that date been absent from  the  UK  for  any  period  such  as  could
disentitle him to that  right.   Accordingly,  the  respondent  should  have
responded to his 15 November 2010 application  by  confirming  that  he  had
acquired a permanent right of  residence  under  regulation  15(1)(b).  This
provision reads as follows:


         "15(1)   The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
                  the UK permanently -


             (a)              an EEA national who has resided in the United
                      Kingdom in accordance with these  Regulations  for  a
                      continuous period of five years;
             (b)                     a family member of an EEA national who
                      is not himself an EEA national but who has resided in
                      the  United  Kingdom  with  the   EEA   national   in
                      accordance with those Regulations  for  a  continuous
                      period of five years."

7. Regulation 15(2) states that: "Once  acquired,  the  right  of  permanent
residence under this regulation shall be lost only through absence from  the
United Kingdom for a period exceeding two years".

8. Given the issues that arose during this appeal, it may assist if  we  add
the following general observations:

         a) Typically, the focus in EEA appeals involving family members  is
            on either or both (i) the nature of the  relationship  with  the
            EEA national/Union citizen; and (ii) the question of whether the
            EEA national/Union citizen has been exercising Treaty  right  in
            the UK over the relevant period. As can be seen from  the  facts
            of this case, however, what constitutes the relevant period  may
            be a matter requiring particular consideration. It needs  to  be
            borne in mind that sometimes a family member may have acquired a
            right of permanent residence on the basis of  historical  facts.
            In the  present  case,  for  example,  once  the  appellant  had
            established that his wife was exercising Treaty rights for  five
            continuous years since the date of marriage (and before  he  was
            divorced), then (subject to (d) below) he  was  from  that  date
            someone who had a right of permanent residence which  could  not
            be broken by absence from the UK unless in excess of two  years.




         b) Continuous residence in the UK of the applicant/appellant family
            member is also an essential requirement  for  proving  permanent
            residence under the 2006  Regulations,  as  is  clear  from  the
            wording of regulation 15(1)(b) which requires  that  to  acquire
            such a right a family member must have "resided  in  the  United
            Kingdom  with  the  EEA  national  in  accordance   with   these
            Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  five  years".   In  a
            similar vein, Article 16(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC extends  the
            right of permanent residence to  "family  members  who  are  not
            nationals of a Member State and have legally  resided  with  the
            Union citizen in the host state for a continuous period of  five
            years."


         c)  Whilst  often   it   may   not   be   in   dispute   that   the
            applicant/appellant family member has been in the UK during  the
            relevant period, that is not something which can  be  taken  for
            granted and it may sometimes become necessary on appeal for  the
            tribunal judge to make a finding on  the  matter  based  on  the
            evidence.  However, if, as here,  it  has  not  previously  been
            raised by the respondent, then procedural fairness dictates that
            an appellant must be afforded a proper opportunity to deal  with
            the issue. In this case, having found the IJ materially erred in
            law, the Tribunal put the appellant on notice  of  the  need  to
            produce evidence relating to his residence in the UK and, as  we
            have seen, the  evidence  he  produced  in  response  more  than
            sufficed to persuade the respondent to concede the appeal.


         d) Further, when assessing whether the  applicant/appellant  family
            member has resided in the UK continuously for  the  purposes  of
            qualifying for permanent residence, it  must  be  recalled  that
            regulation  3(2)  of  the   2006   Regulations   provides   that
            continuity of residence  is  not  affected  by  (a)  periods  of
            absence from the United Kingdom which do not exceed  six  months
            in total in any year; (b) periods of absence  from   the  United
            Kingdom on military service; or (c) any  one  absence  from  the
            United Kingdom not exceeding  twelve  months  for  an  important
            reason such as pregnancy, childbirth, serious illness, study  or
            vocational training or an overseas posting. Article 16(3) of the
            Directive is to similar effect.  Hence in the instant  case  the
            fact that there was nothing on the face of  the  evidence  which
            suggested that  the  appellant  had  had  a  period  of  absence
            anywhere near six months long made the IJ's  decision  to  query
            the matter on his own initiative even more curious.

         e) Finally, once a right of permanent residence has been  acquired,
            it can be lost only through the absence  from  the  host  Member
            State "for a period exceeding two consecutive years" (regulation
            15(2) of the 2006 Regulations; Article 16(4) of the Directive).


9. For the above reasons the First-tier Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law
and its decision is set aside.

10. The decision we re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
