

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Mumtaz (s. 85A - commencement order - adjournment hearing) Pakistan [2011]
UKUT 00472 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 November 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       THE PRESIDENT, MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                NASEER MUMTAZ
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Raif Rahman, Solicitor

The transitional  provision  in  article  3  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
(Commencement No 7 and Transitional Provisions) Order 2011,  concerning  the
commencement of s. 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
(Matters to be considered: new  evidence:  exceptions),  adopts  an  unusual
approach, in making the applicability of that section turn on whether  there
has been a hearing before the commencement date (23 May 2011). Whatever  the
problems such an approach may cause, it is plain that, for the  purposes  of
article 3, an oral hearing at which an application for  an  adjournment  was
considered by a judge (and granted)  was  a  hearing  for  the  purposes  of
article 3, with the result  that  section  85A  did  not  apply,  so  as  to
restrict the evidence that the  judge  could  consider  at  the  substantive
hearing.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State from a decision  of
    Immigration Judge Thew, promulgated 9 June 2011, whereby she allowed an
    appeal by Mr Mumtaz (the appellant before her) in respect of a decision
    made on 4 February 2011 refusing an extension  of  stay  as  a  student
    under the points based system. We gave our decision at  the  conclusion
    of the hearing.

 2. At the time of the  Home  Office  decision  there  was  a  gap  in  the
    information supplied. An appeal was lodged by Mr Mumtaz to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber.

 3. That appeal came before the First-tier Judge,  Judge  Cohen  on  the  5
    April, 2011.  On that occasion the representative of Mr Mumtaz  applied
    for an adjournment in order to present the evidence that was  available
    at the time of the decision and related to  the  decision  and  without
    which  the  application  may  not  have  succeeded.   The  judge  heard
    submissions;  the  Home  Office  were  represented  and   granted   the
    adjournment.

 4. The case next came before Immigration Judge Thew  on  the  6  June.  Mr
    Mumtaz had provided the evidence demonstrating  his  entitlement  under
    the points-based system.

 5. The judge considered the fact that in May 2011 an Order had  been  made
    bringing into effect section 19 of the UK Borders Act 2007 that limited
    the ability of the Tribunal to hear evidence that had not been tendered
    to the Secretary of State at the time of the decision in a points based
    appeal.

 6. At paragraphs 4 and 5 of her judgement the learned Judge said this:


      "4. ....The Commencement Order stated that the new  provision  applied
        to all appeals served  for  the  first  time  against  refusals  of
        application to remain in the United Kingdom under the points  based
        system regardless of the date that the appeal was lodged.


        5.  In the appeal before me the file showed that the  first  hearing
        was listed  for  the  5  April,  2011  when  Mr  Rahman  sought  an
        adjournment for the production of documents which  application  was
        granted by Immigration Judge Cohen.   In  these  circumstances  the
        hearing before me  was  not  the  first  hearing  and  consequently
        section 19 did not apply and it was open  to  me  to  consider  the
        evidence that was adduced concerning the Halifax Bank statement."

         Having considered the evidence she allowed the appeal.

 7. The sole issue in the present appeal is whether the Judge had correctly
    applied the Commencement Order on the facts of the  case  as  he  found
    them to  be.  The  Commencement  Order  is  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    (Commencement No 7 and Transitional Provisions) Order 2011 (SI No. 1293
    cc.53).

 8. Article 2 of the Order says:


        "Section 19 (Points-based applications: no new evidence on  appeal)
        of the UK Borders Act 2007 shall, subject to article 3,  come  into
        force on 23 May 2011."


          Under the heading "Transitional Provision", article 3 reads:


        "(1) The amendment made to the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
        Act 2002 by section 19 of the UK Borders Act  2007  will  not  have
        effect in relation to an appeal in respect of which  a  hearing  at
        the First-tier Tribunal of the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  has
        taken place before 23rd May 2011 and which is still pending.


        (2) For the purposes of this article, a hearing  is  where  one  or
        more Immigration Judges hear an appeal under section 82(1)  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against a decision  of
        the  Secretary  of  State  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal   of   the
        Immigration and Asylum Chamber and includes case management  review
        hearings"


        (3) For the purposes of this article an appeal is 'pending' when it
        has  been  instituted  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  but  has  not  yet  been  finally
        determined, withdrawn or abandoned or has not lapsed under  section
        99 of that Act."


 9. For the purpose of determining this appeal, we shall pass over  without
    comment the defective description of the changes made by the Tribunals,
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007.

10. Before us it was common ground that because  there  had  been  an  oral
    hearing at which  an  application  for  an  adjournment  was  made  and
    considered by the Immigration Judge there had  been  at  least  a  case
    management hearing in respect of this appeal. Consequently article 3(2)
    of the Commencement Order bit and section 19 was not applicable to  the
    decision.  We agree with the concession of Mr Bramble  to  this  effect
    and the submission  of  Mr  Rahman;  and  accordingly  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.

11.  It is to be noted, however, that a more difficult question might arise
    if in this particular case Mr Mumtaz had  applied  in  advance  of  the
    hearing for an adjournment as good practice encourages him to do so  as
    to avoid unnecessary hearings before the Immigration Judge.

12. It is somewhat unusual for a transitional provision  to  apply  not  by
    reference to the date of the Home Secretary's decision  or  indeed  the
    lodgement of the appeal but by reference to a hearing including a  case
    management hearing, as case management hearings both in the  First-tier
    and Upper Tribunal are frequently conducted on the papers on the  basis
    of representations received without the attendance of the parties.   It
    would be bizarre if the efficient practices of  the  Tribunal  were  to
    lead to appellants being disadvantaged as to the  material  they  could
    adduce in support of an appeal.

13. However, while that question remains to be decided on another day,  the
    judge made no error of law in deciding as he did in  this  appeal.  The
    Secretary of State's appeal from that decision will be dismissed.








                               Signed


                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber







