

                                          [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  Kabaghe (appeal from outside UK - fairness) Malawi [2011] UKUT 00473(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 November 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |



                                   Before
                       MR JUSTICE BLAKE, THE PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             BETTY SUSAN KABAGHE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

1) A person who has been removed from the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  an
immigration decision may not appeal against that decision to the  First-tier
Tribunal on human rights grounds (except where a human  rights/asylum  claim
has been certified as clearly unfounded.

2) The statutory jurisdiction to consider whether  an  immigration  decision
is in  accordance  with  the  law  includes  consideration  of  whether  the
decision has been made fairly, because there is a public  law  duty  on  the
Secretary of State to act fairly.

3) Where an appellant challenges a removal decision on the basis that it  is
unlawful and unfair,  and  gives  an  apparently  credible  account  of  the
treatment constituting the unfairness, the judge is entitled to expect  some
form of evidential response from the respondent, identifying  what  happened
and what factors informed the  decision  making.  As  the  AIT  held  in  EO
(Turkey) [2007] UKAIT 00062, the  respondent  should  demonstrate  that  the
relevant considerations  in  paragraph  395C  of  HC  395  were  taken  into
account, in reaching the decision that the appellant should be removed.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   This is an appeal from a decision of  Judge  Place  sitting  in  the
      First-tier Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber on 27 January 2011.
      He dismissed the appellant's out of country appeal against a  decision
      to remove her from the United Kingdom made  on  4  April,  2010.   The
      judge concluded that no valid grounds of appeal had been placed before
      him, and in particular the appellant could not lodge an  appeal  based
      on human rights grounds once she had  been  removed  from  the  United
      Kingdom.


   2.   The relevant history is as follows.  The appellant is a  citizen  of
      Malawi, born in 1954.  She arrived in the United Kingdom in March 2006
      with a valid student visa issued in Botswana granting  her  permission
      to enter and remain in the United Kingdom until  February  2008.   Her
      student visa was extended to April 2009  when  she  made  an  in  time
      application for an extension of stay in order to study  for  a  Higher
      Diploma at  the  Leicester  Business  Academy.  This  application  was
      refused  in  October  2009  for  her  failure  to  meet  the   various
      requirements of the rule.  She  appealed  on  3  November,  2009.  She
      lodged fresh material, submitting that the educational  institute  was
      indeed a registered sponsor and she could maintain  herself  from  her
      own funds.  She did not ask for an oral hearing of that appeal.  By s.
      3C(2) of the Immigration Act 1971 her  leave  to  remain  is  extended
      whilst an appeal is pending, ignoring any possibility of an appeal out
      of time.

   3.    On 30 November 2009 the AIT wrote to  the  appellant  at  her  last
      known address, explaining that any written representations in  support
      of the appeal had to be received by 4 January  2010.   Thereafter  the
      case was placed before a judge for a paper hearing.  He considered the
      matter and reached his conclusion on 5 February 2010.  On the  law  as
      he understood it to be, the appellant had not made out her case and he
      accordingly dismissed the appeal.  This decision  was  promulgated  by
      being sent by  1st  class  post  on  9  February  2010.  Applying  the
      provisions of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
      2005 any application for reconsideration of the decision and/or appeal
      to a higher body should  have  been  made  by  17  February  2010.  No
      application was made in time  for  further  appeal,  consequently  the
      appellant's appeal rights were exhausted on 17 February and from  then
      on she had no leave to remain.

   4.   The next material event was that  on  4  April  2010  the  appellant
      complained to the local police about loss of money from  her  address.
      A check revealed that she had no authority to remain.  An  Immigration
      Officer was called.  She was arrested as  an  overstayer,  interviewed
      and served with Form I51A Part 1, revealing that she was liable to  be
      detained as someone with no authority to be in the UK.  Part 2 of that
      Form was also served that day, indicating that  a  decision  had  been
      made to remove her to Malawi. The appellant was detained  pending  the
      giving of removal directions to  Malawi  on  8  April,  to  which  she
      responded with representations that she should be removed to  Botswana
      which is where her husband and grown up children were living and where
      she had previously lived before coming to the United Kingdom.  She was
      removed to Botswana on 12 April.

   5.    During the time the matter was under consideration and  before  she
      was removed, she had written on 7 April to the  UKBA  explaining  that
      she had not received notice of the result of her  appeal  in  February
      2010 and did not know that the appeal had  been  dismissed.   Although
      she was advised to seek legal advice, it  does  not  appear  that  any
      legal representations by a legal advisor were made on her behalf.

   6.  The appellant wrote a lengthy letter on 21 May 2010 in support of her
      appeal.  She contends that the decision to remove her was unlawful and
      discriminatory because she had not received the decision refusing  her
      appeal and consequently through no fault of her own did not know  that
      she had to leave the  United  Kingdom.  She  states  that  during  her
      interview with the  immigration  officer  she  pointed  this  out  and
      received an apology for the failure to serve  her.  She  explains  her
      dismay that having called the police to investigate the fact that  she
      was a victim of theft she found herself arrested as an overstayer. She
      points out that she would hardly have contacted the police if she  had
      known her leave had expired. She was seeking  legal  advice  while  in
      detention but was not given an  advisor  able  to  act  for  her.  She
      explained that she was refusing to go because  she  wanted  her  money
      back, which she could not achieve whilst in detention. She  complained
      of the decision to detain her pending removal  and  pointed  out  that
      none of the reasons given in the notice served on her  were  accurate.
      She contended that she was treated  so  unfairly  that  the  inference
      should be drawn that she was the victim of racial discrimination.


   The Judge's decision


   7.  In his short determination, judge Place thought  that  the  appellant
      may have been confused as to whether this was an appeal concerned with
      her extension of stay application as opposed to removal.  It  is  true
      that the administration had attached the file for the variation appeal
      to the removal appeal, but the letter of May 2010 makes it quite clear
      what the appellant was complaining about  and  we  see  no  reason  to
      believe the appellant was confused  as  to  the  decision  subject  to
      appeal.  Judge Place found no evidence of racial discrimination and at
      [11] concluded:

         "Whilst it  is  unfortunate  that  the  appellant  was  not  sooner
         informed of the Tribunal's decision against her in relation to  the
         student visa, the fact remains that once her appeal  was  dismissed
         she had no legal basis to remain in the United Kingdom.   There  is
         no evidence before me of any valid ground  of  appeal  against  the
         respondent's decision of the  4  April,  2010  and  I  dismiss  the
         appeal".

   8.    When the appellant received Judge Place's decision she appealed  to
      the Upper Tribunal on 12 February 2011, complaining that the Judge had
      not dealt with the central contention in her case, namely that she was
      not subject to removal under s. 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
      1999 as she had not knowingly remained beyond the time limited by  her
      leave and had not used deception.  The  Judge,  like  the  immigration
      officer, had accepted this lack of knowledge but  did  not  go  on  to
      consider the legal consequences.


   9.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted because there
      was some doubt as to whether Judge Place  had  fully  dealt  with  the
      appeal on the information that was before him.


   Error of law


  10. There is a short answer to the central contention of  the  appellant's
      case. For the purpose of liability to remove under  s.  10(1)  of  the
      Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  it  is  not  necessary  for   the
      authorities to  demonstrate  that  the  appellant  knowingly  remained
      beyond the period of her leave.  It is sufficient if she did  in  fact
      remain beyond the period of her leave.


  11.  On the facts recited above this indeed was the case, irrespective  of
      whether or not the decision promulgated on 9 February ever reached the
      appellant at her the address to which it was sent by post.

  12. There is no information on  the  file  to  suggest  that  service  was
      ineffective, but effective delivery by post can never be  assured  and
      the appellant may well have a point when she says that she  would  not
      have gone to the Police Station  if  she  thought  she  had  irregular
      status. She also points to the  fact  that  on  the  25  February  she
      received a letter from the Tribunal  returning  her  documents.   This
      suggests that the Tribunal had the  accurate  address  on  record  and
      there is no explanation as to why a decision should not have been sent
      to her.

  13.  A lack of knowledge that the appeal has been dismissed  goes  to  the
      question of whether she knowingly overstayed,  which  is  relevant  to
      whether she was guilty of a criminal offence under s. 24(1)(b) of  the
      Immigration Act 1971 rather than whether she  is  liable  to  removal.
      There is abundant authority for the proposition that  knowledge  of  a
      breach of conditions of entry or remaining is not a  prerequisite  for
      the exercise of  administrative  power  of  removal:  see  Macdonald's
      Immigration Law and Practice, 8th edition at 16.7 and 16.41, citing  R
      v Governor of Ashford Remand Centre ex p Bouzagou [1983] Imm AR 69 and
      Hanif [1985] Imm AR 57. However, the cases and the textbook both  make
      the point that absence of knowledge of a breach of the terms of  entry
      is highly material to whether removal is  justified  as  a  matter  of
      discretion and by reference to the factors set out in the  immigration
      rules.

  14.  The judge was accordingly right to find that there  was  a  power  to
      serve a notice upon the appellant that she was liable to detention and
      removal from the United Kingdom under s. 10  of  the  1999  Act  as  a
      person who had remained in the United Kingdom without leave.

  15. However, if the judge had engaged with the  appellant's  complaint  as
      set out in her May 2010 letter, he should have  gone  on  to  consider
      whether the exercise of the power was in accordance with the  law  and
      any applicable immigration rules. This was a litigant in person (or  a
      self represented litigant as the Civil Justice Council in  its  recent
      report  prefers  to  say)  appealing  to   an   expert   Tribunal   in
      circumstances where she is unable to  attend  to  advance  the  appeal
      herself. Although there is no broad  ranging  duty  to  explore  every
      avenue in a complex scheme of immigration law, rules, policy and  case
      law to see if there is a  point  that  may  assist  an  un-represented
      appellant,  the  judge  must  take  the  trouble  to  understand   the
      appellant's case and  evaluate  it  against  the  law  and  the  rules
      applicable to it.


  16. On the material before  him,  there  was  nothing  to  contradict  the
      appellant's claim that the Immigration Officer was willing  to  accept
      that she had not received notice of the adverse appeal  decision.  The
      judge appears to have reached the same conclusion. It is obvious  that
      this is a highly material consideration to how  the  appellant  should
      have been treated.

  17.  The legislative  changes  made  in  2000  left  those  without  leave
      susceptible to administrative removal as  opposed  to  a  decision  to
      deport where there was an in-country right of appeal.

  18. A decision to remove is an immigration decision that carries  a  right
      of appeal under s. 82(2)(g) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
      Act 2002.  However, that right of appeal can only  be  exercised  from
      abroad unless in pursuance of s. 92(4) of the 2002 Act  the  appellant
      has made an asylum claim or human rights claim whilst  in  the  United
      Kingdom.

  19. The grounds of appeal  are  set  out  in  s.  84(1)  and  include  the
      contentions  that  the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with   the
      immigration rules, and/or would breach the UK's obligations under  the
      EU Treaties, the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Act 1998.

  20.   Paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules HC 395 provides:

         "Before a decision to remove under Section 10 is given, regard will
         be had to all the relevant factors known to the Secretary of State,
         including:
                i) age;
               ii) length of residence in the United Kingdom;
              iii) strength of connections with the United Kingdom;
               iv)  personal  history  including  character,   conduct   and
                   employment record;
                v) domestic circumstances;
               vi) previous criminal record and the nature  of  any  offence
                   for which the person has been convicted;
              vii) compassionate circumstances;
             viii) any representations received on the person's behalf.


             In the case of family members the factors listed in paragraphs
             365 to 368 must also be taken into account."


  21. There was little information on the files before  us  as  to  decision
      making process in this case. There was no record of interview  and  no
      report from the immigration officer who served the  removal  decision.
      We asked Mr Bramble to make some enquiries to what had happened on the
      4 April.  In particular:


              i. Was consideration given to para 395C;
             ii.  Was  an  opportunity  given  to  the  appellant  to   make
                 representations before a decision to remove was taken?
            iii. Was there any  reason  to  doubt  her  case  that  she  had
                 remained at the address she had given to  the  Home  Office
                 and the AIT?


  22. We adjourned the matter during the course of  the  morning  for  those
      enquiries to be made. We were informed that the  computer  system  had
      been consulted and Mr Bramble was able to tell us that  there  was  no
      record that para 395C had ever been considered in this case.  He  also
      confirmed that the appellant had always remained at the address  known
      to the authorities.


  23. He readily accepted that a decision to remove that  is  taken  without
      consideration of  the  factors  set  out  in  para  395C  was  not  in
      accordance with the immigration rules and also not a lawful  decision,
      as the law requires the decision maker to consider matters relevant to
      the exercise of discretion to remove before a lawful decision is made.
      He therefore conceded the appeal on  the  ground  that  the  appellant
      identified in her grounds of appeal, albeit not for the  same  reasons
      that she relied on, that the appeal ought to  be  allowed  as  not  in
      accordance with the law.

  24. We entirely agree with Mr Bramble's  concession  on  this  issue.   It
      applies the law known to UKBA and the judge. The AIT decided  as  much
      in the case of EO (Turkey) [2007] UKAIT 62. The italicised summary  of
      the decision reads:


         "(8) In determining an appeal against a decision (whether before or
         after 20 July 2006) to give directions under s 10 (as distinct from
         directions for removal of an illegal entrant) the  Tribunal  should
         first consider whether the decision shows, by its terms,  that  the
         decision-maker took into account the factors set out  in  paragraph
         395C and exercised a discretion on the basis of them.  If  it  does
         not, the appeal should be allowed on the basis that it was  not  in
         accordance with the law and that  the  appellant  awaits  a  lawful
         decision by the Secretary of  State.   If  the  decision  was  made
         properly, the Tribunal should secondly consider whether the removal
         of  the  appellant  would  breach  his  rights  under  the  Refugee
         Convention or the ECHR, and, if not, thirdly whether the discretion
         under paragraph 395C should be exercised  differently,  bearing  in
         mind that paragraph 395C does not have the  restrictions  contained
         in the 'new' paragraph 364. The process is somewhat similar to that
         under the 'old' paragraph 364."

            At [44]: the AIT reached its conclusions:


         "The first is that, where the decision to give  removal  directions
         under s10 does not clearly demonstrate a  proper  consideration  of
         the matters set out  in  paragraph  395C  and  the  exercise  of  a
         discretion to make the decision, the decision will be one which  is
         challengeable on the ground that it is not in accordance  with  the
         law, and the result should normally be that an  appellant's  appeal
         is allowed on that basis only, leaving the Secretary  of  State  to
         make a new and lawful decision in accordance with  the  Immigration
         Rules."


  25. Further for reasons given at [13] and [16] above one of  the  relevant
      compassionate considerations known to the Secretary of  State  at  the
      material time was that the appellant had remained at  her  address  on
      the record and had not received  the  AIT's  decision  dismissing  her
      appeal.

  26. In the circumstances, we conclude that Judge Place's consideration  of
      the issue at [7] in the  light  of  his  duty  set  out  at  [15]  was
      inadequate. He should have proceeded beyond the existence of  a  power
      to make a removal decision to examine whether  the  decision  made  to
      remove the appellant was in accordance with the rules and the law. His
      failure to  inquire  further  is  a  material  error  of  law  and  we
      accordingly set aside his decision dismissing the appeal  and  re-make
      it for ourselves.

Conclusions

  27.  There are three further issues of concern in this case. We spell them
      out in the hope that the UKBA will be able to learn from the  problems
      identified in this case:  see  Administrative  Justice  and  Tribunals
      Council's report and recommendations "Right First Time", June 2011.


  28. First, one of the reasons why permission to  appeal  was  granted  was
      some concern whether Judge  Place  was  right  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant could not rely on human rights grounds in an out of  country
      appeal against removal. For reasons that we set out below, we conclude
      he was right to so find, although the terms of the  notice  served  on
      the appellant are confusing. The notice said:


         "You were served with Form IS 151A on the 4 April informing you  of
         your immigration status and liability to detention and removal.   A
         decision has been taken to remove you from the United Kingdom.


         You are entitled to appeal this decision under Section 82(1) of the
         Nationality, Immigration Asylum Act, after you have left the United
         Kingdom.  A notice of appeal is enclosed. ....


         The appeal must be made on one of the following grounds:
         .......
          that the decision is unlawful because it is incompatible with your
         rights under the European Convention on Human Rights..."


  29.  The statutory scheme is complex but may be summarised:-


       i) It is an exception to  the  broad  rule  that  an  appeal  against
          administrative removal can only take place when the  appellant  is
          out of the country if  the person concerned has made a claim  that
          removal would be contrary to various obligations, including  those
          under the Human Rights Act 1998 (ss. 92(4) and 84(1)(g)).
      ii) Although the language of s. 92(4) is broad - "has made ...a  human
          rights claim, while in the United  Kingdom"-  its  meaning  is  be
          found in the  statutory  context  that  excludes  purely  historic
          claims that have been previously disposed of on  appeal  (see  the
          decision of the Court of Appeal in BA (Nigeria)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
          119 at [10]) and, probably, claims that are  made  for  the  first
          time in response to the decision.


     iii) Where a relevant human rights claim is  made  before  the  removal
          decision, the appeal is to take place before the person is removed
          unless the Secretary of State certifies it  as  clearly  unfounded
          under s. 94(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
          2002.

      iv) In the event of certification s. 94(9) provides  that  the  appeal
          can be considered as if the  person  had  not  been  removed  even
          though they are outside the United Kingdom.

       v) Section 95 provides that  a  person  who  is  outside  the  United
          Kingdom may not appeal on the ground  that  the  removal  will  be
          unlawful and contrary to  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human
          Rights Act save under s. 94(9).

      vi) We further understand that it is the Secretary of  State's  policy
          where human rights etc representations are made after the  removal
          decision to revoke the decision and reach a fresh  decision.  (See
          UKBA   Directorate   Enforcement   Instructions    and    Guidance
          Administrative Removals Procedures  chapter 51 last  bullet  point
          (accessed 28 November 2011)):

             "If asylum or HR is claimed after serving the IS151A  part  2,
             and removal directions are in place then  refer  to  OSCU  for
             advice before suspending  the  removal  directions.  Otherwise
             withdraw the IS151A part 2 and where the applicant will get an
             in country appeal right serve an IS151B with  any  refusal  of
             the claim)"
.
     vii) Where the representations amount  to  a  fresh  claim  within  the
          meaning of paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration  Rules  it  is  the
          Secretary of State's duty to make a  fresh  immigration  decision:
          see BA (Nigeria) as applied in ZA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA  Civ  926;
          [2011] QB 722 at [51] to [59].


  30.  Thus a notice given to an appellant stating that she can appeal  from
      abroad on human rights grounds  is  misleading.   It  is  particularly
      unfortunate if such a notice is given to an unrepresented  person  who
      is in detention and facing summary removal.

  31. In fact there is no reason to believe  that  the  appellant  made  any
      representations that to remove her from the United  Kingdom  would  be
      contrary to the Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human  Rights  Act.  She
      explained that her husband and children lived in Botswana and  if  she
      were to be removed she should be removed there. She was  unwilling  to
      make a voluntary departure whilst in detention because her concern was
      to retrieve the money that she said had been stolen from her.   In her
      May 2010 representations  the  focus  as  already  noted  was  on  the
      legality of the removal decision rather than the  suggestion  that  it
      breached her human rights.

  32. Second, she did however complain about the decision to detain her, and
      this could be said to raise an issue under Article 5 of the ECHR.  She
      drew  attention  to  the  reasons  for  detention  notice,  where  the
      following boxes on the pro-forma were ticked to explain the decision:

         Box B -  "There  is  insufficient  reliable  information  available
         information to decide on whether to grant you  temporary  admission
         or release."


         Box 7 - "You have  not  produced  satisfactory  evidence  .........
         nationality or lawful basis to be in the United Kingdom."


         Box 8 - "you have previously failed or refused to leave the  United
         Kingdom when required to do so."


  33.   The appellant's commentary on each of these grounds is pertinent:


     i) UKBA knew precisely who  the  appellant  was  and  her  immigration
        history from 2006 to 2010, and they moreover knew that she remained
        at her address in Nottingham that she had given for the purpose  of
        the extension application and appeal.
    ii) She had supplied a valid passport  to UKBA when called on to do so,
        had submitted this passport in connection with the appeal  and,  as
        we understand it, the passport had been picked up from her premises
        when the police visited and was with UKBA, so there was no basis to
        query her nationality.
   iii) If it was accepted that the appellant had not received  the  notice
        of the dismissal of the appeal  (as  the  appellant  said,  without
        contradiction) there was no evidential basis for a conclusion  that
        she had failed or refused to leave the United Kingdom when required
        to do so.   There  can  no  failure  or  refusal  unless  there  is
        knowledge of the requirement.

  34.  In summary there are good grounds to believe that not only was  every
      reason   given for the decision to detain wrong but was known  at  the
      time to be wrong (or should have been known). If this  is  right,  not
      only was the decision to remove the appellant contrary to the law  for
      a failure to consider the relevant circumstances, but the decision  to
      detain her for no valid reason also has every appearance of being  one
      that it was not open to the immigration officer to make, and  violated
      both her common law right of liberty and her right under Article  5(1)
      of the ECHR not to be arbitrarily detained (see R  (MXL)  [2010]  EWHC
      2397 (Admin) and Walumba Lumba [2011] UKSC 12.


  35.  The issue of the legality of detention is not one that is for  us  to
      adjudicate on. The jurisdiction of the First-tier and Upper  Tribunals
      is concerned with the legality of immigration decisions as set out  in
      the  statute  and  not  with  ancillary  decisions  related  to   such
      decisions. If the appellant seeks redress by way of damages  for  what
      may be an unlawful detention for a period of up to 8 days  she  should
      promptly communicate with the Home Office and would be well advised to
      seek legal assistance in the United Kingdom to pursue it.

  36.  Third, we remind immigration  judges  and  the  respondent  that  the
      statutory jurisdiction to consider whether an immigration decision  is
      in accordance with the  law  includes  consideration  of  whether  the
      decision has been made fairly because there is a public  law  duty  on
      the Secretary of State to act fairly:   see  discussion  in  Macdonald
      Eighth Edition at 19.09 citing Singh  v  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
      [1986] Imm AR 352;  D.S. Abdi v SSHD [1996] Imm AR 148;   BO (Nigeria)
      [2004] UKIAT 00026; AG (Kosovo) [2007]  UKAIT  00082;   AA  (Pakistan)
      [2008] UKAIT  00003 and HH (Iraq) [2008] UKAIT 00051. These principles
      have been applied in the Upper Tribunal: see Thakur  (PBS  decision  -
      common law fairness)  Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT  151  (IAC)  and  Patel
      (revocation of sponsor licence  -  fairness)  India  [2011]  UKUT  211
      (IAC).

  37.  Where the appellant challenges a removal decision  on the basis  that
      it is unlawful and unfair, and gives an apparently credible account of
      the treatment  constituting the unfairness, the immigration  judge  is
      entitled  to  expect   some  form  of  evidential  response  from  the
      respondent identifying what  happened when and what  factors  informed
      the decision making. There was no information provided on the file  as
      to how and why the decision to  remove  was  reached  apart  from  the
      reasons for the detention summary that has turned  out  to  be  wholly
      inaccurate and an immigration summary  that  is  both  incomplete  and
      silent on the material issue.

  38. We note that that the respondent  was  not  represented  before  Judge
      Place and so he would not have been able to ask for the  inquiries  to
      be made that Mr Bramble has helpfully conducted for our benefit.  This
      is a completely unsatisfactory state of affairs.  While  we  recognise
      that resources are scarce and invidious choices need to be made  about
      where to deploy representatives, the judge must be able  to  determine
      the appeal on accurate information from the respondent supplied in one
      form or another, and in any event internal review  of  such  decisions
      should have identified the  procedural  failings  in  this  case  long
      before the Judge was called on to make a judicial decision.


  39. We repeat what was said by the AIT in EO (Turkey) at [44] quoted above
      at [24] namely the decision maker should demonstrate that the relevant
      considerations were taken into account: either  by  a  contemporaneous
      file note made by the officer, or a reasoned decision made by  someone
      with access to the  relevant  information.   We  note  that  the  UKBA
      Enforcement  Instructions  and  Guidance  "Instructions  on   Applying
      Paragraphs 364 to 368 and  395C  of  the  Immigration  Rules"  chapter
      53.1.1 (accessed 28 November 2011) contemplate that a record  is  made
      of the relevant circumstances:

         "Before a decision  to  remove  is  taken  on  a  case,  the  case-
         owner/operational staff must consider all  known  relevant  factors
         (both  positive  and  negative).  It  is  important  to  cover  the
         compassionate factors in the transcription of the interview and  to
         record them and the fact that you have discussed them with the UKBA
         officer authorising removal, on the local file minute or IS126E and
         UKBA  internal  database  records  (CID).  Removal  should  not  be
         considered  in  any  case  which  qualifies  for  leave  under  the
         Immigration  Rules,  existing  policies  or  where  it   would   be
         inappropriate to do so under this policy."

  40. In the absence of such information  the  judge  will  have  to  decide
      whether to allow the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  lack  of  the
      information is probative of the fact that the relevant  considerations
      were not taken into account, or adjourn for further  inquiries  to  be
      made, causing expense, inconvenience  and  delay,  all  of  which  are
      contrary to the overriding objective of Tribunal justice.

  41.  In the light of above we re-make the decision as follows:-

        a. The decision is not in accordance with  the  Immigration  Rules,
           because  there  is  no  evidence  from  the  Home  Office   that
           consideration was given to the relevant rules before the removal
           decision was made.
        b. The appellant's claim that she had not received  the  notice  of
           decision on appeal was a material consideration in the  exercise
           of discretion as to whether she should be  removed,  or  removed
           when she was, in the circumstances that she was.  A  person  who
           has only just learned of an adverse decision but of  whom  there
           is no reason to believe that they would abscond  would  normally
           be  expected  to  be  given  a   reasonable   period   to   make
           representations and/or arrangements for a  voluntary  departure.
           Although the claim was  not  disputed  there  is  no  reason  to
           believe that it was a circumstance that was taken into account.
        c. The decision was not in accordance with the law because the  law
           requires  the  decision  maker  to  inquire  into  the  relevant
           circumstances  and  consider  them  before  making   a   removal
           decision. There is no evidence that this was done, and  we  have
           been informed positively it was not done.
        d. The decision to remove and detain  pending  removal  appears  to
           have been based  on  irrelevant  considerations  that  were  not
           accurate and were known or should have  been  known  not  to  be
           accurate.
        e. We accordingly allow the appeal.


  42.  We have considered whether any further direction is expedient to give
      effect to this appeal under s. 87(1) of the 2002 Act. We have declared
      the decision to remove the appellant to be an unlawful one. She  might
      well have been the subject of a lawful decision if  all  the  relevant
      factors had been considered  and  she  had  been  unwilling  to  leave
      voluntarily. The appellant is now in Botswana where she has  been  for
      the best part of eighteen months. If she now has any claim to re-enter
      the United Kingdom within the scheme of immigration  control  she  can
      apply for entry clearance for that purpose, and the  previous  removal
      will not count against her, since it was not lawfully  taken.  If  the
      appellant seeks compensation for unlawful detention and /or breach  of
      her right to liberty and security under Article 5 ECHR she  will  have
      to issue separate proceedings. No further directions  will  be  given,
      and the respondent is not therefore obliged  to  bring  the  appellant
      back to the United Kingdom.


  43. We express the hope that the respondent will review procedures in  the
      light of the observations made in this judgment and  improve  practice
      to ensure that decisions are taken into accordance with  the  law  and
      the rules and sufficient evidence of this is provided  to  the  appeal
      judge. We are grateful to Mr Bramble for the assistance he provided in
      this appeal.



                               Signed




                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber







