

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   JO and others (foreign marriage - recognition) Nigeria [2010] UKUT 478
                                    (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 11 November 2010                  |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before

                          MR JUSTICE KENNETH PARKER
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WAUMSLEY


                                   Between

                                     JO
                                     PO
                                     BO
                                     BO
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:     No Representative
For the Respondent:   Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

"An Immigration Judge should not go behind  evidence  of  a  certificate  of
naturalisation as an Italian citizen on the  basis  of  concerns  about  the
bona fides of the marriage that resulted in the naturalisation. It would  be
contrary to public policy for  the  Immigration  Judge  to  dispute  Italian
nationality or the legal validity of the marriage resulting from it."


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by JO (aged 20), PO (aged 6), BO (aged 11)  and  her
      twin BO (aged 11) against the dismissal dated 24 August  2010  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal of  their  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department refusing their  application
      for a residence card as confirmation of a right of  residence  in  the
      United Kingdom as the daughters of an EEA national  exercising  Treaty
      rights, namely their father MO.


   2. On 6  November  2009  the  Secretary  of  State  had  written  to  the
      Appellants requesting that their birth certificates  be  submitted  as
      evidence of their relationship as family  members.   No  response  was
      received to that request and the application  was  therefore  refused.
      The sponsor in this case holds both Nigerian and Italian  nationality.
      He stated that he had married  an  Italian  national  in  1993.   That
      marriage had enabled him, under Italian law, as he represented  it  to
      us, to  acquire  Italian  citizenship  in  addition  to  his  Nigerian
      citizenship.  He had never lived in Italy but made one visit in  1997.
      He divorced his Italian wife in 2001 but it appears that  he  retained
      his Italian nationality.  Before the Secretary of State and before the
      First-tier Tribunal he produced an original passport  to  substantiate
      his claim to Italian citizenship and  at  the  hearing  before  us  he
      produced a passport that had been recently  issued  in  November  2010
      that he said was to replace an  earlier  one-year  passport  that,  in
      turn, had replaced an earlier ten year passport issued  in  1999.   We
      need to stress that the Secretary of State has not  taken  issue  with
      the sponsor's Italian nationality either in the  decision  or  in  the
      appeal proceedings.


   3. On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the judge concluded that his  so-
      called marriage to  the  Italian  national  was,  to  put  the  matter
      bluntly, a sham.  Accordingly, the sponsor  had  simply  deceived  the
      Italian authorities into  believing  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
      subsisting marriage and it was on that false footing that the  Italian
      authorities had accepted his application for Italian citizenship.  The
      judge was, understandably, concerned that the sponsor was, in  effect,
      seeking to rely  upon  fraudulent  arrangements  in  order  to  obtain
      benefits under European Union law and that public authorities  in  the
      United Kingdom, which would include both the Secretary  of  State  and
      the courts, should not allow such fraudulent arrangements to  found  a
      valid claim under European Union law.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal also found that limited weight could be  given
      to the birth certificates which had been obtained very long after  the
      birth of these children  (see  paragraph  12  of  the  Determination).
      Furthermore, insofar as the sponsor relied upon a DNA profiling report
      from LGC there was no satisfactory evidence as  to  when  the  samples
      required for DNA profiling were taken from the Appellants and  nothing
      to show that the right samples were taken from the right people.

   5. Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was given on 3  September  2010.
      This appeal, therefore, raises two short points:  First, was the First-
      tier Tribunal entitled to enquire into the genuineness of the marriage
      to  the  Italian  citizen  in  order  to  conclude  that  the  Italian
      nationality had been obtained by  fraudulent  arrangements?    Second,
      can the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal as to  the  relationship
      between the Appellants and their sponsor lawfully stand?

   6. On the first issue it seems, with respect to the First-tier  Tribunal,
      that it would be inappropriate  for  the  public  authorities  in  the
      United Kingdom to seek to investigate the circumstances of a  marriage
      that has been recognised by the authorities in another Member State of
      the European Union, namely Italy, and that has been  recognised  as  a
      genuine marriage under Italian law.  It was on that basis, as we  have
      been led to believe, that the Italian citizenship was acquired.  Again
      it appears to us to be inappropriate for the public authorities in the
      United Kingdom to question whether the grant  of  Italian  citizenship
      was valid, having regard to the alleged circumstances in which it  was
      granted.  It appears to us that as a  matter  of  comity  such  issues
      would need to be explored in Italy and their  final  resolution  could
      only properly be decided by public authorities in Italy.

   7. We, therefore, conclude that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  by
      embarking upon the exercise that it did.  Indeed at  the  hearing  the
      representative of the Secretary of  State  accepted  that  the  United
      Kingdom was bound by the recognition  by  the  public  authorities  in
      Italy both of the validity of the marriage and of the grant of Italian
      citizenship.  In other words, the Secretary of State does not maintain
      either that the sponsor is not an Italian citizen or  that  he  cannot
      rely upon such rights as European  Union  law  accords  to  him  as  a
      citizen of another Member State.

   8. That leaves, therefore, only the second question.  We  agree  entirely
      with the conclusion reached by the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  little
      weight  could  be  attached  to  the  birth  certificates  that   were
      submitted.  However, having given the matter careful consideration, we
      do not believe that the finding  in  relation  to  the  DNA  profiling
      report can properly stand.  Although we fully recognise  the  concerns
      of the First- tier Tribunal about the robustness of that material,  we
      have come to the conclusion that it is sufficiently reliable.  We note
      that it is nowhere a requirement of the relevant regulations that only
      a birth certificate can be relied upon for the  relevant  purpose  and
      the DNA report was properly admissible in relation to  that  question.
      Although it might theoretically be possible that the sponsor  arranged
      for four other  individuals  to  attend  to  be  DNA  profiled,  those
      individuals in turn would have to have had a very  close  relationship
      with the sponsor, and the alternative scenario that such  arrangements
      had been made with four people other than these Appellants in order to
      deceive the Secretary of State, appear so  unlikely  that  it  can  be
      dismissed. We are prepared to accept that that evidence was,  and  is,
      sufficient to show the claimed relationship between  the  sponsor  and
      the Appellants.


   9. We therefore resolve both of the relevant  issues  in  favour  of  the
      Appellants and accordingly allow this appeal.  The Appellants have, on
      the material before us, satisfied the criteria for the issue  to  them
      of residence cards as confirmation of their rights of residence in the
      United Kingdom as the daughters of an EEA national  exercising  Treaty
      rights under reg 7(1) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006.






   Signed
         Date






   Mr Justice Kenneth Parker




