
[pic]
   Upper Tribunal
   (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


   Haque (s 86(2) - adjournment not required) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT
   00481(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




   |Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9th June 2011                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |




                                   Before


                               MR JUSTICE KING
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL




                                   Between


                                SHAMSUL HAQUE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


   Representation:


   For the Appellant:  Miss C Hulse, of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Moghal
                       Solicitors & Advocates.
   For the Respondent: Mr R Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


An Immigration Judge is obliged to determine  a  ground  of  appeal  brought
under section 84(1)(g) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,
even if the appellant raises for the first time in  his  grounds  of  appeal
that he is a refugee.  There is no obligation to adjourn any hearing  before
the First-tier Tribunal in order to allow the appellant  to  be  interviewed
by the Secretary of State.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on the 22 April 1970  who
    claims to have first entered the United Kingdom in  2001.  This  is  an
    appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on
    the 26th of November 2010 dismissing his appeal against the decision of
    the Respondent of 13 September 2010 to give directions for his  removal
    from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant. These removal directions
    had been made consequent upon the decision of the Respondent to  refuse
    the Appellant's  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The sole ground of appeal  for  which  permission  to  appeal  has  been
    granted concerns the refusal of the Immigration Judge at the  outset  of
    the  hearing  to  adjourn  the  hearing  upon  the  application  of  the
    Appellant's  legal  representative  so  that  the  Appellant  could   be
    interviewed - presumably by the Secretary of State - in relation to "the
    asylum element of his claim" (to use the phraseology of paragraph  3  of
    the determination) which then formed part of his grounds of appeal.  The
    critical context in which this application had been made was that  prior
    to the lodging of his grounds of appeal against  the  removal  decision,
    the Appellant had made no asylum claim. It was only in  his  grounds  of
    the appeal that he raised the ground allowed for in section 84(1)(g)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act')  "that
    removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would breach the United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention".

The background facts


 3. The Appellant first came to the attention of the immigration authorities
    on the 23rd of March 2010 when he was arrested on suspicion  of  illegal
    entry. He was served with form IS151A notifying him of  his  immigration
    status and liability to detention and removal.  He was granted temporary
    admission subject to reporting and residence restrictions. He failed  to
    comply with these  restrictions  but  was  subsequently  encountered  by
    immigration officials on the 26th of August 2010 during  an  enforcement
    visit to premises in Newport where he was working illegally. On the 31st
    of August 2010 the Appellant lodged an application for leave  to  remain
    using form FLR(O). That sought leave to remain on compassionate  grounds
    set out in an accompanying letter from his  solicitors,  Duncan  Moghal.
    These grounds were in terms confined to a claim under Article 8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights based upon the strong connections to
    the United Kingdom which the Appellant said he had established since his
    entry into the UK in 2001. There was no claim made for asylum.

 4. On the 1st of September 2010 the Appellant was served with a  "One  Stop
    Warning" Notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act.   This  Notice   told
    the Appellant in terms that he "must now make a formal  statement  about
    any reasons why you think you should be allowed to stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom" and to do so on the attached form  -  "IS  76  -  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds". This Notice had been served upon the  Appellant  at
    the request of his solicitors, made  in  a  letter  dated  the  27th  of
    August, in which they said they would be grateful for such  notification
    "in order for our client to lodge his human rights allegations".

 5. A "Statement of Additional Grounds" in  response  to  that  section  120
    Notice was duly made by the Appellant on the 2nd of September  2010.  It
    was sent through and drawn up on his  behalf  by  his  solicitors.  This
    statement again made reference to Article 8, but in addition  raised  in
    very general terms a claim under  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.  Article  3
    confers an absolute right not to be subjected to torture or  to  inhuman
    or degrading treatment or punishment. In paragraph 3.1 of the  Statement
    of  Additional  Grounds  it  was  stated  that  "the  Applicant  further
    maintains that if he is removed from the United Kingdom there would be a
    breach of his right under Article 3 ECHR".  What  then  followed  was  a
    discursive exposition of the legal principles said to be  applicable  to
    any consideration of a claim under Article 3, but nothing  was  said  of
    the factual basis for the claim until the  very  last  sentence  in  the
    statement which simply stated "3.4 The Appellants (sic) contend that  if
    he is returned to Bangladesh he will  face  an  immediate  risk  of  ill
    treatment". No further particularity was given of the Article 3 claim.

 6. Again no asylum claim was made to the Secretary of State at this stage.

 7. By decisions dated the 13th of September 2010 the Respondent refused the
    Appellant's application for leave to remain on human rights grounds, and
    decided to give directions under paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2 to the
    Immigration Act 1971 for the removal of the Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom as an illegal entrant. In the "reasons for  refusal"  letter  of
    like date in respect of the Article 3 claim, the  Respondent  stated  at
    paragraph 9 that "we observe that your client provides  no  evidence  or
    argument to explain why his removal to Bangladesh would be in breach  of
    Article 3. We contend that the mere suggestion of a breach of  the  ECHR
    will not in itself postpone your client's removal".

 8. That decision to remove was an immigration decision amenable  to  appeal
    to the First-tier  Tribunal  under  section  82  of  the  2002  Act  and
    further gave rise to an in country right of  appeal  by  virtue  of  the
    Appellant having made a human rights claim while in the UK (see  section
    92(4) of the Act). It is to be noted  however  that  the  Appellant  had
    still not made any asylum claim at this stage.

 9. The Appellant duly exercised his  right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by a Notice of Appeal lodged on the 16th of September 2010.  By
    virtue of section 84(1) of the 2002 Act, that appeal had to  be  brought
    on one or more of the grounds (a) to (g) set  out  in  that  subsection.
    Those grounds include under (g) "that removal of the Appellant from  the
    United Kingdom in consequence of the immigration decision  would  breach
    the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention...".

10. The grounds of appeal lodged by the Appellant included -  amongst  other
    grounds - a ground of appeal referable  to  section  84(1)(g)  in  these
    terms:

           "2.4 That the removal of the Appellant would  be  in  breach  of
           United Kingdom's obligations under the 1951 Refugee convention".

11. This was the first time  the  Appellant  had  ever  raised  the  Refugee
    Convention. As already explained, at no time prior to his lodging of his
    appeal had he made any asylum claim to the Secretary of State.  No  such
    claim had been made in the Statement of Additional Grounds lodged  under
    section 120 although there had been the claim under  Article  3  of  the
    ECHR.

12. Moreover no particulars of the factual basis of this  ground  of  appeal
    were given in the grounds of appeal. These came for the first  time   in
    the witness statement of the Appellant  dated  the  12th  October  2010,
    lodged for the purposes of the appeal, in the following paragraphs:

           "4. I fled Bangladesh because my life was in danger  due  to  my
           involvement in the BNP party (Bangladeshi National Party). I was
           heavily involved with the party and held  quite  high  positions
           such as General Secretary of Sylhet district as  well  as  other
           secretarial positions over the years.  I  would  give  talks  at
           meetings  and  conferences,   distribute   literature,   arrange
           meetings and invite people to join the  party.  When  I  started
           getting a good response from the public I was  targeted  by  the
           Bangladeshi Awami League. Initially members of the Awami  League
           would argue with me and then they started  beating  me  whenever
           they saw me. I was beaten about 5 or 6 times in total and on the
           final occasion I was told that if I was ever seen again I  would
           be killed. I had no choice but to leave the country.


           5. When I entered the United Kingdom I was advised by my friends
           not to  claim  asylum  because  I  would  be  deported  back  to
           Bangladesh. I took their advice because I did not want  to  risk
           being sent back. I believe I would be killed if I am sent back.


           6. I decided to settle down in the United  Kingdom  and  started
           building my life...


           9. I have spent nearly a decade in this  country  and  I  cannot
           just throw that away only to start all  over  again.  Especially
           not at my age. In any event if I am returned I fear  I  will  be
           killed because of my involvement with the BNP party.


           10. I  can  confirm  my  involvement  with  the  BNP  party  has
           continued whilst I have lived in  the  United  Kingdom.  I  have
           attended many meetings in London and Newport and have spoken  at
           conferences in Newport. The organisation I  have  been  involved
           with is called Amra Tajpur Bashee."


The determination of the First-tier Tribunal


13. The appeal  hearing  was  on  the  1st  November  2010.  By  a  decision
    promulgated on  the  26th  of  November  2010  Immigration  Judge  Baker
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds including that  referred
    to as his asylum appeal.

14. In relation to the asylum ground, the Immigration Judge  considered  the
    Appellant's oral evidence  and  the  content  of  a  number  of  letters
    produced by him purportedly from persons in Bangladesh attesting to  the
    date (variously given as 1996/9) of and  the  reasons  for  his  leaving
    Bangladesh together with the bio data information taken  from  him  when
    arrested stating that his last employment in his country of  origin  was
    as a businessman selling clothes under the name of a shop from  1985  to
    2001. The Immigration  Judge  considered  the  contradictions  contained
    within all this evidence as to when, and the circumstances in which, the
    Appellant had left Bangladesh, and made a  number  of  adverse  findings
    relating to the credibility of the Appellant's claims. At  paragraph  37
    the Immigration Judge expressly found that:

           "... he (the Appellant) has not demonstrated that he is in  fear
           of return to Bangladesh. I find  that  he  has  not  established
           there is a real risk of adverse interest in him because  he  has
           not demonstrated even to the lower standard applicable in asylum
           appeals that he had any political activity."

15. At paragraph 45 the findings of the Immigration Judge  are  recorded  in
    these terms:

           "45. For these reasons the  asylum  claim  is  dismissed  on  my
           finding that he was not a political person, he was not  involved
           in any political activity, he was an economic  migrant  who  has
           come to the United Kingdom and  who  was  apprehended  after  an
           unknown period in the United Kingdom."

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal


16. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal lies  only  on  an  error  of  law.  The
    appeal to this Tribunal for which permission has been granted, is on one
    ground only. There is no appeal seeking  to  challenge  the  Immigration
    Judge's findings on the ground of appeal under section 84(1)(g)  on  the
    evidence before her, or on the ground that the Appellant was  unable  to
    give the full facts of his claim to  the  Immigration  Judge.  The  sole
    ground relates to the refusal of the Immigration Judge at the  beginning
    of the hearing to grant an adjournment.

17. Moreover the basis of  the  appeal  is  not  that  the  adjournment  was
    required because the Appellant needed  time  in  order  to  gather  more
    evidence in support of his appeal although such an application  was,  it
    seems, also made to the Immigration Judge and rejected  by  her  on  the
    grounds that "the material sought, the basis  of  the  adjournment,  was
    unknown to the Appellant and he had ample time to obtain  it"  and  that
    the Appellant's appeal could be justly determined without the  necessity
    of an adjournment (see paragraphs 7 to 10 of the determination) .

18. The sole ground advanced in  the  Appellant's  renewed  application  for
    permission to appeal, lodged  with  the  Upper  Tribunal,  is  that  the
    adjournment was required so that the Appellant could be  interviewed  by
    the Home Office on what is described  as  his  asylum  claim.  To  quote
    paragraph 3 of the determination:

           "At the outset of the hearing Mr Ghani stated  that  his  client
           wished to be interviewed in relation to the  asylum  element  of
           his claim, having made his claim for asylum in his statement  of
           12th of October 2010".

19. This aspect of the application was rejected by the Immigration Judge  on
    the ground that there had been no application for  asylum  made  to  the
    Home Office notwithstanding that  the  Appellant  on  the  basis  of  an
    attendance note of  his  solicitors  of  May  2010  -  produced  by  his
    representatives to the First-tier Tribunal - had following on his arrest
    on suspicion of illegal entry in March 2010, been given advice that this
    was an available option and had made subsequent application for leave to
    remain which had made no mention of any asylum ground.  The  Immigration
    Judge expressly found (at paragraph 4 of the determination) that:

           "there is no requirement that an applicant who raised an  asylum
           ground of appeal in the grounds of appeal should be  interviewed
           prior to the determination of the appeal".

    but then exercised a discretion on  whether  nonetheless  to  grant  an
    adjournment on this ground. She declined to do so on the  grounds  that
    the application had been made  late,  and  concluded  that  the  appeal
    "could be justly and fairly determined by  hearing  evidence  from  the
    Appellant who had set out his claim  in  paragraph  4  of  his  witness
    statement and relied upon some documentary  evidence  in  support  with
    reference to paragraphs  4  and  10  of  that  statement".  (See  again
    paragraph 4 of the determination).

20. At paragraph 6  of  the  determination  this  passage  also  appears  in
    relation to the submission that in effect the Immigration  Judge  should
    arrange for the Appellant to be interviewed:

           "This attendance note plainly followed the  date  of  arrest  on
           suspicion of illegal entry when he first came to  the  attention
           of the immigration authorities on 23 March 2010. There had  been
           no subsequent application for asylum made to  the  Home  Office.
           The application for leave to  remain  on  compassionate  grounds
           only was made on 31 August 2010  and  refused  on  13  September
           2010. The attendance note does not record the appellant's  claim
           that his asylum claim should be considered at  interview  rather
           than at the appeal hearing. It is at the appeal hearing  because
           he has failed to make any application for asylum notwithstanding
           the advice plainly received by him as to its availability in May
           of 2010 even when he made  the  later  application  for  further
           leave to remain in August."

The alleged errors of law

21. As we have indicated, this Tribunal can interfere  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision not to grant  an  adjournment  only  if  it  can  be
    demonstrated that the Immigration Judge made an error  of  law.  In  the
    grounds of appeal upon which permission has been granted, this error  of
    law is put in two ways.

22. First it said that in stating that there  was  no  requirement  that  an
    applicant who raised an asylum ground of appeal in his grounds of appeal
    should be interviewed prior to the  determination  of  the  appeal,  the
    Immigration Judge erred in law in that she  (to  quote  the  grounds  of
    appeal but with the emphasis being that of this Court):

           "failed to follow the correct asylum procedure which in turn has
           resulted in the Appellant's claim being  unjustly  and  unfairly
           determined. Had the Appellant been given an  opportunity  to  be
           interviewed by the Home Office then  at  any  subsequent  appeal
           further documents could have  been  produced  that  confirm  the
           genuineness of the original documents relied upon. The Appellant
           has clearly lost this opportunity."

23. Secondly, exception is taken to  the  Immigration  Judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 37 of his determination which we have already out  ("I find he
    has not established there is a real risk  of  adverse  interest  in  him
    because I find he has  not  demonstrated  even  to  the  lower  standard
    applicable in asylum appeals that he had any political  activity").   It
    is said that the Immigration Judge here erred  in  law  "in  failing  to
    recognise that this was not an asylum appeal because  no  asylum  appeal
    decision of the Secretary of State was being appealed  against".  It  is
    further in effect contended that the Immigration Judge in her  reasoning
    rejecting the  ground  of  appeal  under  s.84(1)(g)  erred  in  law  in
    "usurping" "the initial function of the Secretary of  State"  in  asylum
    claims. Thus the second aspect of the  ground  being  pursued  reads  as
    follows:

           "The Immigration Judge failed to recognise that this was not  an
           asylum appeal because no asylum appeal decision of the Secretary
           of State was  being  appealed  against.  The  Immigration  Judge
           should  not  have  carried  out  the  initial  function  of  the
           Secretary of State and should have  afforded  the  Appellant  an
           opportunity to be interviewed in relation to  his  asylum  claim
           especially given that the same was requested."

Our conclusions

24. We find both aspects of this ground of appeal  misconceived.  They  each
    operate on the false premise that the Immigration Judge could only  hear
    and determine an appeal against a decision to give removal directions on
    the ground expressly allowed for under section  84(1)(g)  if  there  had
    first been an initial "asylum decision" by the Secretary of  State.  But
    this simply ignores section 86(2), pursuant  to  which  the  Immigration
    Judge was obliged to  determine  "any  matter  raised  as  a  ground  of
    appeal", that is, she was obliged to determine the ground  raised  under
    section 84(1)(g) and to determine for herself whether the removal of the
    Appellant would be in breach of the UK's obligations under  the  Refugee
    Convention. The fact that the Secretary of State had made a decision  to
    give  removal  directions  consequent  upon  a  decision  rejecting   an
    application for leave to remain on  non  asylum  grounds,  and  had  not
    herself considered any protection issue under  the  Refugee  Convention,
    must be to nothing. In determining the appeal brought under  the  ground
    in section 84(1)(g)  without  first  referring  the  case  back  to  the
    Secretary of State for an  interview,  the  Immigration  Judge  was  not
    usurping any function of the Secretary of State, for the  simple  reason
    that the Immigration Judge was not determining any asylum claim as such,
    since none had ever been made to the Secretary of  State.  Nor  was  she
    determining whether to grant the Appellant refugee status  which  indeed
    she had no power to do.

25. The Immigration Judge  was  not  acting  as  if  she  were  herself  the
    Secretary of State but rather was  exercising  the  appellate  functions
    conferred and provided for by the 2002 Act which obliged her to consider
    the appeal against the  decision  to  give  removal  directions  on  the
    grounds on which the appeal before her had been  brought  under  section
    84(1).

26. We consider our approach to this matter is entirely consistent with  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 1076
    concerning the effect of section 85(2) of the 2002 Act in the context of
    a statement made under section 120. This subsection provides that 'if an
    appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement under section  120,  the
    Tribunal shall  consider  any  matter  raised  in  the  statement  which
    constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in section 84(1) against
    the decision appealed against.'   The majority (Moore-Bick and  Sullivan
    LJJ) held that the Tribunal was obliged on an appeal under section 82(1)
    to consider any matter raised in a section  120  statement  which  would
    constitute a ground of appeal of a kind listed  in  section  84(1).  The
    duty was not restricted to considering only the grounds for the original
    decision of the Secretary of State or the original grounds of appeal.[1]



27. Contrary to what is asserted in the grounds of appeal, there can  be  no
    requirement as a matter of law that  before  any  appeal  brought  under
    section 84(1)(g) can be determined in  a  case  in  which  a  claim  for
    protection under the Refugee Convention is raised for the first time  in
    the grounds of appeal, there has to be a Home Office interview prior  to
    the determination of the appeal. Indeed we do not understand  where  lay
    the power of the Immigration Judge to arrange such an interview.  As  we
    endeavoured to point out to Miss Hulse who was at  understandable  pains
    to stress the purpose of the Home Office  interview  process  in  asylum
    claims and the undoubted benefit to any claimant of such  process  -  by
    reference to the Respondent's published guidance on asylum interviews  -
    the provenance of any requirement in law for such interview must lie  in
    the requirements of paragraph 339NA of the Statement of Changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended)  (the  Immigration  Rules).  This
    provides that "before any decision  is  taken  on  the  application  for
    asylum, the applicant shall be  given  the  opportunity  of  a  personal
    interview on his application for asylum with  a  representative  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  who  is  legally  competent  to  conduct  such  an
    interview". As the terms of paragraph 339NA  make  clear,  however,  the
    interview provided for by this Rule is part only of the  decision-making
    process of the Secretary of State herself  when  considering  an  asylum
    claim made to her, but there is  nothing  which  provides  for  such  an
    interview to take place before an asylum  ground  is  determined  by  an
    Immigration Judge.

28. The interview the Appellant was seeking in  this  case  must  thus  have
    been an interview conducted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  through  her
    representative under paragraph 339NA, but in our judgment it did not and
    could not lie in the power of the Immigration Judge seised of an appeal,
    to direct such an interview. In our judgment the Immigration  Judge  had
    no power, let alone legal duty, to remit the case to  the  Secretary  of
    State for the purposes of such interview. The  Immigration  Judge  could
    only deal with the appeal as  it  had  been  presented  to  her  by  the
    Appellant and this she duly did. She was right to proceed as she did.

29. Certainly we accept the potential benefits to an applicant  for  refugee
    status,  of  going  through  the  asylum  claim  process  including  the
    particular benefits of  the  interview  process  for  the  eliciting  of
    relevant facts but, in any event, there is still the opportunity to give
    oral evidence before the Immigration Judge hearing the appeal.  However,
    the Appellant chose to raise the issue whether his removal would  breach
    the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention as a ground of  appeal
    and for the reasons we have given the Immigration  Judge  was  bound  to
    hear the appeal on this basis without more.

30. For all these reasons we dismiss this appeal on the  ground  upon  which
    permission has been given.

31. Our conclusion is further supported by the  fact  that  under  paragraph
    339NA, the personal  interview  may  be  omitted  where  (amongst  other
    circumstances):

          "(iii)  The  applicant,  in  submitting   his   application   and
           presenting the facts,  has  only  raised  issues  that  are  not
           relevant or of minimal relevance to the examination  of  whether
           he is a refugee as defined in regulation 2  of  the  Refugee  or
           Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection  (Qualification)
           Regulations 2006."

32. We have already  identified  the  paucity  of  the  particulars  in  the
    representations made in the Notice of Appeal in  support  of  the  claim
    under Article 3. Accordingly, in our judgment, the duty of the Secretary
    of State to interview  the  Appellant  under  paragraph  339NA  was  not
    triggered, in any event. This is especially so, bearing in mind that the
    Appellant only provided some detail of the basis of his asylum claim  in
    his witness statement dated 12 October 2010, lodged a mere two weeks  or
    so before his hearing on 1 November 2010 before the  Immigration  Judge,
    with no indication even at  that  late  stage,  that  he  wished  to  be
    interviewed by the Secretary of State.

Alternative ground of appeal


33. We should record that Miss Hulse did seek  to  raise  a  new  ground  of
    appeal not otherwise pleaded, namely that the  Secretary  of  State  had
    erred in law in not treating the Statement of Additional Grounds  served
    upon her on the 2nd  of  September  2010,  which  included  a  claim  to
    humanitarian protection and the unparticularised claim under  Article  3
    (unparticularised save for the contention that the Appellant would  face
    an immediate risk of  ill  treatment  if  returned  to  Bangladesh),  as
    amounting to an asylum claim, and further  erred  in  law  in  not  then
    proceeding to carry out a paragraph  339NA "Personal Interview".

34. We can dispose of this matter in short form. The matter Miss  Hulse  now
    seeks to raise was never part of any ground of appeal to the Immigration
    Judge. As already explained, any appeal to the Upper Tribunal  from  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal has to be based upon  an  error
    of  law  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  making   that
    determination. No such error can be shown by  reference  to  an  alleged
    error of law on the part of the  Secretary  of  State  which  was  never
    raised as a ground of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

35. It follows we find no merit in this  alternative  ground  sought  to  be
    pursued and reject the application to pursue an appeal on this ground.

36. To summarise, an Immigration Judge is obliged to determine a  ground  of
    appeal brought under section 84(1)(g) of  the  2002  Act,  even  if  the
    appellant raises for the first time in his grounds of appeal that he  is
    a refugee.  There is no obligation to adjourn  any  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in order to allow the individual to  be  interviewed
    by the Secretary of  State,  nor  is  there  any  power  to  direct  the
    Secretary of State to conduct an asylum interview.

37. For all these reasons this appeal is dismissed.









                               Signed




                                    Mr Justice King
                               (sitting as) Judge of the Upper Tribunal




-----------------------
   [1] This principle in AS (Afghanistan) is  not  affected  by  the  recent
   judgment in Sapkota and KA (Pakistan) v the Secretary of  State  for  the
   Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1320.


