
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 July 2015                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs Pritam Kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji of Counsel instructed by ATM Law

1.   In visit appeals the Article 8 decision on an appeal cannot be made  in
    a vacuum.  Whilst judges only have jurisdiction to decide  whether  the
    decision is unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  (or  shows
    unlawful discrimination) (see Mostafa (Article 8  in  entry  clearance)
    [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) and Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT
    0261 (IAC)), the starting-point for deciding that must be the state  of
    the evidence about the appellant's ability to meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the immigration rules.

2.   The restriction in visitor cases of grounds of appeal to  human  rights
    does not mean that judges are relieved of their ordinary duties of fact-
    finding or that they must approach these in a  qualitatively  different
    way.  Where relevant to the Article 8 assessment, disputes  as  to  the
    facts must be resolved by taking into  account  the  evidence  on  both
    sides: see Adjei at [10] bearing in mind that the burden of proof rests
    on the appellant.

3.   Unless an appellant can show that there  are  individual  interests  at
    stake covered by Article 8 "of a particularly pressing nature" so as to
    give rise to a "strong claim that compelling circumstances may exist to
    justify the grant of LTE [Leave to Enter] outside the rules":  (see  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [40] and [56]) he or she is  exceedingly
    unlikely to succeed.  That proposition must also hold good  in  visitor
    appeals.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   On 2 April 2014 the appellant (hereafter "Entry Clearance  Officer"  or
    "ECO")  refused  the  application  by  the  respondent  (hereafter  the
    claimant) for entry clearance to visit  the  UK  for  six  weeks.   The
    claimant is a citizen of India and at the date of decision  was  an  83
    year old army widow. She lives in District Karpulthala.  She  said  she
    wished to come to the UK to visit her third son and  sponsor,  Mr  G  S
    Turna, her  daughter-in-law  and  her  grandchildren  aged  19  and  13
    respectively.  She had been the subject of a previous refusal of  entry
    clearance in July 2013.  In a letter from her solicitors dated 3  March
    2014 making a new application, it was accepted she had  not  previously
    provided evidence of her retirement and income from bank interest.  The
    letter produced documents in support of her claim that her main  source
    of income was from sale of crops.  Evidence was also attached  to  show
    she received a state pension of Rs1,000 a month.  It said she  had  two
    sons in India with whom she shared close ties.

2.   In the refusal letter the ECO observed that although the  claimant  had
    stated she had two sons in India she had provided no evidence, or  even
    any indication of whether they resided with her or lived separately and
    she  had  provided  no  evidence  of  their   financial   or   economic
    circumstances or employment.  The ECO noted that the passport issued to
    one of these sons, Mr M Singh, showed his address as in Goa.   The  ECO
    concluded that:

         "[i]n the absence of better, personal circumstances in India, I  am
         not satisfied that you plan to leave the UK  at  the  end  of  your
         visit or that you are genuinely seeking entry as a general  visitor
         for a period not exceeding 6 months (paragraphs 41(i) & (ii) of  HC
         395 (as amended))."

3.   The claimant was informed that her right of appeal was limited in  this
    case to the  grounds  of  appeal  referred  to  in  s.84(1)(c)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (hereafter  "the  2002
    Act").  She appealed.  Her grounds stated that the decision was not  in
    accordance with the law or the immigration rules and was unlawful under
    s.6 of the Human Rights  Act  1988  (HRA  1998).   An  Entry  Clearance
    Manager Review dated 22 October 2014 noted that no  new  documents  had
    been submitted, that no reasons had been given for the  assertion  that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law, the immigration  rules
    or unlawful under the HRA 1998.

4.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge  Farmer  on  22
    January 2015.  In a determination sent on 29 January  2015  he  allowed
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  The judge noted that the claimant had
    produced a bundle  of  documents  which  included  a  detailed  written
    response to the Notice of Refusal.  The  judge  stated  that  he  heard
    evidence from the claimant's son/sponsor and  the  granddaughter.   The
    judge went on to find:

    (i)  that the claimant enjoys  a  family  and  private  life  with  her
         sponsor son and grandchildren.  In this regard he  noted  that  the
         oldest grandchild was 19 and the second grandchild was 13 and  both
         had lived with the claimant until two and a half  years  ago  (July
         2012).


    (ii) that the decision constituted an interference with the  claimant's
         family and private life and as such engaged  Article  8.   In  this
         regard the judge highlighted that both children had lived with  the
         claimant for the majority of their  lives  and  "her  granddaughter
         gave  compelling  evidence  of  the  fact   that   the   [claimant]
         effectively brought them up.  They have not  seen  her  since  they
         left India."


    (iii)    that  the  decision  disproportionately  interfered  with  the
         claimant's right to a private and family  life  with  her  son  and
         grandchildren.  The judge's reasons for this finding were  embodied
         in paragraphs 11 - 13 as follows:


             "11. I was invited to  consider  the  reasons  given  for  the
                  refusal when considering the public interest.  I find that
                  the basis for the refusal was  weak.   The  reasons  given
                  were that the appellant had not provided  details  of  her
                  family's circumstances in India.  She had provided her own
                  circumstances and that of her family she hoped to visit in
                  the UK.  The  respondent  concluded  that  they  were  not
                  satisfied that the appellant would leave at the end of her
                  visit, without basing this conclusion on any facts  found.
                  I accept that the appeal does not lie against  the  merits
                  of the decision  but  against  the  breach  of  Article  8
                  rights, however I put it into the balance when considering
                  the public interest behind refusing  permission  to  visit
                  the UK.


             12.  The respondent relied on the fact that there  is  nothing
                  to prevent the family in the UK visiting the appellant  in
                  India.  This was responded to in two ways.  Firstly  there
                  is the economic reality of  the  cost  of  transporting  4
                  people to India as opposed to one  person  visiting  here.
                  Secondly, and more importantly there is the  logistic  and
                  practical difficulty in arranging a visit.  I accepted the
                  evidence that the family  here  do  not  manage  a  family
                  holiday together, even in the UK.  They find it  difficult
                  to find a period of time when everyone is available.   The
                  appellant's son works for  himself  and  when  he  is  not
                  working he does not earn anything.  It is therefore costly
                  for him to take time off work.  Secondly his wife is in  a
                  full time job which only allows her 4 weeks off a year and
                  only in blocks of a  maximum  of  2  weeks.   Finally  the
                  children are both in education and are more attainable  an
                  objective for the appellant to travel to the UK  to  spend
                  time with her family than vice versa.


             13.  I find that there is no  good  reason  for  finding  that
                  there is a public interest in not permitting the appellant
                  to enter the UK for a 6 week holiday and that the decision
                  disproportionally interferes with the Appellant's right to
                  a  private  and  a  family   life   with   her   son   and
                  grandchildren."


5.   In amplifying the ECO's grounds, Mr  Bramble  said  he  relied  on  the
    principles set out in Mostafa (Article 8  in  entry  clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 00112 (IAC) and Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015]  UKUT  0261
    (IAC).  He said the judge was wrong  to  find  there  was  family  life
    within the meaning of Article 8 because (i)  her  sponsor  son  was  an
    adult; (ii) she had not seen him for two and a half years; (iii) it was
    his family's choice that they moved away from their family life setting
    in India with the claimant; (iv) there was no evidence to suggest  that
    since the grandchildren moved to the  UK  the  claimant  exercised  any
    control over their upbringing or financially supported them.

6.   Mr Bramble drew our attention to what had been said by the Tribunal  in
    Mostafa at [24] that:

         "It will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person  other
         than a close relative will be able to  show  that  the  refusal  of
         entry clearance  comes  within  the  scope  of  Article  8(1).   In
         practical terms this is likely to be limited  to  cases  where  the
         relationship is that of  husband  and  wife  or  other  close  life
         partners or a parent and minor child..."


7.    As  regards  the  judge's  findings  of  interference  and   lack   of
    proportionality, Mr Bramble submitted that the judge had  given  wholly
    inadequate reasons for considering that the public interest was reduced
    or outweighed.  Factors such as the costs of a  visit  or  the  greater
    logistical convenience of the claimant coming to the UK rather than the
    sponsor  and  his  family  going  to   India,   were   not   compelling
    circumstances.

8.   Mr Dhanji submitted that even though the judge did  not  refer  to  any
    case law dealing with Article 8 in visit visa cases under  the  limited
    grounds of appeal imposed by s.88A of the 2002 Act,  his  decision  was
    clearly faithful to Mostafa in that he  considered  that  the  claimant
    intended only a 6 weeks visit, which  was  evidence  capable  of  being
    weighty.  The judge had also applied  the  very  approach  enjoined  by
    Adjei, namely (1) first to ask whether Article 8 is engaged at all; and
    (2) second, if it is, then [paragraph 1 of head  note  to  Adjei]  "the
    Tribunal may need to look at the extent to which the claimant  is  said
    to have failed to meet the requirements of the rules because  that  may
    inform the proportionality balancing exercise that  must  follow."   In
    this case it was  reasonably  open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    claimant's grandchildren had been brought up by her  and  that  Article
    8(1) was therefore engaged.  Even if one of the two  grandchildren  was
    now an  adult,  the  other  remained  a  minor.   Looking  at  the  two
    generations of the family with which the claimant still had close ties,
    he was entitled to find there was existent and meaningful family life.

9.   As regards the judge's treatment of  the  issues  of  interference  and
    proportionality,  Mr  Dhanji  accepted  that  the  judge  gave  cursory
    attention  to  the  matter  of  the  claimant's  ability  to  meet  the
    immigration rules for visitors (paragraph 41) and had not set  out  any
    reasons  in  [11],  but  he  had  nevertheless  conducted  a   balanced
    proportionality assessment and was entitled to consider that the public
    interest in refusing a visit in this case was weak.

10.  In response Mr Bramble pointed out  that  the  evidence  submitted  for
    this hearing cast  serious  doubt  on  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    claimant had brought up the two grandchildren, it  being  said  by  the
    claimant in her witness statement of 22 January 2015 that  she  resides
    in her own property where she lives with her first son, that she visits
    her second son in Goa and has a daughter nearby with  whom  she  shares
    close ties and that since her third son had left  for  the  UK  in  the
    1990s she had "hardly resided with him " and it was never the case that
    the two grandchildren had lived in India without their mother.

11.  In reply to a question from the bench, both parties agreed that  if  we
    were minded to set aside the judge's  decision,  we  could  re-make  it
    without further ado.

DISCUSSION

The decision under the visitor rules as evidence relevant to the  Article  8
    assessment

12.  As explained in Mostafa, by virtue of an  amendment  to  s.88A  of  the
    2002 Act brought into effect on 25 June 2013 by s.52 of the  Crime  and
    Courts Act 2013, there is no right of appeal in visit cases even  in  a
    family visitor case except on grounds alleging that the decision  shows
    unlawful discrimination or is unlawful under s.6 of the HRA  1998.   In
    consequence, in an appeal brought on human rights grounds, judges  have
    no jurisdiction to allow or dismiss it on the basis that it is  not  is
    or is not in accordance with the rules or is or  is  not  otherwise  in
    accordance with the law.  (What we say below about the visitor rules is
    strictly only applicable to those for "general  visitors"  although  it
    may also have some relevance to the specific visitor categories.)

13.  However, in visit appeals the Article 8 decision on  an  appeal  cannot
    be made in a vacuum.   Almost  invariably  the  subject-matter  of  the
    decision under  appeal  is  confined  to  a  refusal  under  the  rules
    (notwithstanding paragraph 2 of the rules, it is rare for an ECO to  go
    on  to  consider  whether  the  refusal  decision  is  contrary  to  an
    applicant's human rights[1]).  The judge cannot ignore the decision  in
    front of him.  That decision is that visit entry clearance  is  refused
    because the applicant does not meet one or more of the requirements set
    out at paragraph 41 for leave to enter as a "general  visitor".[2]   It
    is worth rehearsing in  summary  that  those  requirements   relate  to
    genuineness of intention to visit for a limited period as stated by him
    (41(i)); intention to leave at the end of that period (41(ii)); absence
    of intention to take  employment  (41(iii))  or  to  produce  goods  or
    provide services (41(iv));  absence  of  intention  to  study  (41(v));
    ability to maintain and accommodate himself and any dependants  without
    recourse to public funds; ability to meet the costs of  the  return  or
    onward journey (41(vii)); and other  conditions  requiring  absence  of
    intention to marry, receive private medical treatment etc.  Whilst such
     requirements are clearly not Article  8  considerations  there  is  at
    least one obvious overlap in subject-matter when the applicant seeks to
    visit family members, namely that the genuineness  of  the   intentions
    behind the visit (a requirement set out  in  paragraph  41(i))  may  be
    highly material to the issue of whether there is family life within the
    meaning of Article 8(1) and/ or the issue of whether there  are  strong
    family life reasons for the visit that are to be weighed in the balance
    under Article 8(2).  In this  context  an  inability  to  maintain  and
    accommodate without recourse to public funds or employment may also  be
    material to any Article 8 proportionality exercise.

14.  Whilst therefore judges only have jurisdiction to  decide  whether  the
    decision is unlawful under s.6 of  the  HRA  1998  (or  shows  unlawful
    discrimination), the starting-point for deciding that must be the state
    of the evidence about the applicant's ability to meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 41.

15.  It is also important to bear in mind in Article 8  visit  appeals  that
    the restriction of grounds of appeal to human rights does not mean that
    judges are relieved of their ordinary duties of  fact-finding  or  that
    they must approach these in a qualitatively different  way.   Sometimes
    there may be no dispute as to the facts.  Quite  often,  however,  such
    appeals will feature refusal decisions in which the ECO does not accept
    one or more aspects of the appellant's account whereas the appellant is
    claiming that their account should in fact be accepted.  Obviously  the
    requirement in ECO appeals to decide them on the basis of  evidence  in
    existence at the date of the ECO's decision limits  the  scope  for  an
    appellant to challenge  such  findings  (see  AS  (Somalia)  &  Anor  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  UKHL  32),  but  it
    remains that appeals against visit refusals are capable  of  succeeding
    on the strength of appellants  being  able  to  satisfy  the  judge  by
    production of further documentary evidence  and/or  evidence  from  the
    sponsor  and  other  relevant   witnesses   that   their   account   of
    circumstances appertaining at the date of decision is to  be  believed.
    But where there is a dispute about the facts that is  relevant  to  the
    Article 8 assessment, the judge must seek to resolve it by taking  into
    account the evidence on both sides, bearing in mind that the burden  of
    proof rests on the appellant.



The visitor rules as evidence relating to the public interest

16.  The question arises as to whether the visitor rules are  also  relevant
    in an additional way,  as  evidence  of  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control. It seems to us that  this
    question is one that judges must ask as part of their duty to  apply  a
    two-stage approach to Article 8 considerations. As is clear from  cases
    such as MM & Ors [2014] EWCA Civ 985, the  two-stage  approach  is  not
    confined to in-country appeals; it applies to entry  clearance  appeals
    also.

17.  As regards the immigration rules  in  general,  it  is  uncontroversial
    that, at least since 9 July 2012, they can be taken to reflect the view
    of the Secretary of State as to the proper  balance  to  be  struck  in
    respect of Article 8 considerations.  Equally, however,  it  is  widely
    recognised that outside the context of foreign  criminal  cases  (where
    the rules are a complete code), the rules do not  always  fully  mirror
    all relevant Article 8 considerations and as a result there may be gaps
    between the rules and what Article 8 requires see e.g.  MM  &  Ors,  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Singh and Another [2015] EWCA  Civ  74.
    In SS (Congo) the  Court  of  Appeal  has  further  clarified  that  an
    important distinction has to be made between Leave to Enter  (LTE)  and
    Leave to Remain (LTR) cases, Richards LJ concluding at [40] that:

         "In the light of these authorities, we consider that the state  has
         a wider margin of appreciation in determining the conditions to  be
         satisfied before LTE is granted, by contrast with the  position  in
         relation to decisions  regarding  LTR  for  persons  with  a  (non-
         precarious) family life already established in the United  Kingdom.
         The Secretary of State has already, in effect,  made  some  use  of
         this wider margin of appreciation by excluding section  EX.1  as  a
         basis for grant of LTE, although it is available  as  a  basis  for
         grant of LTR.  The LTE rules therefore maintain, in general  terms,
         a reasonable relationship with the requirements of Article 8 in the
         ordinary run of cases.  However, it  remains  possible  to  imagine
         cases where the individual interests at stake are of a particularly
         pressing nature so that a good claim for  LTE  can  be  established
         outside  the  rules.   In  our  view,   the   appropriate   general
         formulation for this category is that such cases will  arise  where
         an applicant for LTE can show that compelling  circumstances  exist
         (which are not sufficiently recognised  under  the  new  rules)  to
         require the grant of such leave. "

18.  Given that the court in SS (Congo) was principally concerned  with  LTE
    rules governing family reunification under Appendix FM, it  remains  to
    be asked, how do these general considerations play out in  the  context
    of the visitor rules?

19.  There would appear to be competing considerations.  On  the  one  hand,
    it can be said that the visitor rules do not  specifically  accommodate
    such considerations because very similar rules have been in force since
    the 1971 Immigration Act, well before the  HRA  1998  gave  them  legal
    form; and in 2012, when the Home Secretary announced new rules, she did
    not expressly identify the visitor  rules  as  codifying  her  view  of
    Article  8.   Further,  it  cannot  be  assumed  that  her  rules   are
    necessarily compliant in all  respects  with  Article  8.   It  is  not
    unknown for the higher courts to find certain provisions of  the  rules
    (or at least their operation) contrary to the  Human  Rights  Act:  see
    e.g. Quila and Another [2011] UKSC 45; see also MM & Ors at [134].

20.  On the other hand, previous versions of the  visitor  rules  had  never
    been the subject of  successful  challenges  before  either  the  (old)
    European Commission of Human Rights or the ECtHR; even though  in  2012
    the Secretary of State did not specifically identify the visitor  rules
    as Article 8 compliant, she did state that the rules  in  general  were
    compatible with Article 8: see for example a  document  placed  on  the
    Home Office website entitled "Statement of Intent:  Family  Migration",
    June 2012 at paragraph 7.  Similar unqualified language is used in  the
    recent  "Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  on  Family  Migration:
    Appendix FM, Section 1.0a", 3 August 2015. In response to  the  Supreme
    Court judgment in Quila, the Secretary of State  amended  the  relevant
    rules.  There is now also the Home Office Guidance for Entry  Clearance
    Officers,  entitled  "Considering  human   rights   claims   in   visit
    applications", Version 1.0, April 24, 2015, which  states  at  pp.12-13
    that:

         "The Immigration Rules set out the requirements that must be met by
         visitors. Those requirements are established  in  order  to  ensure
         that decisions  made  to  grant  visit  visas  are  in  the  public
         interest, for example, that the person must be a  genuine  visitor,
         can be maintained and accommodated without accessing public  funds;
         does not intend to breach the conditions of their leave  and  there
         are no suitability grounds for refusal.  Where  those  requirements
         are not met, it is not in generally the  public  interest  for  the
         individual to enter the UK."

21.  Further, at a  general  level  it  is  a  right  of  states  to  impose
    immigration controls; in LTE   cases  Article  8  does  not  confer  an
    automatic right of entry (see SS (Congo) [39(i)])  and  "[i]n  deciding
    whether to grant LTE to a family member outside the United Kingdom, the
    state authorities may have regard to a range of factors, including  the
    pressure  which  admission  of  an  applicant  may  place  upon  public
    resources, the desirability of promoting social integration and harmony
    and so forth" (SS (Congo) [39(iii)]).

22.  In light of the above, the visitor rules must in common sense  be  seen
    as part of parcel of that system of  controls  and  as  reflecting  the
    public  interest  in  regulation  of  entry  and  exit,  by  preventing
    unrestricted access for overseas visitors (including those  seeking  to
    visit family members in the UK) and requiring them whilst in the UK  to
    avoid being a burden on public funds and health and education  services
    and to refrain from engagement with the labour market.  In this  regard
    the visitor rules could indeed be said to represent one of the clearest
    examples of the right of states to impose immigration controls  in  the
    interest of their own communities.  Given that other parts of the rules
    do make Article 8-compliant  provision  for  family  reunification,  it
    might  also  be  said  that  the  visit  rules  reflect  the   parallel
    consideration that applicants cannot  expect  to  circumvent  those  by
    means of the visitor  rules  which  stipulate  that  visitors,  whether
    coming for the purpose of seeing family or for tourism, can only do  so
    for a very limited period and subject to certain conditions such as  no
    recourse to public funds.

23.  Having analysed these two competing sets  of  considerations,  we  find
    the latter are to be preferred.  The visitor rules may not be a perfect
    reflection of the Secretary of State's view of what Article 8 requires,
    but, utilising the analysis of Richards LJ in SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387, we do not discern any  significant  gap  between  the  visitor
    rules and "what Article 8 requires".  Indeed, on  the  analysis  in  SS
    (Congo) there is less basis for considering in the visitor context that
    Article 8 requires more than the LTR rules provide because (a) what  is
    in issue in relation to an application for leave to enter  is  more  in
    the nature of an appeal  to  the  state's  positive  obligations  under
    Article 8 (SS (Congo) at [39 (ii)]; see also Shamin  Box  [2002]  UKIAT
    02212); (and b) as a result  the  requirements  upon  the  state  under
    Article 8 are less stringent  in  the  LTE  context  than  in  the  LTR
    context: see SS (Congo) at [38]. Within the context of the  LTE  rules,
    there is the additional fact that the visitor  rules  are  not  in  any
    event about reuniting families, only about allowing  visitors  a  short
    visit in the UK, which can be  for  the  purposes  of  visiting  family
    members but on the  strict  understanding  that  applicants  know  that
    outside the context of that visit, the family concerned will reside  in
    different countries.

24.  It is also important to bear in mind that there are two  dimensions  to
    the way in which the immigration rules serve the public  interest:  not
    just on the general level, by setting out  a  regulatory  framework  of
    immigration control and thereby establishing "a reasonable relationship
    with the requirements of Article 8 in the ordinary run  of  cases"  (SS
    (Congo) at [40]); but also on the particular level, by establishing  in
    any individual case why a grant of entry clearance is not in the public
    interest.  Accordingly we are entitled to consider that when a visit is
    refused because of failure to meet the requirements  of  paragraph  41,
    that ordinarily shows that it is not considered in the public  interest
    for a visit to be granted in those circumstances.

25.  Against this background, the need (emphasised in Adjei) to look at  the
    extent to which the applicant is  said  to  have  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the rules is important for an additional  reason.   For
    if an  applicant  has  failed  to  meet  the  rules,  that  is  apt  to
    demonstrate that the refusal is in the public interest at a general and
    particular level.


26.  Another aspect to the issue of the interrelationship between the  rules
    and Article 8 concerns the issue of whether  a  "near-miss"  under  the
    rules strengthens an argument based on Article 8.  Again SS (Congo)  is
    in point.  At [54]-[56] Richards LJ observed:

         "54. At the hearing, there was debate about the proper approach  to
             be adopted in 'near miss' cases, for example if the sponsor of
             an applicant for LTE  could  provide  evidence  of  an  annual
             income a little  less  than  the  �18,600  required  or  could
             provide evidence which might be regarded as  similar  to  (but
             not the same as)  that  required  under  Appendix  FM-SE.   Mr
             Payne, for the Secretary of State,  made  submissions  to  the
             effect that 'a miss is as good as a mile' and  that  the  fact
             that one  is  dealing  with  a  'near  miss'  case  should  be
             irrelevant to the Article 8 balancing exercise required.   The
             general position of the respondents, on the  other  hand,  was
             that great weight should be attached to the  fact  that  there
             was  a  'near  miss'  by  an  applicant  in  relation  to  the
             requirements of the rules.


         55.   In  our  judgment,  the  true  position  lies  between  these
             submissions.  Contrary to the  argument  of  the  respondents,
             that fact that an applicant may be able to say that their case
             is a 'near miss' in relation to satisfying the requirements of
             the rules will by no means show that compelling  circumstances
             exist requiring the grant of LTE outside the  rules.   A  good
             deal more than this would need to be shown to make out such  a
             case.  The respondents' argument fails to recognise the  value
             to be attached to having a clear statement  of  the  standards
             applicable to everyone and fails to give proper weight to  the
             judgment of the Secretary of State, as expressed in the rules,
             regarding what is needed to meet the public interest which  is
             in issue.  The 'near miss' argument of the respondents  cannot
             be sustained in the light  of  these  considerations  and  the
             authority of Miah v Secretary of State for the Home Department
             [2012] EWCA Civ 261, especially at [21]-[26].


         56.  However, it cannot be said that the fact that a case  involves
             a 'near miss' in relation to the requirements set out  in  the
             rules is wholly irrelevant to the balancing exercise  required
             under Article 8.  If an applicant  can  show  that  there  are
             individual interests at stake covered by Article 8 which  give
             rise to a strong claim that compelling circumstances may exist
             to justify the grant of LTE outside the rules, the  fact  that
             their case is also a  'near  miss'  case  may  be  a  relevant
             consideration which tips the balance under Article 8 in  their
             favour.  In such a case, the applicant will  be  able  to  say
             that the detrimental impact on the public interest in issue if
             LTE is granted in their favour will be somewhat less than in a
             case where the gap between the applicant's  position  and  the
             requirements of the rules is great, and the risk that they may
             end up having  recourse  to  public  funds  and  resources  is
             therefore greater."

27.  This background fortifies us in our view that a judge limited by  s.88A
    to deciding whether the refusal of entry clearance to an  appellant  is
    compatible with Article 8 cannot - and must  not  -  avoid  taking  the
    factual situation as regards the  ability  of  the  appellant  to  meet
    paragraph 41 as a starting point.  In deciding whether Article 8(1)  is
    engaged, for example, the judge must  be  satisfied  that  there  is  a
    factual content to  the  claimed  private  and  family  life.   If  the
    evidence relating to the ability to meet the requirements of  paragraph
    41 discloses to the judge that the visitor has no real family  ties  or
    that the visitor does not genuinely intend a visit,  that  may  have  a
    direct material bearing on the decision as to whether Article  8(1)  is
    engaged.  Similarly, evidence regarding the applicant's ability to meet
    the requirements of  the  rules  may  sound  on  whether  the  decision
    constitutes interference and also on whether, if there is interference,
    it is proportionate. Overall, unless an appellant can show  that  there
    are  individual  interests  at  stake  covered  by  Article  8  "of   a
    particularly pressing nature" so as to give rise  to  a  "strong  claim
    that compelling circumstances may exist to justify  the  grant  of  LTE
    outside  the  rules"  (see   SS  (Congo)  at  [40]  and  [56]),  he  is
    exceedingly unlikely to succeed. That proposition must also  hold  good
    in visitor appeals.






Mostafa and Adjei: weight to be attached to  findings  regarding  compliance
with the rules

28.  Although the judge did not refer to any case law on Article 8 in  visit
    appeals,  both  representatives  cited  Mostafa  and  Adjei  and  their
    submissions touched on what the different panels  in  these  two  cases
    have said about the weight to be  attached  to  any  findings  made  as
    regards compliance with paragraph 41.  We have to ask ourselves whether
    the two decisions are entirely consistent with one another  insofar  as
    the Tribunal in Mostafa states in its head  note  that  the  claimant's
    ability to satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  is  "capable  of  being  a
    weighty, though not determinative factor  when  deciding  whether  such
    refusal is proportionate"; whereas the Tribunal in  Adjei  states  that
    any findings concerning compliance with paragraph 41 "will carry little
    weight, especially  if  based  upon  arguments  advanced  only  by  the
    appellant".

29.  Having  considered  the  two  cases  in  the  light  of  our  foregoing
    analysis, we find there is no conflict between them. Both  panels  were
    properly concerned to establish the  limited  ambit  of  an  Article  8
    appeal  in  the  visit  visa  context,  tribunal   judges   having   no
    jurisdiction to allow or dismiss an appeal on the basis of it not being
    in accordance with the rules (or the law).  Both were also concerned to
    establish that the rules on  visitors  and  Article  8  constitute  two
    separate legal regimes.  Even if a person  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41, that  does  not  necessarily  establish  they  win  under
    Article 8; e.g. Article 8(1) may not even be engaged.  That is  why  in
    Mostafa it was emphasised that applicants need to establish that denial
    of a visit has a material impact on their Article  8(1)  rights.   Both
    were also fully aware that  the  proportionality  assessment  conducted
    under Article 8 has to weigh the interests of  the  individual  against
    the interests of the state in the maintenance of effective  immigration
    control.

30.  Seen in this context there is no inconsistency in what each panel  said
    about evidential considerations.  For  the  Tribunal  in  Mostafa  such
    evidence was capable of being weighty.  The statement by  the  Tribunal
    in Adjei (cited above) must be read in  context:  in  that  appeal  the
    judge  had  simply  bypassed  the  ECO's  reasons  for  refusing  entry
    clearance and as a result "based his findings of fact upon the case  of
    one party only" ([10]); and it was "[i]n those circumstances" that "the
    findings of fact carry very little weight."

31.  In any event, even if we are wrong in our analysis of the reasoning  in
    these two cases, we consider it beyond doubt that (i) evidence relating
    to the ability of an appellant to meet the requirements of paragraph 41
    must be relevant to the assessment of whether there is a  violation  of
    Article 8; (ii) this means that it is essential for  a  tribunal  judge
    deciding the Article 8 question to make any findings on  the  basis  of
    all the evidence in the case.  If an appellant is contending  that  the
    ECO was  wrong  about  matters  of  evidence,  relating  to  intention,
    finances etc., then the Tribunal Judge must decide whether that  is  in
    fact so.  He cannot simply rely on the ECO's findings, but neither  can
    he (as happened in Adjei) simply rely on what an appellant avows.

The claimant's case

32.  It will be readily be apparent in light  of  the  foregoing  discussion
    that the judge deviated in at least two key  respects  from  a  correct
    approach.

33.  First, the judge wholly or largely ignored the findings of the  ECO  as
    regards the claimant's overall family circumstances and  its  relevance
    to ascertainment of her true intentions.  The ECO's reasons for refusal
    make very plain that the officer was not  satisfied  the  claimant  had
    strong family ties in India  because  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence
    regarding the whereabouts of the  two  sons  in  India.   In  [41],  as
    conceded by Mr Dhanji, the judge simply noted  descriptively  that  the
    ECO was concerned about lack of details of her  family's  circumstances
    in India.  The judge gave no evaluation and no reasons for  disagreeing
    with those concerns apart from saying that "the basis for  the  refusal
    was weak", and the curious comment that  "the  respondent  ...  decided
    [that] they were not satisfied that [the claimant] would leave  at  the
    end of her visit, without basing this conclusion on any  facts  found".
    The glaring flaw in this comment is that the burden of proof lay on the
    claimant to show only a genuine visit was intended and that, by dint of
    her failure to evidence that she had close family ties  in  India,  the
    ECO was  plainly  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  claimant  had  not
    established that only a visit was intended.  For the decision-maker  at
    least, that was a fact found.  The later assumption  of  the  judge  at
    [13] that the claimant would enter the UK for a six  week  holiday  was
    wholly unreasoned.

34.  The other departure from  a  correct  approach  concerned  the  judge's
    conduct of the Article 8 balancing  exercise.   Despite  beginning  and
    ending [11] with sentences referring to the public interest, the  judge
    did not weigh anything on the public interest side of the scales at all
    - neither  the  public  interest  at  the  general  level  nor  at  the
    particular level.  Further, to the extent that what the judge  said  at
    [11] and [12] might be construed as meaning to convey that  the  public
    interest could tolerate the claimant "[entering] the UK for  a  6  week
    holiday" [13], this evaluation first of  all  did  not  factor  in  the
    public interest at a general level and second it was based not  on  any
    compelling family circumstances, but only on matters  of  economic  and
    logistical  convenience  ("the  economic  reality  of   the   cost   of
    transporting 4 people to India as opposed to one person visiting here";
    "the logistical and practical difficulty of arranging a visit"  (family
    business; children's school)).  It must also be borne in mind that even
    on the claimant's own evidence hers was not a case of a person with  no
    family life at all in her country of origin.  Even if on her account as
    put to the ECO her most important family ties were with her sponsor son
    and family in the UK, it remained that she had ties of some description
    with two sons in India and their families.

35.  For the above reasons we conclude that the FtT Judge  materially  erred
    in law and his decision is to be set aside.


Re-making of decision

36.  We are satisfied we are in a position to re-make the  decision  on  the
    basis  of  the  evidence  before  us  and   the   parties'   respective
    submissions.  The further evidence includes a witness  statement  dated
    January 2015 from the claimant.  Although this post-dates the  date  of
    decision we consider that  in  certain  respects  it  pertains  to  the
    situation as at the date of decision.  We take into  account  that  the
    claimant is an elderly widow, although she has  been  assisted  in  her
    entry clearance application by solicitors.

37.  As regards the claimant's ability  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    visitor rules, we do not consider she discharged the burden of proof on
    her to establish that at the date  of  decision  she  intended  only  a
    family visit.  The evidence does establish that at the date of decision
    she was financially self-sufficient, but it does not establish that she
    was committed to continuing to live in her home in India.  We  consider
    it significant that in contrast to the great importance she attached to
    her ties with her sponsor son and his children,  she  made  no  similar
    reference to the importance  of  her  ties  with  her  sons  and  their
    families, in India.  In her recent statement it is again said that  her
    ties with the latter are close, but even  here  she  gives  very  scant
    details regarding them, even though she says she and her first son live
    in the same house.  In  conjunction  with  the  fact  that  the  latest
    witness  statement  still  lacks  vital   details   about   her   sons'
    circumstances in India, we conclude that her family life ties in  India
    have not been shown to be sufficiently  strong  for  her  to  have  any
    incentive to return there if she went to the UK.   She  had  not  shown
    only a genuine visit was intended.

38.  Turning to the actual - and only - grounds of appeal with which we  are
    concerned, we are satisfied that the claimant has established that  the
    ties she has with the sponsor son and his family constitutes  protected
    family life within Article 8(1).  We note that even though  identifying
    visitor appeals involving close relatives such as a married  couple  as
    the paradigm Article 8(1) scenario, the Tribunal  in  Mostafa  did  not
    rule out other cases.  It is well-established that the notion of family
    life is not confined to parents and children and can include  the  ties
    between near relatives, including grandchildren, "since such  relatives
    play a considerable part in family life" (Marckx  v  Belgium  (1980)  2
    EHRR 330 at [45]); see also Singh v ECO New Delhi [2004] EWCA Civ  1075
    at [21]).  Nor can it be excluded that in such  contexts,  e.g.  family
    bereavement, significant elements of private as well as family life may
    be engaged.

39.  We bear in mind that ties  between  a  parent  and  adult  children  or
    between a grandparent and children will not as a rule constitute family
    life for Article 8(1) purposes unless  there  is  dependency  over  and
    above normal emotional ties: see Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and  Singh
    and Another [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  In light of these authorities  we  are
    prepared to accept that even though not financially  dependent  on  her
    sponsor son, the claimant enjoyed ties with him  and  has  family  that
    went  beyond   the   normal   emotional   ties   between   an   elderly
    mother/grandmother and her sponsor son/grandchildren  and  fall  within
    the scope of Article 8(1).  Although we have set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge, we consider  that  in  relation  to  the
    issue of whether Article 8(1) was engaged he  was  entitled  to  attach
    particular weight to the  evidence  that  the  claimant  had  played  a
    central role in bringing up the  two  grandchildren  (the  judge  heard
    evidence about this from one of them).  There may have been a two and a
    half year gap, but it was known she had tried unsuccessfully before  to
    get a visa.

40.  Whilst in entry clearance cases it is not  to  be  assumed  that  there
    will always be an interference with family life (see e.g. SM and Others
    (Somalia) [2015] EWCA Civ 233; see  also  more  generally  VW  (Uganda)
    (2009) EWCA Civ 5), we are prepared to accept that the decision in this
    case did interfere in the claimant's right to respect for  family  life
    (or, as the Strasbourg Court prefers to describe it in entry  clearance
    cases, did amount to a lack of respect for family life).

41.  Regrettably we are  wholly  unpersuaded,  however,  that  the  decision
    lacked proportionality.   Like the ECO, we consider  the  claimant  had
    not shown she met the requirements of paragraph 41  to  show  that  she
    intended only a genuine visit.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  would
    appear to have concluded otherwise but gave no or no  adequate  reasons
    for adopting that view. In re-making  the  decision  we  must  now,  of
    course, have regard, inter alia, to the claimant's  letter  of  January
    2015. This letter  certainly  assists  us  in  providing  some  further
    details of her family circumstances in India, but it does not  persuade
    us that her family ties in India were as meaningful  to  her  as  those
    with her third son and his children whom she had brought up.  (In  this
    regard we would observe that we do not accept Mr  Bramble's  contention
    that this further letter casts doubt on whether she had in fact brought
    up these children, as the reference she makes to having "hardly resided
    with him" was a reference to the  sponsor,  who  had  gone  to  the  UK
    leaving his children behind; it  was  not  a  reference  to  these  two
    grandchildren.)

42.  Given this background, there was  a  weighty  public  interest  in  not
    permitting the claimant to enter the UK by way of a  visit  for  family
    purposes.  Furthermore, in order to succeed  in  a  claim  outside  the
    visitor rules, a claimant must show a particularly pressing need so  as
    to give rise to compelling circumstances justifying  a  departure  from
    the rules.  This is an instance of  the  operation  of  the  two  stage
    approach: see e.g. SS (Congo).   The  circumstances  identified  by  Mr
    Dhanji  as  arising  in  the  claimant's  case,   in   particular   the
    difficulties in the way of the sponsor son and his family visiting  the
    claimant in  India,  do  not  in  our  judgment  amount  to  compelling
    circumstances.  Indeed, given her  age  it  would  if  anything  appear
    physically easier for the sponsor son and his family to  undertake  the
    necessary journey than the claimant to travel the other  way.   Bearing
    in mind that the claimant has some family ties  in  India,  we  do  not
    consider it disproportionate for her connection with  her  sponsor  son
    and his family in the UK to be maintained by  them  visiting,  even  if
    that cannot be done concurrently.  Because the claimant could not  show
    only a genuine visit was intended, she must fail under Article 8(2)  no
    matter how strong her family ties with her sponsor son and his family.

43.  Accordingly we conclude that:

    The FtT Judge materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.


    The decision we re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 25 August 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

-----------------------
[1] This is unlikely to change, despite the introduction on April  24,  2015
of a Home Office guidance note entitled "Considering human rights claims  in
visit applications", Version 1.0  ,  first  of  all  because  this  document
states that "[t]he starting-point for considering  a  visit  application  is
that a visit does not generally engage human rights"  and  secondly  because
it states that even where a human  rights  claim  is  made  or  accepted  as
impliedly made, it will only be processed as such if it  has   prospects  of
success.  Notwithstanding paragraph 2  of  the  rules,  this  document  also
considers that if entry clearance is granted  on  the  basis  of  the  human
rights claim, it will be done "outside the rules".
[2]  See now the new provisions regarding visitors  in  Appendix  V  to  the
Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

