
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on  the  application  of  Msiza)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00483 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London

                                                      Friday, 14 August 2015


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                            PEGGY PHUMZILE MSIZA
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                               - - - - - - - -

No appearance or representation on behalf of the Applicant

Ms J Gray, instructed by GLD appeared on behalf of the Respondent.



                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                  JUDGMENT
                          (Given orally at hearing)
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


 1. JUDGE LANE: This is an application  by  Ms  Peggy  Msiza  for  judicial
    review of the respondent's decision of 27 February 2014  to  refuse  to
    grant her leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Permission  to  bring
    judicial review proceedings was granted on 6 January 2015.

2.   I need to deal first with the following procedural matter.   There  has
    been no appearance today by the applicant or  anybody  acting  for  the
    applicant. The proceedings hitherto have, at times, been pursued by the
    applicant acting in person; but also at other times  by  the  applicant
    acting through solicitors and other advisers.  That was the position as
    recently as July this year because, amongst the documentation filed  by
    the applicant following a grant of permission, is the skeleton argument
    settled by Mr King Wyn on 20 July 2015.

3.   On 12 August 2015 the applicant submitted a  form  T484  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal at Field House, seeking an  adjournment  of  today's  hearing.
    The stated reason was that the applicant was unable to attend court  on
    14 August 2015 as her barrister was not available  on  this  day.   She
    asked for the case to be adjourned to another  day.   This  application
    was brought before me on 12 August and I refused  it,  instructing  the
    Tribunal's staff to communicate my decision to  the  applicant  and  to
    state that the reason for it was that it was possible for the applicant
    to obtain other Counsel or else attend in person.   I  am  informed  by
    staff that various attempts were made to contact the applicant to  that
    effect but these attempts were unsuccessful, notwithstanding  that  the
    staff used the telephone number given by the  applicant  in  connection
    with these proceedings.

4.   Ms Gray, who appears on behalf of the respondent, tells me  that  those
    instructing her sent a letter to the applicant on Tuesday of this week,
    seeking to make sure she was in possession  of  all  the  documentation
    relevant to today's hearing.  Telephone calls were  also  made  by  the
    Government Legal Department in connection with today's hearing  and  on
    one occasion, at  least,  when  the  telephone  was  answered  and  the
    Government Legal Department asked to speak to the applicant, the person
    who had answered the telephone terminated the call.  Ms Gray invited me
    to proceed in the absence of the applicant.

5.   In all the circumstances it appears to me to  be  entirely  appropriate
    and in accordance with the overriding objective for me to  do  so.  The
    applicant is plainly aware of the hearing scheduled for today; and  has
    been for some time.  The reason she gave for  her  belated  application
    for an adjournment was entirely unpersuasive.  All reasonable  attempts
    have been made to communicate to  the  applicant  the  refusal  of  her
    adjournment application. The  applicant  should,  in  any  event,  have
    realised that, since she had not received a positive response  to  that
    application, she should attend the hearing.  I therefore concluded that
    the applicant has failed to give a satisfactory reason for her  absence
    from the hearing and that it was appropriate, and indeed  desirable  in
    the interests of the overriding objective, for this hearing to proceed

6.   So far as concerns the applicant's history outside the United  Kingdom,
    the facts are as follows.  She was born  in  September  1977  in  South
    Africa, to South African parents.  In 1985, when she was some  8  years
    old, her mother died.  The applicant  was  taken  two  years  later  to
    Zimbabwe to stay with her aunt.  At that point  the  applicant  was  10
    years old.   She  received  her  primary  and  secondary  education  in
    Zimbabwe, up to 1995.  At that  point  her  aunt  died.   In  1996  the
    applicant went back to South Africa in order to study  for,  and  take,
    her A levels.  She went back to  Zimbabwe  in  1997  but  in  1998  she
    returned to South Africa for a period of some four years, in  order  to
    study at university there.    In  2002  she  went  to  Zimbabwe,  after
    completing her degree.

7.   The applicant then contends that difficulties  surrounding  her  family
    arose in Zimbabwe, involving problems with ZANU-PF members.   This  led
    various nieces of the applicant to go to  the  United  States  but  the
    applicant says she was unable to do likewise because of her  work.   In
    2004, she therefore returned to South Africa, coming later in the  same
    year to the United Kingdom.  Whilst in the United Kingdom she  studied;
    indeed, that was the basis upon which she entered the country.

8.   The applicant returned to  South  Africa  in  2005,  while  her  United
    Kingdom visa was still valid, in order  to  apply  from  abroad  for  a
    further student visa.  In 2009 she became  unlawfully  present  in  the
    United Kingdom and that unlawful status continues.

9.   The decision under challenge is that of 27 February 2014.  In order  to
    understand it, we need to see what material was before the  respondent.
    At page 20 of the bundle, there is a  letter  dated  31  January  2014,
    prepared by solicitors acting for the applicant.  It  said  this  about
    her life in South Africa:

         "Our instruction is that though  our  client  is  a  South  African
         national she is not exposed to life in South Africa because she was
         not brought up in South Africa.  Our client informed us that in  or
         around 1985 her mother died and in 1987 she was taken  to  Zimbabwe
         by her only aunt who was then married to a Zimbabwean man.   Whilst
         in  Zimbabwe  our  client  completed  her  primary  and   secondary
         education.  In 1995 our client aunt died  and  she  was  forced  to
         return to South Africa in 1996 to study for her A-Levels.  In  1997
         our client travelled  to  Zimbabwe  to  stay  with  her  niece  and
         returned to South Africa  in  1998  and  studied  in  South  Africa
         University between  1998  and  2002.   During  the  period  of  our
         client's  study  in  South  Africa,  she  experienced   bully   and
         discrimination from the South African public because of her lack of
         exposure to South African culture.   Upon  the  completion  of  her
         degree our client said it was very difficult for  her  to  stay  in
         South Africa and she had to return to Zimbabwe  to  stay  with  her
         niece with the view of working in Zimbabwe."

     There then followed a description of  difficulties  involving  ZANU-PF,
    to which I have already made reference.

10.  The letter continued by stating that "in 2008 our client's father  also
    died and since then she has lost contact with her stepmother  and  does
    not know her whereabouts till date." It  was  then  asserted  that  the
    applicant had established her private life in the United  Kingdom  over
    the past nine years and ten months.  Of that period  she  was  said  to
    have been in the United Kingdom legally for five years and  "only  four
    years and  ten  months  illegally".   The  letter  submitted  that  the
    proportion of time spent legally as opposed to illegally "weigh in  our
    client's favour ... It is  submitted  that  this  exceptional  cultural
    factors will severely limit our client ability  to  enjoy  her  private
    life if she is returned to South Africa" (sic).

11.  As Ms Gray points out, at this point there was no witness statement  or
    any other substantive material underpinning the solicitor's letter.  It
    is against that background that we must look at the decision letter  of
    27 February 2014.

12.  As is normal in cases of this kind, that letter  began  by  considering
    the rules relating to private  life.   The  letter  made  reference  to
    paragraph  276ADE,  setting  out  the  requirements  to  be   satisfied
    including, for our purposes, various  periods  of  time  spent  in  the
    United Kingdom, which it is common ground the applicant cannot meet.

13.  The contentious provision is paragraph  276ADE(vi),  which  deals  with
    the position where a person has not lived continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for twenty years but "has no ties (including  social,  cultural
    or family) with the country to which he would have to go if required to
    leave the UK".  What the decision of February 2014 said about that  was
    as follows:

         "At the time of your application you were aged 36.   You  were  not
         under the age of 18 years.  Neither were you aged 18 years or above
         and under 25 years of age.  Therefore the Secretary of State is not
         satisfied that you can meet the requirements of Rule  276ADE(1)(iv)
         and (v).  Having spent 27 years in your home  country  and  in  the
         absence of any evidence to the contrary, it is not accepted that in
         the period of time that you have been in the UK you have lost  ties
         to your home country and therefore the Secretary of  State  is  not
         satisfied  that   you   can   meet   the   requirements   of   Rule
         276ADE(1)(vi)."

14.  There was  then  an  examination  of  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances, such as to compel the grant of leave outside  the  Rules
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds, after which it was stated in terms  that  no
    such circumstances had been detected.

15.  In granting permission, the judge stated it was arguable:

         "... that there is some misapprehension  of  the  evidence  in  the
         decision letter in that the decision  maker  has  stated  that  the
         applicant spent 27 years in her home  country  whereas  the  letter
         dated 13  January  2014  accompanying  her  application  for  leave
         indicated that she had only lived in South Africa  for  five  years
         between the age of 19 and 24 years, that she has  no  relatives  in
         South Africa and that she has lived in the United Kingdom twice  as
         long as she has lived in South Africa.  If so it is argued that the
         decision maker has not engaged with relevant evidence in that he or
         she has overlooked relevant evidence in the assessment  of  the  no
         ties stipulation  in  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  and  for  this  reason
         arguably given inadequate reasons."

16.  After the grant of permission and, it would seem, as a direct  response
    to it, the respondent issued a further decision letter dated 22 January
    2015, served in February of this year.  That letter again engaged  with
    the issue as to whether there were  exceptional  circumstances  in  the
    applicant's case.  It also referred to  the  issue  of  ties  to  South
    Africa.  At the bottom of its first page, the  letter  correctly  noted
    that, in fact, the applicant had lived in South Africa for  a  combined
    period of fifteen years; that is to say, the first  ten  years  of  her
    life; the year that she spent studying for her A levels; and  the  four
    years that she spent studying at university.

17.  The letter of 22 January continued by stating that it was not  accepted
    by the respondent that in the period of time she has been in the United
    Kingdom the applicant had lost  ties  to  South  Africa.   Nor  was  it
    accepted in those circumstances that she would face obstacles to her re-
    integration into South Africa.  In particular, it was said that:

         "On your client's own evidence, she has spent some of her formative
         and educational years in South Africa.  She speaks English and this
         is the main language in her home country.  It is not accepted  that
         she had no, or little, exposure to  the  cultural  norms  of  South
         Africa.  The Secretary of State acknowledges  that  the  notion  of
         ties involves more than merely remote  or  abstract  links  to  the
         country of origin.   The  Secretary  of  State  has  given  careful
         consideration to the information submitted with the application but
         is not satisfied that your client's links to the way of life in her
         home  country  are  merely  remote  or  abstract.    In   all   the
         circumstances, the Secretary of State is not  satisfied  that  your
         client has no social, cultural or family ties with her home country
         or that it would not be reasonable or proportionate to  expect  her
         to return.  It is noted that your client is a healthy 37  year  old
         female who is considered able to live an independent life in  South
         Africa.  There is nothing to prevent her from having  contact  with
         her friends in the UK by alternative  methods  such  as  telephone,
         Internet, letters and visits.  Your client states that she has been
         educated in the UK, while it is accepted that  she  has  undertaken
         some of her education in the UK it is also noted that  your  client
         has also completed some of her education in South Africa.   In  any
         case there your client would be able to benefit from  using  skills
         and qualifications which she obtained in the UK in  order  to  find
         gainful employment in South Africa."

18.  There then followed an analysis of whether  in  all  the  circumstances
    the applicant's case could be regarded as exceptional,  warranting  the
    grant of leave outside the Rules. Once again, it  was  considered  that
    this was not the case.

19.  The applicant's skeleton argument makes no reference  to  the  decision
    of 22 January 2015. That is  significant  for  the  purposes  of  these
    proceedings.

20.  Ms Gray advances the case  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  on  several
    bases.   First,  she  submits  that,  taken  in  its  own   terms   and
    particularly having regard to the  material  on  which  the  respondent
    based her decision, the original decision  of  February  2014  was  not
    unlawful.  Secondly, she argues that, if the  first  letter  cannot  be
    said to be lawful in its own terms, then any defect in it was corrected
    by the decision of January 2015.

21.  Ms Gray makes that alternative submission by reference to the case  law
    of Nash v Chelsea College of Art and  Design  [2001]  EWHC  538  and  R
    (Hamasour) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 414
    (IAC)[1]. Ms Gray says the position in the  present  proceedings  falls
    within the first of the  three  possibilities  set  out  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in paragraph 17 of the decision in Hamasour; namely, that  the
    second decision should be read as a continuation of the first decision,
    supplementing it and so curing any defects in it.  Ms Gray's "fallback"
    position is that, if that is not so,  then  the  second  of  the  three
    possibilities in paragraph 17 of Hamasour holds good; namely, that  the
    second decision (even though it cannot be read together with the  first
    decision so as to cure the first decision's defects) is lawful  on  its
    own terms, so that the application for judicial review must still  fail
    because it would not be appropriate in the circumstances to  grant  any
    relief.

22.  I have had regard to the submissions made by Ms Gray, both  orally  and
    in writing.  I have come to the conclusion that  the  application  must
    fail and I shall explain why.

23.  The first reason is that I accept Ms  Gray's  primary  submission  that
    the original decision was not, in fact, unlawful in its own  terms.   I
    have spent some time describing the material upon which the  respondent
    made that decision.  It is frankly exiguous.  Even though the statement
    on the second page of the decision, that the  applicant  spent  twenty-
    seven years in her own country, was erroneous, on the  facts  presented
    to  the  respondent,  the  only  rational  answer  to  the  applicant's
    application was the one she received.   The  applicant's  life  history
    showed that she had lived in South Africa for considerable  periods  of
    time.  She had moved between  South  Africa  and  Zimbabwe  on  several
    occasions, not least in order to obtain an education in  South  Africa.
    She was a 37 year old lady with no  known  health  problems.   She  has
    received what appears to be a  high  standard  of  education  in  South
    Africa and has supplemented that by various courses she has  undertaken
    in the United Kingdom.  She speaks English, which is  the  language  of
    South Africa.

24.  The question of "ties" within the meaning of the immigration rules  has
    been the subject of judicial pronouncements in a number of cases.  Most
    recently, perhaps most conveniently as providing a summary of the  law,
    I turn to the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Bossadi  (paragraph  276ADE;
    suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC).  This makes reference  both
    to the earlier Tribunal decision of Ogundimu  (Article  8-  new  rules)
    [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC)  and  the  Court  of  Appeal  judgments  in  YM
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1292 which approved what was said  in  Ogundimu.   This  was  that  the
    natural and ordinary meaning of  the  word  'ties'  imports  a  concept
    involving something more than merely remote and abstract links  to  the
    country of proposed deportation and removal.  It involves there being a
    continued connection to life in that country.

25.  The Upper Tribunal in Ogundimu also stated that the test  of  ties  was
    an exacting one that requires a rounded assessment of all the  relevant
    circumstances and is  not  confined  to  social,  cultural  and  family
    issues.  That statement was approved by the Court of Appeal in  YM  and
    has been reiterated in Bossadi.

26.  What we take from this is that the asserted absence of  family  members
    in the country of nationality of proposed return is in no sense  always
    determinative. In the present case, even  if  the  applicant  has  lost
    touch with her stepmother following the death of her father,  there  is
    no reason to suppose that  she  could  not  re-establish  contact  once
    returned to South Africa. But, even if she could not, she is relatively
    young, has received a good education and in all  the  circumstances  is
    quite manifestly capable of living independently in South Africa.

27.  For those reasons, therefore, I find that the  decision  letter  of  27
    February 2014 is not wrong in  law  despite  the  reference  to  twenty
    seven, as opposed to fifteen years, in South Africa. However,  even  if
    the erroneous reference could be said to be an error capable  of  going
    to the legality of that decision, it is manifest for the reasons I have
    given that the decision would have been bound to have  been  the  same,
    even if the respondent had made it plain she accepted the applicant had
    only lived in South Africa for a total of fifteen years.

28.  However, even if I am wrong in reaching these  findings  regarding  the
    original letter, Ms Gray is correct to  submit  that  the  decision  of
    January 2015 falls to be read as a continuation of the first  decision,
    thus curing any defects there might be in it.  No  challenge  has  been
    made to the decision letter of 22 January 2015.   I  accept  Ms  Gray's
    submissions that it contains no error of law  whatsoever.   It  engages
    fully and in detail with the applicant's history regarding South Africa
    and Zimbabwe.  It is properly reasoned, both as to the  issue  of  ties
    and as to the issue of whether there might be exceptional circumstances
    necessitating an Article 8 grant of leave.

29.  The reason why I  find  the  second  decision  must  be  treated  as  a
    continuation of the first decision is that I agree with Ms Gray that  a
    consideration of the relevant factors, as articulated in  Hamasour  and
    Nash, lead to that conclusion.

30.  In Hamasour the respondent  had  failed  to  take  account  of  various
    strands of substantive evidence, in the form of witness statements  and
    so forth.  By contrast, in the present case, Ms Gray  points  out  that
    the first decision plainly had regard to the submissions  made  by  the
    solicitors acting for the applicant.  The error in that decision was in
    the reference to time spent in South Africa.  This is not, therefore, a
    case in which it could be properly said that the respondent is  seeking
    to generate fresh reasons, by reference to material which she  has  not
    hitherto properly examined.  There has been  a  delay  in  issuing  the
    supplemental letter;  but  I  agree  with  Ms  Gray  that  in  all  the
    circumstances this is not fatal. In other words it does not drive me to
    adopt the  second  of  the  three  possibilities  in  paragraph  17  of
    Hamasour.  I also do not see anything else in  the  relevant  case  law
    that compels the conclusion  that  one  should  regard  the  letter  of
    January 2015 as being divorced from the first  decision.   Accordingly,
    therefore,  reading  those  two  decisions  together,   there   is   no
    unlawfulness on the part of the respondent.

31.  Finally, if I am wrong about that too, then it is manifestly  the  case
    that the second decision of January 2015 dealt lawfully with the  issue
    of time spent in South Africa.  From that  point,  therefore,  it  must
    have been plain to the applicant and her advisers  that  there  was  no
    longer  any  legitimate  purpose  in  pursuing  these  judicial  review
    proceedings.  On this basis also, therefore, it would be  inappropriate
    to grant relief

32.  For all these reasons this application is refused.  ~~~~0~~~~
-----------------------
[1] "(1) Decision 2 is to be read as a continuum of Decision 1 ...
supplementing it and so curing the defects I have found to be disclosed by
it. It thus operates to render lawful Decision 1 where, absent Decision 2
it would not be;
  (2)  Decision 2 cannot be read together with Decision 1 so as to cure the
defects disclosed by it. Decision 2 is relevant only to the issue of
relief, given the discretionary nature of judicial review proceedings;
  (3) Decision 2 is a 'stand alone' decision, not relevant to these
proceedings, even to the extent of being relevant to the relief to be given
but one that may generate its own, quite separate, route of challenge".

