

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Mehmud (timing of deportation notice) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00486(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  6 December                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                tareq mehmud

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms Joanne Rothwell, instructed by CGS Citygate
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms G.Gough, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     1) The Secretary of State may serve a deportation decision under  s.32
        of the UK Borders Act 2007 despite the fact that, unknown  to  her,
        the appellant had lodged a notice of application to appeal  against
        conviction out of time.
     2) A notice of deportation can be  revoked  or  the  appeal  adjourned
        pending an out  of  time  challenge  to  the  conviction  on  which
        automatic deportation depends.


     3) There is a strong public interest in deporting  those  whose  entry
        has been obtained by fraud and who  then  participate  in  a  large
        scale commercial fraud  to  facilitate  illegal  entry  by  use  of
        fraudulent documents.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant, Tareq Mehmud, is a citizen of Bangladesh who  entered
       the United Kingdom in April 2008 with an entry clearance to study at
       Thames College.  He came to live at an address in London  E17  where
       his mother and elder brother Khaled were staying.


    2. In March 2009 the brothers  Tareq  and  Khaled  were  arrested  with
       others  on  suspicion   of   conspiracy   to   facilitate   unlawful
       immigration.  They were remanded in custody. On 18 December 2009  at
       the Croydon Crown Court the appellant was convicted on count one  of
       the indictment, conspiracy to facilitate illegal  entry.  The  other
       conspirators had previously pleaded guilty.  On 15 January 2010  all
       defendants were sentenced. Khaled and the  other  conspirators  were
       sentenced to seven years imprisonment. This appellant was  sentenced
       to four years' imprisonment. The trial judge expected that by reason
       of the conviction and sentence each defendant would  face  automatic
       deportation.

    3. The appellant subsequently appealed against  this  sentence  to  the
       Court of Appeal. He was successful to the extent that  his  term  of
       imprisonment was reduced from four years to three years. As  he  had
       been sentenced to at least twelve months' imprisonment he remained a
       foreign criminal and liable to automatic deportation under  s.32  of
       the UK Borders Act 2007.

    4. His deportation was under consideration by the  Secretary  of  State
       from February 2010. On 4 February 2011 the appellant was served with
       a deportation decision dated 20 January that had been sent  by  post
       to the prison on 1 February. It  was  common  ground  below  that  4
       February 2011 is  the  material  date  of  the  decision  under  the
       statutory scheme.

    5. The appellant appealed on human rights grounds.  He  contended  that
       deportation would be a disproportionate interference with his  right
       to respect for private and family life under  Article  8  ECHR.   He
       further took a preliminary point  that  the  decision  was  unlawful
       because at the material date the appellant had lodged an application
       to appeal against conviction.

    6. The appeal was heard on 12 August 2011 by a panel of the  First-tier
       Tribunal sitting at Newport. It was dismissed. The panel concluded:-

          a. It was not satisfied that by 4 February 2011 an appeal  against
             conviction had been lodged with the Crown Court.
          b. The relationship between the appellant and his  elderly  mother
             and the physical and emotional support he gives her did not lay
             the foundation for an Article 8 claim.
          c. In the alternative if Article 8(1) was engaged:


                  "we would have had  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the
                  respondent  had  established  on  the  evidence  that  the
                  decision to remove the appellant from the  United  Kingdom
                  was entirely proportionate to the legitimate aim sought to
                  be achieved, namely the maintenance of  a  firm  and  fair
                  immigration policy and  the  prevention  of  disorder  and
                  crime".

    7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on grounds of
       appeal drafted by different counsel. Ms Rothwell who came  into  the
       case late  adopted  them  and  we  are  grateful  for  her  succinct
       submissions.


    8. We must now decide in the light of  those  submissions  whether  the
       panel made a material error of law and if so whether we  should  re-
       make the decision for ourselves.

Ground 1: The timing of the decision

    9. Section 34 of the UK Borders Act 2007, under the  heading  'Timing',
       requires a deportation order to be made at  a  time  chosen  by  the
       Secretary of State (s.34(1)). A deportation order may  not  be  made
       (s.34):


          "(2) ....while an appeal or further appeal against the conviction
          or sentence by    reference to which the order is to be made-
                 a)  has  been  instituted   and   neither   withdrawn   nor
                    determined, or
                 b) could be brought.

                 (3) For the purpose of subsection (2)(b) -
                           (a) the possibility of an appeal out of time with
         permission shall be                       disregarded, and
                 (b) a person who has informed the  Secretary  of  State  in
                 writing that  the person does not intend to appeal shall be
                 treated as no longer able to appeal."


   10.  In the bundle of documents that was before the panel  hearing  this
       appeal, was a letter from a firm of solicitors Stephen Fidler and Co
       dated 4 February  2011  addressed  to  the  appellant's  immigration
       solicitors. The first paragraph of the letter stated:


             "We have lodged the appeal against conviction at Croydon Crown
             Court  for  our  above  named  client  who  you  represent  in
             immigration matters."


   11. Stephen Fidler had not represented the appellant at his trial. On 27
       January 2011 an advocate at that firm had advised the appellant that
       he had grounds to appeal against his conviction having regard to the
       way his defence at trial was conducted.


   12. When the case came before  the  panel  on  12  August  counsel  then
       representing the appellant informed it:-

          a. there was no further documentary evidence about the  appeal  or
             the date it was lodged;
          b. inquiries with the  Croydon  Crown  Court  indicated  that  its
             records revealed that it had  been  received  on  12  February,
             while inquiries with the Court of Appeal indicated that it  had
             received the notice on 11 February.

   13. The panel concluded that there was nothing new to indicate that  the
       appeal had been  lodged  with  the  Croydon  Crown  Court  before  4
       February  2011.  This  was  acknowledged   by   the   advocate   who
       nevertheless submitted that the appeal should be adjourned to  await
       the outcome of the application.


   14. The appellant now submits that on this evidence it was not  open  to
       the panel to conclude that the appeal had not been lodged  before  4
       February 2011.

   15.   We  disagree.  Whilst  it  was  open  to  the  appellant  to  have
       substantiated his ground of appeal before  the  panel  by  producing
       evidence from Stephen Fidler of a Notice of  Appeal,  the  date  and
       method of service, he did not do so.

   16.  The date of  service  of  a  notice  of  appeal  is  determined  by
       reference to  rule 4.10 of the Criminal Procedure  Rules  2010  that
       provide:




           "Date of Service
           4.10.-


           (1) A document served under rule 4.3 or rule 4.8 is  served  on
           the day it is handed over.
           (2) Unless something different is shown, a document served on a
           person by any other method is served-
                 (a)  in the case of a document left at an address, on the
                 next business day after the day on which it was left;
                 (b) in the case of a document sent by first class post or
                 by the equivalent of first class post, on the second
                 business day after the day on which it was posted or
                 dispatched;
                 (c) in the case of a document served by document exchange,
                 on the second business day after the day on which it was
                 left at the addressee's DX or at a correspondent DX;
                 (d) in the case of a document transmitted by fax, e-mail or
                 other electronic means, on the next business day after it
                 was transmitted; and
                 (e) in any case, on the day on which the addressee responds
                 to it if that is  earlier."

   17. Where service is effected by First Class post, the date  of  service
       is deemed to be  the  second  day  after  posting  unless  something
       different is shown. There is nothing to  suggest  that  Fidlers  had
       sent out a notice before 4 February. If the firm had sent the notice
       by post on 4 February  (a  Friday)  it  should  have  arrived  on  8
       February. In fact the information before  the  panel  was  that  the
       earliest date of receipt by either court was 11 February  suggesting
       that actual posting had not taken place until the week  beginning  7
       February.


   18.  On the information before it, the panel was not only  entitled  but
       obliged to conclude that no notice had  been  served  on  the  court
       before the date of the deportation decision. The Secretary of  State
       was accordingly entitled to proceed  on  the  basis  of  the  notice
       served on 4 February 2011.

   19.  There is a further point. Whenever the notice of  appeal  had  been
       sent following the advice of 27 January 2011,  it  would  have  been
       considerably beyond the 28 days from conviction laid down by the  s.
       18(2) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968.  No appeal against conviction
       could proceed unless and until the Court had decided to extend  time
       for giving the notice pursuant to s. 18(3) of the 1968 Act and  Rule
       65(4) of the Criminal Procedure Rules 2010  or  its  successors.  Is
       service of an out of time application to extend time for service  of
       the notice of appeal, the institution of an appeal for  the  purpose
       of s. 34(2)(a) of the 2007 Act?

   20. Ms Gough for the respondent points out that by s. 34(3) of the  2007
       Act the draftsman had discounted an out of time application for  the
       purpose of s. 34(2)(b) of  the  2007  Act  and  the  calculation  of
       whether an appeal could be brought. Ms. Rothwell responds that  this
       provision does not apply to s. 34(2)(a) of  the  2007  Act  and  was
       therefore irrelevant to the question  whether  an  appeal  had  been
       instituted when an application for permission to appeal had actually
       been lodged.

   21. We should apply the words of s. 34 in the light of  its  object  and
       purposes.  We conclude it is a section whose  function  is  to  make
       clear when the Secretary of State can and cannot serve a deportation
       decision. If a decision is served but subsequent  information  comes
       to light, it is open to the decision-maker to withdraw or revoke  it
       under s. 34(4) or to consent to an adjournment of an appeal  pending
       the determination of an application for permission to  appeal.  That
       is a matter of the lawful exercise of discretion: if the appellant's
       construction of the statute  is  right,  service  of  a  deportation
       decision can be prevented by a purely opportunistic  service  of  an
       out-of-time application for permission to  extend  time  and  appeal
       without  any  basis  for  either.  We  consider  it  unlikely   that
       Parliament intended this to  be  the  case  in  a  provision  headed
       "Timing" where it seems that clarity  was  intended  as  to  when  a
       decision can be served.

   22.  In our judgment, s. 34(2) read as a whole means that the  Secretary
       of State  can  serve  a  decision  to  deport  after  28  days  from
       conviction  unless by the end of that period an application has been
       instituted to the Court of Appeal by service of a  notice  and  that
       application has not been determined or withdrawn.  The 28 day period
       can be shortened if the claimant informs the Secretary of  State  in
       writing that there will be no appeal. If no appeal has  been  lodged
       before the expiry of the  28  days,  then  a  late  application  for
       permission to appeal out of time does not prevent the  Secretary  of
       State from serving the notice to deport. We conclude that Parliament
       did not expressly apply s. 34(3) to s.  34(2)(a)  of  the  2007  Act
       because it did not consider there was  a  need  to  as  it  did  not
       contemplate that the lodging of application for permission to appeal
       out of time was the institution of an  appeal  within  the  section.
       The answer to the question posed at  the  end  of  paragraph  19  is
       accordingly 'no'.

   23.  For both reasons (or either) ground 1 fails. If there is an out  of
       time application, a claimant can serve it on the Secretary of  State
       and  invite  her  to  defer  service  of  a  decision  or  agree  an
       adjournment of an appeal but there is no statutory bar to  a  notice
       being served.

    Ground 2: Refusal to transfer hearing

   24.  On 12  August  2011  the  appellant  repeated  an  application  for
       transfer of the hearing from Newport to  London  to  facilitate  the
       attendance of  his  mother.   The  panel  refused  the  application,
       pointing out that similar applications had been made on 30 June  and
       25 July, on the last occasion accompanied by a  statement  from  his
       mother stating that her movements are seriously restricted  and  she
       is largely wheelchair-bound. The applications were  refused  in  the
       absence of medical evidence indicating that the  appellant's  mother
       was unable to travel to Newport in her present medical state. On  10
       August the same application was renewed by fax with a letter from  a
       treating physician Dr  Williams.  Whilst  explaining  her  long-term
       condition this letter did not suggest  that  the  mother  could  not
       travel to Newport.  Indeed it indicated that her condition had shown
       a great of deal of improvement over the past few  years.  The  panel
       noted that the mother had been able to travel from  E17  to  see  Dr
       Williams in Waterslade in Kent and had been to visit  the  appellant
       at one of the prisons he was detained in.


   25. If the appellant's mother was still using  a  wheelchair  in  August
       2011  (as to which there was no evidence), there was  no  reason  to
       suggest that she could not make the journey by train to Newport  and
       then access the hearing centre. A shortage of funds  to  travel  was
       never said to be a problem.

   26. We conclude on the state of the information  before  them  that  the
       panel was entitled to refuse this application for a fourth time  and
       the position had been made crystal clear by the  fax  of  10  August
       rejecting the last such application.


   27.  There was no unfairness to the appellant in this decision.  He  was
       able to rely on his mother's written statement that was not  subject
       to cross examination. The panel did not give  diminished  weight  to
       what she was telling them by reason of her  non-attendance.  It  was
       fully aware of and took into her account  her  contribution  to  the
       case. We reject the submission that the panel made an error  of  law
       by their failure to accede to this late repeated  application,  made
       without the material that had been  previously  indicated  would  be
       needed to support it. This ground also fails.

    Ground 3:  Article 8


   28.  Ms. Rothwell finally submitted that whereas the Secretary of  State
       had accepted that private life was engaged in this case,  the  panel
       fell into error in reaching a different conclusion. This  error  was
       not saved by its consideration of proportionality in the alternative
       as there was no evidence of a balancing exercise or  the  structured
       decision making commended in R v SSHD ex parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
       28, [2004] 2 AC 368.


   29.  We think the panel's decision on  this  question  might  have  been
       better expressed. The appellant was aged  35  at  the  time  of  the
       decision.  He had shared a home with his mother for some  11  months
       before his arrest during which time he had given her some support as
       a son with her health and mobility problems caused by her rheumatoid
       arthritis. It was  a  perfectly  sensible  conclusion  of  both  the
       Secretary of State and the panel to conclude  that  this  degree  of
       support over this period of time  provided to and by  mature  adults
       was not an aspect of family life within the meaning of Article 8 (1)
       and the case law on the question. We can, however, see no reason  to
       disagree with the respondent's assessment that this was evidence  of
       private life and the panel did not give any.

   30.  Neverthess the real question in this case is whether it was private
       life to which respect should  be  afforded  and/or  whether  it  was
       private life of such a nature and the  consequences  of  removal  so
       serious that the  immigration  decision  could  be  said  to  be  an
       interference with it -  see  Omotunde  (best  interests  -  Zambrano
       applied - Razgar) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 247 (IAC). Such an  assessment
       needs to be made in the context of the case as a whole.

   31.   It  is  now  necessary  to  consider  the  circumstances  of   the
       appellant's stay in this country and  the  nature  of  his  criminal
       offending.  The following points emerge from the sentencing  judge's
       remarks:-

          a. From 2003 to 2009 the appellant's elder brother and  the  other
             conspirators had been  running  a  fraudulent  operation  where
             false  documentation  was  issued  suggesting   that   overseas
             students were studying for an  educational  course  within  the
             meaning of the Rules at Thames College.
          b. Fees of some �3 million had been collected by the  conspirators
             in pursuit of this scheme  to  deceive  the  Home  Office  into
             granting entry clearance documents and extensions of stay.  The
             college provided no such courses.
          c. The appellant was himself aware of  the  bogus  nature  of  the
             college and the courses it claimed it was running as he  was  a
             junior partner in the conspiracy from 2008 until his arrest. He
             was an enthusiastic recruit to the fraud and played his role in
             it at the instigation of his brother.
          d. This was a very serious offence because it was not merely  high
             value fraud, it facilitated the admission of foreign  nationals
             to the United Kingdom who had  no  basis  to  be  here  and  it
             deceived the Home Office into granting extensions of stay on  a
             false basis.  It  seriously  undermined  the  whole  scheme  of
             immigration  control  and  public  confidence  in   immigration
             decision making.

   32.  From  this  it  is  apparent  that  the  appellant  himself  was  a
       beneficiary of a fraudulent scheme and he had  no  lawful  basis  of
       stay in the United Kingdom.  He had not come to the  United  Kingdom
       as a family member to look after his mother. She had  been  able  to
       cope for a number of years without him,  and  had  coped  when  both
       brothers were in prison. Her mobility was improving.  At the time of
       the decision she had been granted successive extensions of stay as a
       medical visitor but it was always open to her to join her  sons  and
       return to her husband in Bangladesh who was said to be a man of some
       financial substance and who supported her here.

   33. In summary, the appellant had resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
       eleven months before his arrest having entered on a  visa  that  had
       been obtained by deception that he was a genuine student  at  Thames
       College. The fact that leave to enter  or  remain  was  obtained  by
       false  documents  and   representations   is   a   highly   material
       consideration in the assessment of Article 8 private life. This  was
       not a case where irregular entry had to be made as an asylum seeker,
       but it appears that  the  appellant  had  entered  as  part  of  his
       brothers' fraudulent scheme.

   34.  In our judgment any reasonable assessment of this case  would  have
       led to the conclusion that there was no interference with the  right
       to respect for private life  within  the  meaning  of  Article  8(1)
       applying the structured approach in Razgar and Omotunde (above).  We
       therefore conclude that the panel was entitled to conclude that this
       was not a case where the interference  needed  justification  albeit
       that there was some private life enjoyed between the  appellant  and
       his mother while she remained here.

   35.  Moreover, the panel was right to conclude that the public  interest
       case for deportation of the appellant was a compelling one  for  the
       reasons given by the panel, acknowledging the sentencing remarks  of
       the judge and the Secretary of State's reasons in the  case.  Whilst
       Parliament has legislated so that any foreigner who commits a  crime
       as an adult is liable to deportation subject  to  the  human  rights
       exception if a sentence of at least twelve months  is  imposed,  the
       proportionality of the justification for  interference  with  family
       and private life is not equal in all such cases.

   36.  Under  the  present  legislative  arrangements  the  assessment  of
       proportionality on appeal  is  for  the  Tribunal  judiciary  having
       regard to the strength and nature of the family and/or private  life
       on the one hand and the legitimate aim  on  the  other  and  to  the
       strength of this case for deportation as a fair balance and as being
       necessary in support of that aim.

   37. The legitimate aim of the prevention of crime  is  not  confined  to
       criminals who are likely to  re-offend.   A  sequence  of  decisions
       before and after the passage of s.32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
       makes clear that in very serious cases affecting  public  confidence
       in the criminal justice  and  immigration  systems,  deportation  of
       offenders has a legitimate role of play in the deterrence of  others
       who might be minded to offend: see for example N (Kenya) [2004] EWCA
       Civ 1094 and OH (Serbia) [2008] EWCA Civ 694.

   38. The Secretary of State no longer has  a  policy  that  distinguishes
       between classes of offences and offenders who are potentially liable
       to automatic deportation, but the evidence recorded in the  decision
       of Samaroo v SSHD [2001] EWCA Civ 1139 remains a helpful  source  of
       information  for  judges  to  consider  in  support  of  their   own
       assessments. In addition to those classes of very  serious  offences
       that gravely perturb  public  safety  and  confidence  in  the  law:
       serious sexual violence,  the  deliberation  infliction  of  serious
       bodily harm on another, the use of firearms  and  related  dangerous
       weapons, persistent and organised fraud,  trafficking  of  drugs  or
       people, commercial supply of class A drugs, there is conduct that is
       not merely serious crime but undermines immigration control as well,
       of which this case is an exemplar.

   39. In our judgment the closer the offending is connected to patterns of
       immigration,  as importation of drugs, trafficking  of  people   and
       facilitating illegal entry may all be, the  stronger  the  case  for
       deterrence by marking out society's rejection  of  such  conduct  by
       deportation as a supplementary preventive measure  to  the  sentence
       actually served.  This does not mean that only in these  classes  or
       in all of these classes will  deportation  be  proportionate.  Where
       there  is  genuine  family  life  between   the   claimant   and   a
       spouse/stable partner and the  welfare  of  minor  children  are  at
       stake, serious obstacles may  still  prevent  removal,  particularly
       where the other family member is  a  British  national  who  can  be
       reasonably expected to want to continue residence in  their  country
       of nationality.


   40.  However, there is no family life engaged in this case; there are no
       minor  children  to  consider;  none  of  the  those   affected   by
       deportation are British,  and  it  is  plainly  still  open  to  the
       appellant's mother to join her husband in Bangladesh albeit that she
       now has the right of indefinite residence here.  The  appellant  had
       limited leave  to  enter  and  remain  infected  by  fraud  and  has
       committed a serious offence that undermines immigration control  and
       respect for the law intimately connected to his own admission to the
       country.  Not  only  was  the  panel  entitled  to   conclude   that
       deportation was justified, on  the  evidence  before  it,  no  other
       conclusion was reasonably open to it.

   41. In the circumstances none of the grounds relied on  demonstrate that
       the panel made an error of law, and  any  lack  of  clarity  on  the
       question  of  whether  there  was  private  life  was  marginal  and
       incapable of having any impact on the decision.

   42. Overall we conclude that the panel made no material error of law  in
       the decision to which it came. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.






                               Signed


                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                                   Immigration and Asylum Chamber

