
[pic]

           In the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on  the  application  of  Turay)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00485 (IAC)

Heard at
Birmingham Civil Justice Centre
On 28 May 2015



             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                       The Queen on the Application of
                                FATMATA TURAY
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Mr C McCarthy, instructed by Bhatia Best Solicitors appeared behalf of the
Applicant.
Miss N Candlin, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent



                                  JUDGMENT

   1. This is an application for judicial review, with permission granted by
      His Hon. Judge McKenna.  The decision challenged by the claim form  is
      a decision of the respondent on 11 March 2014 refusing  the  applicant
      leave to remain.  The proceedings were issued on the last day  of  the
      period of three months following that date,  on  10  June  2014.   The
      grant of permission was on 30 October 2014 and the hearing  before  me
      was on 28 May 2015.  At that  hearing  I  was  provided  with  copious
      authorities and a skeleton argument by Mr McCarthy on  behalf  of  the
      applicant.  In such circumstances it is easy  to  lose  sight  of  the
      crucial facts and chronology, which do not always appear very  readily
      from Mr McCarthy's grounds or his  skeleton  argument.   They  are  as
      follows.


   2. The applicant is a national of Guinea.   She  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom in 2005.  After an unsuccessful asylum application her  appeal
      rights were exhausted on 14 July 2005.  She has since remained in  the
      United Kingdom unlawfully.  In 2005, shortly after  her  arrival,  she
      met Mohammed Thullah.  She and  he  began  what  is  described  as  "a
      relationship" straightaway.  He had arrived in the United Kingdom from
      Sierra Leone in 2002.  His status in the United Kingdom  between  2002
      and 2011 is not  indicated  in  the  applicant's  case.   In  2011  he
      obtained British citizenship.  The applicant and Mr Thullah married in
      the United Kingdom on 18 August 2012 and lived together.


   3. On 6 November 2012 the applicant applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a
      partner of a  British  citizen.   The  application  was  made  on  the
      appropriate form and a copy of  it  has  been  provided  to  me.   The
      application was accompanied by the marriage certificate, evidence that
      the couple lived together and shared financial  responsibilities,  and
      the necessary English language test  certificate.   The  questions  in
      what is notoriously a lengthy form are answered in a  clear  and  firm
      hand and, throughout, the form appears to  be  entirely  legible.   It
      indicates that the couple have no children and that  neither  of  them
      has any children of his or her own and gives other  details  of  their
      relationship as sought.  Question 6.12 is as follows:


         "Could you and  your  sponsor  live  together  outside  the  UK  if
         necessary?
           Yes (  ) No (  )
           If no, please provide details."


      The question is answered by ticking the box marked yes, and no details
      are provided.  The form goes on to ask  questions  about  income,  and
      full details are given showing Mr  Thullah's  income  as  �19,000  per
      year.

   4. There was a considerable delay before the applicant had a response  to
      that application.   Following  an  enquiry  by  Mr  Thullah's  MP  the
      decision was issued, as I have said,  on  11  March  2014.   It  is  a
      structured decision working first through the  principal  requirements
      for leave as a partner under Appendix FM to the Statement  of  Changes
      in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended), then under  the  exceptions
      to the general rules, and then  on  the  question  whether  discretion
      should be exercised in the applicant's favour.


   5. The answers given are as follows.  First, the applicant did  not  meet
      the general requirements for leave to remain as a partner, because she
      was in the United Kingdom in breach of immigration laws,  having  been
      an overstayer since 2005.  Secondly, she did not meet the requirements
      of paragraph EX.1.  The relevant wording is that:


          "(b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
          a partner who is in the UK and is a British  citizen,  settled  in
          the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,
          and there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  that
          partner continuing outside the UK."


      The decision on that issue is as follows:


          "It is acknowledged that you have a subsisting relationship with a
          British citizen, however it is not accepted you have  demonstrated
          there would be any insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with
          your partner continuing outside the UK.  You  have  not  submitted
          any evidence why your sponsor would be unable to accompany you  to
          Guinea.  Therefore it is not accepted paragraph EX.1  would  apply
          in your individual circumstances."


   6. So far as discretion is concerned, the decision is very terse:


          "Consideration has also been given as to whether  an  exercise  of
          discretion in your favour should be given, however  the  Secretary
          of  State  has  decided  it  would  not  be  appropriate  in  this
          instance."


   7. In the mean time, the applicant had, apparently in November 2013, been
      diagnosed as HIV positive.  Although, as I have said, she  appears  to
      have been actively seeking a response to her application, she did  not
      draw the diagnosis to the attention of the Secretary of State.   That,
      together with other matters  upon  which  the  applicant  now  relies,
      appears to have been disclosed to the Secretary of State for the first
      time in a witness statement supporting the  application  for  judicial
      review.  The copy of the witness statement in the Tribunal  bundle  is
      dated 9 June 2014.


   8. The Secretary of State's acknowledgement of service was late, as it so
      often is.  The summary grounds of defence respond to the challenge  to
      the decision  of  March  2014:  they  do  not  purport  to  deal  with
      additional  facts  asserted  in  the  applicant's  then  new   witness
      statement.  Following the grant of permission the Secretary  of  State
      considered the matters of which she was then aware and on 18  December
      2014 wrote supplementing her original decision,  taking  into  account
      the contents of the  applicant's  witness  statement,  and  indicating
      that, even taking those matters into account, the adverse decision  on
      the original application was  maintained.   The  detailed  grounds  of
      defence refer to that supplementary letter as remedying any defect  in
      the original consideration of the applicant's application.  In a reply
      to the supplementary grounds, undated, the applicant submits that  the
      defendant is  not  entitled  to  rely  on  the  supplementary  reasons
      "insofar as the decision addresses facts which were known to the  SSHD
      at the time of her original decision".


   9. The grounds of challenge advanced in the  judicial  review  claim  are
      that the decision  of  March  2014  is  not  in  accordance  with  the
      immigration rules "interpreted in light of the requirements of article
      8, ECHR"; that the Secretary of State has "unlawfully failed to  apply
      immigration rules adopting a  proportionality  assessment";  that  the
      Secretary of State has acted in breach of  the  "Tameside  public  law
      obligation to make further enquiries, such as when necessary in  order
      to reach a lawful decision"; and that she has failed to  give  lawful,
      adequate and intelligible reasons enabling the claimant to  understand
      the basis upon which the decision has  been  reached.   Those  reasons
      were expanded by Mr McCarthy before me.


  10. In view of  Mr  McCarthy's  objection  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
      attempted  reliance  on  the  supplementary  decision  letter,  it  is
      convenient to consider the claim on the basis upon which it was  made,
      in response to the decision which had by then  been  taken.   On  that
      basis, the decision is challenged on the ground that the defendant had
      failed to apply the relevant tests within the immigration  rules,  had
      failed to consider article 8 outside the rules,  had  failed  to  make
      further enquiries, and had failed to consider paragraph 276ADE of  the
      Immigration Rules on the basis of the applicant's private life.  Those
      submissions  are   supported   by   various   assertions   about   the
      circumstances of the claimant and her husband.


  11. The difficulty is, however, that  neither  in  those  submissions  nor
      elsewhere does Mr McCarthy deal with the  applicant's  own  answer  to
      question 6.12 in the application form.  In the course of  the  hearing
      he suggested that the question would have been answered differently if
      the applicant  had  had  legal  advice.   That  is  a  very  troubling
      suggestion.  There is nothing on the form or elsewhere to suggest that
      the answer (or indeed any  other  content  of  the  form)  was  either
      mistaken or untruthful.  The position is that the original application
      made to the Secretary of State unambiguously included the  information
      that the applicant and her husband could  live  together  outside  the
      United Kingdom if necessary.  Mr McCarthy's submissions  construct  an
      argument that the applicant and her husband could  not  live  together
      outside the United Kingdom: but that is not  what  she  herself  said.
      There are, as Mr McCarthy points out, certain features  of  their  own
      circumstances, and their relationship, which, if they had chosen to do
      so, might have enabled them to make the argument Mr McCarthy now seeks
      to make on their behalf.  But  that  is  not  what  was  said  in  the
      application.  And to suggest that, reading an  application  containing
      information such as that which was contained in this application,  the
      Secretary of State should have made some assumption that the answer to
      this question (but, apparently, not to any of the other  questions  on
      the form) should be an object of suspicion and  further  investigation
      is simply  absurd.   The  Secretary  of  State  was  dealing  with  an
      application by a person in a relationship which was both long-term and
      formal: but it was an application by  a  person  who  recognised  that
      living outside the United Kingdom was an option for the couple.  There
      was  no  proper  basis  upon  which  the  Secretary  of  State   could
      conceivably  have  been  required  to  override  the  applicant's  own
      assertion and investigate whether, contrary to what she herself  said,
      there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  her  husband
      continuing outside the United Kingdom.


  12. So far as concerns article 8 outside the rules, the position  is  that
      nothing in the application before the  Secretary  of  State  gave  any
      reason why the applicant's case should be regarded as  one  where  the
      applicant had a right under article 8 to reside in the United  Kingdom
      despite failure  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules.   In  Mr
      McCarthy's submissions,  he  emphasised  a  phrase  from  one  of  the
      authorities (R (Ganesabalan) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  2712  (Admin)),  a
      decision of Michael Fordham QC sitting as a Deputy High Court  Judge),
      and the need to consider "the seriousness of  the  difficulties  which
      the spouse is  likely  to  encounter  in  the  country  to  which  the
      applicant  is  to  be  expelled".   But  the  application  before  the
      Secretary of State did not suggest that any  difficulties  that  might
      subsequently be identified by the applicant's legal team were such  as
      to affect the application or  the  ability  of  the  parties  to  live
      together outside the United Kingdom.


  13. Mr McCarthy's submissions continue by asserting that the Secretary  of
      State should have  considered  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
      Rules.  So far as relevant, that paragraph reads  on the relevant date
      as follows:


           "(1) The requirements to be met by an  applicant  for  leave  to
           remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
           date of the application, the applicant
           ...
           (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK
           for less than 20 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)
           but has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with  the
           country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the
           UK".


  14.  Mr McCarthy criticises the Secretary of State for failing to consider
      whether this paragraph applied:  particularly  because  "the  Claimant
      [sic] has a very strong case that she has no  ties  to  Guinea".   The
      Secretary of State, in Mr McCarthy's  submission,  did  not  "ask  the
      right questions".   This  argument  again  is  wholly  without  merit.
      Paragraph 276ADE is inapplicable from its threshold: the applicant was
      not "an applicant for leave to remain on the grounds of  private  life
      in the UK".  Her application was unambiguously for leave to remain  as
      a spouse.  Secondly, all the facts to which  Mr  McCarthy  refers  are
      facts declared by the applicant only after the date  of  the  decision
      under challenge.  The Secretary of State's decision was  the  response
      to the application made, not to some other application  made  on  some
      other grounds which Mr McCarthy might now think  ought  to  have  been
      made.  Despite the interval between the  applicant's  application  and
      the Secretary of State's decision, the applicant did not bring to  the
      Secretary of State's attention any material other than that which  was
      in the application.  As I  have  noted,  this  is  the  case  even  in
      relation to her HIV diagnosis.


  15. Although the matter is not fully explored in  Mr  McCarthy's  skeleton
      argument, he also argues that the Secretary of State  failed  to  give
      proper reasons, particularly in relation to her decision not to  grant
      leave as a matter of discretion.  The Secretary  of  State's  decision
      was that the applicant had no right to have leave  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom.  No basis has ever been  suggested  for  granting  her
      leave other than on the basis that she had a  right  to  it.   In  the
      circumstances, the Secretary of State's treatment of  this  issue  was
      wholly adequate.  Even now there is, as I understand it, no suggestion
      that the applicant is a person whose circumstances merit  a  grant  of
      leave to remain other than on the basis of entitlement.  Even if  some
      public law error could be identified in the passage  of  the  decision
      letter dealing with discretion, there would be no proper ground for  a
      grant of relief.


  16. Thus, in my judgement as a response to the application actually  made,
      the decision letter of 11 March 2014 was wholly adequate and apposite.
       The challenge is based on a presentation of the applicant's case that
      is different to the way in which she presented it to the Secretary  of
      State.  That challenge is simply hopeless.


  17. I turn now to Mr McCarthy's objection  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
      reliance on her supplementary letter.  It is of course perfectly clear
      that the supplementary letter is not a new  decision;  it  is  equally
      clear that the applicant's challenge is to the decision  of  11  March
      2014 and that, as the authorities show, the Tribunal should be wary in
      allowing the Secretary of State to provide  ex  post  facto  reasoning
      supporting  a  challenged  decision,  after  seeing  the  grounds   of
      challenge to  it.   In  judicial  review  proceedings  of  this  sort,
      however, it is commonplace for the Secretary of State  to  update  her
      decision and reasons, in the light of material provided at the time of
      the judicial review proceedings or subsequently.  See, for example,  R
      (Islam) v SSHD [2015] EWHC 1049 (Admin).  In such  circumstances,  the
      formal position is no doubt that the Secretary  of  State  offers  the
      supplemental letter  as  part  of  her  response  to  the  claim;  the
      applicant  thereupon  adjusts  his  position  in  order  to  meet  the
      Secretary of  State's  case  as  it  is  now  said  to  be.   Save  in
      exceptional circumstances, the Court or Tribunal is likely to dispense
      with requirements for leave to amend grounds, and  simply  proceed  on
      the pragmatic  basis  that  the  applicant  wants  to,  and  needs  to
      challenge the Secretary of State's position taken as a  whole  on  the
      basis of all the material available at the time.  There is  usually  a
      considerable advantage for the applicant, because  any  material  that
      has been brought to the Secretary of State's attention only after  the
      decision originally under challenge can be taken into account  by  the
      Court and the Secretary of State, without  the  applicant  needing  to
      make a new, paid for  application  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  and
      without having to bring fresh, possibly costly, proceedings if the new
      application is refused.


  18. In the present case, however, Mr McCarthy's position is  clearly  that
      he does not apply to amend his grounds  in  order  to  deal  with  the
      Secretary  of  State's  supplementary  letter:  he  objects   to   the
      consideration of that letter, save in one respect  to  which  I  shall
      return.  In my judgement he is wholly entitled to take  that  position
      if so instructed or advised.  As such, his challenge is the one  which
      I have already dealt with,  that  is  to  say  the  challenge  to  the
      Secretary of State's decision on the 11 March 2014 and on the basis of
      the material then before her.


  19. As noted earlier, however, Mr McCarthy confines the full force of  his
      criticism of the supplementary letter to its dealing with matters that
      he says were already known to the Secretary of State, even if the  way
      in which the appellant seeks to present the facts  can  be  determined
      only from post-decision material.  In relation to the applicant's  HIV
      diagnosis, however, he accepts that it could not have formed  part  of
      the Secretary of State's initial consideration.  He therefore proposes
      that the Secretary of State's response to that fact alone be separated
      from the rest of the supplementary decision and form  the  subject  of
      challenge in the present proceedings.


  20. In principle, that submission seems to me to be  unsatisfactory.   The
      Secretary of State purports, in  the  original  decision  taken  as  a
      whole, supplemented by the supplementary letter taken as a  whole,  to
      consider the applicant's  circumstances  as  a  whole.   Although  the
      various issues are dealt with separately, the conclusion has to be one
      which reflects the facts as a whole.  The Secretary of State has never
      been asked to make a decision on the basis upon which Mr McCarthy  now
      suggests the Tribunal should now make a decision: that is to  say,  on
      the facts disclosed on the original application with the  addition  of
      the diagnosis and nothing else.  I do not consider that  it  would  in
      general be right to try to divide up a supplementary decision in  this
      way.


  21. In any  event,  however,  there  are  reasons  why  it  would  not  be
      appropriate in the present case.   It  will  be  remembered  that  the
      diagnosis pre-dated the  Secretary  of  State's  decision.   The  only
      reason why it is not a feature of the original decision  is  that  the
      applicant chose to await a decision on the application  that  she  had
      made, rather than seeking to supplement it with new facts.   In  order
      to  enable  the  Secretary  of  State's  response  to  the  diagnosis,
      contained in the supplementary decision letter, to be the  subject  of
      challenge in these proceedings, Mr McCarthy would have to make on  the
      applicant's behalf an application to amend his  grounds  in  order  to
      include a challenge to the Secretary of State's response  to  the  HIV
      diagnosis, which was not a part of the factual matrix of the  decision
      of  11  March  2014,  challenged  in  these  proceedings.   No  formal
      application has been made.  If it had been made, I should have refused
      it for two reasons: one for the general reason I have just given;  the
      second because the failure to deal with the  matter  in  the  original
      decision derives wholly from the applicant's own conduct.


  22. The position is  therefore  that  the  applicant's  challenge  to  the
      original decision fails.  No doubt she is at liberty  to  make  a  new
      application, based on the new material and new  arguments  upon  which
      she now relies, if she chooses to do so.  The application for judicial
      review is dismissed.


  23. There remains the question of costs.   Mr  McCarthy  makes  relatively
      detailed submissions on this issue,  relying  on  the  fact  that  the
      respondent failed to comply with the requirements either of the  rules
      or of the decision of this Tribunal in R (Kumar) v  SSHD  [2012]  UKUT
      104 (IAC).  My description above of the challenge as "hopeless"  might
      be regarded as somewhat  surprising,  given  that  the  applicant  had
      permission to bring this claim.  The applicant, however, and her legal
      representatives, have a duty of candour to the  Tribunal.   In  making
      the claim, the applicant ought to have indicated the contents  of  the
      application to which the Secretary of State's decision was a response,
      including in particular the crucial answer to question 6.12,  and  the
      lack of any indication of  any  difficulties  that  the  couple  would
      experience abroad.  If the facts had been set out in that way,  it  is
      in my judgement virtually inconceivable  that  permission  would  have
      been granted, even without an acknowledgement of service.


  24. In these circumstances I see no reason to depart from the  usual  rule
      that costs follow the event, and I  anticipate  making  an  order  for
      costs in the respondent's favour.





                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 14 August 2015

