

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


     T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 November 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-KINGSTON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      T
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Palmer, instructed by Immigration UK
Partnership



     i) Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
        does not apply to children who are outside the United Kingdom.


    ii) Where there are reasons to believe that a child's  welfare  may  be
        jeopardised   by   exclusion   from   the   United   Kingdom,   the
        considerations of  Article  8  ECHR,  the  "exclusion  undesirable"
        provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  extra  statutory
        guidance to Entry Clearance Officers to apply  the  spirit  of  the
        statutory guidance in certain circumstances  should  all  be  taken
        into account by the ECO at first instance and the judge on appeal.

   iii) When the interests of the child are under consideration in an entry
        clearance case, it may be necessary  to  make  investigations,  and
        where appropriate having regard to age, the child herself may  need
        to be interviewed.


    iv) Where the appeal can be fairly determined  on  the  merits  by  the
        judge,  it  is  inappropriate  to  allow  it  without   substantive
        consideration simply for a decision to be made in  accordance  with
        the law.

     v) It is difficult to contemplate a scenario where a  s.  55  duty  is
        material to an immigration decision and indicates a certain outcome
        but Article 8 does not.

A copy of the statutory guidance "Every Child Matters, Change for  Children"
issued by the United Kingdom Border Agency in November 2009 and referred  to
in paragraph 18 of this determination, can  be  accessed  at  the  following
link:

http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/documents/policyandlaw/legisla
tion/bci-act1/change-for-children.pdf?view=Binary



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

   1.   This is a case concerned with a child born on 12  December  1995  in
      Jamaica who at the time of the hearing before us was a few days  short
      of her 16th birthday.  We will direct that she should be  referred  to
      as T and there shall be no publication of her name and address or that
      of her mother to whom we shall refer as C.


   2.   The subject matter is an appeal against the decision  of  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer, Kingston to refuse to issue T with entry  clearance
      to join C in the United Kingdom under paragraph 298 of the Immigration
      Rules HC 395. The ECO, Kingston was originally the respondent  to  T's
      appeal but is now the  appellant  before  us.  For  the  avoidance  of
      confusion we will call the ECO the  defendant.  The  case  was  listed
      before us with the Secretary of State as the appellant,  but  although
      the ECO acts pursuant to instructions issued by the Secretary of State
      we conclude that the ECO is  the  proper  party  to  this  appeal  and
      accordingly appears as such in the title to this determination.


   3.   On 7  July  2011  Judge  VA  Osborne  determined  the  appeal  on  a
      preliminary point without hearing any evidence or making any  findings
      of fact. She allowed the appeal to the extent that it was remitted  to
      the Entry Clearance Officer to give proper  consideration  to  matters
      arising under s.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
      2009 ("BCIA"). The defendant sought permission to appeal on the  basis
      that the s.55 duty did not apply to the ECO.  Permission  was  granted
      on 1 August 2011 and directions were issued by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Freeman on 30 August 2011 when he indicated his view that  "the  judge
      was clearly wrong not to deal with the  case  herself"  and  that  the
      Upper Tribunal was likely to re-make the decision without any  further
      evidence.


   4.   The issues before us are:-

        a. Did the First-tier Tribunal Judge make a material error  of  law
           in reaching the conclusions that she did?
        b. If so, what should now be done to determine this appeal?

   5. At the conclusion of the hearing we indicated our conclusion  that:-


        a. The judge had made a material error of law.
        b. This appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  with
           directions for a hearing at the first available date  after  six
           weeks  from  the  date  of  this  decision,  and  that   further
           directions be given to assist in the hearing of this appeal.


   6.  We now give our reasons for these conclusions.


   The outline facts


   7. The following facts are drawn from the papers.  They  are  necessarily
      provisional until they are either agreed  between  the  appellant  and
      defendant or the Judge who hears the evidence reaches  conclusions  on
      contested matters.


   8. The sponsor C was born in Jamaica  in  May  1977.  Her  father  was  a
      British citizen.  In her witness statement she  says  she  obtained  a
      British passport through her  father  in  2000.  This  may  be  either
      because she was a British citizen by descent from  birth  or  she  was
      registered as such a citizen later. It seems that C first went to  the
      United Kingdom in 2000. She has made  visits  back  to  Jamaica  since
      then.

   9. T was born to C and her unmarried partner  CL  in  1995.  C  makes  no
      mention  of  any  other  children  by  CL,  but  in  the   course   of
      investigating this application, the ECO spoke by phone  to  CL  on  30
      November 2010 and he said that he has two other children by C, NL  who
      was 6 in 2010 (born approximately 2004) and  KL 12 (born approximately
      1998).  If that is right  there  appears  to  have  been  an  intimate
      relationship between C and CL between at least 1995 and 2004.


  10. C says that she decided to migrate to the  UK  in  2006,  although  it
      appears she was already spending most of her time there  before  then.
      She married  a  Jamaican  national  in  2007;  he  was  granted  entry
      clearance as a spouse and is settled in the UK where  they  both  work
      and live in accommodation in Kent, where  they  live  with  C's  elder
      sister S.

  11. In 2009, T made her first application for entry clearance sponsored by
      her mother. This was refused on 7 July 2009. The ECO concluded that  C
      had left Jamaica in 2000 when T was  5  years  old,  and  that  T  was
      supported by her father who she saw regularly and her mother who  sent
      remittances and visited in 2002, 2006, 2007 and  2008.  There  was  an
      appeal that T asked to be decided on the papers and it  was  dismissed
      by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 8 March 2010. The  judge  was
      not satisfied either that C had sole  responsibility  for  T  or  that
      there were compelling circumstances making exclusion undesirable.  The
      judge also concluded that refusal of the application did not breach  C
      and T's right to respect for family life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

  12.  In September 2010 a second application for entry clearance  was  made
      supported by more information including a letter dated  29  June  2010
      from a  medical  centre  in  Kingston  giving  details  of  a  medical
      examination and complaint made by T of sexual assault on 30 June 2006;
      a statement from someone who says that she has looked  after  T  since
      July 2010 and evidence of remittances and contact by C.

  13. The second application was refused on 30 November 2010  shortly  after
      the telephone call with CL referred to above,  when  it  was  assessed
      that T lived with her half  brother,  saw  her  father  regularly  and
      accordingly the ECO  was  not  satisfied  under  either  head  of  the
      Immigration Rules. The decision was reviewed by  the  Entry  Clearance
      manager on 18 April 2011 who concluded that no case had been  made  of
      compelling circumstances making exclusion  undesirable  and  that  the
      decision did not interfere with family life  and  if  it  did  it  was
      justified and proportionate having regard to the factual foundation of
      the rejection of the claim under the Immigration Rules.

  14.  When the case came before Judge Osborne in June 2011 it was submitted
      to her that the ECO had not considered the s.55 duty with  respect  to
      T. The Presenting Officer then appearing for the defendant  apparently
      took instructions and conceded that the appeal should  be  allowed  on
      this ground.

Section 55

  15. Section 55 BCIA 2009 came into force on 2  November  2009.  It  states
      that:


        "(1)   The Secretary of State must make arrangements  for  ensuring
        that -
               a) the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
                  having regard to the need to safeguard  and  promote  the
                  welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom; and
               b) any services provided  by  another  person   pursuant  to
                  arrangements  which are made by the  Secretary  of  State
                  and relate to the discharge of a  function  mentioned  in
                  subsection (2) are provided having regard to that need.


         2) The functions referred to in sub-section (1) are-
               (a) any function of the Secretary of State  in  relation  to
               immigration, asylum or nationality;
               (b)  any  function  conferred  by  or  by  virtue   of   the
               Immigration Acts on an immigration officer;
               (c )  any customs function of the Secretary of State;  and
               (d)  any customs function conferred on a designated  customs
               official.


         (3)    A  person  exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,   in
         exercising the function,  have regard to any guidance given to  the
         person by the Secretary of State  for  the  purpose  of  subsection
         (1)."

      Subsections (4) and (5) impose  similar  duties  on  the  Director  of
      Border Revenue.

  16.  Mr Saunders's core submission to  us  is  that  this  statutory  duty
      imposed no obligations on the ECO, Kingston, as the subject matter  of
      the duty is the welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom  and
      T has never been to the United Kingdom.


  17. Mr Palmer does not dispute that T is  outside  the  scope  of  section
      55(1) but submits that the guidance actually issued by  the  Secretary
      of State indicates that a duty is imposed on Entry Clearance  Officers
      in like manner as on immigration officers.

  18. The statutory guidance, "Every Child Matters, Change for Children" was
      issued in November 2009. Under the heading  "Children  and  UK  Border
      Agency Staff Overseas", paragraph 2.34 reads:


         "The statutory duty in section 55 of the 2009 Act does not apply in
         relation to children who are outside the United  Kingdom.  However,
         UK Border Agency staff working overseas must adhere to  the  spirit
         of the duty and make enquiries when they  have  reason  to  suspect
         that a child may be  in  need  of  protection  or  safeguarding  or
         present welfare needs that require attention."

  19.  Despite the clear statement in the first sentence  of  this  guidance
      confusion arises with respect to the  UKBA  operational  guidance.  We
      were  handed a UKBA document said to be  valid  from  31  August  2011
      entitled "General reasons for refusing  section 2 of 5  -  Considering
      Entry Clearance":


        "This page contains guidance for entry clearance officers  on  what
        to consider when an applicant under the age of 18 applies for entry
        clearance without  the  permission  of  their  parent(s)  or  legal
        guardian. This  relates  to  general  reasons  for  refusing  under
        paragraph 320(16) of the rules.


        You must carefully consider your statutory duty to children,  under
        section 55 of the Borders  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
        before you apply  the  instructions  in  this  guidance  either  to
        children or people with children".


  20. Mr Palmer develops his submission by reference to:


        a.  the  case  law  on  the  welfare  of  children  as  a   primary
           consideration in all immigration decision-making as set  out  in
           the lead decision of the Supreme Court in ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
           UKSC 4 and
        b. the principle that an immigration decision must be in accordance
           with the law and is not in accordance with the law if  it  fails
           to take into account or have regard to relevant policies.


  Conclusions


  21. We agree with Mr Saunders that there was no statutory duty on the  ECO
      to take account of or apply statutory guidance issued under  s.  55(3)
      because  the  scope  of  the  duty  under  s.  55(1)  is  clearly  and
      unambiguously restricted  to  children  in  the  UK  and  because  the
      guidance itself accurately reflects the duty in explaining that  there
      is no such duty in respect of children abroad.


  22. The operational guidance  relating to general reasons for refusing has
      no purchase in this case:

        a. It is not statutory guidance within the meaning of s.55;
        b. It inaccurately  states  the  legal  position  with  respect  to
           s.55(1) and internal guidance cannot  be  used  to  interpret  a
           statute;
        c. It is dealing with a specific issue (a child under 18 making  an
           application without consent of the  parent/guardian)  that  does
           not arise here.

  23. We do not accept that the request in paragraph 2.34 of  the  statutory
      guidance to have regard to the spirit of s.55 means that  the  present
      decision is "not in accordance with the law".  We observe:


        a. The statutory duty to take measures to  safeguard  welfare  does
           not arise, and the guidance itself cannot  extend  the  duty  to
           overseas cases.
        b. The reference to "the spirit of s.55" is too  vague  as  to  the
           subject of a separate common  law  duty  to  take  a  particular
           course when assessing the case.
        c. "The spirit of s.55" would apply where the  ECO  had  reason  to
           suspect that the child was in need of protection, and it appears
           from the decision letter that the ECO did not conclude that  was
           the case.
        d. Whether the ECO was right or  wrong  to  reach  that  conclusion
           depends on a resolution of disputed issues of fact rather than a
           remittal back to the  ECO  for  compliance  with  an  unspecific
           policy that neither imposes a  duty  nor  directs  a  particular
           response to this application.


  24. We would add further that the function of judges  in  the  Immigration
      and Asylum Chambers of both the First-tier and Upper Tribunals  is  to
      decide appeals, rather than  supervise  the  exercise  of  public  law
      functions by a  general  judicial  review  jurisdiction.  When  judges
      determine appeals they can decide what the  material  facts  are,  and
      proceed from those  factual  findings  to  reach  conclusions  on  the
      statutory grounds set out in s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002. These are essentially:


        a. whether the decision is in accordance with the Immigration Rules
           applicable to the situation in question;
        b. whether any discretion afforded by the Rules  should  have  been
           exercised differently;
        c.  whether  the  decision  is  in  accordance  with  international
           obligations reflected in UK law and practice and
        d. whether the decision is in accordance with the law.


      We accept that "law" in this context includes the duty to  act  fairly
      which in turn   includes the duty to have regard to policies that  are
      material to the decision in question.


  25. Where an immigration decision is flawed for failure to have regard  to
      an applicable policy outside the Immigration Rules,  then  immigration
      judges of both Tribunals have no  appellate  function  to  review  the
      merits of the exercise of discretion or a judgment that is required to
      be made. Except in most unusual circumstances the  most  that  can  be
      done is for the appellate decision to record that the decision- making
      process is flawed and incomplete and so the application or decision in
      question remains outstanding and not yet properly determined  (see  AG
      and  others)  (Policies;  executive  discretions;  Tribunal's  powers)
      Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082).


  26. In this case, any policy requirement to take into account the  welfare
      needs of the child who is abroad would run alongside two  other  legal
      duties that do certainly apply to Entry Clearance Officers namely:

          a. The duty to assess the application under the Immigration  Rules
             including whether there any compelling reasons why T should not
             be excluded from joining C in the UK. This may well include the
             mother's suggestion that T had not been properly  looked  after
             by her father, has been the victim of a sexual assault while in
             the father's care, is underperforming at school because of lack
             of such care, and has been moved to other  temporary  guardians
             through  absence  of  an  appropriate  quality  of  care  to  a
             vulnerable teenager.
          b. The duty on the ECO to act compatibly with T and C's Article  8
             rights and to grant entry clearance if an  assessment  of  what
             those rights required indicated that this was necessary.

  27. There is obviously family life enjoyed between T and C as  mother  and
      teenage daughter. The question is whether the notion  of  respect  for
      such family life requires her admission under Article 8(1).  In making
      any such assessment, T's best interests are  a  primary  consideration
      (see the sequence of decisions in Strasbourg and the higher courts  to
      this effect applying Article 3 of the UN Convention on the  Rights  of
      the Child to all administrative decision making:  see  Singh  v  Entry
      Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1075,  30  July  2004;
      Tuquabo-Tekle v the Netherlands (Application no. 60665/00) [2005] ECHR
      803 (1  December  2005);  Uner  v  the  Netherlands  (Application  no.
      46410/99)  [2006]  ECHR  873  (18  October  2006);  Maslov  v  Austria
      (Application no. 1638/03) [2008]  ECHR  546  (23  June  2008)  and  ZH
      (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.


  28.   These  duties  can  be  directly  enforced  by  Tribunal  judges  in
      determining appeals. It is for the judge to decide on all the relevant
      evidence what the best interests of the child are  in  the  particular
      circumstances of the case, whether there are compelling  circumstances
      requiring  admission,  and  whether  if  the  case  fails  under   the
      Immigration Rules, there remains a lack of  respect  for  family  life
      Article 8(1)).


  29.  There is accordingly no  need  to  declare  that  a  lawful  decision
      remains outstanding that should be made  good  before  the  appeal  is
      disposed of. Although the matter is  not  before  us  in  the  present
      appeal, we would be minded to reach the same conclusion even  where  a
      clear s.55 duty did arise because the immigration decision affected  a
      child who  was  in  the  United  Kingdom.  We  find  it  difficult  to
      contemplate  a  scenario  where  a  s.55  duty  was  material  to   an
      immigration decision and indicated a certain outcome but Article 8 did
      not. Not  least  is  this  the  case  because  in  a  case  where  the
      immigration decision was an interference with the right to respect for
      private and family life, compliance with the scheme of s.55 is a  pre-
      requisite for justification of the interference as being in accordance
      with law.

  30. We are also conscious of the Court of Appeal's decision in AJ  (India)
      [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 that compliance with the s.55 duty is a matter of
      substance rather than form,  and  if  the  decision  maker's  mind  is
      directed to the situation of the child under the rules, Article 8 ECHR
      or s.55, it is difficult to contend that there has no consideration of
      the statutory duty in substance.

Error of Law

  31.  For these reasons we conclude  that  the  judge  was  misled  by  the
      concession of the Presenting Officer in reaching  the  conclusion  she
      did. That involved a material error of law. We set aside the  decision
      and now give consideration as to how it should be re-made.

Directions for remaking

  32.  There has been no hearing of the substance of the appeal at  all  and
      no findings of any kind.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals,  Court  and
      Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the  function  of  primary  fact-
      finding to the Upper Tribunal.


  33. When we have set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  s.12(2)
      of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires us to remit
      the  case  to  the  First-tier  with  directions  or  re-make  it  for
      ourselves. Where there has been no hearing at all  before  the  First-
      tier and the facts are disputed  or  unclear,  we  conclude  that  the
      decision should be remitted to the First-tier judge to  determine  the
      appeal.

  34. There are still a number of primary  questions  of  fact  that  remain
      uncertain:-
        a. What were the living arrangements for T and C before 2000?
        b. When did C decide to settle in the UK and what arrangements  did
           she make for T between 2000 and 2006?
        c. When did C's relation with CL cease; how many children did  they
           have together and what arrangements  were  made  for  any  other
           children and by whom?
        d. Where was T living during the period 2000 to 2006; 2006 to 2010,
           and from 2011 to date?
        e. Who feeds, clothes and materially supports her?  Who  makes  the
           decisions on important questions in T's life and gives her moral
           guidance and support?
        f. Has T been neglected while in her father's care, if so  how  and
           why? This includes the question  whether  T  has  been  sexually
           assaulted.

  35. Whatever the ECO may have concluded having spoken  to  father  on  the
      phone, the claimant had submitted material capable of suggesting  some
      threat to her welfare. More such material has now  been  submitted  in
      support of the appeal.  The judge deciding this case will be  assisted
      by the ECO's response to this material.


  36. Apart from the policy requirement to consider the spirit  of  s.55  if
      there is reason to suspect that  the  welfare  of  the  child  may  be
      compromised by refusing her application, the  ECO  will  be  conscious
      that  the  best  interests  principle  includes  some  requirement  to
      sufficiently explore disputed material to  reach  a  conclusion.  Lady
      Hale in ZH (Tanzania) indicated at [34] to [37] (set out in Appendix A
      below) that this includes taking into account the views of  the  child
      herself.

  37.  The child is of an age when she can be  interviewed.   We  understand
      that C will promptly send written confirmation of what  she  told  us,
      that she is willing for the ECO to interview T about these matters. In
      our judgment it is important for the  ECO  to  explore  the  questions
      posed at [34] with T.  At the very least T should have the benefit  of
      a telephone interview where she can comment on  what  her  father  has
      said and explain her position. It will be  for  the  ECO  to  consider
      whether a face-to- face interview is practicable and desirable.

  38.  T has been seeking to come to the UK since  2009  and  all  delay  in
      cases affecting children is highly undesirable. Accordingly,  we  will
      issue the following  directions  for  the  effective  and  expeditious
      hearing of this appeal:

        a. C to confirm in writing to Mr Saunders at the Senior  Presenting
           Officers Unit by Monday 5 December that she is willing  for  the
           ECO to interview T.
        b. The defendant to make inquiries set out at [34] and  [37]  above
           with T by 13 January 2012;
        c. C's representatives serve any fresh evidence on which they  seek
           to rely at this appeal on  the defendant by 6  January 2011;
        d. The defendant to lodge a statement setting out  the  outcome  of
           the further inquiries  under b. and the response to any evidence
           filed by C not already considered by 20 January 2012;
        e. C to lodge any submissions by way of reply by 27 January 2012;
        f. Appeal to be heard at Taylor House on the first open date  after
           30 January 2012. Time estimate 3 hours. Parties  to  inform  the
           Resident Judge at Taylor House  promptly  if  this  estimate  is
           considered inaccurate;
        g. C, and her husband to be available for cross examination at  the
           hearing.


                               Signed




                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
Appendix A - Extracts from ZH (Tanzania)


       Consulting the children
   1. Acknowledging that the best interests of the child must be  a  primary
      consideration in these cases immediately raises the  question  of  how
      these are to be discovered. An important part of this  is  discovering
      the child's own views. Article 12 of UNCRC provides:
                 "1. States Parties shall assure to the child who is capable
                 of forming his or her own views the right to express  those
                 views freely in all matters affecting the child, the  views
                 of the child being given due weight in accordance with  the
                 age and maturity of the child.
                 2. For this purpose,  the  child  shall  in  particular  be
                 provided the opportunity to be heard in  any  judicial  and
                 administrative  proceedings  affecting  the  child,  either
                 directly, or through a  representative  or  an  appropriate
                 body, in a manner consistent with the procedural  rules  of
                 national law."
   1. There are circumstances in which separate representation of a child in
      legal proceedings about her future is essential: in this country, this
      is so when a child is to be permanently removed from her family in her
      own best interests. There are other circumstances in which it  may  be
      desirable, as  in  some  disputes  between  parents  about  a  child's
      residence or contact. In most cases, however, it will be  possible  to
      obtain the necessary information about the child's welfare  and  views
      in other ways. As I said in EM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the
      Home Department [2008] UKHL 64; [2009] 1 AC 1198, at para 49:
                 "Separate consideration and  separate  representation  are,
                 however, two different things. Questions  may  have  to  be
                 asked  about  the  situation  of  other   family   members,
                 especially children, and about their views.  It  cannot  be
                 assumed that the interests of all the  family  members  are
                 identical. In  particular,  a  child  is  not  to  be  held
                 responsible  for  the  moral  failures  of  either  of  his
                 parents. Sometimes, further information may be required. If
                 the Child and Family Court Advisory and Support Service or,
                 more probably, the local children's services authority  can
                 be persuaded to help in difficult cases, then so  much  the
                 better. But in most  immigration  situations,  unlike  many
                 ordinary abduction cases, the interests of different family
                 members are unlikely to be in conflict  with  one  another.
                 Separate legal (or other)  representation  will  rarely  be
                 called for."
   1. The important thing is that those conducting and deciding these  cases
      should be alive to the point and prepared to ask the right  questions.
      We have been told about a pilot scheme in the Midlands  known  as  the
      Early Legal Advice Project (ELAP). This is  designed  to  improve  the
      quality of the initial decision, because the legal representative  can
      assist the "caseowner" in establishing all  the  facts  of  the  claim
      before a decision  is  made.  Thus  cases  including  those  involving
      children will be offered an appointment with a  legal  representative,
      who has had  time  to  collect  evidence  before  the  interview.  The
      Secretary of State tells us that the pilot is limited to asylum claims
      and does not apply to pure article 8 claims.  However,  the  two  will
      often go hand in hand. The point, however, is that it is  one  way  of
      enabling the right questions to be asked and  answered  at  the  right
      time.
   1. In this case, the mother's representatives did obtain  a  letter  from
      the children's school and a report from a youth worker in the  Refugee
      and Migrant Forum of East London (Ramfel),  which  runs  a  Children's
      Participation Forum and other activities in  which  the  children  had
      taken part. But the immigration authorities must be prepared at  least
      to consider hearing directly from a child who wishes to express a view
      and is old enough to do so. While their interests may be the  same  as
      their parents' this should not be taken for granted in every case.  As
      the Committee on the Rights of the Child said, in General  Comment  No
      12 (2009) on the Right of the Child to be Heard, at para 36:
                 "in many cases . . . there  are  risks  of  a  conflict  of
                 interest  between  the  child  and   their   most   obvious
                 representative (parent(s)). If the hearing of the child  is
                 undertaken  through  a  representative,  it  is  of  utmost
                 importance that the child's views are transmitted correctly
                 to the decision-maker by the representative."
      Children can sometimes surprise one.




