
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

KB & AH (credibility-structured approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT 00491 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 August 2017                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                            Kb (First Appellant)
                            ah (Second Appellant)
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maintained)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Turpin Miller,
Solicitors
     (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

    1. The 'Credibility Indicators' identified in the  Home  Office  Asylum
    Policy Instruction, Assessing credibility and  refugee  status  Version
    3.0, 6 January 2015 (which can be summarised as comprising  sufficiency
    of   detail;   internal   consistency;   external   consistency;    and
    plausibility), provide a helpful framework within which  to  conduct  a
    credibility assessment. They facilitate a more structured approach  apt
    to help judges avoid the temptation to look at the evidence in  a  one-
    dimensional way or to focus in  an  ad  hoc  way  solely  on  whichever
    indicator or factor appears foremost or opportune.


    2. However, any reference to a structured approach in relation  to  the
    subject matter  of  credibility  assessment  must  carry  a  number  of
    important (interrelated) caveats, among which are the following:


         -the aforementioned indicators are merely indicators, not necessary
         conditions;


         -they are not an exhaustive list;


         -assessment of credibility being a  highly  fact-sensitive  affair,
         their main role is to help make  sure,  where  relevant,  that  the
         evidence is considered in a number of well-recognised respects;


         -making use of  these  indicators  is  not  a  substitute  for  the
         requirement to consider the evidence as a whole or 'in the round';


         -it remains that credibility assessment is only  part  of  evidence
         assessment and,  as  Lord  Dyson  reminded  decision-makers  in  MA
         (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  UKSC
         49 at [33], 'the significance of lies will vary from case to case';




         -in the UK context, use of such a  structured  approach  must  take
         place  within  the  framework  of  EU  law  governing   credibility
         assessment, Article 4 of the Qualification Directive in particular;
         and,


         -also in the context of UK law, decision-makers (including  judges)
         by s. 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
         etc.) Act 2004 are statutorily obliged to consider certain types of
         behaviour as damaging to credibility.


    3. Consideration  of  credibility  in  light  of  such  indicators,  if
    approached subject to the aforementioned caveats, is a valid and useful
    exercise, based squarely on existing learning.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision we seek to say a few things aimed at promoting a  more
    structured approach to evidence and credibility assessment.

2.   The appellants  are  nationals  of  Pakistan  born  in  1950  and  1979
    respectively and are of the Ahmadi faith.  The first appellant  is  the
    second appellant's son.  Five days after arrival in  the  UK  on  visit
    visas on 14 December 2014, they made  an  application  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection. The basis of their case has always  been  that
    they are both committed Ahmadis who fled Pakistan following an incident
    in December 2014 when members of  Khatme  Nabuwaht  damaged  the  first
    appellant's shop in Rawlapindi and made threats to harm  him.  When  he
    and the local branch president of the  Ahmadi  community  went  to  the
    police to report the incident the latter showed no interest. He and his
    mother left for the  UK  three  days  later.   On  17  June  2015,  the
    respondent  accepted  that  they  were  Ahmadis   but   refused   their
    applications.  Their appeals  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge Oakley who on 6 November 2015 dismissed  their  appeals.   On  21
    March 2016 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge (DUTJ) Sheridan set aside  Judge
    Oakley's decision for error of law and remitted it to the FtT.   On  13
    October 2016 FtT Judge E B Grant again  dismissed  their  appeals,  but
    that decision too was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge (UTT)  O'Connor
    on 3 February 2017 with a direction that it should be  re-made  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

3.   Before UTJ O'Connor, Mr Fripp requested that  the  case  proceed  as  a
    vehicle for further country guidance on Ahmadis.  UTJ O'Connor gave him
    permission to draw up a note in support of his position.  Subsequently,
    on consideration of that note, the Upper Tribunal decided that the case
    should not proceed as potential country guidance.

4.   At the hearing Mr Fripp called three witnesses, Mr Mansoor  Shah,  Vice
    President of the Ahmadiyaa Muslim Association  UK  (AMAUK),  the  first
    appellant and Mr A B, a relative of the appellants.  The  Tribunal  had
    already been informed that the second appellant  would  not  attend  to
    give oral evidence as she  was  unwell.   The  evidence  of  the  three
    witnesses is summarised in Appendix A.

Oral submissions

5.   Mr Wilding said the appellants' case turned  in  large  part  on  their
    credibility.  If they were not credible, that was the end  of  it.   If
    they were credible about the shop incident, but not about the causes of
    it, they would not be at risk on return because the shop incident could
    not be differentiated from an ordinary criminal incident.  If  however,
    we believed the shop incident and that  it  was  religiously  motivated
    then they were entitled to succeed in their appeals,  as,  given  their
    evidence, they would fall within the  terms  of  the  country  guidance
    given by the Tribunal in MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions  -
    risk) CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC).  (For convenience the headnote to  MN
    is reproduced in Appendix B.)

6.   Mr Wilding submitted that we should find the  appellants  not  credible
    because it was implausible that if the first appellant  and  his  local
    branch president had gone to the police station  in  December  2014  to
    report the attack they would have left after only an hour  of  waiting.
    Nor was it plausible that within three days he  and  his  mother  would
    have left Pakistan in response to the incident  leaving  his  wife  and
    children behind.

7.   Mr Wilding submitted  that  even  if  we  accepted  the  shop  incident
    happened, the first appellant had not established it was a  religiously
    motivated attack.  Even though the first appellant was in the  shop  at
    the time, nothing happened to him.  The  evidence  of  the  AMAUK  made
    clear their procedures relied very much on self-reporting.   There  was
    only limited filtering of people who asked for reports and there was no
    monitoring of whether attacks/incidents were religiously motivated.  It
    was just as likely the shop incident was an ordinary  criminal  matter.
    The first appellant's evidence was  that  there  were  Khatme  Nabuwaht
    posters in a number of places around the area.

8.   Mr Wilding asked that we count  against  the  appellants  that  despite
    claiming to leave Pakistan within  three  days  of  the  incident,  the
    appellants had not claimed asylum on arrival.  The significance of  the
    first appellant's answers to questions asked of him about  why  he  had
    left his wife and children behind  was  not  his  failure  to  try  and
    sponsor them, but the dubious lack of concern  it  showed  about  their
    circumstances.  They were still living close by in the same area.

9.   Even if we found the appellants were at risk in their home  area,  when
    assessing internal relocation we should attach weight to the fact  that
    his own wife and children still lived nearby without it being suggested
    they were at risk.

10.  Mr Wilding clarified that  the  appellants'  case  was  not  one  about
    whether  return  would  require  them  to  suppress   their   religious
    orientation, since, on their own evidence, they had  not  hidden  their
    Ahmadi identity and activities when in Pakistan.

11.  As regards the reference by Mr Fripp in his written  skeleton  argument
    to "five general points" (see below paragraph 20), he broadly  accepted
    them except that he conceded that the guidance by the  Tribunal  in  MN
    about the "particular importance" of Ahmadi faith  to  individuals  was
    simply to be given its ordinary meaning. As regards  Ahmadi  women  and
    children, whilst  their  situation  might  cause  them  to  face  extra
    difficulties (e.g. in not being able  to  undertake  communal  worship)
    their cases would turn on particular facts.  There was not a heightened
    risk in every case.

12.  In reply to questions from the bench, Mr Wilding said he accepted  that
    the first appellant had given a consistent account and that  he  raised
    no challenge either as to the sufficiency of  detail  of  his  account.
    The respondent's challenge was purely to plausibility.  Mr Wilding said
    that if the Tribunal found the appellants were telling the truth  about
    the shop incident and it was satisfied that the attack was  religiously
    motivated, then the appellants were entitled to succeed.

13.  Mr Fripp submitted that the  appellants'  account  was  credible.   The
    first  appellant's  account  of  the  incident  in  his  shop  as   the
    culmination of years of threats and harassment was consistent with  the
    objective evidence regarding the situation of Ahmadis in Rawalpindi and
    elsewhere in  Pakistan.   Non-state  actors  such  as  Khatme  Nabuwaht
    conducted a widescale and highly  organised  campaign  against  Ahmadis
    with the complicity of the state.  The appellants' case sought to  rely
    squarely on existing country guidance as set out in MN whose  principal
    findings were encapsulated in  the  statement  that  Ahmadis  were  "an
    oppressed religious minority".

14.  As  regards  credibility,  the  AMAUK  evidence  lent  support  to  the
    appellants' case in relation to the  appellants'  level  of  engagement
    with the Ahmadi community.  The first appellant held substantial office
    in his local Ahmadi community in Pakistan over a number of years.   The
    evidence described him as an active  member  of  the  Ahmadi  community
    committed to his faith, someone who was both a 'Musi' (teacher)  and  a
    'Quaid' (leader).  That evidence also went to explain why he  had  come
    to the adverse attention of the malvis.  The AMAUK  evidence  regarding
    the first appellant was singular in that the report  produced  did  not
    just state what the local president had  been  told;  it  said  he  had
    accompanied the first appellant to the police  station  to  report  the
    incident.  This showed that the local branch took the matter seriously.
     The difficulties the first appellant  encountered  in  getting  police
    protection were corroborated by the UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  for
    Assessing the Protection Needs of Members of religious Minorities  from
    Pakistan, January 2017.  Viewed in the context of there being a pattern
    of ineffective police protection of Ahmadis in Pakistan, the fact  that
    the first appellant and the local  branch  president  left  the  police
    station after an hour before  any  report  was  formally  recorded  was
    entirely plausible.  Another feature of the first  appellant's  account
    was that it was not exaggerated; he  did  not  say  violence  had  been
    inflicted on his person.

15.  Mr Fripp urged the Tribunal not to accept Mr Wilding's submission  that
    it was implausible the first appellant would have left Pakistan leaving
    his wife and children behind yet taking his mother.  The  fact  was  he
    and his mother were the only ones who had  visas.   Additionally,  once
    the two appellants came to the UK and claimed asylum there was no basis
    whilst their claims were pending on which  a  visa  for  his  wife  and
    children could have been applied for:  the  advice  they  obtained  was
    correct.

16.  As for Mr Wilding's scepticism about the causes of the  shop  incident,
    it was appropriate to recall what was said by Lord Hoffman in Shah  and
    Islam [1999] UKHL 20 about Jewish shopkeepers in Nazi Germany: one  had
    to look at the surrounding circumstances and not simply  focus  on  the
    incident itself.

17.  Mr Fripp said that even though  the  second  appellant  had  not  given
    evidence because of health difficulties, her previous written and  oral
    evidence was consistent with what is known about the situation faced by
    Ahmadi women, unable to  practise  her  faith  communally  because  the
    Ahmadi community had forbidden it as a protective measure.  The  second
    appellant was also relatively elderly and in poor health.

18.  Asked by the bench what response he  had  to  Mr  Wilding's  submission
    that the appellants had a viable internal  relocation  alternative,  Mr
    Fripp said he relied on what  was  said  in  MN  about  the  nationwide
    pattern of hostilities towards  Ahmadis.   In  this  regard  the  first
    appellant's profile as an active Ahmadi was also relevant; he could not
    be expected to conceal his Ahmadi practices.

The evidence

19.  Bearing in mind that this case has been before the Upper Tribunal  once
    before, it is salient to note that we had a very considerable  body  of
    written evidence before us.  In addition to the witness  statements  of
    the appellants, and the various  reports  from   AMAUK  (enumerated  in
    Appendix A to this decision) there were a number  of  copy  photographs
    showing what was said to be the damage done to  the  first  appellant's
    shop in December 2014 and what are said to be the posters put up by the
    Khatme Nabuwaht on the first appellant's shop over the relevant period.




Our assessment

Country guidance

20.  Mr Fripp has requested in his skeleton argument that in  deciding  this
    case the Tribunal take  the  opportunity  of  giving  further  guidance
    arrived at  supplementing  that  given  by  the  Tribunal  in  MN.   He
    identified five points on which  he  considered  further  guidance  was
    needed. We decline to do so.  The Tribunal made clear on  16  May  2017
    that this  case  would  not  proceed  as  potential  country  guidance.
    Further, Mr Wilding conceded that if we accepted the  core  account  of
    the first appellant  regarding  the  shop  incident  and  that  it  was
    religiously motivated, then the appellants  fell  squarely  within  the
    category of those Ahmadis identified in MN as likely to be at  risk  on
    return.  Mr Fripp in turn accepted that his case stood or fell  on  our
    decision as regards its factual  matrix.   In  such  circumstances,  it
    would be otiose to attempt to make general observations not germane  to
    the decision we have to make on the appeal.

Principal issues of fact

21.  We would, however,  see  it  as  an  oversimplification  to  treat  the
    principal issue of fact we have to decide as being whether the December
    2014 shop incident happened as described by the  first  appellant.   On
    the first appellant's account, there was no assault on his  person  and
    going by the photographic evidence the damage to his property  was  not
    substantial.  Whilst the two malvis who  caused  the  damage  did  make
    threats to his life, it would appear from one  of  the  photos  of  the
    posters put up by Khatme Nabuwaht that the latter  at  least  sometimes
    promoted themselves as conducting a "peaceful protest" against  Ahmadis
    and no evidence has been adduced to show that around this  time  either
    of the appellants or other Ahmadis in the  area  had  been  victims  of
    physical violence at the hands of Khatme Nabuwaht  or  others.   Hence,
    were we to take the December 2014 incident in isolation,  we  would  at
    least hesitate as regards whether it  was  sufficient  to  establish  a
    "severe violation of basic human rights" contrary to Article 9(1)(a) of
    the  Qualification  Directive  (QD)  2004/83/EC.   However,  that  same
    Article also provides at Article 9(1)(b) for a second way in which acts
    can constitute acts of persecution, namely if it be "be an accumulation
    of various measures, including violations  of  human  rights  which  is
    sufficiently severe as to affect an individual in a similar  manner  as
    mentioned in (a)".

22.  In this wider context account must be taken of the  fact  that  on  the
    appellants' evidence the first appellant had been subject  to  acts  of
    harassment and threats over a period of a  number  of  years  since  he
    opened the shop, albeit infrequent, and the fact  that  over  the  same
    period the second appellant had received verbal abuse when she went  to
    market.  On the  appellants'  evidence  (if  we  accept  it)  the  shop
    incident, although  in  itself  not  a  major  attack,  represented  an
    escalation of the measures the malvis had been taking against the first
    appellant.  We bear in mind as well that for persecution to exist it is
    not  necessary  that  there  be  concrete  acts:  direct   threats   of
    persecution also constitute acts of persecution of sufficient severity.
     The threat to kill made during the shop incident  must  be  considered
    together with the malvis'  poster  campaign  whose  messages  sometimes
    included ones that, whilst falling short of  death  threats,  contained
    veiled threats of  harm  intended  to  create  uncertainty  about  what
    further actions might follow. The fact  that  such  posters  co-existed
    with  others  that   referred   to   "peaceful   protect"   cannot   be
    determinative.

23.  Accordingly, whilst we accept Mr Wilding's concession  (to  the  effect
    that if we believe (a) that the shop incident happened; and (b) that it
    was religiously motivated, the appellants are entitled  to  succeed  in
    their asylum appeals), we take that to be  made  by  reference  to  the
    wider context as described by the appellants.

24.   We  also  take  Mr  Wilding's  submission  (that  if  we  believe  the
    appellants and also accept that the shop incident  and  the  background
    harassment were religiously motivated the appellants  are  entitled  to
    succeed in their appeals) as a concession that it is not  necessary  to
    analyse separately the extent of  the  appellants'  commitment  to  the
    Ahmadi faith and practices. If we accept the evidence of the appellants
    and the AMAUK then, whilst the first appellant did not openly preach or
    proselytize in any direct way, he was a particuarly active  Ahmadi  and
    so in that way came within the terms of paragraph 2(i) and (6)  of  the
    headnote in MN.

25.  The central issue remains as to whether we accept that  the  appellants
    have given a credible account and that is one  concerning  persons  who
    have been victims of religiously motivated acts and so victims of  past
    persecution. If we accept past persecution then by  virtue  of  Article
    4(4) of the Qualification Directive (paragraph 339K of the  Immigration
    Rules) this fact "will be regarded  as  a  serious  indication  of  the
    person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm, unless there are  good  reasons  to  consider  that  such
    persecution or serious harm will not be repeated".

Assessment of credibility

26.  Here again we regard  it  as  important  to  begin  with  Mr  Wilding's
    submissions and in particular his  acceptance  that  the  challenge  he
    makes to the appellants' credibility is solely on the basis of lack  of
    plausibility. That, it seems to us, amounts to an important  concession
    for two reasons. First of all, it represents an acknowledgment that the
    respondent accepts that in all other respects the  appellants'  account
    passes muster. It is integral to the  respondent's  own  Asylum  Policy
    Instruction, Assessing credibility and refugee status  Version  3.0,  6
    January 2015 at paragraph 5.4 that:

         "if after looking at all the evidence and  keeping  the  relatively
         low standard of proof in mind, the claimant's statements and  other
         evidence about the facts being established can be accepted if  they
         are:


         ? of sufficient detail and specificity
         ? internally consistent and coherent (to a reasonable degree)
         ? consistent with specific and general COI
         ? consistent with other evidence (to a reasonable degree)
         ? plausible

         all indicators must be applied, and the credibility of the  account
         examined in the round ...".

27.  Applying this instruction to Mr Wilding's own  concessions,  the  first
    appellant's account is one that was sufficiently detailed and specific;
    and internally consistent.   Mr Wilding does not  dispute  either  that
    the appellants' evidence is also externally consistent, i.e. consistent
    with specific and general COI and with the other evidence.  Given  that
    the Instruction bids caseworkers to  apply  all  these  indicators,  it
    appears that Mr Wilding relies exclusively on just one  of  them.   Put
    another way, his submission entails acceptance that the appellants  can
    have counted  in  their  favour  all  of  the  identified  "Credibility
    Indicators"  (further  expanded  upon  in   paragraph   5.6   of   this
    Instruction) bar that concerned with plausibility.

28.  Second, Mr Wilding's concession rests the respondent's  case  on  [lack
    of] plausibility, an indicator or factor that  has  been  seen  by  the
    Tribunal and  the  courts  -  as  is  indeed  reflected  in  this  same
    Instruction - as one that, although in itself valid, requires a certain
    degree of caution in its application. Thus in HK v Secretary  of  State
    for the  Home  Department  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1037  case  at  [28]-[30]
    Neuberger LJ stated:

         "28. Further, in  many  asylum  cases,  some,  even  most,  of  the
             appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely but  that  does
             not mean that it is untrue. The ingredients of the story,  and
             the story as a  whole,  have  to  be  considered  against  the
             available country evidence and reliable expert  evidence,  and
             other familiar factors, such  as  consistency  with  what  the
             appellant has said before, and  with  other  factual  evidence
             (where there is any).


         29.  Inherent probability, which may be helpful  in  many  domestic
             cases, can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate, factor
             to rely on in some asylum cases. Much of the evidence will  be
             referable to societies with customs  and  circumstances  which
             are very different from those of which the members of the fact-
             finding  tribunal  have  any  (even  second-hand)  experience.
             Indeed, it is likely that the country which  an  asylum-seeker
             has left will be suffering  from  the  sort  of  problems  and
             dislocations with which the overwhelming majority of residents
             of this country will be wholly unfamiliar. The point  is  well
             made in Hathaway on Law of Refugee Status (1991) at page 81:


                       'In assessing the general human  rights  information,
                  decision-makers must  constantly  be  on  guard  to  avoid
                  implicitly recharacterizing the nature of the  risk  based
                  on their own perceptions of reasonability."
         30.  Inherent improbability in the  context  of  asylum  cases  was
             discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in Awala -v- Secretary
             of State [2005] CSOH 73. At paragraph 22, he pointed out  that
             it was "not proper to reject an applicant's account merely  on
             the basis that it is not credible or  not  plausible.  To  say
             that an applicant's account is not  credible  is  to  state  a
             conclusion" (emphasis added). At paragraph 24,  he  said  that
             rejection of a story on grounds of implausibility must be done
             "on reasonably drawn inferences and not simply  on  conjecture
             or speculation". He went on to emphasise, as did  Pill  LJ  in
             Ghaisari, the entitlement of the fact-finder to rely  "on  his
             common sense and his ability,  as  a  practical  and  informed
             person, to identify what is or is not plausible". However,  he
             accepted that "there will be cases  where  actions  which  may
             appear implausible if judged by...Scottish standards, might be
             plausible  when  considered  within   the   context   of   the
             applicant's social and cultural background".
29.  Reflecting much the same caution, paragraph 5.6.4 of this  Home  Office
    Instruction invokes, inter alia, what was said  in  Y  v  Secretary  of
    State [2006] EWCA Civ 1223:

         "[I]n [Y] the Court of Appeal stated that in regarding  an  account
         as incredible the decision-maker must take care not to do so merely
         because it would not be plausible if it had  happened  in  the  UK.
         Again, underlying factors may well lead to behaviour and  responses
         on the part of the claimant which run  counter  to  what  would  be
         expected."

30.  The reference by Neuberger LJ at [28] of HK to  the  need  to  consider
    factors related to plausibility along with "other  familiar  factors...
    such as consistency" is also illustrative of the need to  avoid  basing
    credibility assessment on just one indicator. We would  add  that  even
    when focusing just on plausibility, it is  not  a  concept  with  clear
    edges. Not only may  there  be  be  degrees  of  (im)plausibility,  but
    sometimes an aspect of an  account  that  may  be  implausible  in  one
    respect may be plausible in another.

31     It seems to us that the indicators  identified  in  the  Home  Office
    Instruction (which can  be  summarised  as  comprising  sufficiency  of
    detail; internal consistency; external consistency;  and  plausibility)
    provide a helpful framework  within  which  to  conduct  a  credibility
    assessment. They facilitate a more  structured  approach  apt  to  help
    judges avoid  the  temptation  to  look  at  the  evidence  in  a  one-
    dimensional way or to focus in  an  ad  hoc  way  solely  on  whichever
    indicator or factor appears foremost or opportune.  We note  that  this
    Instruction draws  heavily  on  case  law  authorities.   However,  any
    reference to a structured approach in relation to the subject matter of
    credibility assessment must carry a number of important  (interrelated)
    caveats, among the most important of which are as follows.

32     First, such "Credibility Indicators" have to be  understood  as  just
    that: a mere set of indicators, factors or indiciae. They are far  from
    being a set of necessary conditions or requirements. To seek  to  apply
    them as if they were determinative would be unduly prescriptive as well
    as fatal to the need to ensure a full  examination  of  the  individual
    circumstances.

33    Second, such indicators are not to be taken  as  an  exhaustive  list:
    for example, the list given in the Home  Office  Instruction  does  not
    include demeanour. In our view, that  is  consistent  with  established
    case law which considers that in asylum appeals it will rarely be  safe
    to attach significant weight to demeanour as a factor  (see  e.g.  B  v
    Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (Democratic  Republic  of
    Congo) [2003] UKIAT 00014, para 10: "judging demeanour across  cultural
    divides is fraught with danger"); indeed, we shall mention  below  what
    we made of the demeanour of the first appellant.  On the other hand, we
    do not think it possible  to  exclude  that  in  certain  circumstances
    demeanour may be relevant.

   34   Third, it must never be forgotten that credibility assessment  is  a
    highly  fact-sensitive  affair.  Whilst  having  regard  to  a  set  of
    "Credibility Indicators" assists in making sure that,  where  relevant,
    the evidence is considered in a number of well-recognised  ("familiar")
    respects, it does not prevent  a  decision-maker  reaching  a  decision
    without going through such indicators step-by-step. For example,  their
    use may be otiose if an individual's account rests wholly on a physical
    impossibility (e.g. that he jumped  a  6  metre  wall  unaided)  or  is
    riddled with major inconsistencies.  Conversely,  if  for  example  the
    individual is a vulnerable person whose account is  strongly  supported
    by expert medical evidence, it may not always matter that  it  contains
    inconsistency and lack of detail.

35   Fourth, making use of these indicators is  not  a  substitute  for  the
    requirement to consider the evidence as a whole; it is rather a way  of
    helping decision-makers organise their assessment 'in the round' so  as
    to ensure they do  not  fail  to  properly  take  into  account,  where
    relevant, every factor that might tell  in  favour  of  or  against  an
    applicant (on the importance of  taking into  account  factors  telling
    for (and against) claimants see R (YH) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 116, 4 All ER, 448 at [24]).

36.    Fifth, although not germane to this case, we should  not  forget,  as
    Lord Dyson reminded decision-makers in  MA  (Somalia)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 49 at [33], 'the significance
    of lies will vary from case to case'. Credibility  assessment  is  only
    part of evidence assessment. Even when  the  accounts  put  forward  by
    applicants are not credible, it is still possible  in  certain  (albeit
    unusual)  circumstances  for  their  applications   for   international
    protection to succeed.

37.     There are also two considerations specific to the context of EU  law
    and UK law.

38.   One is that use of such a structured approach cannot entirely  capture
    what it is necessary for decision-makers (including judges) applying EU
    law to undertake when assessing credibility. They are required to  base
    their assessment on Article 4 of the Qualification Directive (paragraph
    339J of the Rules) whose terms  include  an  obligation  to  take  into
    account "all relevant facts as they relate to the country of origin..."
    (Article 4(3)(a); paragraph 339J(i)) and "the individual  position  and
    personal circumstances of the person" (Article 4(3)(c); 339J(iii)).  If
    a finding of past persecution has  been  made,  Article  4(4)(paragraph
    339K)  requires  a  particular  approach  to  assessing  the  risk   of
    repetition. When it comes to deciding whether to excuse a failure by an
    applicant to confirm their statements by supporting evidence, they must
    apply the conditions set out in Article 4(5) (paragraph 339L).  Article
    4(5)(d) QD  (paragraph  339L(iv))  requires  that  'the  applicant  has
    applied for international protection at  the  earliest  possible  time,
    unless the applicant can demonstrate good reason for  not  having  done
    so').

39.  The other is that in the  UK  context,  by  s.  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004,  decision-makers
    are statutorily obliged to  consider  certain  types  of  behaviour  as
    damaging to credibility.

40.    We have referred  the  "Credibility  Indicators"  of  sufficiency  of
    detail, internal consistency, external consistency and plausibility  as
    being "well-recognised" (or in Neuberger LJ's words in HK, "familiar").
    We do so  because  they  are  broadly  the  same  as  those  indicators
    identified in a number of reputable background studies, for example, by
    UNHCR in Beyond Proof, Credibility Assessment  in  EU  Asylum  Systems:
    Full Report, May 2013; by the IARLJ in  Assessment  of  Credibility  in
    Refugee and Subsidiary Protection Claims  under  the  EU  Qualification
    Directive, Judicial Criteria and Standards, IARLJ, Credo Project, 2013,
    p. 35; and by a number  of  academics,  including  James  Hathaway  and
    Michelle Foster, The Law of  Refugee  Status,  2nd  edition,  Cambridge
    University Press 2014, p.139. We regard consideration of credibility in
    light of such indicators, if approached subject to  the  aforementioned
    caveats, to be a valid and useful exercise, based squarely on  existing
    learning.


41.  It  will  be  apparent  from  the  above  that  we  do  not  understand
    assessment of credibility by reference to credibility indicators to  be
    at odds with the tasks set  out  in  Article  4  of  the  Qualification
    Directive; rather their application is simply a  way  of  furthering  a
    more structured approach to those tasks. And, in light of Tribunal  and
    Court of Appeal authority on the proper application of s.8 (SM (Section
    8: Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116; JT (Cameroon) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2008]  EWCA Civ 878), the  categories
    of behaviour that this section identifies as  damaging  to  credibility
    cannot be determinative: as Pill LJ  said  at  [21]  of  JT  (Cameroon)
    [2008] EWCA Civ 878, it is "no more than  a  reminder  to  fact-finding
    tribunals that conduct coming within the categories  stated in  section
    8 shall be taken into account in assessing credibility."

The credibility of the appellants

42.  Returning to consider the appellants' evidence  in  the  round  in  the
    light of Mr Wilding's concessions, it is necessary to ask what are  the
    considerations  that  count  for  and  against  them  as  regards   the
    credibility of their accounts?

43.  Mr Wilding's concessions have significantly  (and  somewhat  unusually)
    circumscribed the ambit  of  the  credibility  assessment  we  need  to
    undertake in the appellants' case. We take his  concessions  to  entail
    that we are entitled without further ado to  count  in  favour  of  the
    appellants  their  consistency  (internal  and  external)   and   their
    sufficiency of detail and specificity. We would observe that  it  would
    have been our own finding in any event that  their  evidence  possessed
    these qualities.  In  our  view  the  significant  degree  of  internal
    consistency  of  the  first  appellant's  account  would  have  carried
    particular weight because there have been a number of occasions in  the
    course of proceedings over the past two or so years when he has had  to
    face questions and provide explanations. (We will return to the  matter
    of the  second  appellant's  consistency  and  credibility  in  general
    later.) Leaving aside that Mr Wilding no longer sought to rely  on  the
    respondent's reasons for refusal letters, we would observe further that
    in any event they were flawed by a mistaken reliance on the  appellants
    adducing unreliable "First Information Report (FIR)  evidence".  It  is
    now accepted that the appellants had  never  submitted  such  evidence.
    These refusal  letters  also  failed  to  adhere  to  the  Home  Office
    Instruction to which we have already  made  reference  on  "Credibility
    Indicators" - they did not address, in particular,  whether  the  first
    appellant should have been given any credit for providing a  consistent
    account.

44.  Turning to consider factors we count against the appellants,  we  shall
    first  of  all  address  one  that  Mr  Wilding  did  not  label  as  a
    plausibility consideration as such, namely the appellants'  failure  to
    claim asylum on arrival. This is not behaviour falling  within  s.8  of
    the 2004 Act, but when  considering  any  aspects  of  the  appellants'
    statements not supported  by  documentary  or  other  evidence  we  are
    required by  Article  4(5)(d)  of  the  Qualification  Directive,  when
    deciding whether to excuse lack of confirmation of statements, to  take
    into account, inter  alia,  whether  "the  applicant  has  applied  for
    international protection at the  earliest  possible  time,  unless  the
    applicant can demonstrate good reason for not having  done  so".  Given
    that (i) the delay in claiming was only a  few  days;  (ii)  the  first
    appellant was not asked in his asylum interview to provide good  reason
    for the delay; (iii) when the second appellant was asked in her  asylum
    interview for a reason, she stated that she was ill - a matter which Mr
    Wilding does not dispute; and (iv) the respondent did not rely  on  any
    lack of good reason in her reasons for refusals letters in  respect  of
    either appellant,  we are prepared to accept  that  there  was  a  good
    reason for the delay. Even if we had not found that to be the case,  we
    would not have considered it  a  matter  of  sufficient  importance  in
    assessing the core elements of their claim, which are indeed  supported
    by documentary or other evidence.

45.  Turning then to plausibility,  we  do  regard  it  as  to  some  degree
    implausible that the appellants should have left Pakistan so soon after
    the shop incident.  If the first appellant felt that the safety of  his
    wife and children could be secured by them merely moving to  live  with
    her mother some 45 minutes away, then the question has to be  asked  as
    to why he and his mother also did not see moving away from their  house
    but remaining in Rawalpindi as at least as an interim measure.  On  the
    other hand, we consider that  it  is  important  when  considering  the
    circumstances surrounding their departure to  recollect  the  Court  of
    Appeal guidance in the Y  case.   Based  on  the  fact  that  the  shop
    incident represented an escalation in the level  of  adverse  attention
    directed by the malvis  against  the  first  appellant  (he  said  they
    threatened to kill him), it is equally plausible  that  he  would  have
    seen fit to leave Pakistan quickly.   On  this  matter,  therefore,  it
    seems to us that plausibility considerations cut two ways.

46.  We see some, albeit limited, force in Mr Wilding's submission  that  it
    was implausible that the first appellant and the local branch president
    would have left the police station  after  only  an  hour  and  without
    having their complaint recorded.  From the AMAUK evidence,  it  appears
    important to the Ahmadi community to have adverse  incidents  with  the
    authorities reported to the authorities, even if they do  not  consider
    that to do so results in effective protection.  At the same  time,  the
    first appellant's and the AMAUK's evidence was that the police reaction
    to their complaint did not  inspire  confidence  and  it  is  at  least
    understandable that they took the view that having informed the  police
    what had happened, little else was to  be  gained  by  waiting  around,
    particularly as the first appellant was the one who had to  decide  how
    to respond to the threats made to kill him that same day.

47.  There is still the matter of the fact that  the  first  appellant  does
    not suggest that by moving 45 minutes away his wife and  children  were
    left vulnerable to adverse  attention  from  the  malvis.   Is  that  a
    significant factor pointing against accepting the  credibility  of  the
    first appellant's account?  We have decided it is not  because  of  the
    very different profile of the first appellant as compared with his wife
    and children, who, in accordance with Ahmadi community  rules,  limited
    their activities outside their own living  quarters.   Given  that  the
    first appellant had been elected local "Quaid" (leader) in charge of 42
    people, we consider it is reasonably likely that  he  would  understand
    the matter of his own safety as being very different, given that if  he
    remained  anywhere  in  Rawalpindi,  the  same  group  of  malvis  were
    extremely likely to locate him and re-commence their adverse attention.
    We do not find it accurate of Mr Wilding to submit that the  appellants
    have never suggested that the family members  remaining  in  Rawlapindi
    were still at risk: it was the  first  appellant's  evidence  that  his
    brother, who remained in Rawlapindi and in charge of the shop  although
    employing a non-Ahmadi to run it, was "lying low and still looking  for
    an opportunity to escape".

48.  Put shortly, we do not consider that application  of  the  Plausibility
    indicator to the evidence in the appellants' case significantly damages
    the credibility of their account.

49.  The only other matter of potential significance that  we  consider  can
    be counted against the appellants is that the first appellant's  sister
    and brother in the UK did not attend to  give  evidence  nor  submit  a
    witness statement.  We do not  think  it  good  enough  for  the  first
    appellant to seek to excuse this by saying she would have  come  if  he
    had asked.  He was put on notice earlier  that  the  failure  of  close
    family to attend as witnesses may be viewed  adversely.   At  the  same
    time, the appellant's witnesses did  include  a  cousin,  Mr  B,  whose
    evidence we had no reason to reject and it did provide some  degree  of
    corroboration (as to  the  events  surrounding  the  appellants'  rapid
    departure from Pakistan)  from  within  the  first  appellant's  family
    circles in the UK.

50.   We  alluded  earlier  to  the  possible  relevance  of  demeanour   in
    assessment of credibility and stated our own view that it would  rarely
    if ever be of importance in asylum  appeals.  Illustrative  perhaps  of
    why, it was our own reaction to the  first  appellant's  evidence  that
    throughout he seemed uncomfortable and not always able to give  answers
    to the specific question being asked of him (a number of questions  had
    to be repeated for that reason). However, viewing  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, we bore in mind that we were receiving his evidence  through  an
    interpreter and that these features  of  his  oral  testimony  were  as
    likely to be personality traits  not  connected  to  matters  going  to
    credence. Hence we decided to attach little  negative  weight  to  such
    shortcomings.

The AMAUK evidence

51.  It will be apparent from our analysis thus far  that  we  consider  the
    AMAUK evidence produced in this case to  lend  support  to  their  core
    claims. Mr Wilding has not sought to undermine it.  We hasten  to  add,
    however, that our acceptance of it is specific to the evidence  we  had
    in this case. Given that Mr Shah's evidence accepted that for the  most
    part the only real filtering that took place of requests by persons for
    help with reports from Pakistan  was  in  deciding  whether  they  were
    genuinely of the Ahmadi faith, and that the local branch presidents  in
    Pakistan for the most part simply reported  what  they  were  told,  we
    certainly see no reason to treat such evidence as having  any  elevated
    status.  When considering what was said about AMAUK letters  in  MN  we
    also take into account the subsequent reported decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AB (Ahmadiyya Association UK letters) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT
    511 (IAC) which also rejected endowing such letters with  any  elevated
    evidential status.

The second appellant

52.  Hitherto we have largely focused on an assessment of  the  evidence  of
    the first appellant and the issue  of  his  credibility.   A  principal
    reason for doing so is that it was not disputed by Mr Wilding that  the
    second appellant is elderly  and  has  health  difficulties.   We  did,
    however, have a record of the  evidence  she  gave  in  September  2016
    before FtT Judge  E  B  Grant.   In  broad  terms.  that  evidence  was
    consistent with what she has said in her witness  statements  and  also
    with the first appellant's account.  During the evidence of  the  first
    appellant the bench asked him about two aspects of his  evidence  which
    were at odds with that given by the  second  appellant  in  her  asylum
    interview, regarding how long after the shop incident he had  told  his
    mother about it and whether the police had ever provided any degree  of
    protection to his shop. Given the medical evidence  we  have  regarding
    the second appellant's psychological problems, we are minded to  accept
    the first appellant's explanation for these discrepancies in  terms  of
    her lack of understanding. We note that Mr Wilding did not  suggest  we
    do  otherwise.  In  any  event  Mr  Wilding's  concession  as   regards
    consistency and sufficiency of detail  was  made  in  respect  of  both
    appellants.

53.  The essence of the second appellant's evidence  was  that  in  Pakistan
    she had been an active Ahmadi, having the status of  "Musi".   Although
    her ill-health prevented her from going out much, she  had  encountered
    abuse directed at her as an Ahmadi when she went to the marketplace.

54.  In light of the above, we conclude that the core account given by  both
    appellants as regards their experiences in Pakistan and  their  reasons
    for leaving are credible.

Causes

55.  Mr Wilding's submission was that even if we  accepted  the  appellants'
    evidence as credible, it did not establish that the shop  incident  was
    religiously  motivated.   It  was  not  entirely  clear   whether   his
    submission was directed at arguing  that  the  shop  incident  was  not
    persecutory because it could just  as  likely  have  been  an  ordinary
    criminal act (an Article 9 QD issue) or at arguing that  there  was  no
    Convention reason or ground for the adverse attention (the  Article  10
    Qualification Directive issue).  We shall consider it as embracing both
    issues.

56.  Even so, we are unable to agree with this submission.  Having  accepted
    the first appellant's evidence about the background of  harassment  and
    threats from Khatme Nabuwaht against the first appellant  as  credible,
    we find no difficulty in  accepting  that  he  had  been  targeted  for
    harassment and verbal threats by the malvis, not just when  he  was  at
    his shop but on journeys from home to get there. We note that the first
    appellant's evidence was that they also knew where he lived.

57.  That Ahmadis who are visible to Khatme Nabuwaht  can  be  targeted  for
    threats and intimidation and sometimes violence is  borne  out  by  the
    background evidence, not just that  considered  and  evaluated  by  the
    Tribunal in MN but by the aforementioned UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines
    of January 2017.

58.   Accordingly  we  conclude  it  reasonably  likely  that  the   adverse
    attention experienced by the first appellant was religiously motivated,
    and the same goes for the lesser degree of taunts  and  abuse  directed
    against the second appellant when she went to the marketplace. That  in
    our judgement  differentiates  the  shop  incidents  from  an  ordinary
    criminal  incident  and  also  suffices  to  establish  a  reason   for
    persecution within the meaning of Article 10 QD.

Future risk

59.  We have already highlighted the test we must apply when  satisfied  (as
    here) that appellants have proved past persecution,  namely  that  this
    fact "will be regarded as a serious indication of  the  person's  well-
    founded fear of persecution or real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm,
    unless there are good reasons to  consider  that  such  persecution  or
    serious  harm  will  not  be  repeated"  (Article  4(4)   Qualification
    Directive (paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules).  Implicit  in  Mr
    Wilding's concession that if  credible  about  the  shop  incident  and
    causes the appellants were entitled to succeed in  their  appeals,  was
    recognition that, on the basis of the  first  appellant's  account  his
    role as an active Ahmadi, serving a role locally as "Musi" and "Quaid",
    afforded good  reasons  to  consider  that  such  persecution  will  be
    repeated. That in any event, is our assessment, particularly bearing in
    mind the fact that the first appellant (and  to  a  lesser  extent  the
    second appellant) falls within the  terms  of  paragraph  2(i)  of  the
    guidance in MN.

Internal relocation

60.  Mr Wilding submitted that we should conclude that the appellants  would
    have a viable internal relocation alternative based on  the  fact  that
    the first appellant's wife and children appear to have achieved  safety
    by  moving  45  minutes'  drive  away  and  the  fact  that  the  first
    appellant's shop appears to have remained in operation with the help of
    his brother although now  manned  by  a  non-Ahmadi.   We  reject  this
    contention. In the headnote and at point 7 of the headnote and [124] of
    MN the Tribunal stated that:

     "[T]he option of  internal  relocation,  previously  considered  to  be
         available in Rabwah,  is  not  in  general  reasonably  open  to  a
         claimant who genuinely wishes to engage n paragraph 2(i) behaviour,
         in the light of the nationwide effect  in  Pakistan  of  the  anti-
         Ahmadi legislation."

61.  We also note that the Home Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance:
    Pakistan: Ahmadis, Version 2.0, May 2016 states at 2.4.2 that:

         "MN and others held that, in light  of  the  nationwide  effect  in
         Pakistan of the anti-Ahmadi legislation,  the  option  of  internal
         relocation, previously considered to be available in Rabwah, is not
         in general reasonably open to a  person  who  genuinely  wishes  to
         practise and manifest their faith openly in  Pakistan  contrary  to
         the restrictions of the Pakistan Penal Code ...".

62.  We recall further our earlier note that the first appellant's  evidence
    in his latest witness statement of 8 September 2016 was that whilst his
    brother continues to live in  Pakistan  he  is  "lying  low  and  still
    looking for an opportunity to escape".

63.  In our view what we stated earlier regarding the mixed plausibility  of
    the first appellant's decision to leave Pakistan  also  has  a  bearing
    here.  Unlike his wife and  children,  the  first  appellant  would  be
    returning as an active Ahmadi whose level of involvement in the  Ahmadi
    faith was at a significant level.  In our view,  wherever  he  went  in
    Pakistan, it is reasonably likely he would sooner or later attract  the
    same kind of adverse attention.  In making this assessment we  bear  in
    mind not only what was said on the subject of  internal  relocation  by
    the Tribunal in MN, but also what was said  in  the  UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines.

64.  The aforementioned UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines, January 2017  note  at
    Part 5 (p. 22) that: -

         "[l]ittle or no protection is  reportedly  afforded  by  the  state
         authorities.  It appears that crimes and acts of  violence  against
         Ahmadis  are  not  consistently  investigated,  allegedly  due   to
         pressure from Islamic fundamentalist groups,  and  perpetrators  of
         such crimes are reportedly not brought to justice"


    and at Part VI (p. 42) that:


         "For Ahmadis who practise their faith openly or who have  been  the
         target of threats and/or attacks by  fundamentalist  Sunni  groups,
         such as Pasban  Khatme-Nabuwaht,  there  is  no  viable  IFA/IRA  [
         Internal Flight Alternative/Internal Protection Alternative]  given
         the countrywide reach of such groups, compounded  by  the  reported
         lack of effective state protection ...".

Notice of Decision

65.  The decision of the FtT judge has already been set aside  for  material
    error of law.

66.  The  decision  we  remake  is  to  allow  the  appellants'  appeals  on
    protection (asylum) grounds.


Signed                                  Date: 22 November 2017
                [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Appendix A: summary of oral evidence

1.   The first witness called was Mr Mansoor Shah,  Vice  President  of  the
    Ahmadiyaa Muslim Association UK (AMAUK).   He  said  he  had  read  the
    reports on the first appellant dated 6 January 2015, 13  October  2015,
    25 February 2016, 5 September 2016 and 9  August  2017.   He  explained
    that the procedure followed by  his  association  in  the  event  of  a
    request from a member wanting help with an asylum claim was to send  it
    to their Department for Internal Affairs in Pakistan who then contacted
    the local branch president in the appellant's home area who then either
    personally or through delegation drew up a report  regarding  what  was
    known about the applicant's Ahmadi activities.  Asked by  Mr  Fripp  if
    there had ever been misuse of this  procedure,  Mr  Shah  said  in  his
    experience only once or  twice  had  there  ever  been  a  minor  error
    relating to a  person's  precise  name  or  age  or  where  information
    received from someone had possibly been misrepresented.   How  complete
    the records held by  local  branch  presidents  were  depended  on  the
    individual holding the post.  If some matter was not  reported  to  the
    local branch president he could not confirm it; he  could  only  report
    what had been reported to him locally.  He (Mr Shah) had no  reason  to
    doubt the integrity of the local branch president who wrote a report on
    the first appellant.  The appellants'  case  was  an  illustration,  he
    said, of the situation whereby sometimes, in response to an applicant's
    request for further help, the local branch president would be asked  to
    produce a supplementary report.  When there was the need to go  to  the
    local police to notify an incident against an Ahmadi  reported  to  the
    local branch president, he would go himself or send someone  to  attend
    on his behalf; but the Ahmadi  community  organisation  at  this  local
    level had limited resources.  Mr Shah said he  had  given  evidence  in
    appeal cases two or three times.

2.   In reply to questions from Mr Wilding, Mr Shah said  he  had  not  been
    personally involved in the procedure whereby  a  report  regarding  the
    appellants was requested by his  association  to  the  headquarters  in
    Pakistan.  The association's procedure upon receipt of any report  from
    Pakistan was to keep it on file as a confidential document.   It  would
    only be made available to appeal authorities in certain cases.  He said
    it was one of his association's missions to promote  the  Ahmadi  faith
    and bring  to  public  attention  what  was  happening  to  Ahmadis  in
    Pakistan.  However, the association did not encourage Ahmadis to settle
    in other countries and was not in the  business  of  supporting  Ahmadi
    asylum claims in general.  His association believed  it  had  to  adopt
    rigorous procedures in order to ensure, for example, that  it  was  not
    infiltrated by terrorists.

3.   Asked further about the association's procedures,  Mr  Shah  said  that
    when individuals approached  the  association  for  help  there  was  a
    filter: the association had  to  be  satisfied  the  applicant  was  an
    Ahmadi; only then  would  the  association  proceed.   The  information
    request typically concerned matters such as whether the individual  was
    known to the local Ahmadi community in Pakistan, whether he or she held
    any Ahmadi office there, whether they made any financial  contributions
    etc.

4.   Asked by Mr Wilding whether there had ever  been  incidents  where  the
    association thought an individual was lying, Mr  Shah  said  there  had
    been although they were rare.  He  gave  the  example  of  someone  who
    became an Ahmadi in the UK who said he had been an Ahmadi in  Pakistan,
    but the Pakistan headquarters could find no  proof.   He  gave  another
    example where someone said he had been the victim  of  an  incident  in
    Pakistan in which they said they were beaten, but no such incident  had
    been reported to the local branch president.

5.   Mr Wilding sought more detail regarding the  contents  of  the  reports
    drawn up by local branch presidents.  In general,  said  Mr  Shah,  the
    local branch would just confirm that an incident had been  reported  to
    them; they did not seek to pass judgment on whether the incident was an
    ordinary crime or religiously motivated.  Their reports did not confirm
    causes.  The extent to which the writer of the report was able  to  say
    from their own knowledge that an incident had happened or an individual
    had been attacked would depend on the local  branch  resources  and  on
    whether members on the ground in the area had  witnessed  such  things.
    Even if a report writer had no personal knowledge that an incident  had
    happened, they would still report it: "We do not seek external evidence
    every time".  Whilst the reports drawn up did not  attempt  to  confirm
    causes, it was widely known within  their  community  that  "a  lot  of
    things happened as a result of our religion".

6.   In re-examination Mr Shah was asked to explain an earlier reference  he
    had made to Ahmadis who were  "Musi"  (it  was  the  evidence  of  both
    appellants that they were Musis).  Musis were, he said,  persons  whose
    level of commitment to the association was  strong  and  who  dedicated
    their entire  lives  to  their  faith.   They  made  greater  financial
    contributions but these were not enough on their  own  to  make  one  a
    Musi.  People had to apply to become Musis; it took  one  year  for  an
    application to be dealt with.  A "Quaid" (it was the first  appellant's
    evidence that he was also a Quaid) was someone who  was  a  leader  and
    whose role was to set a good example of dedication to the community.

7.   Mr Shah said the fact that the further report on the  appellants  dated
    25 February 2016 mentioned that the branch  president  had  accompanied
    the first appellant to  the  police  station  showed  that  the  former
    attached particular importance to the matter.

8.   The next  witness  was  the  first  appellant.   Having  confirmed  his
    witness statements were true and correct, he said that he  was  present
    when the Khatme Nabuwaht "malvis" trashed his shop  in  December  2014.
    He was sure they did so because of his faith. He knew this  because  he
    had received harassment and threats since the day he began his business
    in 1999.  There had also been minor  incidents,  gluing  of  locks  and
    putting up posters.  Sometimes they just argued.  On  the  day  of  the
    trashing of his shop they had said "You are an infidel.  Run, otherwise
    we will kill you".  Sometimes they stopped him on his way to the  shop.
    He informed his jamaat (place of worship) who advised him to change his
    route.  He had not seen the two men  who  came  and  trashed  his  shop
    before.  Straight after the incident he went and told his local  branch
    leader and the latter accompanied him to the police station.  They told
    the police that his shop had been attacked; the police  made  them  sit
    and wait.  The police did not go to see  the  shop  or  say  that  they
    would.  He believed that was because they knew he was an Ahmadi.   They
    were at the police station for an hour.  Asked by Mr Wilding  why  they
    had left after such a short time,  the  first  appellant  said  it  was
    because they knew the police would  not  help.   After  they  left  the
    police station he went home and talked to his  mother.   Asked  if  the
    malvis had ever attacked or threatened him at his home,  he  said  they
    knew where he lived.  They also used to stop him on his way to work.

9.   Mr Wilding asked about why, if he was aware his  attackers  knew  where
    he lived, he had not fled together with  his  wife  and  children.  The
    first appellant said he would have taken  them  but  only  he  and  his
    mother had a visa.  Since the shop incident in December 2014, his  wife
    and children had not applied for a visa.  He  had  inquired  about  how
    they might join him but had been advised by immigration consultants "it
    would not be good".  His wife and children had moved  to  her  parents'
    house 45 minutes drive away.  It was not possible to leave  his  mother
    behind; his attackers would have abused her; when his  mother  went  to
    the marketplace the malvis would abuse her.  There had  been  incidents
    of arson and beatings directed at  Ahmadis  in  his  local  area.   His
    brother lived in the same area.

10.  Mr Wilding asked the first appellant about  his  mother's  health.   He
    said  she  had  been  having  health  problems  in  Pakistan  and  took
    medication.   She  would  also  go  sometimes  to  hospital  for  blood
    transfusions.  He denied that the real reason he  and  his  mother  had
    come to the UK was to get her medical treatment.  He had come to the UK
    as a visitor in early  2014,  he  stayed  with  his  sister  and  other
    relatives.  They had learnt from a telephone call from his mother about
    the shop incident.

11.  Mr Wilding asked  why  had  the  sister  or  other  relatives  had  not
    attended to give evidence on his and his mother's behalf.  He said  "if
    I called she [his sister] would have come".  His mother had visited the
    UK four or five times without  problems.   She  did  not  need  medical
    treatment in the UK  because  of  any  money  shortage.   It  was  very
    difficult for him to live in the UK having left his wife and two  small
    children in Pakistan.

12.  The first appellant was  asked  again  about  the  December  2014  shop
    incident.  He said that  up  to  then  the  malvis  who  had  come  and
    threatened him were not always the same people.  Over his time  at  the
    shop about eight to ten different people had  come.   They  called  him
    "Mirzi" as a term of insult.

13.  In re-examination the first appellant said the posters put  up  by  the
    malvis had been put on his shop front.  The messages on them called for
    people to "boycott" his shop.  He had witnessed his mother being abused
    when she went to the marketplace.

14.  The first appellant was asked by the bench  whether  he  had  told  his
    mother about the shop incident that same day.  He said he had.  It  was
    put to him that his mother had said in her asylum  interview  that  she
    only learnt about the shop incident two days later.  He  said  she  was
    not aware of these things; her understanding was poor.

15.  The third and final witness was Mr A B who was granted  refugee  status
    in the UK December 2014.   He  said  he  was  a  cousin  who  knew  the
    appellants when they lived in Rawalpindi.  He knew both  appellants  to
    have been Musis in Pakistan.  He had learnt  about  the  December  2014
    incident from his wife who had been informed by the  first  appellant's
    mother.  His wife had heard  about  it  after  a  telephone  call  from
    Pakistan to his mother.


Appendix B: headnote to MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions -  risk)
    CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC):

         "1.    This country guidance replaces previous guidance in MJ &  ZM
             (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008]  UKAIT  00033,  and  IA  &
             Others (Ahmadis: Rabwah) Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT  00088.  The
             guidance we give  is  based in part on the developments in the
             law including the decisions of the Supreme Court in HJ  (Iran)
             [2010] UKSC 31, RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  UKSC  38  and  the  CJEU
             decision in  Germany  v.  Y  (C-71/11)  &  Z  (C-99/11).   The
             guidance relates principally to Qadiani Ahmadis;  but  as  the
             legislation which is the background to the  issues  raised  in
             these appeals  affects  Lahori  Ahmadis  also,  they  too  are
             included in the country guidance stated below.

         2.   (i)      The background  to  the  risk  faced  by  Ahmadis  is
                  legislation that restricts the way in which they are  able
                  openly to practise their faith. The legislation  not  only
                  prohibits preaching and other forms of  proselytising  but
                  also in practice restricts other elements  of  manifesting
                  one's religious beliefs, such as  holding  open  discourse
                  about religion with non-Ahmadis, although not amounting to
                  proselytising. The prohibitions include  openly  referring
                  to one's place  of  worship  as  a  mosque  and  to  one's
                  religious leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are  not
                  permitted to refer to the call to prayer as  azan  nor  to
                  call themselves Muslims or refer to their faith as  Islam.
                  Sanctions include a fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy
                  is found, there is a risk of the death  penalty  which  to
                  date has not been carried out although there is a risk  of
                  lengthy incarceration if the penalty is imposed.  There is
                  clear evidence that this legislation is used by  non-state
                  actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis. This  includes  the
                  filing of First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first step
                  in  any  criminal  proceedings)  which   can   result   in
                  detentions whilst prosecutions are being pursued.  Ahmadis
                  are also subject  to  attacks  by  non-state  actors  from
                  sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.

             (ii) It is, and has long been, possible in general for Ahmadis
                  to practise their faith on a restricted  basis  either  in
                  private  or  in  community  with  other  Ahmadis,  without
                  infringing domestic Pakistan law.

         3.   (i) If an  Ahmadi  is  able  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of
                  particular  importance  to  his  religious   identity   to
                  practise and manifest his  faith  openly  in  Pakistan  in
                  defiance of the restrictions in the  Pakistan  Penal  Code
                  (PPC)  under  sections  298B  and  298C,  by  engaging  in
                  behaviour described in paragraph 2(i) above, he or she  is
                  likely to be in need of protection, in the  light  of  the
                  serious nature of the sanctions that potentially apply  as
                  well as the risk of prosecution  under  section  295C  for
                  blasphemy.

             (ii) It is  no  answer  to  expect  an  Ahmadi  who  fits  the
                  description just given  to  avoid  engaging  in  behaviour
                  described  in  paragraph  2(i)  above   ("paragraph   2(i)
                  behaviour") to avoid a risk of prosecution.

         4.   The need for protection applies  equally  to  men  and  women.
             There is no basis for considering that Ahmadi women as a whole
             are at a particular or additional risk; the decision that they
             should not attend mosques in Pakistan was made by  the  Ahmadi
             Community following attacks on the mosques in Lahore in  2010.
             There is no evidence that women in particular were the  target
             of those attacks.

         5.   In light of the above, the first question  the  decision-maker
             must ask is (1) whether the claimant genuinely is  an  Ahmadi.
             As with all judicial fact-finding the judge will need to reach
             conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving such  weight
             to aspects of that evidence as appropriate in accordance  with
             Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.  This is  likely  to
             include an enquiry whether the claimant was registered with an
             Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged  there
             on  a  regular  basis.  Post-arrival  activity  will  also  be
             relevant.    Evidence   likely   to   be   relevant   includes
             confirmation from the UK  Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the
             activities relied on in Pakistan  and  confirmation  from  the
             local community in the UK where the claimant is worshipping.

         6.   The next step (2) involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
             intentions or wishes as to his or her faith,  if  returned  to
             Pakistan.  This is relevant because of the need  to  establish
             whether it  is  of  particular  importance  to  the  religious
             identity of the Ahmadi concerned to engage in  paragraph  2(i)
             behaviour. The burden is on the claimant to  demonstrate  that
             any intention or wish to practise and manifest aspects of  the
             faith openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code
             (PPC) is genuinely held and of particular  importance  to  the
             claimant to preserve  his  or  her  religious  identity.   The
             decision maker needs to evaluate all the  evidence.  Behaviour
             since arrival in the UK may also be relevant. If the  claimant
             discharges  this  burden  he  is  likely  to  be  in  need  of
             protection.

         7.   The option of internal relocation, previously considered to be
             available in Rabwah, is not in general reasonably  open  to  a
             claimant who genuinely  wishes  to  engage  n  paragraph  2(i)
             behaviour, in the light of the nationwide effect  in  Pakistan
             of the anti-Ahmadi legislation.

         8.   Ahmadis who are not able to show  that  they  practised  their
             faith at all in Pakistan or that they did so on anything other
             than the restricted basis described in paragraph  2(ii)  above
             are in general unlikely to be able to show that their  genuine
             intentions or wishes are to practise and manifest their  faith
             openly on return, as described in paragraph 2(i) above.

         9.    A  sur  place  claim  by  an  Ahmadi  based  on  post-arrival
             conversion or revival in  belief  and  practice  will  require
             careful  evidential  analysis.  This  will  probably   include
             consideration of evidence of the head of the claimant's  local
             United Kingdom Ahmadi Community and from the UK  headquarters,
             the latter particularly  in  cases  where  there  has  been  a
             conversion. Any adverse findings in the claimant's account  as
             a whole may be relevant to the assessment of likely  behaviour
             on return.

         10.  Whilst an Ahmadi who has  been  found  to  be  not  reasonably
             likely to engage or wish to engage in paragraph 2(i) behaviour
             is, in general, not  at  real  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan,
             judicial fact-finders may in certain cases  need  to  consider
             whether that person would nevertheless be reasonably likely to
             be targeted  by  non-state  actors  on  return  for  religious
             persecution by  reason  of  his/her  prominent  social  and/or
             business profile.







