
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of Sean Devons Irons) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department FCJR [2013] UKUT 00495(IAC)


|Given orally at the hearing at Field House    |Judgment sent                |
|On 12 September 2013                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE storey

                                   Between

             THE QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF SEAN DEVONS IRONS)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Representation:

Mr A Khan, instructed by Makanda Bart & Co appeared behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr S Singh, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.





                                  JUDGMENT

JUDGE storey:

1.     This is an application for judicial  review  of  a  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the further representations of  the  applicant,  a
    citizen of Jamaica,  as  a  fresh  claim  following  the  making  of  a
    deportation order against him under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act
    2007 and the subsequent decision to remove him to Jamaica.

2.   Refusal decisions of 30 May 2012 and 28 and  29  June  2012  have  been
    augmented by consent by a supplementary  decision  letter  of  24  June
    2013. This letter takes into account both materials  previously  relied
    on and letters of 2 May and 14 August  2013  from  a  Specialist  CAMHS
    Worker of Enfield Council Mental Health Trust.

Immigration history and judicial proceedings

3.   It is of some  significance  to  the  overall  context  in  which  this
    application stands to be decided to  recount  briefly  the  applicant's
    immigration history and related judicial proceedings. He arrived in the
    UK in July 2000 as a visitor but in February 2001 was granted leave  to
    remain as a student and in October  2001  was  granted  exemption  from
    immigration control, having enlisted in the British army. In  May  2006
    however he was convicted at Croydon  Crown  Court  of  being  knowingly
    concerned in the fraudulent evasion of prohibition  or  restriction  on
    importation of class A controlled drugs and sentenced to eleven  years'
    imprisonment.

4.   On 26 May 2006 he was discharged from the  army  due  to  his  criminal
    conviction.  On 14 July 2010  he  was  given  notice  of  liability  of
    deportation.  In March 2011 a deportation order followed.   On  2  June
    2011 a First-tier Tribunal panel  dismissed  his  appeal  against  that
    decision, this dismissal being upheld by the Upper Tribunal soon after.
    The applicant became appeal rights exhausted in December 2011.

5.   Following his re-detention under  Immigration  Act  powers  in  January
    2012 the applicant claimed asylum.  On 14  March  2012  the  respondent
    treated this as an application to revoke an automatic deportation order
    and  certified  it  as  clearly  unfounded  under  Section  94  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2012.   On  1  May  2012  his
    judicial review application  against  this  decision  was  refused  and
    identified as being totally without merit. In June 2012  the  applicant
    made  further  representations  which  included  submissions  that  the
    applicant and his mother had recently received threats in the UK from a
    criminal gang that he would be shot on his arrival at  the  airport  in
    Jamaica and that there were serious concerns about the mental health of
    his younger half-sister, S. As noted earlier, the respondent refused to
    accept these as a fresh claim in letters dated 28 and 29 June 2013.  On
    13 February 2013 permission to apply for judicial review was granted by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane. He stated that the new  evidence  about  the
    applicant's younger half-sister was arguably different. He  added  that
    the evidence of threats to the applicant in the UK  was  also  arguably
    different enough to require  an  answer  to  the  question  of  what  a
    hypothetical judge would do. On 2  April  2013  the  parties  signed  a
    consent order providing, among other things, that the  applicant  serve
    on the respondent  up  to  date  medical  records  in  respect  of  the
    applicant's half-sister and that the respondent consider those  medical
    records and issue a further decision. On  16  May  2013  the  applicant
    wrote to the respondent enclosing a  report  from  a  specialist  CAMHS
    worker, dated 2 May 2013.     On 24 June 2013 the respondent  issued  a
    further refusal letter.

Relevant law

6.    The respondent does not dispute that,  in  conformity  with  paragraph
    353(i) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended), the  materials  on
    which the applicant has sought to rely include  content  that  had  not
    already been considered. The basis of  her  latest  refusal  is  rather
    paragraph 353(ii). Paragraph 353  specifies  that  further  submissions
    will only be significantly different if  the  content  "...  ii)  taken
    together with the previously considered material, created  a  realistic
    prospect of success, notwithstanding its rejection." Hence  I  have  to
    decide whether in accordance with the latter paragraph  the  respondent
    asked herself the right question and acted  rationally  in  considering
    that there was  no  realistic  prospect  of  the  new  materials  taken
    together with the old causing a hypothetical  Tribunal  Judge  applying
    anxious scrutiny to find in the applicant's  favour  on  asylum  and/or
    human rights grounds. (The  reference  made  in  lead  decisions  to  a
    "hypothetical judge" must, of course, be  read  in  the  light  of  the
    observation made by Carnwath LJ (as he then  was)  in  YH,  R  (on  the
    application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 116 at [16] that it is a "helpful discipline" but not a  legal
    formula.)

The grounds

7.   The grounds as amplified  by  Mr  Khan  in  a  skeleton  argument  were
    essentially twofold.

8.   First, it is contended that the respondent has  acted  unreasonably  in
    responding negatively to the applicant's asylum and Article  3  related
    claims, that he would be at risk on return to Jamaica from members of a
    drug gang who had made serious threats  against  him  and  his  mother,
    threats which were the subject of a criminal investigation by UK police
    based at Uxbridge Police Station to whom the applicant and  his  mother
    had reported them in June 2012.  It is emphasised by Mr Khan  that  the
    applicant has never had an opportunity to have this asylum claim tested
    before a fact finding Tribunal.

9.   Second, it is averred that the respondent has failed  to  give  anxious
    scrutiny to the evidence relating  to  the  applicant's  younger  half-
    sister, S. Letters from her  GP  and  hospital  doctors  were  said  to
    demonstrate that in addition to underlying health problems (she suffers
    amongst other things from sickle cell anaemia), she developed  suicidal
    ideation as a direct result of her learning of the applicant's prospect
    of deportation and her belief that his  life  would  be  in  danger  on
    return. Here also Mr Khan highlighted the fact  that  the  evidence  of
    this girl's suicidal ideation has never as yet  been  considered  by  a
    fact-finding tribunal.

The asylum and Article 3 claim  to  risk  on  return  arising  from  alleged
threats from a criminal gang

10.  Dealing with the applicant's first ground, I am not persuaded that  the
    respondent's decision letters disclose any Wednesbury unreasonableness.
    The respondent has clearly given careful consideration to the  evidence
    adduced by the applicant in support of his claim to  be  at  risk  from
    drug gang members.  In  this  regard  she  was  entitled  to  treat  as
    significant the following matters:

    (i)  the fact that despite the incidents said to underpin  the  adverse
          interest of  gang  members  having  occurred  in  2005  (when  the
          applicant was arrested at the airport in the  UK  in  relation  to
          importation of class A drugs), he had never made  any  mention  of
          any concerns about his safety on return either during  his  appeal
          proceedings before the First-tier and Upper Tier Tribunals in 2011
          or in the context of his judicial review application which in  May
          2012, as I have already mentioned, was found to be totally without
          merit. The applicant had nowhere sought to explain why he made  no
          mention of such concerns previously or why, if threats  were  only
          made recently, they had not been made earlier. He  had  failed  to
          explain why, given his removal had  been  set  on  five  different
          occasions, texts had only been sent to  forewarn  him  on  one  of
          them.


    (ii)    that he had failed to substantiate the claims made by  him  and
          his mother to have received the alleged threatening texts in  June
          2012. (It is now apparent from a copy email of 10 August 2013 that
          the CID Main Office Inspector who was in charge  of  investigating
          these complaints had noted that they had been made  a  short  time
          prior to the applicant facing being deported to Jamaica  and  that
          "due to the lack of evidence, the possibility of false  reporting,
          the matter was NFA'd [No Further Action-ed] and not in the  public
          interest to proceed").


    (iii)    that he had failed to explain how the gang members would  have
          been able to obtain  either  his  or  his  mother's  mobile  phone
          numbers to send the alleged threatening text.


    (iv)  that he had failed to explain why any gang member would  forewarn
          the applicant of any such threats.

11.   As  regards  his  asylum-related  claim,  the  respondent  also   gave
    consideration to whether, even assuming these threats  were  real,  the
    applicant would be able  to  obtain  sufficiency  of  protection.   Her
    written responses  cite  background  country  information  relating  to
    Jamaica supporting her assessment.

12.  Mr Khan, in his submissions, has  not  sought  to  identify  background
    evidence to the contrary, but he has sought to rely on a passage in the
    Operational Guidance Note on  Jamaica,  version  11.0,  December  2012,
    stating that "[c]laimants who fear a criminal  gang  who  are  able  to
    demonstrate that the gang poses a real and serious  threat  may  be  at
    risk of persecution in Jamaica. Unless reasonably likely to be admitted
    into  the  Witness  Protection  Programme,  a  person  targeted  by  an
    organised criminal gang will not normally receive effective  protection
    in his home area."  Whilst I think it is  fair  to  say  that  the  OGN
    position on sufficiency of protection in this type of context  is  more
    nuanced  than  the  position  presented  in  the  respondent's  refusal
    letters,  it  is  nevertheless  clear  that:  (a)  its  presumption  of
    ineffective protection only applies if witness protection  is  unlikely
    to be available; (b) more importantly, there is nothing in the  OGN  to
    say that internal flight  or  internal  relocation  would  normally  be
    unavailable and indeed the succeeding paragraph  (3.6.15)  states  that
    "[i]t may be practicable for applicants who  may  have  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in one area to relocate to other parts  of  Jamaica
    where gang violence is less prevalent and where they would not  have  a
    well-founded fear ...."; and (c) in the applicant's case the respondent
    had justifiably considered that the applicant  would  not  be  able  to
    demonstrate a real risk of persecution from a criminal gang and so  her
    observations on sufficiency of protection and internal relocation  were
    made in the alternative in any event.

Article 8 and the circumstances of the half-sister

13.  Turning to the applicant's second ground, which relates to his and  his
    half-sister's Article 8  circumstances,  taking  the  previous  refusal
    decisions together with that dated 24 June 2013, I am not persuaded  it
    has merit either.

14.    As regards the best interests of the  child  (the  applicant's  half-
    sister), it is true that the refusal decisions do not in terms refer to
    these, but I am satisfied that the relevant letters dealt in  substance
    with the issue  of  her  best  interests  and  constituted  a  rational
    response to the further representations regarding them.

15.   First of all, the evidence relating to this girl had to be  considered
    - and was considered - by the respondent in the wider  context  of  the
    applicant's private and family life ties in the UK.  In its decision of
    June 2011 the First-tier Tribunal panel found that the applicant's ties
    with his mother and half-sister did  not  go  beyond  normal  emotional
    ties.  The panel noted that as a result of his own social network,  his
    life in the army and his imprisonment, he had not lived in his mother's
    house for a considerable period of time and at that point in  time  the
    primary focus of his family life was indeed his relationship  with  his
    wife, K (whom he had married in 2003) and his son KO.   Although  there
    was evidence of the applicant's half-sister visiting the  applicant  in
    prison and writing to him in prison, there was no  evidence  sufficient
    to require the respondent to consider that there had been a qualitative
    change in the nature of the applicant's ties with her.

16.  Second, in relation to his half-sister's medical circumstances,  it  is
    clear that the respondent acknowledged that the medical  evidence  from
    the GP and the hospital doctors identified  her  suicidal  ideation  as
    being linked to her distress at the applicant's  imminent  deportation.
    However, the same evidence - the discharge summary from Barnet &  Chase
    Farm Hospital, dated 21 June 2012 in particular - also identified  this
    as  being  linked  to  his  half-sister's  pre-existing   psychological
    problems which were said to have a 7 year  history  ("she  described  a
    seven year history of feeling sad most of the  time"),  and  to  derive
    also from a "complex  family  situation".  Significantly,  despite  the
    applicant's representatives being afforded by consent  the  opportunity
    in April 2013 to adduce further medical  reports,  the  only  materials
    forthcoming were the two letters from the specialist  CAMHS  worker  at
    Enfield  Council  and  neither  of  these  rejected  the  medical  view
    previously stated that this girl's suicidal ideation was in part due to
    her complex family history going back seven years. I also note that  no
    report was adduced specifically seeking to express the  "voice  of  the
    child", S, herself  despite  it  obviously  having  been  open  to  the
    applicant's representatives to obtain such.

17.  Thirdly, it is also clear that when assessing the impact on  the  half-
    sister of the deportation of the applicant  the  respondent  also  took
    into account, as she was entitled to do, that this same body of medical
    evidence would be seen to  demonstrate  that  she  would  have  ongoing
    support from the specialist CAMHS team: it was stated in the letter  of
    14 August 2013 by the specialist worker in question  that  "CAMHS  will
    continue to offer ongoing emotional support to [S]. In the event of any
    further crisis with [S]'s mental health we would work closely with  her
    and her family to ensure that she is supported and her wellbeing  being
    safeguarded".  The earlier 2012 medical evidence also made  clear  that
    the girl was not considered a high suicide risk.

18. Fourthly, the contents of the 2 May 2013 letter from the  CAMHS  worker
    does not bear out Mr Khan's  assertion  in  his  skeleton  argument  at
    paragraph 20 that the condition of the girl has deteriorated since June
    2012. This recent letter clearly  regards  the  half-sister's  suicidal
    ideation as having lessened.  It is  made  clear  that  she  still  has
    significant anxiety and stress, that there has been some  worsening  of
    her academic and social progress and that worry about her brother,  the
    applicant, has left her in a state of "emotional turmoil". At the  same
    time, the letter does not record any clinical indiciae of a significant
    suicide risk and notes that "S... was able to  acknowledge  that  these
    [suicide thoughts] had been fleeting thoughts with no actual intent and
    that in reality she would not  act  for  fear  of  causing  her  mother
    further distress." The letter also clarifies that in the context of the
    2012 examination of the girl:


            "Dr Broster [a Consultant  Child  and  Adolescent  Psychiatrist]
       concluded that S's presentation felt  more  like  an  expression  of
       suicide or thinking as opposed to an actual  plan  with  intent  and
       that she might benefit from a space in which  she  could  be  helped
       address the issues that had been raised".


19.  For the above reasons I conclude that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    not Wednesbury unreasonable and that she was entitled to conclude  that
    there was no realistic  prospect  of  a  hypothetical  Tribunal  Judge,
    taking the new materials together with the  old  and  applying  anxious
    scrutiny, allowing the applicant's appeal.

DECISION

This application for judicial review is refused.


Mr Khan confirmed that he could not resist the respondent's application  for
costs and for an order that assessment will take place on a standard  basis.
I hereby make such an order.

Mr Khan  confirmed  he  did  not  wish  to  make  an  oral  application  for
permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

