
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

   R (on the application of Ashfaq Ali) v Secretary of State for the Home
  Department (s3C extended leave: invalidation) IJR [2014] UKUT 00494(IAC)


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London


                               Given orally at Field House on 8 October 2014


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE peter lane

                                   Between

                                 ASHFAQ ALI

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr P Richardson, instructed by Worldwide Solicitors, appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr R Dunlop, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor, appeared on behalf of
the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                         APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION

                                  JUDGMENT

                           - - - - - - - - - - - -

Leave that has been extended by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration  Act
1971 is invalidated by section 10(8) of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999
where a decision is made under section 10 to remove the person  having  such
leave.
    JUDGE PETER lane: This is a renewed application by Mr  Ashfaq  Ali  for
    permission to challenge a decision of 5 August 2014 to remove him  from
    the United Kingdom.  Permission was refused on the papers on 12  August
    2014 by Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?.

2.   I have today granted permission  for  Mr  Richardson,  who  appears  on
    behalf of the applicant, to argue his amended grounds, there  being  no
    objection to that course from Mr Dunlop, who represents the respondent.
     Those grounds were sent to the Tribunal under cover of a letter  dated
    7 October 2014.

3.   The circumstances giving rise to the decision under  challenge  are  as
    follows.  The applicant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 10  March  1984,
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 November 2011 as  a  student.   His
    leave was subsequently extended to expire on 17 February 2014.   On  15
    February 2014 the applicant applied for further leave  to  remain.   In
    order to prove certain of the requirements  necessary  to  obtain  such
    leave he supplied an ETS TOEIC certificate which purported to show that
    he had taken an exam on 19 November 2013.

4.   However, the respondent was informed  by  the  test  facilitator,  ETS,
    that the applicant's test score had been cancelled as  invalid  due  to
    evidence of fraud.  This applicant's case  bears  similarities  with  a
    large number of other cases that the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  Higher
    Courts have seen.

5.   On 5 August 2014 the applicant  was  arrested  and  served  with  forms
    IS.151A, IS.151 part 2, IS.91R, IS.86, IS.98 and IS.98A and a  decision
    refusing an application for leave to remain.  Directions were  set  for
    his removal on 13 August 2014.  These proceedings were  brought  on  11
    August.

6.   The challenge mounted by Mr Richardson essentially comes  down  to  the
    following proposition: that on what at least is an arguable reading  of
    the relevant legislation, the applicant is entitled  to  an  in-country
    right of appeal; and in those circumstances it is no answer at  all  to
    suggest that the applicant could bring an appeal from abroad.

7.   I deal first with the "chronology" argument put forward  on  behalf  of
    the applicant.  The applicant needs to show that the decision to refuse
    to grant him leave to remain was  in  fact  made  before  the  decision
    pursuant to section 10 of the Nationality and Immigration Act  1999  to
    remove him as a person who had breached his conditions and/or attempted
    to use deception in connection with an application.

8.   Mr Richardson points to the immigration  factual  summary  set  out  at
    page 24 of the bundle, where we see it recorded  that  on  15  February
    2014 a decision was said to have been taken  in  the  applicant's  case
    marked "refused with no right of appeal".  If  correct,  this  was,  of
    course, considerably before the notice of immigration decision dated  5
    August, comprising the decision to remove pursuant to section 10 of the
    1999 Act.

9.   I do not consider in the circumstances that the  applicant  can  derive
    any arguable benefit from the immigration factual summary.  I say  this
    for two reasons.  First, the actual decision to refuse to  grant  leave
    to remain, to be found at pages 21 and 22 of the bundle,  categorically
    states as follows:

         "This decision is not an immigration  decision  under  section  82.
         Section 82(2)(d) concerns a 'refusal to vary a  person's  leave  to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the result of the  refusal
         is that the person has no leave to enter or remain.'


         This is not the situation in this case as the effect of  the  prior
         section 10 decision means that  any  existing  leave  to  enter  or
         remain in the United Kingdom was invalidated under section 10(8) so
         you have no leave to enter or remain at the time  the  decision  to
         refuse to vary leave to remain was notified."


10.  The key word in that quotation is "prior".  It  makes  plain  that  the
    removal decision came first.  That is logical, when one  looks  at  the
    sequence of events that needed to  be  pursued  by  the  respondent  in
    order, first, to invalidate the leave which  the  applicant  had  as  a
    student, and then to make a  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  leave  to
    remain, which importantly is not an immigration decision.

11.  The second reason why I find against the applicant  on  this  issue  is
    because I accept the submission of Mr Dunlop that immigration decisions
    are given when they are served and one looks in vain for any service of
    a relevant immigration decision in this case.

12.  I therefore do not find that there is arguable merit in the  submission
    in the amended grounds that section 78 of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (no removal  while  appeal  pending)  provides  any
    relief.  This is because,  so  far  at  least  in  this  analysis,  the
    applicant has not shown that he had  an  in  country  right  of  appeal
    against the decision to refuse to  grant  him  leave,  which  could  be
    "pending" while he remains here.

13.  I turn to the issue regarding section 3C leave.  Mr Richardson  submits
    that the scheme of the legislation is such that section 3C leave enjoys
    a status which in effect makes it immune from action being taken  under
    section 10, so as to negate it.

14.    Section 10(8) provides as follows:

         "When a person is notified that a decision has been made to  remove
         him in accordance with this section  the  notification  invalidates
         any leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom previously given
         to him."

15.  Mr Richardson submits that the applicant's leave under  section  3C  of
    the Immigration Act 1971 is not leave that was "given to  him"  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  but,  rather,  is  leave  that  is  conferred  by
    Parliament pursuant to that section.  With respect,  I  do  not  accept
    that submission.  It is contrary to the Court of Appeal authority in QI
    (Pakistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 614.  As I consider  to  be  unarguably  the
    case in any event, that judgment holds that section 3C does not  create
    a new species of leave but rather, as its language  indicates,  extends
    the leave that has already been granted but which would otherwise  have
    expired, in circumstances where an application for  variation  of  that
    leave has been made but not determined by the respondent.

16.  Mr Richardson points to other aspects of section 3C, as supporting  the
    proposition that section 10(8) cannot apply to it.  He draws  attention
    to section 3C(3), which provides that "leave extended by virtue of this
    section shall lapse if the applicant leaves  the  United  Kingdom".  In
    particular, he draws my attention to  section  3C(2)(a),  which  states
    that leave is extended by virtue of section 3C "during any period  when
    the application for variation is neither decided nor withdrawn".

17. I find, however, that the argument  fails  for  the  following  reasons.
    First, section 10(8) has application  to  section  3C  leave,  for  the
    reason I have already  given.   Secondly,  in  the  present  case,  the
    application for variation within section 3C(2)(a) is no  longer  extant
    and therefore section 3C(2)(a) can have no application.

18.  I derive support for my findings from what Mr Dunlop says would be  the
    consequences, were Mr Richardson's submission about section  3C  to  be
    arguably correct.  It would produce anomalous results, as  between  the
    position of somebody who was faced with section 10 action before  their
    original leave expired, and a person  who  may  be  equally  guilty  of
    deception or other misconduct, but whose leave had already expired  and
    been extended by section 3C.  I can discern no rational explanation for
    the anomalies that would ensue.  Those anomalies strike me as  pointing
    firmly in favour of the interpretation advanced by the respondent.

19.  I do not find the fact that the Court of Appeal has granted  permission
    in the case of Mehmood to be determinative of the  arguability  of  the
    section 3C submission. Obviously, I have some regard to the  fact  that
    the Court of Appeal saw fit to grant permission; but I know nothing  of
    the details of the case. In particular,  I  do  not  know  whether  the
    respondent was able to play any part in the proceedings, which resulted
    in the grant of permission or whether relevant case law  (such  as  QI)
    was cited to the Court of Appeal.

20.  Next, I deal  with  the  applicant's  submission,  which  is  based  on
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006.  The
    current form of this section is helpfully set out  in  Mr  Richardson's
    amended grounds.  He submits that the decision in this applicant's case
    was a "pre-removal decision", within the meaning of section 47 and that
    this means I should at  least  grant  permission,  because  section  47
    applies to the applicant's case. That is to say, the decision to remove
    is, in reality, a section 47 decision and an appeal against  a  section
    47 decision is appealable in-country (section  82(1)(ha)  of  the  2002
    Act).

21.  I agree, however, with Mr Dunlop that section 47 and  section  10  have
    distinct spheres of operation.  Section 47 is intended to  apply  where
    the decision of the respondent is, in terms, to refuse to vary leave to
    remain and where, in order to deal with the consequences of the  person
    concerned possibly becoming an overstayer and in the interests  of  the
    "one-stop" principle, it is  desirable  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    should be able to give a removal decision to such a person, at the same
    time as a refusal to vary leave to remain.

22.  In the present case, however, section  10  applies  in  its  own  terms
    because of the  allegation  that  the  applicant  attempted  to  obtain
    further leave by deceptive means (see section 10(1)).

23.  The applicant's final argument is that an out of country appeal is  not
    adequate.  However, this loses much of its force, once it can  be  seen
    that the relevant legislation does not confer an entitlement to an  in-
    country right of appeal. As a result, the applicant merely falls within
    the general category of person, faced with section  10  decisions,  for
    whom an out of country appeal is an entirely appropriate avenue for him
    to ventilate any concerns he has about  the  respondent's  decision  (R
    (Lim) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    773).

24.  For all these reasons, despite  Mr  Richardson's  able  submissions,  I
    refuse this application. ~~~~0~~~~
