

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   R (ota JS) and R (ota YK) v Birmingham City Council (AAJR) [2011] UKUT
                                 00505 (IAC)

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision                     |
|On 5 October 2011                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Warr




                      The Queen on the application of JS
                (by his litigation friend THE REFUGEE COUNCIL)
                                                                    Claimant
                                                                          -
   v -
                           BIRMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL
                                                                   Defendant
                                     and

                     The Queen on the application of YK
                 (by his litigation friend KAMALJIT SANDHU)
                                                                    Claimant
                                    - v -

                           BIRMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL
                                                                   Defendant

Representation:

For the Clamant JS:      Mr Suterwalla, instructed by Bhatia Best
Solicitors
For the Claimant YK:   Mr Bedford, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Defendant:        Mr Harrop-Griffiths, instructed by Birmingham
                  City Council


Introduction: The Problem

 1. Local Authorities owe certain duties to children under the Children Act
    1989 and other legislation.  As the Supreme Court decided in  R  (A)  v
    Croydon LBC [2009] UKSC 8, those duties are owed to those  who  are  in
    fact under the age of eighteen, not only those who the Local  Authority
    reasonably considers to be under the age of eighteen.

 2. If the Local Authority refuses to provide benefits to a young person on
    the ground that he is not a child, the remedy is by  challenge  to  the
    Local Authority's decision by way of Judicial Review.  In  addition  to
    the normal grounds  on  which  Judicial  Review  lies,  the  notion  of
    illegality in this context  encompasses  a  wrong  assessment  of  age.
    Thus, in a case of this sort, it is open to  a  claimant  to  establish
    that, as a matter of fact, the Local Authority's assessment was  wrong.
    The Court has, in other words, the task  of  assessing  the  claimant's
    age.

 3. That task is in addition to the other tasks of the  Court  on  Judicial
    Review.  A Local Authority's  decision  on  age  may,  like  any  other
    decision of a public body, be unlawful for failure to take into account
    relevant factors, or for taking into account irrelevant  ones;  it  may
    simply be irrational.   Considerations  such  as  these  may  assist  a
    claimant to establish that the Local  Authority's  decision  should  be
    quashed.  But when the only issue is age, the proceedings are likely to
    be directed to an assessment of age by the Court, rather than merely to
    quashing the assessment already made, leaving  the  way  open  for  the
    Local Authority to make a new one.

 4. That must be particularly so when the  case  has  reached  an  advanced
    stage of preparation.  Days of court time will have been set aside  for
    the hearing of evidence; witnesses will have been  instructed;  lawyers
    will have devoted considerable energy to preparing a precise case based
    on the evidence; the claimant seeks a  substantive  resolution  of  the
    disputed question of his age.  It is very unlikely that at  that  stage
    the traditional processes  and  remedies  of  administrative  law  will
    provide an appropriate resolution of the case.   The  hearing  will  be
    directed not merely to seeing  whether  the  Local  Authority  decision
    should be displaced, but, if so, to determining what the claimant's age
    most likely is.

 5. Age Assessment is, however, an inexact  science.   The  decision  of  a
    Court may be authoritative but it is not necessarily  for  that  reason
    more nearly factually correct than an assessment by anybody else.   And
    litigation should be a last resort: if the claimant can accept a  Local
    Authority assessment, or if the parties can agree to compromise,  there
    should be no need for the Court's intervention.   The  Judicial  Review
    claim will not need to be brought, or, if brought, can  be  settled  by
    consent.  That is not in any sense a worse outcome than a full hearing,
    at the end of which the Court makes an  assessment  of  the  claimant's
    age.  On the contrary, it is likely to be a better outcome.   There  is
    no "loser"; and a great deal of time and money is saved.

 6. Unfortunately, however, settlement of the issue  between  the  claimant
    and the Local Authority may not be the  end  of  the  matter.   Even  a
    judicial decision on the issue  between  the  claimant  and  the  Local
    Authority may not be the end of the matter.  The reason for that is  as
    follows.

 7. Many, perhaps most, of the young people who  raise  these  issues  have
    come to the United Kingdom  as  asylum  claimants.   The  issue  arises
    because they have no documents.  They  make  an  asylum  claim  to  the
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department.   An  officer  of  the  UK
    Borders Agency may assess the claimant's age under section 94(7) of the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, as part of  the  process  of  deciding
    whether he is entitled to NASS support; or he may simply need  to  take
    the claimant's age, or claimed age, into account in assessing any  risk
    he would face on return to his own country.  Further, the Secretary  of
    State has developed and published policies for the granting of leave to
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking minors, even if they are not  entitled  to
    status as refugees.  There may or may not be a negative decision on the
    asylum claim.  If there is a negative decision, there may or may not be
    an appeal.  In any case, the decision of the Secretary of  State  or  a
    judge of the Tribunal may incorporate an assessment or a  judgement  of
    the claimant's age.  Based on it,  the  claimant  may  be  issued  with
    status documents giving his age  as  so  ascertained.   And  experience
    shows that that assessment or judgement  may  be  different,  sometimes
    very different, from any assessment made by the Local Authority.

 8. What then?  From being in a position in which the claimant did not know
    his age, he now has two officially ascertained ages.  If  he  is  asked
    how old he is, he must respond "it depends who is asking".  And because
    of the difference in responsibility for the housing  of  asylum-seekers
    over and under eighteen  years  old,  he  may  find  that  neither  the
    Secretary of State  (who  operates  the  NASS  System  for  those  over
    eighteen) nor the Local Authority for the area in which  he  is  (which
    has duties to those under eighteen) is  prepared  to  house  him.   The
    Secretary of State refuses,  because  she  accepts  that  he  is  under
    eighteen; and the Local Authority refuses because it considers that  he
    is not.

 9. This is obviously both unsatisfactory  and  unjust.   Unfortunately  in
    many cases it is not readily capable of satisfactory  resolution,  even
    on the basis of an Age Assessment by the Court.  An assessment made  by
    the Court in proceedings against a Local Authority is not  a  judgement
    in in rem and does not bind the Secretary of State.   If  authority  is
    needed for that proposition it is to  be  found  in  the  judgement  of
    Hickinbottom J, in R (PM) v Hertfordshire County  Council  [2010]  EWHC
    2056 (Admin).  There is  a  further  consequence,  which  is  that  the
    Secretary of State does not need to be joined as an  interested  party,
    and perhaps cannot be: she is not a person  directly  affected  by  the
    proceedings within the meaning of CPR 54.1(2)(f).  Anyway, she will not
    be joined as a defendant, by a claimant who is prepared to  accept  her
    assessment, but not that of the Local Authority.  And she will  not  be
    joined as a defendant by a Local Authority anxious to perform  its  own
    duties but unconcerned with and not able  to  afford  to  be  concerned
    with, the actions of another public body whose decisions  do  not  bind
    it.

10. There is a further, procedural problem.  Following the decision of  the
    Supreme Court in R (A) v Croydon, a judicial initiative was  developed,
    allowing transfer of Age  Assessment  Judicial  Reviews  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Such transfer can take place under section 31A of the Senior
    Courts Act 1981, as inserted by section 19 of the Tribunals, Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007.  It has the sanction of the Court of Appeal in  R
    (FZ) v Croydon LBC [2011] EWCA Civ 59 at [31],  and  such  business  is
    assigned to  this  Chamber  by  Article  11(c)(ii)  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal (Chambers) Order 2010 (SI  2010/2655).  The
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber is considered to  have  the  appropriate
    expertise, because of hearing asylum and other cases in which  the  age
    of a claimant, particularly a claimant from abroad, is an issue.

11. But the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 was passed at a time
    when the  appeals  process  for  immigration  and  asylum  matters  had
    recently been reformed; and it was no  doubt  considered  inconceivable
    that such causes would ever come before the new  Tribunals  established
    by that Act.   A consequence is that  one  of  the  conditions  of  the
    transfer of a Judicial Review application to the Upper Tribunal is,  as
    specified in section 31A (7) of the Senior Courts Act 1981:

    "(7) Condition 4 is that the application does not  call  into  question
    any decision made under -
               (a)  the Immigration Acts,
               (b)  the British Nationality Act 1981,
               (c)  any instrument  having effect under an enactment within
    paragraph (a) or (b), or
               (d) any other provision of law for the time being  in  force
           which   determines   British   citizenship,   British   overseas
           territories  citizenship,  the  status  of  a  British  national
           (Overseas) or British Overseas citizenship."


12. So if the Secretary of State is joined as a party, the claim cannot  be
    transferred to the Upper Tribunal, and the benefits of expertise, speed
    and reduced cost are lost.  And the joinder of the Secretary  of  State
    after transfer would result in even more waste, if the claim needed  to
    be transferred back to the High Court.

13. There are thus motives for avoiding the involvement of the Secretary of
    State.  On the other hand, the background to the  dispute  between  the
    claimant and the Local Authority may, as we have indicated,  include  a
    decision by the Secretary of State or a judgement by the  Tribunal,  in
    each case under the Immigration Acts.  And it may be that one party  or
    the other seeks to rely on it.

14. It is with those matters in mind that  directions  were  given  in  the
    present cases to enable the examination, as a preliminary issue, of the
    impact of decisions already made under the Immigrations  Acts,  on  the
    course or the outcome of proceedings for Judicial  Review  against  the
    Local Authority.  In each  of  these  cases  the  Local  Authority  had
    assessed the claimant as substantially  older  than  the  Secretary  or
    State and the Immigration Judge had done.


         The Claimants

    JS

15. JS comes from the Gardiz Provence of Afghanistan.  He  claims  to  have
    been born in 1996: that  is  because  he  says  that,  before  he  left
    Afghanistan in 2008 his mother told him that he was twelve.  He arrived
    in the United Kingdom in about December 2008.  He  was  encountered  by
    police in Birmingham and accommodated as a minor.  He  made  an  asylum
    application and was also assessed  by  Birmingham  City  Council.   The
    Council estimated his date of birth as 1 January 1990, making him  over
    nineteen at the date of the assessment.  That assessment was challenged
    by way of Judicial Review, the proceedings being settled by  way  of  a
    Consent Order.  A second assessment was carried out by the defendant in
    July 2009.  That again concluded that, at the date of  the  assessment,
    the claimant was aged over eighteen.  That is the assessment challenged
    by the claimant in the present proceedings.

16. Meanwhile, the claimant's application for asylum had been unsuccessful.
     He appealed to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  Immigration Judge
    Juss heard the appeal and allowed it.  He also made a finding about the
    claimant's age, concluding only that the claimant was a  minor  at  the
    date of his decision in June 2009.  The  Judge's  reasons  appeared  to
    have been that the assessment which  had  been  made  was  not  Merton-
    compliant, and that the claimant "certainly looks  more  like  thirteen
    than nineteen".  The Secretary of State sought reconsideration, and the
    appeal was eventually reheard before Immigration Judge Robertson in the
    Upper Tribunal.  She allowed the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  (thus
    rejecting the claimant's claim  to  asylum),  but  concluded  that  the
    claimant was fifteen at  the  time  of  the  assessment  by  Birmingham
    Council in 2009.  So far as concerned the issue  between  the  claimant
    and the Secretary of State, therefore, his age has been  determined  as
    presently under eighteen, and considerably under eighteen at  the  date
    of both the Secretary of State's original decision and the  defendant's
    assessments.  We have not seen any subsequent documentation  issued  by
    the Secretary of State to JS, but we understand from Mr Suterwalla  who
    represents JS, that such documentation has been issued.

    YK


17. YK is also from Afghanistan.  He came to the United Kingdom in May 2010
    and claimed asylum in June.  He was treated as a child for the purposes
    of his substantive asylum interview,  but  refused  asylum  on  the  27
    August 2010.  Birmingham City Council assessed his age as over eighteen
    on 3 September 2010.  That is the assessment formally  under  challenge
    in  these  proceedings,  although  the   appellant   has   subsequently
    undertaken a further review of the claimant's age  and  on  25  January
    2011 confirmed its view that he is over  eighteen,  with  an  estimated
    date of birth of 1 January 1992.

18. Meanwhile, the claimant had appealed against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision in relation to his asylum claim.   His  appeal  was  heard  by
    Immigration Judge Chohan on 14 October 2010.  He dismissed the  appeal,
    but considered in full the evidence relating to the claimant's age.  He
    expressed  concerns  about  the  Secretary  of  State's   reliance   on
    Birmingham  City  Council's  assessment,   particularly   because   the
    assessment mentioned in the Secretary of State's decision  letter  only
    became available after the date of the decision letter.  He found as  a
    fact that the claimant was born on 1 January 1996,  adding  "certainly,
    there is nothing to suggest otherwise".

19. The history of the claimant's appeal after that appears to be that  the
    Upper Tribunal reversed the outcome of the appeal to Judge Chohan,  and
    there has subsequently been a grant of  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal.  But what is important for present purposes  is  that,
    following the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the Secretary of State
    appears to have accepted Judge Chohan's assessment  of  the  claimant's
    age, and accordingly issued him with a status document giving 1 January
    1994 as his date of birth.

20. The result was not entirely to  the  claimant's  benefit,  because  the
    consequence of the Secretary of State's acceptance  that  the  claimant
    was a minor was that NASS Support was withdrawn from him,  and  he  was
    for a short time without any access to accommodation.  The  matter  has
    been resolved on an interim  basis  pending  the  conclusion  of  these
    proceedings.


         Submissions

21. The two claims  therefore  have  the  following  relevant  features  in
    common.  First, the defendant's assessment is that the  claimant's  age
    is substantially more than he  claims.   Secondly,  there  has  been  a
    judgement by an Immigration Judge  that  the  claimant  is  of  an  age
    substantially lower than that assessed  by  the  Local  Authority,  and
    therefore nearer to, or the same as, the claimant claims.  Thirdly, the
    Judge's assessment has been accepted by the Secretary of State.   These
    cases do therefore raise the uncomfortable spectacle  of  the  claimant
    having different ages for different  purposes,  and  in  YK's  case  at
    least, the consequential difficulty of obtaining benefits.

22. For JS, Mr Suterwalla accepted that the Immigration Judge's finding  as
    to the claimant's age is not binding on  another  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, or on the parties.  He submitted that it is evidence  in  the
    case, and that the weight to be attributed to it is a  matter  for  the
    court determining the claimant's age in these proceedings.  But he also
    submitted that, in the circumstances, these proceedings inevitably call
    in to question the decision of the Immigration Judge, a decision  under
    the  Immigrations  Acts.   These  proceedings  should   therefore,   he
    submitted, be transferred back to the High Court.

23. Mr Bedford, for YK, raised a different issue which, with respect, we do
    not think was very fully developed.  He asserted that  the  real  issue
    was whether the Local Authority was bound by the Secretary  of  State's
    decision.  His submissions were based on the assertion  that  both  the
    Secretary of State and the Local Authority are emanations of the  State
    and that, from  the  point  of  EU  Law,  it  is  the  State  that  has
    obligations in relation  to  the  reception  and  treatment  of  asylum
    seekers and the making of status and  other  decisions.   He  suggested
    that if the matter was not clear, we should refer it to  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union.   Both  Mr  Suterwalla  and  Mr  Harrop-
    Griffiths,  who  represented  the  defendant,  sought  to  resist  that
    proposal.  Mr Harrop-Griffiths submitted that  the  transfer  of  these
    claims to The Upper Tribunal had been unlawful.  He drew  attention  to
    the fact that in R (FZ) v Croydon LBC, there had been no hearing before
    the  Tribunal:  where  there  had  been  one,  a  claim  such  as  this
    necessarily calls the outcome of a decision under the Immigration  Acts
    into question.  In any event, he  submitted,  the  Secretary  of  State
    should be made a party to these proceedings,  which  would  necessarily
    prevent Condition 4 in section 31A (7) of the Senior  Courts  Act  1981
    from being satisfied.

    Guidance and Protocol


24. Mr Harrop-Griffiths did, however, provide us with two  documents  which
    we regard as of the highest importance in the  circumstances  of  these
    cases.  They are the UKBA's Guidance  "Assessing  Age",  most  recently
    amended on 17 June 2011, and a document entitled "Age Assessment: Joint
    Working Protocol Between Immigration and Nationality Directorate of the
    Home Office (IND) and  Association  of  Directors  of  Social  Services
    (ADSS)."  It is not dated although the reference to "IND" shows that it
    is of some age: IND is the former name of the UKBA.  It is also on  its
    face, incomplete: section  16  is  marked  "yet  to  be  agreed".   The
    substantial parts of it, are stated to have been agreed between IND and
    Local Authorities and Mr Harrop-Griffiths told us that Birmingham  City
    Council accepted  that  it  formed  part  of  the  Council's  published
    policies.

25. The UKBA instructions on  assessing  age  recognised,  throughout,  the
    difficulty of ascertaining the age of a  young  person  whose  date  of
    birth  is  not  known.   Chapter  5  is  headed  "Local  Authority  Age
    Assessments".   It  summarises  the  circumstances   in   which   Local
    Authorities will need to make Age Assessments,  and  notes  that  those
    assessments may sometimes differ from an assessment made by  UKBA.   It
    notes that  if  the  Local  Authority's  Age  Assessment  is  the  only
    information available, it may conclude the question; on the other hand,
    there may be good reasons for the Secretary of State to differ from it.
     The Local Authority should be asked to indicate the  reasons  for  the
    assessment, particularly if the Secretary of State intends to  rely  on
    the Local Authority's assessment at an appeal hearing.   The  principle
    of sharing information with Local Authorities  pervades  the  document:
    for example, Chapter 7 is headed "Sharing Evidence of  Age  with  Local
    Authorities", and begins:

        "Case owners are reminded that they must liaise closely  and  share
        information relevant to the applicant's age with Local Authorities"

26. In Chapter 8, "Weighing up Conflicting Evidence of Age", issues arising
    from different assessments by  different  Local  Authorities,  and  new
    evidence obtained in the course of an immigration appeal is considered.
     A Merton-compliant Age Assessment by a Local Authority is to be  given
    "prominence", but, for example, if the  Secretary  of  State  considers
    evidence produced for the purposes of  an  appeal  to  be  sufficiently
    persuasive to give ground  for  displacing  it,  "the  Local  Authority
    should normally be made aware of the new evidence  and  be  invited  to
    review their earlier decision.  The Local Authority's  view  should  be
    considered by the case owner before they  reconsider  the  decision  on
    age"

27. Section 11 is headed "Immigration Judge Findings on Age".  It begins:
        "If during the determination of an asylum  appeal  the  Immigration
        Judge finds the appellant to be a child,  the  Agency  will  accept
        this outcome in most cases, and proceed to treat the applicant as a
        child.


        Case owners cannot normally expect to depart from  the  Immigration
        Judge's determination on age unless that decision is appealed. "

28. The text goes on to note that there may be circumstances which  provide
    exceptions to this general rule, but in any  event  UKBA  must  have  a
    "sound and rational" reason to  depart  from  the  Immigration  Judge's
    assessment.  In cases where UKBA think that there is a  reason  not  to
    implement the  Immigration  Judge's  assessment,  "case  owners  "must"
    consider  section  7.1  Discussing  Evidence  of  Age  with  the  Local
    Authority and liaise with their senior case worker".

29. Further,


        "Where an Immigration Judge finds the applicant is a child and,  on
        the particular facts of the case, the Agency intends to give effect
        to the decision, it is essential that the matter is first discussed
        with the Local Authority (the Agency's  reason  for  accepting  the
        Immigration Judge's decision should be put in writing to the  Local
        Authority).  This gives the Local Authority the chance  to  provide
        any new, relevant evidence to the  case  owner,  ensures  that  the
        Local Authority is made aware of the Tribunal's finding on age  and
        gives the  Local  Authority  the  opportunity  to  re-consider  the
        assessment.  The Local Authority should  be  asked  to  confirm  in
        writing whether or not in light of the Immigration Judge's finding,
        it proposes to accept the applicant as a child and its reasoning".

       There is then a reference to R (PM) v  Hertfordshire  County  Council
[2010] EWHC 2056
       (Admin), and the section concludes as follows:


        "If  the  Local  Authority  has  good  reason  not  to  accept  the
        Immigration Judge's decision on age, consideration should be  given
        to appealing the Tribunal's decision


        While these discussions with the Local Authority are taking  place,
        case  owners  should  notify  the   applicant   and   their   legal
        representative that the Local Authority  is  currently  considering
        the Immigration Judge's findings and whether or not to amend  their
        decision on age".

30. The Age Assessment Joint Working Protocol begins by stating its purpose
    as to set out "arrangements to support a cooperative  approach  to  Age
    Assessment" between  IND  (now  UKBA)  and  UK  Local  Authorities  and
    Statutory Child Care Agencies.  One of the intended outcomes, listed at
    section 7, is:

        "Clear and agreed determinations on whether asylum  applicants  and
        other migrant children are over or under  eighteen  years  of  age,
        where their age is not known or is disputed by a partner agency".

31. Sections 9 to 12 set out the bureaucratic process for determination  of
    age, according to whether it is a Local Authority or UKBA that is first
    approached by the claimant.  But section 13 takes the matter further on
    in time.  It is  headed  "Where  Information  with  a  Bearing  on  Age
    Assessment Emerges Later in the Asylum Process".  The section begins:

        "There are occasions when IND or the responsible LA  only  receives
        information bearing on the age or credibility of an applicant  much
        later in the process.  Where such  new  information  merits  a  re-
        assessment of age of an asylum seeker, it  is  important  that  the
        Agencies follow processes consistent  with  those  above  to  avoid
        applicants being left without appropriate support".


32. The section goes on again to deal with process.  Section 14 is  headed:
    "Conflicting Assessments".   The first half of it deserves  to  be  set
    out in full:

                 "a.) Between IND and a LA
           In many cases  it  is  likely  that  IND's  assessment  will  be
           consistent with that of the LA.  In some cases IND's  assessment
           will differ from that of the LA; for  example  if  IND  believes
           that  specific  evidence,  e.g.  a  document,   has   not   been
           sufficiently taken into account or there are concerns  that  the
           person presenting to IND is not the same person as seen  by  the
           LA.


           In such a case IND frontline staff should discuss the case  with
           the named contact at the LA in the first instance.  For  example
           they should point out contrary evidence that  they  believe  may
           not have been considered by the LA.


           In the event that neither party can persuade the other as to the
           correctness of their determination the case will be referred  to
           the Asylum Policy Unit and  a  formal  reconciliation  attempted
           with the LA within 7 working days.


           In the interim, pending reconciliation, the applicant should  be
           supported in accordance with the LA assessment.


           If no agreement is reached through this process the matter  will
           be referred  for  binding  adjudication  to  a  nominated  third
           party."


    Discussion

33.  These  two  documents  indicate  that   there   should   be   constant
    communication between a Local Authority and the Secretary of  State  if
    there is a difference of opinion between them on an  asylum  claimant's
    age.   The  UKBA  document  indicates  that  the   claimant   and   his
    representative are to be kept  informed  about  any  disagreement,  and
    suggests that there will be a positive process  of  persuasion  between
    agencies, clearly with the intention of achieving a common  view.   The
    joint working protocol goes further still.  It provides  for  a  formal
    process of "reconciliation", or reference  to  "binding  adjudication".
    Mr Harrop-Griffiths told us, in written submissions after the  hearing,
    that the defendant's position is that no such reference has  ever  been
    made; but that is not the point.  We began by drawing attention to  the
    difficulty faced by claimants who have  different  ages  for  different
    purposes.   The declared public position of the Secretary of State  and
    Local Authorities is that that will happen only after  there  has  been
    constant liaison between  them,  discussion,  persuasion,  attempts  to
    agree,  and  if  necessary  a  process  of  apparently   extra-judicial
    determination.

34. In the submissions to which we have just referred, Mr  Harrop-Griffiths
    attempts to minimise the importance of the Age Assessment Joint Working
    Protocol in particular.   He  says  that  it  needs  and  is  receiving
    updating in the light of recent decisions of the  courts,  including  R
    (A) v Croydon LBC.  He suggests  that  the  process  for  referral  for
    "binding adjudication" is inappropriate in the light of that  decision,
    unless the "nominated third party" is the Court or the Upper Tribunal.

35. It does not appear to us that  these  documents  can  be  dismissed  so
    readily.   The clear public position is  that  differences  in  opinion
    about the claimant's age will be sorted  out  between  the  authorities
    concerned,  and  will  not,  save  no   doubt   in   most   exceptional
    circumstances, which do not appear to be  envisaged  by  the  published
    policies, be a matter for the claimant to have  to  take  up  with  two
    authorities separately.  Clearly, if he disagrees with the assessed age
    following the reconciling of difference between the authorities, he may
    be able to take proceedings by way of Judicial Review.  But there is no
    suggestion that a claimant would be in  a  position  that  the  present
    claimants are in.  They  each  have  their  two  assessed  ages.   They
    challenge the one they do not like, but they run the risk of losing  an
    advantage that they already have from the Secretary of State.  Even  if
    that does  not  happen,  they  can  have  no  assurance  that  all  the
    governmental and quasi-governmental authorities  that  they  deal  with
    will, as a result of these proceedings, or at all, agree on their  age.



36. It was for this reason that we raised during the hearing  the  proposal
    that, in these cases, which have not yet been fully prepared for an Age
    Assessment hearing on evidence, the appropriate outcome was to be found
    in traditional  public  law.   In  his  written  skeleton,  Mr  Harrop-
    Griffiths asserts that, in R (A) v Croydon LBC, the Supreme Court ruled
    that:

        "A Local Authority's decision that a person was or was not a  child
        for the purposes of the Children Act 1989 was  not  susceptible  to
        challenge on ordinary Judicial Review principles but was  a  matter
        of fact to be decided by a court on an application for  a  Judicial
        Review."

37. As we have already indicated, we do not think that  is  accurate.   The
    judgements of the Supreme Court, as we  read  them,  are  that  such  a
    decision is not only susceptible  to  challenge  on  ordinary  Judicial
    Review principles: they are not ruled out, but in  addition  the  Local
    Authority's assessment is susceptible to challenge simply on the  basis
    that it is in fact wrong.

38. In the present cases, there is little or no trace of the communication,
    discussion, persuasion and reconciliation that the defendant's policies
    indicate will take place.  It is in our judgement no answer to say that
    those  policies  relate  only  to  initial  assessment,  and   not   to
    reassessment in the light of an Immigration  Judge's  judgement.   Both
    the UKBA's policy  and  section  13  of  the  protocol  show  that  the
    principles apply  throughout  the  assessment  process,  including  the
    taking into account of evidence on appeal, and an  Immigration  Judge's
    judgement.  In both of the present cases, the Secretary of  State  has,
    following the judgement of an Immigration Judge, made a new  assessment
    which is in flat contradiction to that of the Local Authority, with  no
    attempt to decide whether there was any good reason for preferring  one
    over the other for the general purposes for the State's  dealings  with
    the claimant.

39. The policy documents to which we have referred are  commendable.   They
    indicate a clear and public intention to  avoid  difficulties  such  as
    arise for the claimants in  the  present  cases.   It  is  best  if  an
    assessment can be reached which all parties,  including  the  claimant,
    can accept.  If that cannot be done, it is clearly much better for  the
    claimant to be challenging only one assessment.  Otherwise, as we  have
    said, he may for various reasons be in great difficulty.

40. The UKBA document is not the defendant's policy; but the  protocol  is.
    The defendant appears to us neither to have followed the policy nor  to
    have given any  good  reason  for  departing  from  it.   Instead,  the
    defendant simply adopted and maintained  an  Age  Assessment  that  was
    different from that adopted by the Secretary of State.

41. In these circumstances it appears to us  that  the  proper  outcome  of
    these proceedings is to quash the defendant's decisions on that  ground
    alone, leaving the defendant to apply its policy and  differ  from  the
    Secretary of State's assessment only by following the procedure in  the
    protocol, in particular section 14(a).   In a case such as this,  where
    there are what we regard as clear grounds for Judicial  Review  on  the
    traditional basis, there does not  seem  to  be  any  good  reason  for
    preparing for a long and expensive hearing which may not need to happen
    if the claimants are content with an Age Assessment to which  both  the
    Secretary of State and the Local Authority have subscribed.

42. In any event, determining the proceedings  in  this  way  prevents  the
    claimants from having to deal separately with the  Secretary  of  State
    and the Local Authority as respects their age, and prevents them  being
    prejudiced by the failure of the authorities  of  the  State  to  agree
    between themselves.

43. We shall therefore quash both the decisions under challenge,  and  make
    any necessary directions.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 13 December 2011

