

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Khadija BA Fakih) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department IJR [2014] UKUT 00513(IAC)

Heard at Field House

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between


                              KHADIJA BA FAKIH
                                                                   Applicant
                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Applicant:     Mr M. Henderson, instructed by Deighton Pierce Glynn

For the Respondent:    Mr Z. Malik, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor


                                  JUDGMENT
                       Handed down on 5 November 2014

Judge O'Connor:

Introduction


   1. On 8 October 2013 the Respondent granted the Applicant leave to remain
      for a period of 30 months. It is not in dispute that  such  leave  was
      granted outside of the Immigration Rules.  The  Respondent  imposed  a
      condition on this leave prohibiting the Applicant from having recourse
      to  public  funds  ("NRPF  condition").  The  Respondent   agreed   to
      reconsider her decision to impose such a condition, upon receipt of  a
      pre-action protocol letter dated 19 December 2013 threatening judicial
      review proceedings.  However,  on  28  February  2014  the  Respondent
      maintained  her  earlier  decision.  It  is  the  lawfulness  of   the
      imposition of the NRPF condition on the Applicant's leave that  is  at
      the centre of these judicial review proceedings.


   2. By way of background, the Applicant is a national  of  Yemen  born  in
      1945. She arrived in the United Kingdom  on  18  September  2011  with
      entry clearance as a visitor conferring leave to enter until 10  March
      2012. She has resided with her British citizen daughter, Ms Al-Albeed,
      since that time.


   3. On 10 March 2012 the Applicant made an application to  the  Respondent
      for leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules. It  was  broadly
      submitted  in  this  application  that  the  Applicant's  health   had
      deteriorated significantly in the period shortly after her arrival  in
      the United Kingdom and that she was dependent upon  her  daughter  for
      financial and emotional support, as well as for day-to-day  care.  Her
      daughter was not at that time, and is still not, in employment and she
      receives Employment Support Allowance.


   1. The Respondent refused this application by way of a decision of the 28
      June 2012 and the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  an  appeal  brought
      against it for reasons given in a  determination  of  the  19  October
      2012. Thereafter, both the First-tier, and  Upper,  Tribunals  refused
      the Applicant permission to appeal. Undeterred by this  the  Applicant
      brought an application for judicial review before  the  Administrative
      Court challenging the decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing to grant
      her permission to appeal.


   2. Whilst these judicial review proceedings were ongoing  the  Respondent
      gave further consideration  to  the  Applicant's  case  and  made  the
      decision of 8 October 2013 referred to in paragraph 1 above.


      Decisions under challenge


   3. The Respondent's decision of 8 October  2013  states,  insofar  as  is
      relevant to these proceedings, as follows:


        "Conditions attached to your stay in the United Kingdom


        The conditions attached to  this  period  of  stay  in  the  United
        Kingdom permit you to work... However, access to  public  funds  is
        not permitted as explained below...


        Public Funds


        Under the Immigration Rules you are not entitled to receive  public
        funds to help meet your living and accommodation costs (or those of
        any dependents). In addition your sponsor is not entitled to  claim
        or receive public funds on your behalf. The term "public funds"  is
        defined in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules..."


   4. On 3 January 2014,  after  having  received  the  pre-action  protocol
      letter of  19  December  2013  and  further  correspondence  from  the
      Applicant of 2 January  2014,  the  Respondent  agreed  to  reconsider
      whether a NRPF condition should be imposed on the Applicant's leave.


   5. As identified above, in a decision of 28 February 2014 the  Respondent
      decided not to "change [the Applicant's]  condition  codes  so  as  to
      allow access to public funds" stating when doing so:

            "Those seeking to establish their family  life  in  the  United
           Kingdom must do so on a  basis  that  prevents  burdens  on  the
           taxpayer. The changes to the Immigration Rules implemented on  9
           July 2012 are predicated in part on  safeguarding  the  economic
           well-being of the UK, which is a legitimate aim under Article  8
           of the ECHR (the right to respect for private and  family  life)
           for  which  necessary  and  proportionate  interference  in  the
           Article 8 rights can be justified.

           Under Appendix FM, limited leave:


    .  Under the 5 year partner and parent routes;


    . As a bereaved partner;


    . As a fianc�(e) or proposed civil partner.

           will be granted subject to a condition of no recourse to  public
           funds

           In


    . All other cases I (sic) which limited leave is granted as a partner or
      a parent under Appendix FM;


    . All cases in which leave on the grounds of  private  life  is  granted
      under paragraph 276BE or paragraph 276DG; and


    .     All cases in which limited leave is granted outside the  rules  on
      the grounds of family or private life,

           leave will be granted subject to a condition of no  recourse  to
           public funds, unless there are exceptional circumstances set out
           in the application which require recourse to public funds to  be
           granted.  Exceptional circumstances which  require  recourse  to
           public funds will exist where the  applicant  is  destitute,  or
           where there are particularly compelling reasons relating to  the
           welfare of a child of a parent in receipt of very low income.


           Consistent with the provision of support for asylum seekers  and
           their dependents under section 95 of the Immigration and  Asylum
           Act 1999, a person is destitute if:


                  a. They do not have adequate accommodation or any means of
                     obtaining it  (whether or  not  their  other  essential
                     living needs are met); or


                  b. They  have  adequate  accommodation  or  the  means  of
                     obtaining it, but cannot meet  their  essential  living
                     needs.


          The onus is on the applicant to evidence their destitution on  the
        basis of the information  set  out  in  their  application  and  any
        supplementary  information  about  their  circumstances  which  they
        provide in support of their application.


        It is stated that she lives with her  daughter  who  is  reliant  on
        benefits. They are finding it difficult to cope as she is (sic) this
        has had a bad impact on the quality of their lives.


        She lives with her daughter  and  cannot  show  she  does  not  have
        adequate accommodation. She has also failed to show that she  cannot
        meet the cost of her essential living needs.


        Your client does not meet the destitution threshold and we  are  not
        able to change her condition codes to allow access to public funds"


   6. With the permission of Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson, granted on 29 May
      2014, the Applicant challenges both the Respondent's initial  decision
      of 8 October 2013 to impose the NRPF condition on her  leave  and  the
      decision of 28 February 2014 refusing to remove  such  condition.  The
      Respondent has not raised any issues  as  to  the  timeliness  of  the
      challenge brought to  the  former  decision,  and  neither  did  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Gleeson identify such issue in her grant of permission.
      If necessary I extend the time for bringing challenge to the  decision
      of 8 October 2013 until 23 May 2014 - this being the date  upon  which
      the application for permission to bring  judicial  review  proceedings
      was lodged.  The  Applicant  sent  pre-action  correspondence  to  the
      Respondent after the decision of 8 October, and the Respondent  agreed
      to reconsider her decision as a consequence. Given the  terms  of  the
      Respondent's  letter  of   3   January   agreeing   to   undertake   a
      reconsideration, it was perfectly reasonable,  and  prudent,  for  the
      Applicant to await  the  outcome  of  such  reconsideration  prior  to
      bringing these proceedings.  Had she not done so she would, I have  no
      doubt, been met with the submission that  the  proceedings  were  both
      premature and academic.


      Grounds of Challenge


   7. The Applicant submits that the  Respondent  has  acted  unlawfully  in
      imposing the NRPF condition in that:


          A. It was made pursuant to a 'rule' that was unlawful  by  reason
             of not having been laid before Parliament.


          B. When formulating this 'rule' the  Respondent  did  not  comply
             with her duties under s.149 of the Equality Act 2010. She  did
             not adopt a substantial, open-minded and rigourous approach to
             her public sector equality duties ("PSED"), nor was she  clear
             precisely what the equality implications  were  when  she  put
             them in the balance, nor did she recognise the desirability of
             achieving them.


          C. The Respondent's approach to the  assessment  of  whether  the
             Applicant was destitute was unlawful  on  the  facts  of  this
             case.


The Respondent's Policy


   8. The relevant guidance relating to the imposition of a  NRPF  condition
      on grants of limited leave is, in its  October  2013  version,  to  be
      found in Part 8 of the chapter  on  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
      Directorate Instructions ("the Respondent's policy") which reads:

          "Those seeking to establish  their  family  life  in  the  United
           Kingdom must do so on a  basis  that  prevents  burdens  on  the
           taxpayer. The changes to the Immigration Rules implemented on  9
           July 2012 are predicated in part on  safeguarding  the  economic
           well-being of the UK, which is a legitimate aim under Article  8
           of the ECHR (the right to respect for private and  family  life)
           for  which  necessary  and  proportionate  interference  in  the
           Article 8 rights can be justified.

           Under Appendix FM, limited leave:


    .  Under the 5 year partner and parent routes;


    . As a bereaved partner;


    . As a fianc�(e) or proposed civil partner.


           will be granted subject to a condition of no recourse to  public
           funds.

           In


    . All other cases in which limited leave is granted as a  partner  or  a
      parent under Appendix FM;


    . All cases in which leave on the grounds of  private  life  is  granted
      under paragraph 276BE or paragraph 276DG; and


    .     All cases in which limited leave is granted outside the  rules  on
      the grounds of family or private life

           leave will be granted subject to a condition of no  recourse  to
           public funds, unless there are exceptional circumstances set out
           in the application which require recourse to public funds to  be
           granted.  Exceptional circumstances which  require  recourse  to
           public funds will exist where the  applicant  is  destitute,  or
           where there are particularly compelling reasons relating to  the
           welfare of a child of a parent in receipt of very low income.


           Whether to grant recourse to public  funds  as  a  condition  of
           leave under the Immigration Rules is a  decision  for  the  Home
           Office caseworker to make on the basis of this guidance.


           Consistent with the provision of support for asylum seekers  and
           their dependents under section 95 of the Immigration and  Asylum
           Act 1999, a person is destitute if:


               a. They do not have adequate accommodation or  any  means  of
                  obtaining it  (whether or not their other essential living
                  needs are met); or


               b. They have adequate accommodation or the means of obtaining
                  it, but cannot meet their essential living needs.


           ...


           The onus is on the applicant to evidence their  destitution,  or
           that   there   are   particularly   compelling   child   welfare
           considerations, on the basis of the information set out in their
           application and any supplementary information or evidence  about
           their circumstances which  they  provide  in  support  of  their
           application.


           In considering the applicant's financial circumstances, the case
           worker should have in mind that:


                        ...


               . Where the applicant is granted limited leave to  remain  on
                 the grounds of private life, they will generally have lived
                 in the UK for a significant period. Where the applicant has
                 been granted limited leave as a parent, they will also have
                 lived in the UK for a  period  before  applying  for  leave
                 under these Rules. To show they are destitute the applicant
                 will have to demonstrate good reasons  why  their  previous
                 means of support are no longer available to them.


           The applicant will need to provide evidence, including of  their
           financial position, demonstrating that, on  an  on-going  basis,
           they do not have access to adequate accommodation or  any  means
           of obtaining it, they cannot meet their other  essential  living
           needs,  or  there  are  particularly  compelling  child  welfare
           considerations.


           Where the caseworker accepts that, even  though  they  have  the
           right to work if they did not before, the applicant is destitute
           (including accepting any previous means of support are no longer
           available),  or   that   there   are   particularly   compelling
           circumstances relating to the welfare of the child of  a  parent
           in receipt of a very low income, the case  worker  should  grant
           recourse to public funds.


           When an applicant who was granted recourse to  public  funds  at
           the initial grant of leave applies for further leave to  remain,
           they will be re-assessed and only  granted  further  leave  with
           recourse to public funds if they continue to  be  destitute,  or
           where their  continue  to  be  particularly  compelling  reasons
           relating to the welfare of a child of a parent in receipt  of  a
           very low income."








Requirement to lay the Respondent's policy before Parliament


Summary of submissions


   9. Mr Henderson submits  that  the  requirement  to  impose  a  condition
      prohibiting recourse to public funds on a grant of  limited  leave  to
      remain is a rule falling within the ambit of s. 3(2) of the  1971  Act
      as to the conditions to  be  attached  to  the  grant  of  leave  and,
      consequently, that there is a requirement to lay it before Parliament.




  10. The requirement has, he submits, all the features of a rule - applying
      the test identified by the Supreme Court in R (Alvi)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2012] 1  WLR  2208,  and  R  (Munir)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] 1 WLR 2192.


  11. The Respondent also relies on the decisions of the  Supreme  Court  in
      Alvi and Munir, as well as the judgment of Sedley LJ in ZH  Bangladesh
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  Imm  AR  450,  in
      support  of  a  submission  that  "the  fact  that   the   Immigration
      Directorate Instructions do not have, and cannot be treated as if they
      possessed, the force of law, mean that they cannot be categorised as a
      rule" and, consequently, anything contained therein is not required to
      be laid before Parliament. It is said that this provides  "a  complete
      answer to the Claimant's contentions under Ground (1)."


  12. Mr Malik broadly submits, in the alternative, that:


             a. Parliament has given scrutiny to the issue of  the  granting
                leave to remain on Article 8 grounds with a NRPF condition -
                this having been undertaken in relation to the  requirements
                of Appendix  FM  and  Paragraphs  276ADE  to  276DH  of  the
                Immigration Rules, which provide for a NRPF condition to  be
                imposed on a grant of leave made pursuant to the Rules;


             b. A grant of leave outside the Rules on Article 8  grounds  is
                made pursuant to the Secretary of State's "published  policy
                on exceptional circumstances" (See R (Nagre) v Secretary  of
                State for the Home Department [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  at
                paragraph 13). It cannot be  sensibly  be  argued  that  the
                Immigration Rules should include stipulations in relation to
                those who are given leave to remain outside  of  the  Rules;
                and


             c.  The  stipulation  of  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the
                Respondent's policy is  amply  flexible  and  therefore  the
                Policy is not in the nature  of  a  rule  and  their  is  no
                requirement for it to be laid before Parliament.


      Legal Framework


  13. Part 1 of the Immigration Act 1971 ("1971 Act") is concerned with  the
      regulation of entry into and stay in the United Kingdom. Section  1(2)
      provides that those not having a right of abode in the United  Kingdom
      may live, work and settle here by permission and:


         "...subject to such regulation and control  of  their  entry  into,
         stay in and departure from the United Kingdom as is imposed by this
         Act..."


  14. By section 3(1)(c) of the 1971 Act:

        "Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act where a person is
        not a
        British citizen...
        ...
        c) If he is given limited leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom, it
        may be given subject to all or any  of  the  following  conditions,
        namely
        ...
        ii) A condition requiring him to maintain and accommodate  himself,
        and any dependants of his, without recourse to public funds...."

  15. Section 3(2) of the 1971 Act provides that:

          "The Secretary of State shall from time to time (and as  soon  as
          may be) lay before Parliament statements of the rules, or of  any
          changes in the rules, laid down by him as to the practice  to  be
          followed in the administration of this  Act  for  regulating  the
          entry into and stay in the United Kingdom of persons required  by
          this Act to have leave to enter, including any rules  as  to  the
          period for which leave is to be given and the  conditions  to  be
          attached in different circumstances...; (emphasis added)


          If a statement laid before either House of Parliament under  this
          subsection is disapproved by a resolution of  that  House  passed
          within the period of forty days beginning with the date of laying
          (and exclusive of any period during which Parliament is dissolved
          or prorogued or during which both Houses are adjourned  for  more
          than four days), then the Secretary of State shall as soon as may
          be make such changes or further changes in the rules as appear to
          him to be required in the circumstances, so that the statement of
          those changes be laid before Parliament at latest by the  end  of
          the  period  of  forty  days  beginning  with  the  date  of  the
          resolution (but exclusive as aforesaid)"

  16. In Alvi the Supreme Court gave detailed consideration to the issue  of
      what constitutes a rule for the purposes of section 3(2) of  the  1971
      Act in the context of a decision of the Respondent refusing  to  grant
      leave to remain - Lord Hope of Craighead and  Lord  Dyson  giving  the
      principle judgments.


  17. Lord Hope concluded, at [41]:


        "The content of the rules is prescribed by sections 1(4) and 3(2) of
        the 1971 Act in a way that leaves matters other than those to  which
        they refer to her discretion.  The  scope  of  the  duty  that  then
        follows depends on the meaning that is to be given to the provisions
        of the statute. What section 3(2) requires is  that  there  must  be
        laid before Parliament statements of the rules, and of  any  changes
        to  the  rules,  as  to  the  practice  to  be   followed   in   the
        administration of the Act for regulating the control of  entry  into
        and stay in the United Kingdom  of  persons  who  require  leave  to
        enter. The Secretary of State's duty is expressed  in  the  broadest
        terms.  A  contrast  may  be  drawn  between  the  rules   and   the
        instructions (not inconsistent with the rules) which  the  Secretary
        may give to immigration officers under paragraph 1(3) of Schedule  2
        to the 1971 Act. As Sedley LJ said in ZH (Bangladesh) v Secretary of
        State for the Home  Department  [2009]  Imm  AR  450  para  32,  the
        instructions  do  not  have,  and  cannot  be  treated  as  if  they
        possessed, the  force  of  law.  The  Act  does  not  require  those
        instructions or documents which give guidance of  various  kinds  to
        caseworkers, of which  there  are  very  many,  to  be  laid  before
        Parliament. But the rules must be. So everything  which  is  in  the
        nature of  a  rule  as  to  the  practice  to  be  followed  in  the
        administration of the Act is subject to this requirement..."


  18. He further considered the Secretary of State's duty at [54], where  he
      said:


        "...I think therefore  that  it  would  be  right  to  approach  the
        question as to scope of the Secretary of State's duty under  section
        3(2) on the basis that it was not Parliament's  intention  that  the
        procedure which it laid down should impede the administration of the
        system."


  19. Lord Dyson's conclusion at [94] was  expressly  agreed  with  by  Lord
      Hope:


        "In my view, the solution which best achieves these objects is  that
        a rule is  any  requirement  which  a  migrant  must  satisfy  as  a
        condition of being given leave to enter or leave to remain, as  well
        as any provision "as to the period for which leave is  to  be  given
        and the conditions to be attached in different circumstances" (there
        can be no doubt about the latter since it is expressly provided  for
        in section 3(2)). I would exclude from the definition any procedural
        requirements which do not have to be satisfied as a condition of the
        grant of leave to enter or remain. But  it  seems  to  me  that  any
        requirement which, if not satisfied by the migrant, will lead to  an
        application for leave to enter or remain being  refused  is  a  rule
        within the meaning of section 3(2).  That  is  what  Parliament  was
        interested in when it enacted section 3(2). It wanted to have a  say
        in the rules which set out the basis  on  which  these  applications
        were to be determined." (emphasis added)


  20. At [97] Lord Dyson continued:


        "The key requirement is that the immigration  rules  should  include
        all those provisions which set out criteria  which  are  or  may  be
        determinative of an application  for  leave  to  enter  or  remain."
        (emphasis added)


  21. Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe, Lord Clarke of Some-cum-Ebony  and  Lord
      Wilson concurred, agreeing with Lord Hope and Lord Dyson on the points
      upon which they agreed. Lord  Clarke  summarised  the  features  which
      distinguish a rule from guidance at [120]:


        "Guidance is advisory in character; it assists  the  decision  maker
        but does not compel a particular outcome.  By  contrast  a  rule  is
        mandatory in nature, compels a decision maker to reach a  particular
        result."


  22. The Supreme Court heard the case of Munir at the same time as that  of
      Alvi; and in doing so gave consideration to whether Deportation Policy
      5/96 should have been laid before Parliament. Lord Dyson,  giving  the
      judgment of the Court, said at [45] and [46]:


        "...If a concessionary policy statement  says  that  the  applicable
        rule will always be relaxed in specified circumstances,  it  may  be
        difficult to avoid the conclusion that the  statement  is  itself  a
        rule "as to the practice to  be  followed"  within  the  meaning  of
        section 3(2) which should be laid  before  parliament.  But  if  the
        statement says that the rule may be relaxed  if  certain  conditions
        are satisfied, but that whether it will be relaxed  depends  on  all
        the circumstances of the case, then in my view it does not fall with
        the scope of section 3(2)...


        ...The less flexibility inherent in the  concessionary  policy,  the
        more likely it is to be a  statement  "as  to  the  practice  to  be
        followed" within the  meaning  of  section  3(2)  and  therefore  an
        immigration rule. But DP5/96 was amply flexible  and  was  therefore
        not an  immigration  rule  and  did  not  have  to  be  laid  before
        Parliament."


   4. To set the instant application in its full context it is also  prudent
      at this stage to observe that on 9 July 2012 the  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department introduced (by HC 194) a large number  of  new
      Immigration Rules, including those relating to the grant of  leave  on
      private life (paragraph 276ADE) and family life (Appendix FM) grounds.
      Amongst the rules introduced by HC 194 was Paragraph 276BE:

          "Leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK


          276BE. Limited leave to remain on the grounds of private life  in
          the UK may be granted  for  a  period  not  exceeding  30  months
          provided that the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
          requirements in paragraph 276ADE are met.  Such  leave  shall  be
          given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State  deems
          appropriate."

   5. For completeness sake it is to be noted that the Rules were amended on
      28 July 2014 by HC 532 so as to read:


          "276BE(1) - Limited leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  private
           life in the UK may be granted for  a  period  not  exceeding  30
           months provided that the Secretary of State  is  satisfied  that
           the requirements in paragraph 276ADE are met, or, in respect  of
           the requirement in paragraph 276ADE(vi) and (v), were met in the
           previous application which led to a grant  of  leave  to  remain
           under this sub-paragraph.


           Such leave shall be given subject to a condition of no  recourse
           to public funds unless the Secretary  of  State  considers  that
           such a person should not be subject to such a condition.


           276BE(2) - Where an applicant does not meet the requirements  of
           paragraph 276ADE(1) but the Secretary of State grants  leave  to
           remain outside the rules on Article  8  grounds,  the  applicant
           will normally be granted leave for a  period  not  exceeding  30
           months and subject to a condition of no recourse to public funds
           unless the Secretary of State considers that the  person  should
           not be subject to such a condition"


      Discussion and conclusions


  23. This is not a case about whether the Applicant should be granted leave
      to enter or remain, but about the conditions to  be  attached  to  the
      leave to remain that she has been granted. The Applicant's  leave  was
      granted  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  as  a  consequence
      paragraph 276BE of the Rules (set out above) played  no  part  in  the
      consideration of whether such grant should be made subject to  a  NRPF
      condition. Neither did paragraph 276BE(2) - this provision  not  being
      introduced into the Rules until  a  date  after  the  decisions  under
      challenge in this application.


  24. That rules relating to the imposition of conditions on grants of leave
      (as opposed to rules relating to the  pre-conditions  to  a  grant  of
      leave) fall within the ambit of section 3(2) of the 1971 Act is not  a
      matter in issue before me and, in any event, that they do so is, in my
      view, an inescapable conclusion from a plain and  literal  reading  of
      section 3(2) itself, as well as from  paragraph  94  of  Lord  Dyson's
      judgment in Alvi (as identified in emphasis above).


  25. I turn first to consider  Mr  Malik's  "basic  contention"  that  "the
      Immigration Directorate Instructions fall outside the ambit of section
      3(2) of the 1971 Act" and consequently that there is no requirement to
      lay anything contained therein before Parliament. This,  it  is  said,
      provides a "complete answer"  to  the  Applicant's  first  ground  and
      relieves the Tribunal of the need to undertake a detailed analysis  of
      whether the Respondent's policy is objectively a rule by reference  to
      the principles identified in Alvi and Munir.


  26. Mr Malik's submission is underpinned by reliance upon paragraph 32  of
      Sedley LJ's  judgement  in  ZH  (Bangladesh)  in  which  his  lordship
      concluded that the IDI's do not have, and cannot be treated as if they
      possessed, the force of law. This much though is uncontroversial.


   6. In my view  nothing  in  Sedley  LJ's  judgment  supports  Mr  Malik's
      contention that the Immigration Directorate Instructions fall  outside
      the ambit of section 3(2), if they otherwise incorporate a 'rule' of a
      type identified in Alvi and Munir. Neither, in my  judgment,  is  this
      contention supported by anything said by their lordships  in  Alvi  or
      Munir. If there is any doubt about this, and in my conclusion there is
      not, such doubt is laid to rest by Lord Sumption in his judgment in  R
      (New London College) v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 2358  -  a  further  case  in
      which the Supreme Court gave consideration to  the  ambit  of  section
      3(2) of the 1971 Act, this time in the context of  challenges  brought
      to guidance relating to  licenses  for  educational  establishments  -
      where at [7] he observed that:


        "...Section 3(2) [of the Immigration Act 1971] is not  confined  to
        the Immigration  Rules  formally  so  called.  It  extends  to  any
        instrument, direction or practice laid down  by  the  Secretary  of
        State which (i) contains or constitutes 'a rule',  and  (ii)  deals
        with the practice to be followed in the administration of  the  Act
        for regulating 'the entry into or stay in  the  United  Kingdom  of
        persons required by this Act to have leave to enter' or the  period
        or conditions attaching to them." (emphasis added)


  27. The fact that the IDIs do not have the force of law says nothing about
      whether  any  particular  provision   or   requirement   therein   is,
      objectively, a rule and consequently whether it must  be  laid  before
      Parliament. So much is made clear by Lord Hope's judgment in Alvi [41]
      in which, after having first referred to the  above-cited  passage  in
      Sedley LJ's judgment in ZH (Bangladesh), his Lordship  concludes  that
      everything that is in the nature of a rule as to the  practice  to  be
      followed in the administration of the 1971 Act  must  be  laid  before
      Parliament.


  28. It is also pertinent to observe that  the  requirements  in  issue  in
      Alvi, whilst not found in the IDI's, were  to  be  found  in  guidance
      issued by the Secretary of State (the Occupation Codes  of  Practice).
      It cannot be said that these Codes of Practice of themselves  had  the
      force of law, yet the Court concluded that the  requirements  set  out
      therein were in the nature of a rule  and  ought  to  have  been  laid
      before Parliament.


  29. Mr Malik, as I understand  his  submissions,  also  asserts  that  the
      Applicant's first ground is defeated by the fact that  Parliament  has
      approved the imposition of the NRPF condition on to  grants  of  leave
      made pursuant to the Immigration Rules - as to which see, inter  alia,
      paragraphs 276BE and 276BE(2) of  the  Rules,  set  out  above[1].  He
      reasons that had the policy relating  to  the  imposition  of  a  NRPF
      condition on grants of leave made outside of  the  Rules  been  placed
      before Parliament, it would undoubtedly have been approved.


  30. I find this submission to be misconceived. It is not for this Tribunal
      to determine whether Parliament would, or would not, have  approved  a
      rule had it been laid before it. In judicial  review  proceedings  the
      Tribunal  is  confined  to  determining  the  legality  of  a   public
      authority's actions, save only that it has discretion whether to grant
      relief even if such actions are found to be unlawful. I must  consider
      whether there was a legal obligation on  the  Respondent  to  lay  her
      policy before Parliament and, if so,  whether  she  lawfully  did  so.
      Speculation as to what Parliament would have done had the Respondent's
      Policy been placed before it forms no part of such a consideration.


  31. As to Mr Malik's submission that "it cannot sensibly  be  argued  that
      the Immigration Rules should include stipulations in relation to those
      who are granted leave outside of the Rules", again I see no  force  in
      this. Section 3(2) of the 1971 Act does not  distinguish  between  the
      requirement to lay before  Parliament  those  rules  relating  to  the
      imposition of conditions attached to leave  granted  pursuant  to  the
      Immigration Rules and  those  rules  relating  to  the  imposition  of
      conditions attached to leave granted outside of the Immigration Rules.
      The source of the Respondent's  power  to  grant  leave  is,  in  both
      scenarios, the 1971 Act (Lord Dyson in Munir at [44]).


  32. It is not being said by the Applicant  that  the  Respondent's  policy
      ought to form a part of the Immigration Rules, but rather that  it  is
      in  the  nature  of  a  rule  and  therefore  should  be  laid  before
      Parliament. Whether the Policy thereafter should  be  included  within
      the Immigration Rules is a matter for the Respondent. This, though, is
      an entirely different issue to whether the Policy  is  a  rule  laying
      down a practice to be followed in the administration of the  1971  Act
      for regulating the stay in the  United  Kingdom  of  persons  required
      under that Act to have leave.


  33. Moving on then to what is the core of the  Applicant's  first  ground,
      the application of the principles identified in Alvi and Munir to  the
      Respondent's policy.


  34. It is Mr Henderson's case that  the  Respondent's  policy  is  neither
      explanatory nor advisory in nature, in that it requires the imposition
      of a NRPF condition save in exceptional  circumstances  that,  in  the
      absence of child welfare  considerations,  can  only  exist  where  an
      applicant is destitute. There is, he says, no discretion afforded to a
      caseworker in the application of the terms of the Policy.


  35. Mr Malik responds  to  this  by  focusing  on  the  term  "exceptional
      circumstances"   which,  he  submits,  admits  of  a  wide  range   of
      considerations and is not, as the Applicant  asserts,  limited  to  an
      assessment of whether an applicant  has  demonstrated  that  they  are
      destitute. In the alternative he points to the inherent flexibility in
      a consideration  of  whether  an  applicant  is  "destitute"  and,  in
      particular, whether such applicant can meet  their  "essential  living
      needs".


  36. In so submitting, Mr Malik draws support from two  witness  statements
      authored by a Ms Donna Kajita, a Grade 7 officer in the Family  Policy
      Team in the Immigration and Border  Policy  Directorate  of  the  Home
      Office, "responsible  for  policy  in  respect  of  immigration  cases
      engaging the ECHR Article 8..." The former of these two statements  is
      dated 3 February 2014 and was drawn for the purposes of the hearing of
      a different matter before the Administrative Court, with the latter of
      these statements being drawn on 25 September 2014 for the purposes  of
      the instant case.


  37. The Respondent recognises, says Ms Kajita in her first statement, that
      some applicants might be destitute and that some are  likely  to  have
      children. As a consequence it was decided that it would be appropriate
      to allow departure from  the  normal  position  of  attaching  a  NRPF
      condition to a grant of leave  in  certain  circumstances  where  such
      leave is granted under a  ten-year  settlement  route.  A  policy  was
      developed in this regard that "allowed recourse to public funds  where
      the applicant was destitute or (later) [5 March 2013] where there were
      particularly compelling reasons relating to the welfare of a child  of
      a parent in receipt of very low income."


  38. In her statement of 25 September 2014 Ms Kajita added:


        "[7]...The SSHD also retains discretion to  grant  leave  to  remain
        without  the  'no  recourse  to  public  funds'  condition  if   the
        particular  facts   of   a   case   are   sufficiently   compelling,
        notwithstanding that the applicant does not meet the  terms  of  the
        policy." (emphasis added)


  39. On my reading of Ms Kajita's  evidence,  the  Respondent's  policy  is
      operated much as Mr  Henderson  submits  it  should  be  read.  If  an
      applicant is granted leave to remain outside the Rules  on  Article  8
      ECHR grounds then a NRPF condition will  be  attached  to  that  leave
      unless it is established by such  person  that  either  (i)  they  are
      destitute or (ii) there are particularly  compelling  reasons  not  to
      impose such a condition relating to the welfare of a child of a parent
      in receipt of very low income. There  remains  a  residual  discretion
      outside of the terms of the Policy not to impose a NRPF  condition  if
      the particular facts of the case are "sufficiently compelling".


  40. The proper approach to be taken  by  the  courts  to  the  meaning  of
      policies and guidance was  considered  most  recently  in  a  planning
      context by the Supreme Court in Tesco Stores  Limited  v  Dundee  City
      Council [2012] UKSC 13 in which Lord Reed JSC  (with  whom  all  other
      members of the Supreme Court agreed) said:

         "[18]... As in other areas of  administrative  law,  the  policies
         which it sets out are designed to secure consistency and direction
         in the exercise of discretionary powers, while allowing a  measure
         of flexibility to be retained.  Those  considerations  point  away
         from the view that the meaning of  the  plan  is  in  principle  a
         matter which each planning authority is entitled to determine from
         time to time as it pleases, within the limits of  rationality.  On
         the contrary, these considerations suggest that in  principle,  in
         this area of public administration as in others (as discussed, for
         example,  in  R  (Raissi)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department), policy statements should be  interpreted  objectively
         in accordance with the language used, read as always in its proper
         context.


         [19] That is not to say that such statements should  be  construed
         as if they were statutory or contractual  provisions.  Although  a
         development plan has a legal status and legal effects, it  is  not
         analogous in its nature or purpose to a statute or a contract.  As
         has often been observed,  development  plans  are  full  of  broad
         statements  of   policy,   many   of   which   may   be   mutually
         irreconcilable, so that in a particular case one must give way  to
         another. In addition, many of the provisions of development  plans
         are framed in language whose application to a given set  of  facts
         requires the exercise of judgment. Such matters  fall  within  the
         jurisdiction of planning authorities, and their exercise of  their
         judgment  can  only  be  challenged  on  the  ground  that  it  is
         irrational or perverse (Tesco Stores Ltd v Secretary of State  for
         the Environment and ors, per Lord Hoffmann, p 780).  Nevertheless,
         planning authorities do not live in the world  of  Humpty  Dumpty:
         they cannot make the development plan  mean  whatever  they  would
         like it to mean." (emphasis added)

 41. Returning to the Respondent's policy, in her February 2014 statement Ms
     Kajita identifies, with a degree of particularity, that the package  of
     reforms in  July  2012,  which  included  an  earlier  version  of  the
     Respondent's policy, was aimed at reducing  burdens  on  the  taxpayer,
     promoting integration and tackling abuse. The reforms were preceded, it
     is said, by a major public consultation and they were debated at length
     in Parliament. Previously, applicants who did  not  qualify  for  leave
     under the Immigration Rules but who could establish an Article 8  right
     to remain in the UK, were granted discretionary leave  outside  of  the
     Rules and were permitted recourse to public funds.


 42. After 9 July 2012 those granted leave under Appendix FM  (family  life)
     on a five-year route to settlement were  required  to  meet  a  minimum
     income threshold, which was designed  to  prevent  the  burden  on  the
     taxpayer. Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE (private life) also  provide
     a ten-year route to settlement. The  Respondent  did  not  consider  it
     appropriate to allow recourse to public funds for those  granted  leave
     on the ten-year route. To do so, it is said, would undermine the policy
     intention behind setting a minimum income requirement under  the  five-
     year route. This is also consistent with the need to reduce the  burden
     on the taxpayer. I agree with the decision of Kenneth Parker J in NS  v
     Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 1971 (Admin)  at
     [59] that these  constitute  powerful  reasons  of  public  policy  for
     prohibiting recourse to public funds in the circumstances identified.


 43. It is clear that the 'package of reforms' referred to above intended to
     make reliance on public funds by persons granted  leave  to  remain  on
     family or private life grounds an exception  to  the  default  position
     precluding such reliance.  Reading the policy in this context  supports
     the   restrictive   interpretation   of   the    phrase    "exceptional
     circumstances" favoured by Mr Henderson.


 44. This is also the case if the Respondent's policy is considered  in  the
     context of  other  relevant  policies  and  guidance  relating  to  the
     imposition of the NRPF condition.


 45. In January 2014 the Respondent introduced guidance titled "Request  for
     a change of conditions of leave granted  on  the  basis  of  family  or
     private  life"  (the  "2014  Guidance").   This   guidance   identifies
     circumstances in which a request can be made for the removal of a  NRPF
     condition previously imposed on a grant of  leave.  The  2014  Guidance
     reproduces parts of the Respondent's policy and states that  a  request
     to remove a NRPF condition may be made if:


        "1.       Since  being  granted  leave  to  remain  your  financial
            circumstances have changed and you  have  become  destitute  or
            there are now particularly compelling reasons relating  to  the
            welfare of your child; or


         2.  You were destitute,  or  there  were  particularly  compelling
            reasons relating to the welfare of your child, at the  time  of
            your application was being considered but you failed to provide
            evidence of this and you now wish to send in this evidence"


 46. It is to be observed that the January 2014 policy does not refer to the
     need to demonstrate exceptional circumstances in order for a previously
     imposed NRPF condition to be removed  but,  relevantly,  only  that  an
     applicant has become destitute,  or  was  destitute  at  the  time  the
     condition was imposed but failed  to  provide  sufficient  evidence  to
     demonstrate this.


 47. I can see no justification, and none is offered by the Respondent,  for
     a more restrictive consideration to be applied  to  a  decision  as  to
     whether to remove a previously imposed NRPF condition (i.e. destitution
     or compelling reasons relating to the welfare of a child) than would be
     applied to a decision as to whether to impose such a condition  in  the
     first place; which on the Respondent's case is not  restricted  in  its
     consideration to the issues of  destitution  and  the  welfare  of  the
     child.


 48. The terms of the January 2014  policy  clearly,  in  my  view,  provide
     support for a restrictive reading of  the  "exceptional  circumstances"
     criteria in the Respondent's policy.


 49. In addition, reading the  phrase  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the
     context of the Respondent's policy as a whole  also  leads  me  to  the
     conclusion that Mr Henderson is correct in his submissions.


 50. First, whilst detailed guidance is provided in the Respondent's  policy
     as to how to determine whether an applicant is destitute, there  is  no
     guidance  relating  to  the  consideration  of  any   other   potential
     exceptional circumstances - save for those involving the welfare  of  a
     child.


 51. Second, the final paragraph  of  the  Respondent's  policy  relates  to
     circumstances in which an applicant has already been  granted  recourse
     to public funds as a condition of an earlier grant of  leave  and  has,
     thereafter, applied for and been granted further leave to remain.  This
     paragraph requires a caseworker to re-assess whether to impose  a  NRPF
     condition in such circumstances and mandates that  recourse  to  public
     funds should only be granted "if they [the applicant]  continue  to  be
     destitute, or  where  there  continue  to  be  particularly  compelling
     reasons relating to the welfare of a child of a parent in receipt of  a
     very low income." (emphasis added)


 52. The consideration under  the  Respondent's  policy  as  to  whether  an
     applicant has demonstrated exceptional circumstances is not  restricted
     in its application to those who have been granted leave to  remain  for
     the first time (initial grant of leave). This being so, if Mr Malik  is
     right in his interpretation of the policy it would contain  an  obvious
     internal inconsistency in relation to the approach to be taken to those
     who have been granted further leave. The earlier paragraphs would allow
     recourse to public funds to be permitted in  circumstances  other  than
     where destitution or particularly compelling reasons  relating  to  the
     welfare of a child have been demonstrated, whereas the final  paragraph
     of the policy would allow for recourse to public funds to be  permitted
     only where destitution or particularly compelling reasons  relating  to
     the welfare of a child have been demonstrated.


 53. In further support of his interpretation of the Policy Mr Malik directs
     attention to the fact that  it  has  been  amended  from  its  original
     version, issued on 9 July 2012, so as to omit the word  only  from  the
     following sentence: "Exceptional circumstances which require access  to
     public funds to be granted will  exist  only  where  the  applicant  is
     destitute." (emphasis added) - a  fact  that  can  be  identified  from
     paragraph 44 of Ms Kajita's first statement but  which  passes  without
     comment therein or in her later statement.


 54. Whilst one explanation for this amendment to the policy is that it  was
     intended to remove a restriction as to the type of  circumstances  that
     could  be  considered  when  determining  whether  to  impose  a   NRPF
     condition, it is certainly not the only possible explanation. It  could
     be, for example, that the use of the word only was  deemed  superfluous
     and it was therefore removed because it was thought to  be  obvious  to
     any reader of the policy that the exceptional circumstances that  could
     be relied upon by an applicant  were  limited  to  the  two  identified
     therein. As observed above, despite Ms Kajita being in  a  position  to
     set out why such an amendment was made she says nothing in relation  to
     this matter in either of her statements.


 55. Finally, although Mr Malik submitted "on instructions" that in practice
     caseworkers take into account a wide range of  factors  in  determining
     whether there are exceptional circumstances in any given case,  and  do
     not restrict themselves to the considerations of destitution and  child
     welfare referred to within the Policy, he did not draw attention to any
     evidence supporting such assertion.


 56. Insofar as there is evidence before me relating to this issue,  I  find
     that it supports the  contrary  conclusion  i.e.  that  the  Policy  is
     operated restrictively in practice. First, in the instant  case  it  is
     plain that in her February 2014 decision the  Respondent  did  restrict
     herself  to  a  consideration  of  whether  the   Applicant   met   the
     "destitution threshold". In addition, in her evidence of February  2014
     Ms Kajita states, inter alia, that:


        "[53] Caseworkers must now assess each case  on  the  basis  of  the
        information and evidence provided, including any evidence of support
        from a Local Authority, to see whether the applicant meets the terms
        of the policy  in  that  they  are  destitute,  or  that  there  are
        particularly compelling reasons relating to the welfare of the child
        of a parent in receipt of a very low income so as to warrant a grant
        of recourse to public funds...


        [84] ...if the information and evidence provided by the applicant is
        insufficient to show she is destitute or that there are particularly
        compelling child welfare considerations,  the  caseworker  will  not
        normally  make  further  enquiries   to   establish   whether   more
        information or better evidence can be provided.


        [87] ...since the new rules were implemented on  9  July  2012,  398
        applicants have shown, in their application  or  subsequently,  that
        they are  destitute,  or  that  there  are  particularly  compelling
        reasons relating to the welfare of a child of a parent in receipt of
        a very low income, and have therefore been granted leave  to  remain
        without a condition of no recourse to public funds."


 57. Ms Kajita also gave evidence to the Administrative Court in NS and,  in
     his summary of that evidence, Kenneth Parker J said of it at [58]:


        "...The policy developed by the government (as set out  in  the  RPF
        Guidance) therefore required caseworkers to grant recourse in  cases
        where the applicant was destitute, or where there were  particularly
        compelling reasons relating to the welfare of a child of a parent in
        receipt of a very low income"


 58. For all the reasons set out above, I find that  a  consideration  under
     the Respondent's Policy of whether  "exceptional  circumstances"  exist
     does not admit  of  any  other  consideration  other  than  whether  an
     applicant is destitute or whether  there  are  particularly  compelling
     reasons for allowing recourse to public funds relating to  the  welfare
     of a child of a parent in receipt of a very low income.


 59. As to the phrase "essential living needs", I agree with Mr  Malik  that
     the circumstances relevant to a consideration of this issue  under  the
     Policy  are  not  limited.  Nevertheless,  this  does  not  assist  the
     Respondent in demonstrating that the policy is flexible because it does
     no more than require a caseworker to assess the factual constituents of
     destitution in a particular case i.e. (i) what a particular applicant's
     essential living needs are and (ii) whether these can be  met  by  that
     applicant absent recourse to public funds. Such  a  consideration  says
     nothing about the circumstances in which a NRPF condition would not  be
     imposed, absent an applicant's destitution or  particularly  compelling
     child welfare considerations.


 60. If exceptional circumstances are not found to  exist  a  caseworker  is
     required,  under  the  policy,  to  impose  a  NRPF  condition  on   an
     applicant's leave. Whilst Mr Malik submits that a caseworker does  have
     discretion not to impose an NRPF condition on an applicant's  leave  in
     such circumstances, he identifies this as being  as  a  result  of  the
     exercise of the caseworker's residual discretion outside of  the  Rules
     and Policy - as does Ms Kajita[2].


 61. The existence of such  residual  discretion,  asserts  Mr  Malik,  also
     provides a complete answer to the Applicant's first  ground.  I  cannot
     accept that this is so. The Respondent always has a residual discretion
     to act to the benefit of  an  applicant  in  matters  relating  to  the
     administration of the 1971 Act for regulating the stay of  persons  who
     require leave; this being  irrespective  of  the  requirements  of  the
     Immigration Rules and the terms of any guidance or policy that  may  be
     relevant in any given  case.  If  the  existence  of  such  a  residual
     discretion were to provide an answer  to  whether  the  Respondent  was
     required to lay the instant policy before Parliament it  would,  in  my
     conclusion, deprive section 3(2) of the  1971  Act  of  any  meaningful
     effect. It would also, but did not, provide the answer  in  Alvi  -  in
     that it would have been open to the  Respondent,  in  exercise  of  her
     residual discretion, to have granted  Mr  Alvi  leave  outside  of  the
     Immigration  Rules  despite  the  fact  that  he  did  not   meet   the
     requirements laid down in the Occupation Codes of Practice. The Supreme
     Court nevertheless concluded that the Occupation Codes of Practice were
     in the nature of rule and that the Respondent was thereby  required  to
     lay them before Parliament.


 62. Summing up my conclusions above, the Respondent's policy cannot be said
     to be advisory in character,  assisting  the  decision  maker  but  not
     compelling a particular outcome. I find the contrary to be the  case  -
     it lacks any flexibility and constrains a decision-maker to imposing  a
     NRPF condition if an applicant has not met  identifiable  and  specific
     criteria. It is, therefore, in the nature of a rule as to the  practice
     to be followed in the administration of the 1971 Act for regulating the
     stay in the United Kingdom of persons required to have leave to  enter,
     in that it is a rule relating to the conditions to be attached to  such
     leave. For that reason, in my  conclusion  it  should  have  been  laid
     before Parliament pursuant to section 3(2) of the 1971 Act.


 63. The fact that (i) the Respondent's policy, insofar as it relates  to  a
     consideration of whether to impose an NRPF condition on persons granted
     leave as a consequence of the Respondent having exercised her  residual
     discretion outside of  the  Immigration  Rules,  was  not  laid  before
     Parliament when it ought to have been, and  (ii)  that  the  Respondent
     relied upon it when imposing a NRPF condition of the Applicant's leave,
     in my conclusion renders both the Respondent's decision  of  8  October
     2013 to impose a NRPF  condition  on  the  Applicant's  leave  and  her
     decision of 28 January 2014 not to  remove  this  condition  from  such
     leave, unlawful.


 64. Mr Malik  submits  that  despite  the  aforementioned  conclusion,  the
     Applicant should not be granted the relief she seeks,  given  that  the
     regime under which the Respondent considers the imposition of  an  NRPF
     in cases where leave is granted outside of the Rules changed on 28 July
     2014, with  the  introduction  of  both  paragraph  276BE(2)  into  the
     Immigration Rules and a  new  Policy[3].  He  maintains  that  in  such
     circumstances to grant the Applicant relief "would be meaningless."


 65. Insofar as this submission relates to the quashing of the  Respondent's
     policy, I agree with Mr Malik. The Respondent's  policy  is  no  longer
     relied upon in determining whether to impose a NRPF condition on  leave
     granted outside of the Rules. There is no purpose in quashing a  policy
     that is no longer of application; it is sufficient to conclude that the
     Respondent's  policy  of  October  2013,  insofar  as  it  applies   to
     applicants granted leave outside the Rules, was unlawful.


 66. As to the Respondent's  decisions  on  the  Applicant's  case,  if  the
     Respondent were to undertake a  further  consideration  of  whether  to
     impose a NRPF condition, and I have no  evidence  before  me  that  she
     would, this would require up-to-date evidence  as  to  the  Applicant's
     circumstances. That evidence is not before  me,  and  neither  would  I
     expect it to be. I am not prepared to find that the Respondent is bound
     to  impose  a  NRPF  condition  upon  any  further  consideration  and,
     consequently, in my conclusion the fact any further consideration would
     take place in the context of a new regime in which  the  Rules  provide
     for the imposition of a NRPF condition, should not deny  the  Applicant
     the relief she seeks.


      Duties under the Equality Act 2010


 67. Whilst this ground was not pleaded with  particularity,  and  Mr  Malik
     says not pleaded at all, prior  to  its  inclusion  in  Mr  Henderson's
     skeleton argument of the 1 September 2014, who was  not  instructed  at
     earlier stages, I gave the Applicant permission to rely on  it  at  the
     hearing of 9 September. As a consequence, the second day of the hearing
     was adjourned to a date  that  Mr  Malik  indicated  would  enable  the
     Respondent to identify and file any evidence she wished  to  rely  upon
     which, at the hearing of 29 September,  Mr  Malik  confirmed  had  been
     done.


Summary of submissions


 68. It is the Applicant's case that the Respondent has acted unlawfully  by
     failing to comply with her public sector equality  duties  ("PSED")  as
     set out in s.149 of the Equality Act 2010 ("2010 Act"), in both (i) the
     formulation of the criteria in her policy and (ii) the  application  of
     such criteria to the facts of  her  case  -  it  being  said  that  the
     Applicant is a disabled person for the purposes of the 2010 Act.


 69. The Respondent submits that there has been  full  compliance  with  her
     PSED both in relation to  (i)  the  formulation  of  the  Policy  -  as
     confirmed by the Home Office Policy Equality Statement relating to  the
     Family Migration Policy ("PES"), and (ii) the application of the Policy
     to the Applicant's case - in particular for the reasons  identified  in
     the Respondent's decision letters, as elucidated in the evidence  given
     by Ms Kajita.


Legal Framework


 70. By section 149 of Equality Act 2010:


        "(1) A public authority must, in the  exercise  of  its  functions,
        have due regard to the need to -


          (a) eliminate discrimination, harassment, victimisation  and  any
          other conduct that is prohibited by or under this Act ;


          (b) advance equality of opportunity between persons who share a
          relevant protected characteristic and persons who  do  not  share
          it;


          (c) foster good relations between persons who  share  a  relevant
          protected characteristic and persons who do not share it.


        ...


        (3)  Having  due  regard  to  the  need  to  advance  equality of
        opportunity  between  persons  who  share  a   relevant   protected
        characteristic and persons who do not share it involves having  due
        regard, in particular, to the need to-


          (a) remove or minimise  disadvantages  suffered  by  persons  who
          share a relevant protected characteristic that are  connected  to
          that characteristic;


          (b) take steps to meet the needs of persons who share a  relevant
          protected characteristic that are different  from  the  needs  of
          persons who do not share it;


          (c)  encourage   persons   who   share   a   relevant   protected
          characteristic to participate in public  life  or  in  any  other
          activity   in   which   participation   by   such   persons    is
          disproportionately low.


        (4) The steps involved in meeting the  needs  of  disabled  persons
        that are different from the needs of persons who are  not  disabled
        include, in particular, steps to take account of disabled  person's
        disabilities..."


 71. Disability is a protected characteristic by virtue of s.149 (7) of  the
     2010 Act.


 72. The relevant principles relating to the application of  the  PSED  were
     set out at some length by McCombe LJ (with the agreement of Kitchin and
     Elias LJJ) in Bracking v Secretary  of  State  for  Work  and  Pensions
     [2013] EWCA Civ 1345 (at [26]).  I  do  not  propose  to  rehearse  the
     entirety of this paragraph in McCombe LJ's judgment, but the  principal
     points therein can be summarised as follows:


       1) Equality duties  are  an  integral  and  important  part  of  the
          mechanisms for ensuring the fulfillment  of  the  aims  of  anti-
          discrimination legislation;


       2) An important evidential element in the discharge of the  duty  is
          the recording of the steps taken by the decision maker in seeking
          to meet the statutory requirements;


       3) The relevant duty is on the  Minister  or  other  decision  maker
          personally. What matters is what he or she personally  took  into
          account and what he or she personally knew;


       4) A Minister must assess the risk and extent of any adverse  impact
          and the ways in which such a risk may be  eliminated  before  the
          adoption of a proposed policy  and  not  merely  as  a  rearguard
          action following a concluded decision;


       5) The duty to have due regard  to  the  relevant  matters  must  be
          fulfilled before and at the time  when  a  particular  policy  is
          being considered and is a non-delegable and continuing  one.  The
          duty must be exercised in substance, with  rigour,  and  with  an
          open mind - it is not a tick-box exercise. While there is no duty
          to make express reference to the  regard  paid  to  the  relevant
          duty, reference to it and to the relevant  criteria  reduces  the
          scope for argument;


       6) It is not for the court to determine whether  appropriate  weight
          has been given to the PSED. Provided the court is satisfied  that
          there has been a rigorous consideration of the duty and a  proper
          appreciation of the potential impact of the decision on  equality
          objectives, it is for the  decision  maker  to  decide  how  much
          weight should be given  to  the  various  factors  informing  the
          decision;


       7) The concept of 'due regard' requires the court  to  ensure  there
          has been a  proper  and  conscientious  focus  on  the  statutory
          criteria;


       8) Public authorities must be  properly  informed  before  taking  a
          decision. If the relevant material is not available,  there  will
          be a duty to acquire it and this will frequently mean  that  some
          further consultation with appropriate groups is required.


 73. In paragraphs 60 to 62 of his judgment McCombe LJ concludes  (with  the
     agreement of Kitchin LJ):


         [60]  ...the  2010  Act  imposes  a  heavy  burden   upon   public
         authorities in discharging the PSED and in ensuring that there  is
         evidence available, if necessary, to demonstrate  that  discharge.
         It seems to have been  the  intention  of  Parliament  that  these
         considerations of equality of opportunity (where they  arise)  are
         now to be placed at the centre of formulation  of  policy  by  all
         public  authorities,  side  by  side  with  all   other   pressing
         circumstances of whatever magnitude.


         [61] It is for this reason that advance consideration  has  to  be
         given to these issues and they have to be an integral part of  the
         mechanisms of government...


         [62] In this case, I have come to the conclusion (admittedly  with
         some reluctance) that too much of the  Respondent's  case  depends
         upon the inferences that Ms Busch invites  us  to  draw  from  the
         facts as a whole rather than upon hard evidence. In my view, there
         is simply not the evidence, merely  in  the  circumstance  of  the
         Minister's position as a Minister  for  Disabled  People  and  the
         sketchy references to the impact on  ILF  fund  users  by  way  of
         possible cuts in the care packages in some cases,  to  demonstrate
         to the court that a focused regard was had to the potentially very
         grave impact upon individuals in this group of  disabled  persons,
         within  the  context  of  a   consideration   of   the   statutory
         requirements for disabled people as a whole.".


Discussion and conclusions


 74. In support of the submission that the  Respondent  has  complied  fully
     with her PSED Mr Malik directs particular attention  to  the  following
     passages in the two witness statements drawn by Ms Kajita:


        Statement of 3 February 2014 at [5]:


         "The Home Office designed the new policies in detail and drafted a
         new set of family  Immigration  Rules,  taking  into  account  the
         overall policy aims  referred  to  above,  the  comments  received
         during the consultation and the expert  advice  of  the  Migration
         Advisory Committee (MAC). We  carefully  considered  the  economic
         impact of the changes and their impact on relevant characteristics
         such as age, disability, race, gender and  sexual  orientation.  A
         Policy Equality Statement on the new policies was published on  13
         June 2012.


        Statement of 25 September 2014 at [7]:


        "Disability is a factor that can be taken into account in  deciding
        whether or not the applicant meets the terms of the policy such  as
        to warrant a grant of leave without the no recourse to public funds
        condition. The  existence  of  a  disability  may  be  material  in
        deciding whether or  not  an  applicant  meets  the  definition  of
        destitute. For example, the current version of the policy instructs
        the  caseworker  to  "consider  any  information  provided  by  the
        applicant about their current or prospective employment and/or that
        of their partner. The SSHD also retains discretion to  grant  leave
        to remain without the no recourse to public funds condition if  the
        particular  facts  of   a   case   are   sufficiently   compelling,
        notwithstanding that the applicant does not meet the terms  of  the
        policy."


 75. The PES of 13 June 2012 identifies itself as relating  to  the  "Family
     Migration" policy and was "prepared to accompany  the  new  Immigration
     Rules laid before Parliament  on  13  June  2012".  On  this  date  the
     Director of Migration Policy, Glyn Williams, certified that having read
     the  available  evidence  he  was  satisfied  that   it   "demonstrates
     compliance, where relevant, with section 149 of the Equality  Act  2010
     and that due regard has been made to the need  to:  eliminate  unlawful
     discrimination;  advance  equality  of  opportunity;  and  foster  good
     relations."


 76. Where there is a relevant PES, as here, one would expect it to indicate
     with some particularity how the PSED were discharged: per Elias  LJ  in
     (R (Hurley) v Secretary of State for Business  [2012]  H.R.L.R.  13  at
     [75]).


 77. The assertion by Ms Kajita  that  the  Immigration  and  Border  Policy
     Directorate was fully aware of the  potential  impact  of  the  changes
     brought in by the  new  Immigration  Rules  on  persons  with  relevant
     characteristics - such as a disability - is no substitute for  positive
     evidence to that effect: (R (Equality and Human  Rights  Commission)  v
     Secretary of State for Justice [2010] EWHC 147 (Admin) at [53]).  It is
     notable  that  in  neither  of  her  two  statements  does  Ms   Kajita
     particularise that due regard was had to the potential  impact  of  the
     removal of recourse to public funds for disabled persons who have  been
     granted leave to remain on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds  outside  of  the
     Immigration Rules.


 78. Turning to a consideration of  the  PES,  examination  therein  of  the
     "Equality Issues" is separated in to six categories of "change"  to  be
     made to the "family route" and "family visitor appeals" by the  "Family
     Migration" policy, these being: (i)  Partners,  (ii)  Settlement  (iii)
     Adult dependent relatives, (iv) Private life (v)  ECHR  Article  8  and
     criminality and (vi) Family visits.


 79. Page two of the PES sets out a "Summary of the evidence  considered  in
     demonstrating due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty".  None  of
     the evidence referred to in that section of the PES has  been  produced
     before me and neither party has made reference to anything in it.


 80. Thereafter, under the heading "ECHR Article 8" in the "Introduction" to
     the PES it  is  stated  that:  "If  an  applicant  fails  to  meet  the
     requirements of the  new  Immigration  Rules,  it  should  only  be  in
     genuinely  exceptional  circumstances  that  refusing  them  leave  and
     removing them from the UK would breach Article 8."[4]


 81. In his submissions Mr Malik focused attention on pages 25 and 26 of the
     PES, under the heading "Indirect Discrimination - ECHR Article 8  right
     to respect for private life". The "Proposed policy" under consideration
     at this section of the PES is described therein  by  reference  to  the
     Immigration Rules relating to private life, which came into force on  9
     July 2012.


 82.  The  "Policy  aim"  is  stated  to  be:  "Reflecting  clearly  in  the
     immigration rules the requirements to be met to remain in the UK on the
     basis of the ECHR Article 8 right to respect for private life, and  not
     rewarding those who have not complied with the immigration laws."


 83. Identification of  the  policy  aim  is  immediately  followed  by  the
     heading; "What outcomes will it achieve"; under which it is said:


              "The changes will:


    . Set clear requirements for who can qualify to remain in the UK on  the
      basis of private life.


    . Replace the 14-year long residence route  to  settlement  under  which
      illegal migrants could qualify for settlement if they evaded detection
      for 14 years.


    . Reduce burdens on the taxpayer as the 10-year route to  settlement  on
      the basis of private life will not offer automatic  access  to  public
      funds. Applicants granted leave on a 10-year route  will  be  able  to
      work and contribute to the UK economy."


 84. There then follows a chart identifying the characteristics protected by
     s.149 of the 2010 Act. In relation to the protected  characteristic  of
     "Disability", it is said in a column  headed,  "Are  people  with  this
     protected characteristic particularly likely to be affected?"


         "No. There is no data currently  available  on  how  many  disabled
         people currently benefit from the 14-year long  residence  rule  or
         are granted discretionary leave on the basis of private life. There
         is no reason to suppose people with this  protected  characteristic
         are particularly likely to be affected."


 85. Contrary to Mr Malik's submission, it is not at all obvious that  leave
     granted exceptionally outside of the  Immigration  Rules  is,  for  the
     purposes of the Family Migration policy, treated as leave granted under
     "the  10-year  route"  to  settlement.  Indeed  I  draw  the   contrary
     conclusion from paragraphs 37  to  44  of  Ms  Kajita's  February  2014
     statement, in which she, inter alia, states at [44]:


        "Guidance to accompany the new Rules was published on 9  July  2012
        ... setting out the policy on when recourse to public  funds  would
        be granted in 10 year route cases. It also covered those  cases  in
        which there were exceptional circumstances that warranted  a  grant
        of leave outside of the rules  on  Article  8  grounds."  (emphasis
        added)


 86. If there is any doubt about whether a particular statutory duty imposed
     by s.149 of the 2010 Act is engaged, the issue  needs  to  be  explored
     before any conclusion can safely be reached that it is not: R (Hurley).
     It is not the Respondent's case before me that it is beyond doubt  that
     there would be no impact on issues falling within the ambit on s.149 in
     relation to the withdrawal of recourse to public funds to persons  with
     a disability granted leave exceptionally  outside  of  the  Immigration
     Rules on private or family life grounds; rather, the Respondent submits
     that due regard was had, in relation to this category  of  persons,  to
     the 'needs' identified within s.149 of the 2010 Act.


 87. In my conclusion, on the very limited evidence placed before me, I find
     that Respondent has not demonstrated that this is so.


 88. As in Bracking, the Respondent's case before me depends upon inferences
     and not evidence. In this case I am, inter alia, being asked  to  infer
     that the consideration identified in pages 25 and 26 of the PES relates
     both to leave granted pursuant to the Immigration  Rules  and  to  that
     granted exceptionally outside the Rules on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  -
     despite this not directly being stated to be so either on the  face  of
     the PES or in the witness statements drawn by Ms  Kajita.  This  is  an
     inference I am not prepared  to  draw  in  circumstances  where  it  is
     reasonable to expect the Respondent to have produced clear evidence  to
     this effect.


 89. I remind myself  that  the  PES  places  a  heavy  burden  upon  public
     authorities in  discharging  the  PSED  and  in  ensuring  evidence  is
     available to demonstrate that discharge. Although  the  PES  recognises
     that leave to remain can be granted outside of the Immigration Rules in
     exceptional circumstances, the evidence that has been provided  to  the
     Tribunal does not in my view demonstrate that there has been a rigorous
     consideration by the Respondent of her public sector equality  duty  to
     have due regard to the potential impact of  the  change  in  policy  in
     relation to the imposition of a NRPF condition on those persons with  a
     disability who have  been  granted  leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
     Immigration Rules.


 90. Mr Malik submits that the decisions  under  challenge  in  the  instant
     application should not be quashed because the Applicant is not disabled
     and consequently the failure of the Respondent to abide by her PSED  in
     relation to the formulation of the Policy could have had no  impact  on
     her. This submission is somewhat academic  given  my  conclusion  above
     that the decisions under challenge should be quashed as  a  consequence
     of the fact that the Respondent's policy,  insofar  as  it  relates  to
     those granted leave outside of the Immigration Rules, should have been,
     but was not, laid before Parliament.


 91. However, if I am not correct in my conclusions on the first  ground,  I
     find the Respondent's decisions fall to be quashed in any event. I have
     found the Respondent's policy,  insofar  as  it  is  applied  to  those
     granted leave outside o the Rules, to be  unlawful.  Although  judicial
     review is a discretionary remedy,  absent  speculating  that  the  same
     decision would have  been  reached  by  the  Respondent  had  she  been
     considering a lawful policy, something I am not prepared to do,  I  can
     see no good reason why the Respondent's decisions should not fall to be
     quashed.


      Consideration of the Applicant's case by the Respondent


 92. I have no doubt that both Mr Malik  and  Ms  Kajita  are  correct  when
     stating that an individual's physical and mental heath (whether or  not
     they have a disability) are factors to be taken into account  when  the
     issue of an applicant's  destitution  is  being  considered  under  the
     Respondent's policy - for example in relation to an assessment  of  (i)
     the likelihood of an applicant obtaining employment and (ii) the  level
     of an applicant's essential living needs.


 93.  Unsurprisingly,  the  Applicant  supplied  little  evidence   to   the
     Respondent with her original application of 10 March 2012 of either her
     inability to meet her essential living  needs  or  the  impact  of  her
     claimed disability on those needs. At this time it was the Respondent's
     policy to permit those granted leave on Article 8 ECHR grounds  outside
     of the Rules recourse to public funds. The policy  changed  whilst  the
     Applicant's application was under consideration.


 94. When making the first of her decisions the Respondent had  before  her,
     inter alia:


        i) A letter from Dr T Rana GP dated 21 November 2011  stating  that
           the Applicant "needs help with her washing  and  feeding...  has
           problems with hearing and is  often  unaware  of  danger  around
           her...needs a wheelchair  to  walk  as  she  has  problems  with
           mobility."


       ii) A determination of the First-tier Tribunal of  19  October  2012
           relating to the Applicant, in which the Tribunal  accepted  that
           the Applicant  had  "medical  issues",  but  not  that  she  was
           "suffering from any  kind  of  terminal  or  severely  disabling
           medical  condition".  The   determination   also   records   the
           Applicant's evidence that there "has been a deterioration in her
           health, particularly since she has come to the  United  Kingdom"
           and that her daughter "provides personal care for her  including
           walking, feeding, showering and giving her medication." At  [32]
           the Tribunal found that  the  Applicant  was  dependent  on  her
           daughter for "emotional and day-to-day care" and  it  thereafter
           at [48] stated that it was "prepared to look at  the  Article  8
           issues on the basis of the picture painted by Ms Albeed"


 95. By the  time  the  Respondent  made  her  February  2014  decision  the
     Applicant had also placed before her:


       (i)    An undated statement drawn in  her  name  asserting  that  she
           cannot cook for herself, wash her own clothes, bath herself  and
           that she is "not able to walk around" by herself;


       (ii)Two statements from the Applicant's daughter to the  same  effect
           as the evidence given by the Applicant, and further  identifying
           that the Applicant is reliant on a wheelchair.


 96. Neither the Respondent's decision of 8 October  2013  nor  that  of  28
     February 2014 refer  to  or  engage  with  the  health  conditions  the
     Applicant claimed to be suffering from.  In my conclusion the Applicant
     is unable to understand from the terms of these decision  letters  what
     conclusions the Respondent reached in relation to  the  credibility  of
     the evidence given  in  this  regard;  neither  is  she  informed  what
     relevance the  Respondent  attached  to  such  health  conditions  when
     considering the issue of destitution.


 97. Whilst it cannot be said that the Respondent's  decision  to  impose  a
     NRPF condition on the Applicant's leave was not one that  was  open  to
     her on all of the available evidence, and whilst a decision maker  does
     not have to refer to each and every piece of  evidence  when  making  a
     decision, there is a requirement to provide sufficient reasons  on  the
     core issues so as to enable an  applicant  to  know  why  a  particular
     decision was reached. A failure to do so renders a  decision  unlawful.
     In this case I find both the decision of 8 October 2013 and that of  28
     February 2014 to be devoid of a lawful adequacy of reasoning such as to
     render them unlawful.


 98. Mr Malik belatedly sought to rely  upon  Ms  Kajita's  evidence  of  25
     September 2014 as remedying any  error  there  may  have  been  in  the
     reasoning in the Respondent's earlier decision letters  thus  negating,
     he submits, the need to grant the Applicant the relief she seeks.


 99. In her evidence Ms Kajita states that the Respondent took into  account
     the Applicant's claimed medical conditions  when  considering  all  the
     circumstances of  her  case  prior  to  imposing  the  NRPF  condition;
     particular reliance having been placed by the decision-makers,  it  was
     said, on (i) the Respondent's conclusion of 28 June 2012 that she  "was
     not satisfied that there [was] evidence of a serious health  condition"
     and (ii) the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions that the Applicant  does
     not  have  "any  kind  of  terminal  or  severely   disabling   medical
     condition."


100. However,  Ms  Kajita's  evidence  only  goes  to  highlight  a  further
     difficulty with the  Respondent's  approach  to  the  consideration  of
     whether to impose a NRPF condition on the Applicant's  leave.  In  both
     her decision of June 2012 and the Tribunal's determination  of  October
     2012 it was concluded that refusing to grant  the  Applicant  leave  to
     remain would not  breach  her  Article  8  ECHR  rights.  However,  the
     assessment of whether to impose a NRPF condition was undertaken in  the
     context of the Respondent having accepted that there  were  exceptional
     circumstances in the Applicant's case requiring leave to remain  to  be
     granted - a core feature of the Applicant's case in this regard  having
     been the severity of her health condition. In  my  conclusion  in  this
     context reliance by the Respondent on her earlier conclusions, and  the
     conclusions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  of  itself  required  some
     reasoned analysis, and the absence of such reasoning also  renders  the
     decisions unlawful.


101. Additionally, I agree with Mr Henderson that the  Respondent  has  also
     failed to comply  with  her  PSED  when  giving  consideration  to  the
     particular facts of the Applicant's case.


102. Section 6 of the 2010 Act provides that a person has  a  disability  if
     they have a physical or mental impairment  and  the  impairment  has  a
     substantial and long-term adverse effect on their ability to carry  out
     normal day-to-day activities.  Section 212 of  the  2010  Act  provides
     that "substantial means more than minor or trivial.


103. The PSED can extend to the duty  to  make  further  inquiry  into  some
     feature of the evidence presented to the decision-maker that  raises  a
     real possibility that  an  Applicant  has  a  relevant  characteristic:
     Pieretti v Enfield LBC [2011]  2  ALL  ER  642;  Aikens  LJ  (with  the
     agreement of Longmore and Mummery LLJ) at [35 & 36]. In  my  conclusion
     the evidence before the Respondent  was  sufficient  to  raise  a  real
     possibility that the Applicant was disabled in a sense relevant to  the
     assessment of whether she was destitute.  There  is  no  indication  in
     either of the Respondent's decision  letters  (i)  as  to  whether  the
     Respondent treated the Applicant as a disabled person and, if not, (ii)
     why this was so and whether she  considered  making  further  enquiries
     regarding this issue.


104. The law required the Respondent to take steps to take  account  of  the
     Applicant's disability, at least to the extent that she was required to
     make further enquiries into whether it existed and if so whether it was
     relevant to the decision to impose a NRPF condition on her  leave.  She
     failed to make  such  further  enquiries  and  was,  therefore,  in  my
     conclusion in breach of her duties under s.149(3)(b)  and  (4)  of  the
     2010 Act, rendering her decisions unlawful.


105. Ms Kajita's evidence does not lead  me  to  an  alternative  conclusion
     given that she fails to  (i)  refer  to  the  statutory  definition  of
     disability set out in the 2010 Act (ii) identify  whether  it  was  the
     Respondent's position that the Applicant was  not  'disabled'  for  the
     purposes of the Act and, if so, why such a conclusion was reached  and,
     (iii) provide evidence in relation to whether the Respondent considered
     making further enquiries of the Applicant in order to determine if  she
     had a relevant disability.


106. For all the reasons given above, I find the Respondent's  decisions  of
     8 October 2013 and 28 February 2014, imposing a NRPF condition  on  the
     Applicant's leave, to  be  unlawful  and  I  consequently  quash  those
     decisions.








-----------------------
[1] There are further such provisions contained within Appendix FM to the
Rules - see for example paragraphs D-LTRP.1.2, D-LTRPT.1.1 and D-LTRPT.1.2
[2] Paragraph 7 of her witness statement of 25 September 2014
[3] Statement of Ms Kajita of 25 September 2014
[4] Page four of the PES

