
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

       JO and Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th July 2014                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                              JO, CU, AU and BU
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellants:       In person and unrepresented
Respondent:   Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

   1) The duty  imposed  by  section  55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act  2009  requires  the  decision-maker  to  be  properly
      informed of the position of a child affected by the  discharge  of  an
      immigration etc function.  Thus  equipped,  the  decision  maker  must
      conduct a careful examination of all relevant information and factors.

   2) Being adequately informed and conducting  a  scrupulous  analysis  are
      elementary prerequisites to the inter-related tasks of identifying the
      child's best interests and then balancing  them  with  other  material
      considerations.

   3) The question whether the duties imposed by section 55 have  been  duly
      performed in any given case  will  invariably  be  an  intensely  fact
      sensitive and contextual one. In the real  world  of  litigation,  the
      tools available to the court or  tribunal  considering  this  question
      will frequently be confined to the application or submission  made  to
      Secretary of State and the ultimate letter of decision.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         Introduction

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria and members of the same  family.
    The first-named Appellant is the mother (aged 32) of  the  other  three
    Appellants who are aged 7,  5  and  4  respectively.   The  mother  has
    resided in the  United  Kingdom  since  February  2005  and  the  three
    children were born here and have resided here throughout  their  lives.
    On 24th April 2011, the Respondent  served  on  the  Appellants  formal
    notice that they were persons liable to  be  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  No action was taken and, by letter dated 19th July 2013,  the
    Appellants' representative made  the  case  that  the  removal  of  his
    clients would infringe their rights under Article 8 ECHR.  This was the
    stimulus for the series of inter-related decisions giving rise  to  the
    subsequent appeals.

 2. By a series of linked decisions dated 05 September 2013, made on behalf
    of the Secretary of State for the Home Department  (the  "Secretary  of
    State"), the Appellants' applications for permission to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom were refused and, further, decisions were made to remove
    the  Appellants  from  the  United  Kingdom.     The  Appellants   duly
    exercised their right to challenge these decisions by  appeal.  By  its
    determination promulgated on 10 March  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (the "FtT") dismissed the Appellants' appeals. Permission to appeal  to
    this Tribunal was granted on the basis that the  FtT's  conclusions  in
    respect of the Appellants' Article 8 ECHR claims were arguably vitiated
    by error of law.

 3. There is but one material provision of the  Immigration  Rules  in  the
    present context.  It is paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM, which is in  the
    following terms:

         "This paragraph applies if -


           i)  The  applicant  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
              relationship with a child who:
              aa) is under the age of 18 years;
              ab) is in the United Kingdom;
              ac) is a British citizen or has lived in  the  United  Kingdom
                  continuously  for  at  least  the  7   years   immediately
                  preceding the date of application; and

         (ii) It would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom...."

    It is common case that  this  provision  of  the  Rules  has  potential
    application to the eldest child of the family, who  was  born  in  July
    2006.

          The Impugned Decision

4.   The materials assembled on behalf of the Appellants  and  forwarded  to
    the Secretary of State as part of their conjoined application for leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom consisted of a witness statement of the
    mother, a letter from the oldest child  of  the  family,  a  series  of
    letters from a number  of  supporters  and  acquaintances  and  various
    materials  relating  to  the  childrens'   educational   progress   and
    achievements.    What   consideration   and   assessment    of    these
    representations  and   information   was   undertaken   by   the   case
    worker/decision maker concerned?  The only indication available is  the
    following passage in the letter of decision:

        "Consideration has  been  given  to  section  55  of  the  Borders,
        Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.   There  is  no  evidence  to
        suggest that we have departed from section 55 as  the  family  unit
        will be kept intact when removed from United  Kingdom  [sic].   The
        family unit will be maintained and  will  be  removed  together  to
        Nigeria.  The child's father .....  has no valid leave to remain in
        the UK and is liable for removal.  Child [sic] has no ties  in  the
        UK other than to the parents and siblings. Your client  is  clearly
        familiar with the life and education system in Nigeria having spent
        the majority of her formative years in that country.  She  is  able
        to support her children whilst they become used  to  living  there.
        Your client entered the country illegally and had no basis to  stay
        here.  Therefore the time accrued by your client was through  [sic]
        illegally gained. Your client was reminded that they have no  valid
        leave and that they should voluntary [sic] depart  the  UK,  on  13
        January 2011, which they have not.  The child had also  gained  the
        time without any legal basis in the country.   Therefore  it  would
        not be unreasonable to expect the child  to  accompany  her  mother
        back to Nigeria.  Your client was always aware  of  her  precarious
        immigration status in the UK and continued to disregard immigration
        rules by continuing to stay  when  she  had  no  legal  basis  thus
        acquiring the length she has.  Your client was not  in  a  category
        that would lead to settlement. ....


        Your client therefore does not meet EX.1(CC) of Appendix FM of  the
        Immigration Rules and it is considered that your  client's  removal
        is entirely proportionate and in line  with  Article  8(2)  of  the
        ECHR."

              [Emphasis added.]

     The remaining text of the letter of decision is couched  in  relatively
    formulaic terms and of little moment in the context of these appeals.

 5.  It is clear from the determination of the  FtT  that  the  mother  gave
    evidence of an irreparable fracture in relations between  her  and  her
    mother and two younger siblings in Nigeria; she testified that she does
    not know whether they are still alive and, if so, where they live;  the
    last  communication  occurred  some  seven  years  ago;  she   has   no
    educational or vocational qualifications; she has made active voluntary
    contributions to activities in the childrens'  school  and  the  church
    with which they are associated; she has no resources of any  kind;  the
    family lives and depends  on  charitable   donations  and  support  for
    survival; she has no prospects of employment in Nigeria; and  there  is
    no prospect of the children being educated in the  event  of  returning
    there.

     Her evidence to this Tribunal was to like effect.

         Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009

6.   I turn to consider the applicable legal framework.  In the  context  of
    the present appeals, this is dominated by section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("the 2009 Act") provides:

         "(1) The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
    that -


                    a)  the  functions  mentioned  in  sub-section  (2)  are
                       discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and
                       promote the welfare of children who are in the United
                       Kingdom ....


                 [this is the umbrella, administrative duty]


           2) The functions referred to in sub-section (1) are -


              (a) any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                       immigration, asylum or nationality;


                    b)      any function conferred by or by  virtue  of  the
                       Immigration Acts on an Immigration Officer ...


           3)  A  person  exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,   in
              exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given to
              the person by the Secretary of State for the purpose of  sub-
              section (1).


    The latter is the  crucial,  case-by-case  duty  to  be  discharged  by
    decision makers and caseworkers.  It  is  formulated  in  terms  of  an
    unqualified duty.  The genesis of section 55 is found in a provision of
    international law, Article 3(1) of the UN Convention on the  Rights  of
    the Child ("UNCRC", 1989):

         "In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken  by  public
         or  private   social   welfare   institutions,   courts   of   law,
         administrative  authorities  or  legislative   bodies,   the   best
         interests of the child shall be a primary consideration."


     In the field of immigration, therefore, the  enactment  of  section  55
      discharges an international  law  obligation  of  the  UK  Government.
      While section 55  and  Article  3(1)  of  the  UNCRC  are  couched  in
      different terms, there may not be any major difference between them in
      substance, as the decided cases have shown. The final striking feature
      of section 55 is that it operates to protect all children who  are  in
      the United Kingdom: there is no qualification  such  as  residence  or
      nationality.

 7.  Section 55 has been considered by the United Kingdom Supreme  Court  in
      two cases.  These decisions demonstrate, inter alia,  the  interaction
      between section 55 and Article 8 ECHR.  While  these  provisions  have
      separate juridical identities, they are clearly associated. Thus where
      the Article 8 family life equation involves children,  section  55  is
      immediately engaged. In ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC4,  Baroness  Hale
      emphasised that the best interests of the  child  must  be  considered
      first - see paragraph [26] - while Lord Kerr stated:

         "[46]    ........   A primacy of importance must be accorded to his
             or her best interests.  This is not, it is agreed, a factor of
             limitless importance in the sense that it  will  prevail  over
             all other considerations.  It is a factor, however, that  must
             rank  higher  than  any  other.   It   is   not   merely   one
             consideration that  weighs  in  the  balance  alongside  other
             competing factors. Where  the  best  interests  of  the  child
             clearly  favour  a  certain  course,  that  course  should  be
             followed unless countervailing reasons of  considerable  force
             displace them."

              [Emphasis added]

      As was recognised in  Mansoor  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin), the onward march of the Strasbourg
      jurisprudence has involved the progressive  development  of  the  best
      interests of the child principle under Article 8.


8.   In ZH, Baroness Hale opined that Article 8 ECHR must be interpreted  in
    such a way that the best interests of relevant children are  a  primary
    consideration, while recognising that they may not necessarily  be  the
    paramount consideration: [33].  Thus the rights of other, adult  family
    members may be accorded lesser importance. In a passage  in  which  the
    1924 Geneva Declaration resonates strongly, she adverted to the "strong
    public interest in ensuring that children  are  properly  brought  up".
    Notably, echoing Lord Hope in the  Norris  case,  she  emphasised  that
    there is "no substitute for [a] careful examination  .......   [of  all
    the circumstances]" [34].  Thus:

         "[82]    ....   The Court will  need  to  know  whether  there  are
             dependent children,  whether  the  parent's  removal  will  be
             harmful to their interests and what  steps  can  be  taken  to
             mitigate this. ....  In the more usual case, where the  person
             whose extradition [or removal or deportation] is sought is not
             the sole or primary carer for the  children,  the  Court  will
             have to  consider  whether  there  are  any  special  features
             requiring further investigation of the  children's  interests,
             but in most cases it should be able to proceed  with  what  it
             has."

    I draw particular attention to [35] - [37] of the opinion  of  Baroness
    Hale. The thrust of these passages is that the initial  decision  maker
    must be properly informed.  In the context of discussing a pilot scheme
    to which the Supreme Court's attention had been  drawn,  Baroness  Hale
    stated, at [36]:

           "This  is  designed  to  improve  the  quality  of  the  initial
           decision, because the legal representative can assist the  'case
           owner' in establishing all the  facts  of  the  claim  before  a
           decision is made."

    Within these paragraphs one finds  references  to  gathering  evidence,
    asking the correct questions and interviewing the child concerned.

9.   More detailed prescription of the correct approach to  section  55  and
    its interaction with Article  8  ECHR  has  followed.   In   Zoumbas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  1  WLR  3690,  the
    Supreme Court  recently  considered  the  interplay  between  the  best
    interests of the child and Article 8 ECHR,  rehearsing  what  might  be
    termed a code devised by Lord Hodge comprising seven principles:

      (1)     The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
           proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR;


      (2)     In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
           be a primary consideration, although not always the only primary
           consideration;  and  the  child's  best  interests  do  not   of
           themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;


      (3)     Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
           the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,   no   other
           consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;


      (4)     While different judges might approach the question of the best
           interests of a child in different ways, it is important  to  ask
           oneself the right questions in an orderly  manner  in  order  to
           avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child  might  be
           undervalued when other important considerations were in play;


      (5) It is important to have a clear idea of  a  child's  circumstances
           and of what is in a  child's  best  interests  before  one  asks
           oneself whether those interests are outweighed by the  force  of
           other considerations;


      (6)     To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
           of all relevant factors  when  the  interests  of  a  child  are
           involved in an Article 8 assessment; and


      (7)     A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
           not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.

10.  The passages highlighted above seem to me to  support  the  proposition
    that in order to discharge the twofold, inter-related duties imposed by
    section 55 (i) to have regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the
    welfare of any children involved in the factual matrix in question  and
    (ii) to have regard to the Secretary of State's guidance, the  decision
    maker must be properly  informed.   I  consider  this  construction  of
    section 55 to be  dictated  by  its  content,  its  evident  underlying
    purpose, the aforementioned decisions of the Supreme Court and the well
    established  public  law  duty  to  have   regard   to   all   material
    considerations. The  outworkings of this discrete duty  were  expounded
    by Lord Diplock in Secretary of  State  for  Education  and  Science  v
    Metropolitan Borough Council of Tameside [1977] AC 1014, at 1065b, in a
    passage which has  particular resonance in the context of section 55:

         "......  It is for a court of law to determine whether it has  been
         established  that  in  reaching  his  decision  ............   [the
         Secretary of State] had directed himself properly in law and had in
         consequence taken into consideration the  matters  which  upon  the
         true construction of the  Act  he  ought  to  have  considered  and
         excluded from his consideration matters  that  were  irrelevant  to
         what he had to consider .....


         Or, put more compendiously, the question for the court is  did  the
         Secretary  of  State  ask  himself  the  right  question  and  take
         reasonable steps to acquaint himself with the relevant  information
         to enable him to answer it correctly?"

     Linked to this is another hallowed principle of public law, namely  the
    duty of the public  authority  concerned  to  promote  the  policy  and
    objects of the Act in giving effect to the relevant  power  or  duty  :
    Padfield - v - Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and  Food  [1968]  AC
    997, at 1030b/d per Lord Reid.  This overlay of public law duties, when
    applied to section  55,  should  serve  to  ensure  fulfilment  of  the
    underlying legislative purpose in every case.   These  principles  also
    give sustenance to the proposition that the duties enshrined in section
    55 cannot be properly performed by decision  makers  in  an  uninformed
    vacuum. Rather,  the  decision  maker  must  be  properly  equipped  by
    possession of a sufficiency of relevant information.

11.  I consider that, properly analysed, there are two  guiding  principles,
    each rooted in duty.  The first is that  the  decision  maker  must  be
    properly informed.  The second is that,  thus  equipped,  the  decision
    maker must conduct a careful examination of  all  relevant  information
    and factors.  These principles have a simple logical attraction,  since
    it is difficult to conceive how a decision maker  could  properly  have
    regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child or
    children concerned otherwise. Furthermore, they reflect long recognised
    standards of public law. Being adequately  informed  and  conducting  a
    scrupulous analysis are elementary prerequisites to  the  inter-related
    tasks of identifying the child's best interests and then balancing them
    with other material considerations.  This  balancing  exercise  is  the
    central feature of cases of the present type.  It cannot  realistically
    or sensibly be undertaken unless and  until  the  scales  are  properly
    prepared.

12.  The second of the duties imposed by section 55 is, per subsection  (3),
    to have regard to the statutory guidance promulgated by  the  Secretary
    of  State.   In  considering  whether  this  discrete  duty  has   been
    discharged in any given case, it will be necessary for the appellate or
    reviewing Court or Tribunal to take cognisance of the relevant guidance
    emanating  from  the  same  subsection,  juxtaposing  this   with   the
    representations and information  provided  by  the  person  or  persons
    concerned and the ensuing decision.  The guidance is an  instrument  of
    statutory authority to which the decision  maker  "must"  have  regard:
    there is no element of choice or discretion.   The  guidance  was  duly
    published in November 2009.   It  is  entitled  "Every  Child  Matters:
    Change for Children".  Notably, at paragraph 2.7 it contains  a  series
    of "principles" which are rehearsed in the context of a statement  that
    UKBA (the United Kingdom  Borders  Agency,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    agents)  "must .....   act according to ......." same.  Three of  these
    principles are worthy of particular note:

    (a)  Ethnic identity, language, religion, faith, gender and  disability
           are taken into account when  working  with  a  child  and  their
           family.


     (b) Children should be  consulted  and  the  wishes  and  feelings  of
           children taken into account whenever practicable when  decisions
           affecting them are made.


     (c) Children should have their applications dealt with in a timely way
           which minimises uncertainty.


    I consider  that  these  provisions,  considered  in  tandem  with  the
    principles enunciated by the Supreme Court and the  public  law  duties
    rehearsed above, envisage a process  of  deliberation,  assessment  and
    final decision  of  some  depth.    The  antithesis,  namely  something
    cursory, casual or superficial, will plainly not be in accordance  with
    the specific duty imposed by section 55(3) or the overarching  duty  to
    have regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the  welfare  of  any
    children involved in or affected by the relevant factual matrix.  Ditto
    cases where the decision making process and its product  entail  little
    more than giving lip service to the guidance.

13.  The question of whether the duties imposed  by  section  55  have  been
    duly performed in any given case will invariably be an  intensely  fact
    sensitive and contextual one.  In the real  world  of  litigation,  the
    tools available to the Court or tribunal considering this question will
    frequently, as in the present case, be confined to the  application  or
    submission made to the Secretary of State and the  ultimate  letter  of
    decision, as the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Baradaran  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department and Another [2014] EWCA  Civ
    854 graphically illustrates.  These materials will, therefore, call for
    scrupulous judicial examination in  every  case.  In  this  context,  I
    concur with the statement of Wyn Williams J  in  R  (TS)  v  SOSHD  and
    Northamptonshire CC [2010] EWHC 2614 (Admin), at [24]:

         "....  The terms of the written decision must be such  that  it  is
         clear that the substance of the duty was discharged."

    The question of whether the Secretary of State's decision is  expressed
    in adequate and satisfactory terms will inevitably be contextual.  Thus
    generalisations are to be avoided.

14.  One of the more  intriguing  questions  thrown  up  by  section  55  is
    whether it has a procedural dimension in  certain  cases.  Furthermore,
    does it impose a proactive duty of enquiry on the Secretary of  State's
    officials in some cases? And how does the  Tameside  principle  (supra)
    apply to decisions made in this sphere?  Another  interesting,  related
    question is whether, in a given case, a failure to conduct meetings  or
    interviews with an affected child and/or  its  parents,  or  others,  a
    course specifically envisaged by the statutory guidance, will give rise
    to a breach of section 55. It would seem surprising if  obligations  of
    this kind could never arise under the aegis of section  55.  This  view
    finds cogent support in the opinion of Baroness Hale in ZH (supra),  in
    a passage under the rubric "Consulting the Children", at [34]:

         "Acknowledging that the best interests  of  the  child  must  be  a
         primary  consideration  in  these  cases  immediately  raises   the
         question of how they are to be discovered.  An  important  part  of
         this is discovering the child's own views.   Article  12  of  UNCRC
         provides:


             '1.  States parties shall assure to the child who  is  capable
                  of forming his or her own views the right to express those
                  views freely in all matters affecting the child, the views
                  of the child being given due weight in accordance with the
                  age and maturity of the child.


             2.   For this  purpose,  the  child  shall  in  particular  be
                  provided the opportunity to be heard in any  judicial  and
                  administrative proceedings  affecting  the  child,  either
                  directly, or through a representative  or  an  appropriate
                  body, in a manner consistent with the procedural rules  of
                  national law.'"

    These questions do not, however,  arise directly in the  present  case,
    mainly because the  existence  of  the  three  children  concerned  was
    disclosed and a not insubstantial quantity of evidence relating to them
    was included in the application to the Secretary of  State  and  having
    regard to what I  consider  to  be  the  manifest  infirmities  in  the
    impugned decision (infra).  Thus I resist the temptation to embark upon
    an obiter excursus.

    Consideration and Conclusions

15.  As explained above, in a case of the present type much  attention  will
unavoidably be    focused on the  terms  of  the  decision  under  scrutiny.
Viewed particularly from the    perspective of section  55,  the  letter  of
decision in the present case invites the     following analysis:

    (a)   There  is  no  reference  to  any  of  the  relatively  extensive
         documentary materials submitted with the application  of  the  four
         Appellants.  Nor is there any engagement with the witness statement
         of the  mother  (the  first  Appellant),  which  describes  "family
         problems back home in Nigeria"; her  family's  disapproval  of  her
         relationship with the father  of  her  children  (the  other  three
         Appellants); the discontinuance of communications with  her  family
         to the extent that the first Appellant does not know  whether  they
         are alive or dead and, if alive, where they live;  the  educational
         progress and prowess of the oldest child  (the  second  Appellant);
         the integration of the family in United Kingdom life  and  culture;
         and the absence of any links with the mother's country  of  origin,
         Nigeria. None of these issues is addressed.  They  are  effectively
         airbrushed.

    (b)  The decision letter refers to only one child.  Though not entirely
        clear, it seems likely  that  this  is  the  oldest  of  the  three
        children.  No mention is made of the other two.  Furthermore,  none
        of the children is identified by name or initials or otherwise.


    (c)  The text of the decision letter indicates that  the  consideration
        given to the oldest  child  was  at  best  cursory.   There  is  no
        engagement, even superficially, with the  evidence  presented  with
        the application.


     d) The suggestion that  the  mother  will  be  "able  to  support  her
        children while they become used to living" in Nigeria  was  neither
        contained in nor supported by the information in the application to
        the Secretary of State or any other source of information  and  has
        been subsequently belied by the evidence given to  both  Tribunals.
        Furthermore, no analysis, even superficial, of what such  "support"
        would entail is undertaken. The  decision  maker  appears  to  have
        succumbed  to  conjecture.  The  public  law  misdemeanour  thereby
        committed was the familiar one of leaving out of  account  material
        considerations and/or lapsing  into  the  prohibited  territory  of
        irrationality. An alternative  analysis,  now  firmly  embedded  in
        contemporary public law, is  that  material  errors  of  fact  were
        committed by the decision maker.

    (e)  The purported consideration of the best interests of the  children
         makes no reference whatever to the statutory  guidance,  explicitly
         or implicitly. There is no indication that the decision  maker  was
         even aware of the guidance.

    (f)  The relevant passage conflates a series of issues, some  of  which
         have no  proper  bearing  on  the  childrens'  best  interests:  in
         particular,  the  mother's  immigration  history,  her   precarious
         immigration status when the children were  born  and  the  mother's
         failure to depart the United Kingdom  sooner.  This  recitation  of
         "proportionality adverse" factors occurs in a passage which  begins
         with a reference to section 55, followed  immediately  by  a  blunt
         self-congratulatory conclusion.

    (g)  The  passage  in  question  also  highlights  a  consideration  of
         questionable propriety, namely the unlawful immigration  status  of
         the childrens' estranged father. Neither the combined  applications
         being determined nor the ensuing decisions concerned this person.

     The conclusion that the consideration given to the  need  to  safeguard
    and promote the welfare of the three children  concerned  was  woefully
    inadequate is irresistible.

16.  I consider that the information submitted was not properly  considered.
    No other analysis commends itself. Fundamentally, there is no  analysis
    of the best interests of any of the children in  the  decision  letter.
    Furthermore, I find  no  warrant  for  inferring  that  a  proper  best
    interests exercise was conducted by the decision maker or others,  even
    though not expressed in the  decision  letter.  The  next  question  is
    whether the second of the duties imposed by section 55, namely to  have
    regard to  the  statutory  guidance,  was  discharged.   This  guidance
    features nowhere in the letter of decision, explicitly  or  implicitly.
    I consider that there is no basis for inferring that it was considered,
    properly or at all.

17.   In its determination,  the  FtT  did  not  subject  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to the kind of analysis conducted above.  The  section
    55 duties feature nowhere in the determination and there is no mention,
    even oblique, of the statutory guidance.  The FtT  failed  to  consider
    whether the Secretary of State had complied with either  duty.   As  my
    analysis makes clear, I consider that the  FtT  should  have  concluded
    that the Secretary of State's officials had  failed  to  discharge  the
    duties imposed by section 55 to have regard to the  need  to  safeguard
    and promote the welfare of the children concerned and to have regard to
    the statutory guidance. It did not do so. This is the fundamental error
    of law infecting the FtT's decision.

18.  The second clearly identifiable error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    FtT is the failure to recognise that the oldest child  of  the  family,
    the second Appellant, was capable of succeeding under  the  Immigration
    Rules, as set out in [3] above.  While this  was  acknowledged  in  the
    decision letters (and, as noted above, is accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State), the Judge failed to address this, as is clear from
    [16] of the determination and the ensuing passages.   As  a  result  of
    this error, the Judge gave no consideration to the relevant  provisions
    of the Rules and the tests enshrined therein.  Thus, in particular, the
    Judge did not review whether the Secretary of State's assessment of the
    requirement that "it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom", always one of the key  questions  under  the
    rule in question, was in accordance with the  law.    I  consider  this
    error of law to be plainly material, since the outcome could have  been
    different if it had been avoided.

    DECISION


19.  For the reasons elaborated above, I conclude that the decision  of  the
    FtT is infected by errors of law, the  materiality  whereof  is  beyond
    plausible dispute.  Accordingly:

         (i)   I set aside the  decision  under  section  12(2)(a)   of  the
             Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

          ii) Being satisfied that no further hearing is necessary,  I  re-
              make the decision in this forum, in accordance  with  section
              12(2)(b)(ii).  As the Secretary of State's decision  was  not
              in accordance with the law, for the reasons elaborated above,
              I allow the appeal.


20.  It will now be incumbent on the  Secretary  of  State  to  re-make  the
    decision in accordance with this judgment.




                                    [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER





Note:

This Determination  has  been  corrected  under  rule  42  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 so as to rectify the accidental  error
in [2] of the version first  promulgated  suggesting  that  the  Appellants'
human rights applications had been  certified  as  clearly  unfounded  under
section 94(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  There
was no such certification.

BMcC


