

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Babajanov (Continuity of residence - Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006)
[2013] UKUT 00513 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 August 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                               IGOR BABAJANOV

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss B Asanovic, Counsel, instructed by Turpin &
Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


   1)  The  right  of  permanent  residence  under  regulation  15  of   the
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  is  capable  of
      being established whilst a national of a  Member  State  or  a  family
      member of that national is outside the host country.


   2) Leaving aside military service, the reasons for that absence must come
      within regulation 3(2) (which corresponds  with  provisions  16(3)  of
      Directive 2004/38/EC).  The specific reasons  set  out  in  regulation
      3(2)(c) are not exhaustive, given the phrase "such as", which precedes
      them; but the absence must be for "an important reason".


   3) Accordingly, in determining whether a period of absence  falls  within
      regulation 3(2)(c), regard must be had to the purpose giving  rise  to
      that absence.  The purpose needs to be of an importance comparable  to
      those specified in  regulation  3(2)(c)  and  involve  (i)  compelling
      events and/or (ii) an activity linked to the exercise of Treaty rights
      in the host country.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

ERROR OF LAW

 1. We found an error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for reasons given in our decision dated 22 May 2013 which  was
    in these terms:

         "1.  The claimant, who is a citizen of Azerbaijan born 11 May 1991,
             appeals with permission the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge Hart TD who dismissed his appeal against  the  Secretary
             of State's decision dated 19 April 2012 refusing  to  issue  a
             document certifying permanent residence by the claimant in the
             United Kingdom under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
             Regulations 2006 (as amended).

         2.   The claimant was the second appellant in the appeal before the
             First-tier  Tribunal;  his  mother,   also   a   national   of
             Azerbaijan, succeeded on the basis of the judge's finding that
             she  had  acquired  and  not  lost  her  right  of   permanent
             residence.

         3.   The short immigration history  of  the  parties  is  that  the
             claimant's mother married  an  Irish  national  called  Thomas
             McLean on 17 May 2003.  They had met in Azerbaijan.   In  June
             2003 he returned to the United Kingdom.  The claimant and  his
             mother were issued with a family permit and travelled  to  the
             United Kingdom on 30 April 2004.  They had previously been  in
             Ireland for a period that year.  Residence cards  were  issued
             to the claimant and his mother on 8 August 2005 due to  expire
             in July 2010 and the family took up residence in this country.
               On  7  August  2008  the  family,  including  the  claimant,
             travelled to Ireland where his mother gave birth to a daughter
             born 8 February 2009.  She returned with her daughter  to  the
             United Kingdom on 2 April  2009.   The  claimant  remained  in
             Ireland until he returned to the United Kingdom in June  2010.
             He endeavoured unsuccessfully to find employment  in  Ireland.
             He also undertook a course of study.

         4.   Following expiry of the residence cards for the  claimant  and
             his mother, in  July  2010  applications  were  made  for  new
             residence cards which were issued in March  2011  following  a
             successful appeal against an initial refusal which  was  heard
             on 4 February 2011.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that
             Mr Mclean was a qualified person between June 2003 and  August
             2008.

         5.   On 3 January 2012 the claimant's mother ceased cohabiting with
             Mr Mclean following a deterioration  in  their  marriage  from
             July 2011.  The claimant (who turned 21 on 10  May  2012)  and
             his mother applied for permanent residence cards on  19  March
             2012.

         6.   In allowing the appeal by  the  claimant's  mother  the  judge
             concluded that by 30  April  2009  (and  thus  after  she  had
             returned to the  United  Kingdom);  (i)  she  had  acquired  a
             permanent right of residence and, (ii)  had  not  been  absent
             from the United Kingdom  since  then  save  for  brief  visits
             between 16 May and August 2009 to  her  husband's  parents  in
             addition to visits which she had made to  Russia.   The  judge
             was satisfied that all these visits were less than  two  years
             and as a consequence she had not lost her right  to  permanent
             residence.

         7.   As to the claimant, after  considering  the  decision  by  the
             Court of Justice of  the  European  Union  in  Dias  (European
             citizenship] [2011] 21 July 2011 and the accompanying  opinion
             of the Advocate General, the judge reached these conclusions:

             (i)  The claimant was the dependant child of  his  mother  who
                  was the spouse of an EEA national and that  until  10  May
                  2012 he was the direct descendant of his mother  and  aged
                  under 21.

             (ii) The claimant's absence in Ireland had been for 22  months
                  and that this exceeded permitted absences  of  six  months
                  and  exceptionally,  twelve  months  (with  reference   to
                  Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations).

             (iii)    It was  accepted  that  (these  absences)  broke  the
                  continuity of  the  claimant's  residence  in  the  United
                  Kingdom as the dependant child of Mr McLean's spouse.

             (iv)     Having now reached the age of  21,  ceased  education
                  and established his  own  independent  life,  it  was  not
                  asserted that the claimant remained dependent upon  either
                  Mr McLean or his mother.

         8.   The judge noted argument  from  the  claimant's  counsel  that
             these absences should not bar him from a  right  of  permanent
             residence, however he went on  to  find  that  the  claimant's
             residence in the United Kingdom was broken when  he  travelled
             on 7 August 2008 to Ireland and did not return until June 2010
             during which he had lived with his  stepfather's  parents  and
             had undertaken education.

         9.   According  to  the  judge,  the  inherent  difficulty  in  the
             claimant's case was that he had not resided in the host member
             state for  a  period  of  22  months  and  was  not  therefore
             integrated in this country for that period.  The judge did not
             consider the decision in  Dias  to  be  authority  for  adding
             together two separate periods of  residence  in  one  country,
             "interspersed with a long continuous gap overseas to  assemble
             a period for five years continuous residence".

         10.  An argument based on proportionality was also advanced by  the
             claimant's counsel based on him having attained a  significant
             degree of integration in the United  Kingdom.   This  did  not
             persuade the judge who considered it a stumbling block that he
             had "... not acquired a degree of integration  in  the  United
             Kingdom when he spent 22 months in Ireland returning  only  in
             June   2010".    Whilst   acknowledging   the    concept    of
             proportionality in reg. 21 of the 2006 Regulations. he did not
             consider that this applied to  the  grant  of  recognition  of
             permanent residence after a period for absence "... which does
             not comply with the precise Regulations".

         11.  We heard argument from Miss Asanovic supported by  a  detailed
             skeleton argument and a reply from Mr Bramble who acknowledged
             some  difficulties  with   the   judge's   determination   but
             steadfastly maintained that such errors were not material.  We
             announced our decision at the hearing that we  were  satisfied
             the judge had made a material error of law on the first ground
             advanced by Miss Asanovic and adjourned the case for a further
             hearing in order to remake the decision, taking account of any
             new evidence the claimant wished to produce about his stay  in
             Ireland and further argument on the second ground.

         12.  The reasons for our decision are as follows.

         13.  In respect of the first ground, Miss Asanovic was content that
             reg. 3(2) correctly transposed Article  16  of  the  Directive
             2004/58/EC.  The only discernible difference is  that  Article
             16(3) provides that "continuity  of  residence  shall  not  be
             affected by temporary absences ...." whereas  Regulation  3(2)
             provides that, "Continuity of residence  is  not  affected  by
             ..."

         14.  We therefore will consider this appeal in accordance with  the
             terms of the 2006 Regulations.  Relevant to our  decision  are
             Regulations 15 and 3(2) as follows:


                  'Regulation 15 - Permanent right of residence


                  (1)  The following persons  shall  acquire  the  right  to
                      reside in the United Kingdom permanently -


                      (a)  an EEA national who has resided  in  the  United
                           Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations  for
                           a continuous period of five years;


                      (b)  a family member of an EEA national  who  is  not
                           himself an EEA national but who  has  resided  in
                           the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA  national  in
                           accordance   with   these   Regulations   for   a
                           continuous period of five years; ..."


                  (2)   [The]  right  of  permanent  residence  under   this
                      Regulation shall be lost only  through  absence  from
                      the  United  Kingdom  for  a  period  exceeding   two
                      consecutive years."

         15.  Regulation 3(2) provides:

                  (2)  Continuity of residence is not affected by -

                      (a)  periods of absence from the United Kingdom which
                           do not exceed six months in total in any year;

                      (b)  periods of absence from the  United  Kingdom  on
                           military service; or

                      (c)  any one absence  from  the  United  Kingdom  not
                           exceeding twelve months for an  important  reason
                           such  as  pregnancy  and  child  birth,   serious
                           illness,  study  or  vocational  training  or  an
                           overseas posting.'

         16.   The  first  ground  of  application  argues  that  no  formal
             admissions were made to the effect that it had  been  admitted
             that the continuity  of  residence  had  been  broken  by  the
             claimant's absence for 22 months in Ireland.  We  accept  this
             having regard to the subsequent findings by the judge at  [60]
             that the claimant's residence in the United Kingdom was broken
             by the Irish absence.  There would have been no need for  such
             a finding to be made had there been  a concession.

         17.  In her oral argument,  Miss  Asanovic  distinguished  presence
             from residence so that a period of  absence  from  the  United
             Kingdom did not of itself break "residence". She  argued  that
             neither  the  Directive  nor  the  Regulations   states   that
             temporary absences longer than those provided for in reg. 3(2)
             automatically broke continuity of residence. Whether it did or
             not was a matter to be determined by the Member State  with  a
             view to the principles of proportionality and the  purpose  of
             Article 6  of  the  Directive  being  applied.   The  examples
             provided in reg. 3(2) are not exhaustive.

         18.  We will need further argument on the approach urged on  us  by
             Miss Asanovic on the meaning of "residence".  However  we  are
             satisfied that the judge did not turn his mind specifically to
             this and he appears  to  have  proceeded  on  the  basis  that
             residence in the United Kingdom equates to presence  here  and
             failed to consider whether it was possible for the claimant to
             retain residence in the United Kingdom within the  meaning  of
             the 2006 Regulations whilst absent.  We will to  hear  further
             on whether  an  absence  of  longer  than  the  twelve  months
             referred to in reg. 3(2) means, without more, that  continuity
             of residence is broken.

         19.  The further issue that needs to be considered is this. If  the
             claimant is able  to  establish  that  he  had  not  lost  his
             residence in the United Kingdom during the first nine  of  the
             22 months he was away in Ireland (having regard to the reasons
             for his  absence),  had  he  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
             residence whilst outside the country which was not  undermined
             by his continuing absence which in total did  not  exceed  two
             months?   The  findings  of  fact  of  the   judge   are   not
             sufficiently clear for us to confidently  address  this  point
             and hence the need for further evidence.

         20.  The second ground raises the issue that even if there had been
             a technical break in the continuity of  residence,  could  the
             claimant aggregate periods spent in the United Kingdom  before
             and after his 22 months' absence. We  will  need  to  consider
             this possibility which will only arise if the  claimant  fails
             to establish that he had not broken continuity of residence by
             the time nine months had expired into his stay in  Ireland  by
             when, coupled  with  his  previous  residence  in  the  United
             Kingdom for four years three months, he had been  resident  in
             the United Kingdom for five years  or  alternatively  had  not
             broken his continuity of residence at all due to  the  reasons
             for his absence.

         21.  A Preliminary Ruling on interpreting the  two  conditions  for
             the acquisition of the right under Article 16(3) Sub-Directive
             2004/38/EC  has  been  sought  and  we  shall   give   further
             consideration this at the resumed hearing.

         22.  That hearing is to take place on 19 August  2013  at  10  a.m.
             with half a day set aside for this purpose.

         23.  The claimant is directed to file with the Upper  Tribunal  and
             serve on the respondent any new  evidence  (including  witness
             statements of any witnesses who are to be called which  should
             stand as the evidence in chief) no later then 14  days  before
             19 August 2013."

RE-MAKING THE DECISION - THE EVIDENCE

 2. At the resumed hearing on 19 August we heard evidence from the claimant
    and his mother. They were accompanied by Mr  Maclean  but  he  was  not
    tendered.  We reserved our determination.

 3. Although there were some discrepancies in the evidence that emerged  in
    the course of hearing when considered with that given before the First-
    tier Tribunal and as between the witnesses at the hearing before us, Mr
    Bramble did not take any issue on credibility.  We consider that he was
    sensible to do so as the inconsistencies principally arose out  of  the
    claimants' understanding of matters when he was a minor.

 4. The time frame of events is important  in  this  appeal.  The  relevant
    dates are set out in paragraphs 3 to 5 of our  error  of  law  decision
    above. Reminding us of the most significant dates, 30  April  2009  was
    the fifth anniversary of the arrival of the claimant and his mother  in
    the United Kingdom with a family permit. By then the claimant's  mother
    had returned to the United Kingdom and will  have  benefited  from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal that  by  30  April  2009  she  had
    acquired a right of permanent residence which she had not lost  through
    any absence.  The claimant joined his mother in the United  Kingdom  in
    June 2010 following a completion of a course of study in  Ireland.   By
    then he had been outside the United Kingdom for 22 months.

 5. Taking into account the evidence  we  heard  at  the  hearing  and  the
    statements adopted, the following core facts have been  established:

      i) Whilst in the United Kingdom the claimant  studied  at  John  Mason
         School from 2004 until 2008 when he was awarded certain GSCEs.

     ii) The decision to go to Ireland in August 2008 was  made  jointly  by
         the claimant's mother and his stepfather, the  purpose  being  that
         she should give birth there. Their daughter  was  born  8  February
         2009.

    iii) The claimant as a  minor  travelled  to  Ireland  on  his  mother's
         passport. Her wish was that he should not be idle and wanted him to
         work or study. The claimant endeavoured to enrol at  a  college  in
         Ireland for a higher diploma course in  March  2009.   The  college
         considered he was not suitable for that  course  and  he  therefore
         pursued a foundation course at the Ballyfermot College  of  Further
         Education in Art evidenced by an  award  dated  7  July  2010  with
         results ranging from distinction (for 6 units) merit  (for  2)  and
         pass (for 1) all of which were assessed in May  2010.   The  course
         fees were paid by the claimant's mother and stepfather.

     iv) The claimant's mother visited the United Kingdom on occasion whilst
         she was in  Ireland.  The  claimant  received  his  own  Azerbaijan
         passport before his graduation but he did not accompany his  mother
         on those visits. He understood that he  did  not  return  with  his
         mother in March 2009 because she could not afford for him to travel
         with her.  Her explanation was  that  there  was  no  accommodation
         available for her son as she planned to stay  with  a  friend.  Her
         long term plan was for him to return to  the United  Kingdom.   She
         had not given thought to any  financial  implications  of  her  son
         accompanying her.

      v) On his return to the United Kingdom in June 2010 the  claimant  re-
         established contact with his close friends whose identities he gave
         at the hearing.  The claimant has had a succession  of  jobs  since
         his return, the most recent involving accounting work  in  a  bingo
         hall.

 6. We conclude that by the time the  claimant  and  his  mother  left  the
    United Kingdom, they were integrated here and had built up connections.
     The purpose in going to Ireland was only a  temporary  one.   Why  the
    claimant did not return with  his  mother  was  for  a  combination  of
    reasons and  it  appears  on  balance  that  the  absence  of  suitable
    accommodation and the desirability that the  claimant  should  complete
    the course of studies he was pursuing were the principal ones.

THE ISSUES

 7. Echoing the issues we identified in  our  error  of  law  decision  and
    taking account of Miss Asanovic's most recent skeleton argument we need
    to address the following questions:

      i) Did the claimant remain continuously resident in the United Kingdom
         for the purposes of Directive 2004/38/EC ("the Citizens Directive")
         and the Regulations on 30 April 2009 notwithstanding  his  presence
         in Ireland?

     ii) If so, would the claimant have acquired by 30 April 2009 a right of
         permanent residence in the United Kingdom?

    iii) What is the effect on any right of permanent residence the claimant
         may have had of his mother returning to the United Kingdom  without
         him, one month before the fifth anniversary?

     iv) On the assumption the claimant had acquired a  right  of  permanent
         residence by 30 April 2009 what is the effect on that right of  the
         claimant continuing to live in Ireland until June 2010?

      v) If the claimant is unable to demonstrate  that  by  virtue  of  his
         absence from the United Kingdom from August 2008 or from his mother
         returning in March 2009, can the periods of residence in the United
         Kingdom disregarding the interlude in Ireland be aggregated for the
         purposes of establishing a right of permanent residence?

 8. We were referred to a number of authorities including

      a) Lassal [2010] EUECJ Case C- 1629/09

      b) Tsakouridis [2009] EUECJ Case C - 145/09

      c) Dias [2011] EUECJ Case C-325/09

      d) Onuekwere (Imprisonment - residence) [2012] UKUT 00269 (IAC)

      e) Essa (EEA: rehabilitation - integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC)

      f) Teixeira [2010] EUECJ Case C-480/08

SUBMISSIONS

 9. In the course of her submissions, Miss Asanovic confirmed there was  no
    authority on the question whether a permanent right of residence in the
    host country can  be  acquired  whilst  someone  is  outside  the  host
    country.

10. We have set out above the relevant Regulations in paragraphs 14 and  15
    of our error of law decision but we repeat them for ease  of  reference
    below:



                  "Regulation 15 - Permanent right of residence


                  (1)  The following persons  shall  acquire  the  right  to
                      reside in the United Kingdom permanently -


                      (a)  an EEA national who has resided  in  the  United
                           Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations  for
                           a continuous period of five years;


                      (b)  a family member of an EEA national  who  is  not
                           himself an EEA national but who  has  resided  in
                           the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA  national  in
                           accordance   with   these   Regulations   for   a
                           continuous period of five years;


                                    ...


                  (2)   [The]  right  of  permanent  residence  under   this
                      Regulation shall be lost only  through  absence  from
                      the  United  Kingdom  for  a  period  exceeding   two
                      consecutive years."

                  Continuity of Residence

                  3.   (1)  This  regulation  applies  for  the  purpose  of
                     calculating periods of     continuous residence in the
                     United Kingdom under regulation  5(1)  and  regulation
                     15.

                     (2)   Continuity of residence is not affected by -

                     (a)   periods of absence from the United Kingdom which
                           do not exceed six months in total in any year;

                     (b)   periods of absence from the  United  Kingdom  on
                           military service; or

                     (c)   any one absence  from  the  United  Kingdom  not
                           exceeding twelve months for an  important  reason
                           such  as  pregnancy  and  child  birth,   serious
                           illness,  study  or  vocational  training  or  an
                           overseas posting."

11.  As we observed in the error of law decision  there  is  only  a  minor
    difference  between  the  provision  in  Article  16  of  the  Citizens
    Directive and the above Regulations (shall in lieu of  is)  in  Article
    16(3).  The full text of Article 16 is as follows:

         "Article 16

         General Rules for Citizens and their Family Members

         1.   Union citizens who  have  resided  legally  for  a  continuous
             period of five years in the host Member State shall  have  the
             right of permanent residence there.  This right shall  not  be
             subject to the conditions provided for in Chapter III.

         2.   Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family  members  who  are  not
             nationals of a member state and have legally resided with  the
             Union citizen in the host Member State for a continuous period
             of five years.

         3.   Continuity of residence shall not  be  affected  by  temporary
             absences not exceeding a total number of six months  a  years,
             or by absence  of  longer  duration  for  compulsory  military
             service, or by one absence of  a  maximum  twelve  consecutive
             months for important  reasons  such  as  pregnancy  and  child
             birth, serious illness, study or  vocational  training,  or  a
             posting in another Member State or a third country.

         4.   Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be  lost
             only through absence from the host Member State for  a  period
             exceeding two consecutive years."

12. We were also directed to recitals in the preamble to the  Directive  by
    Mr Bramble:

         "17. Enjoyment of permanent residence by Union  citizens  who  have
             chosen to settle long term  in  the  host  Member  State  will
             strengthen the feeling of  Union  citizenship  and  is  a  key
             element in promoting social cohesion,  which  is  one  of  the
             fundamental objectives of the  Union.  A  right  of  permanent
             residence should therefore be laid down for all Union citizens
             and their family members who have resided in the  host  member
             state in compliance with the  conditions  laid  down  in  this
             Directive during a continuous period  of  five  years  without
             becoming subject to an expulsion measure.

         18.  In order to be a genuine  vehicle  for  integration  into  the
             society of the host Member State in which  the  Union  citizen
             resides, the right of permanent residence, once attained shall
             not be subject to any conditions."

13. In summary Mr Bramble's submissions were

      i) When read with Recital 17 of the preamble, Article 16 has as a  key
         element a choice to settle long term (in the host country) and  the
         Directive is quite clear as to the level of integration required.

     ii) The categories in reg 3(2) were exhaustive.

    iii) Any time spent outside the United Kingdom cannot count towards  the
         qualifying period except for reasonable absences.

     iv) If the absence exceeds the periods provided for in Reg. 3(2)  there
         is no opportunity to aggregate  and  the  accumulation  must  begin
         again.

      v) Such rights as the claimant had acquired before leaving for Ireland
         had been  lost and he therefore cannot succeed in obtaining a right
         of permanent residence.

     vi) With reference to the decision in Dias, the claimant's absence  for
         22 months resulted in him losing his rights. This receives  support
         from the decision in Onuekwere.

    vii) With reference to Reg. 15(1)(b)  there  is  no  difference  between
         presence and residence.

14.  Miss Asanovic developed aspects of her most recent  skeleton  argument
    in the course of her submissions. In summary the skeleton argues:

      i) There is nothing on the face of  the  Directive  to  state  that  a
         person must be present in the Member State in order  to  claim  the
         right  of  permanent  residence.   It  is  contrary  to  the  basic
         principles  of  interpretation  of  Union  law  to  interpret  this
         differently. An interpretation  contrary  to  residence  not  being
         equated with presence would deprive the national of residence which
         includes absences of its meaning in the context of Article 16. This
         provides that some absences would count and some would not.

     ii) Given that the purpose of permanent residence is  integration,  how
         can it be said  that  a  person  who  had  an  unbroken  period  of
         residence with no absences during four  years  followed  by  twelve
         months for important reasons is less integrated than the person who
         was present in the member state for two years, absent for  one  and
         then present for another two years with reference to  the  analysis
         of purpose in  Teixeira  at  [38]?  Such  an  interpretation  would
         deprive the provision for permitted absences of any useful  effect.
         If that approach is adopted no anomaly is created, given that  once
         one has acquired a permanent rights  of  residence,  loss  of  that
         right by virtue of loss of level of integration is by reference  to
         an absence of more than two years.

    iii) As to whether the claimant's continuity of residence in the  United
         Kingdom was interrupted having regard to his mother returning on  2
         April 2009 (an absence  of  seven  months  and  26  days)  and  the
         claimant remaining for an additional 28 days before qualifying  for
         permanent  residence,  it  is  disproportionate  to   assess   that
         additional absence as not falling into the  category  of  permitted
         absences.  Had the claimant returned with his  mother  on  2  April
         2009 to the United Kingdom and gone back to Ireland to commence and
         complete  his  studies,  he  would  have  also  acquired  permanent
         residence and his subsequent absence would  have  been  immaterial.
         The claimant had not taken any steps which reflected  an  intention
         of living in Ireland nor had he become  integrated  there  and  his
         absence in any event was less than twelve months in duration.

     iv) The right of residence for the claimant  is  a  reflection  of  the
         purpose of maintaining family unity of a migrant worker's family in
         the context of which the  principle  of  freedom  of  movement  for
         workers must be given a broad interpretation, see  Lassal.

      v) Dias  is  authority  for  the  proposition  that  "the  integration
         objective which lies behind acquisition of the right  of  permanent
         residence ... is based not only on territorial and time factors but
         also on qualitative elements relating to the level  of  integration
         in the host  Member  State".  [64]   There  is  nothing  about  the
         claimant's presence in Ireland the United Kingdom to 30 April  2009
         that indicates that he lost his integration in the UK.

     vi) In the alternative the whole period of  22  months  he  was  absent
         needs to be assessed on the basis of the principles in  Tsakouridis
         and the conclusion of the court at [33]:

             'The national  authorities  responsible  for  applying  Article
             28(3) of the Directive 2004/38 are required  to  take  all  the
             relevant factors into consideration in each individual case, in
             particular the duration of each period of absence from the host
             Member State, the cumulative  duration  and  the  frequency  of
             those absences, and the reasons why the person  concerned  left
             the host Member State.  It must be  ascertained  whether  those
             absences involved the transfer to another State of  the  centre
             of the personal, family or occupational interests of the person
             concerned.'

    vii) As to whether the  period  of  residence  can  be  aggregated,  the
         principles in Dias at [62] are applicable to the present  situation
         for the claimant and with reference to Essa which provides that for
         the purposes of the qualifying period of residence  periods  before
         and after incarceration can be aggregated.

   viii) This remains the case if there had been an absence for an important
         reason, where the centre of one's  life  had  not  moved  elsewhere
         (Tsakouridis)  and  the  quality  of  integration  had   not   been
         compromised through absences (Dias).

15. Miss Asanovic's skeleton ends with a request for  a  reference  broadly
    along the lines that when interpreting the conditions for the acquiring
    of the right under Article 16(3)  is  the  National  Court  obliged  to
    interpret permissible periods  of  absence  which  have  no  impact  on
    acquisition of permanent residence literally as being  no  longer  than
    twelve months in duration or assess them in the light of their  length,
    purpose and impact on  the  quality  of  the  integration.  This  short
    summary does not do justice to the detailed points of  reference  which
    we have been invited to make. We indicated to Miss Asanovic that if our
    view is that reference is required, we would invite further submissions
    from the parties.

OUR CONCLUSIONS

16. Article 16(3) of  Directive  2004/58/EC  provides  that  continuity  of
    residence for  the  purposes  of  establishing  a  right  of  permanent
    residence shall not be affected by  temporary  absences  which  do  not
    exceed a total of six months a year. There is no requirement to explore
    the purpose or reason for that absence which is described  solely  with
    reference to the duration of time.  Longer absences  for  an  undefined
    period for compulsory military service are also deemed  not  to  affect
    continuity of residence.  Separate from these two categories is a third
    which provides that one absence of  a  maximum  of  twelve  consecutive
    months shall not affect continuity of  residence,  "...  for  important
    reasons such as pregnancy and child birth, serious  illness,  study  or
    vocational training or a posting  in  another  Member  State  or  third
    country".

17. We consider that the right of permanent residence under  regulation  15
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 is capable
    of being established whilst a national of a Member State  or  a  family
    member of that national  is  outside  the  host  country  provided  the
    reasons for the absence come within Article 16(3) (and reg  3(2)).  The
    reasons in these provisions are not exhaustive  in  the  light  of  the
    reference to "such as" (reg 3 (2)(c)) but the absence must  be  for  an
    important reason. For the interpretation of that phrase,  regard  needs
    to be had to the purpose giving rise to the absence.  The purpose needs
    to  be  of  a  kind  comparable  to  those  illustrated  which  embrace
    compelling events and/or an activity which by implication, is linked to
    the exercise  of  treaty  rights  in  the  UK.  The  reason  should  be
    sufficiently compelling to require the Union citizen (or family member)
    to leave the host  Member  State  for  a  purpose  connected  with  his
    continued integration in that Member State or  for  a  reason  that  is
    triggered  by  considerations  of  importance  that  need  to  be   met
    notwithstanding that integration.

18. As observed in Dias ( where the court notes the Opinion of the Advocate
    General)  at [64]:

         "In that regard, it should be noted as  the  Advocate  General  has
         stated in points 106 and 107 in her Opinion, that  the  integration
         objective which  lies  behind  the  acquisition  of  the  right  of
         permanent residence laid down in Article  16(1)  of  the  Directive
         2004/38 is based not only on territorial and time factors but  also
         on qualitative elements, relating to the level  of  integration  in
         the host Member State."

19. It follows therefore that the purpose  of  absence  of  not  more  than
    twelve  months  must  be  examined  in  the  light  of  the  degree  of
    integration present in the host Member State before the absence and the
    manner in which that integration has been affected by the absence.

20. In the case of the claimant, he was a minor  at  the  time  his  mother
    decided to go to Ireland to give birth.  Her decision to go to  Ireland
    was for a reason provided for in Article 16(3) (and reg  15).   As  her
    son and a minor, the claimant was not taking a decision of his  own  in
    travelling with her to Ireland.  Her decision to return to  the  United
    Kingdom without the claimant seven months and twenty six days after her
    departure did not arise out of a decision by her that he should  remain
    in Ireland permanently but because there was  inadequate  accommodation
    for him in the United Kingdom.  The further reason was because  of  the
    time which had already been invested in the claimant pursuing a  course
    of studies.

21. Accordingly we are satisfied that the decision by the claimant's mother
    that he should accompany her to Ireland did not result in  a  break  in
    the continuity of his residence in the United Kingdom  and  furthermore
    her decision to return to the United Kingdom without him similarly  did
    not result in a break of the continuity of his UK residence.   We  have
    quoted above in our summary of the submissions from Miss  Asanovic  the
    relevant passage from Tsakouridis at [33].  We are satisfied there  was
    not a transfer of parental responsibility from the claimant's mother to
    another party and accordingly  the  fact  that  the  claimant  did  not
    accompany his mother did not mean that by 30 April 2009 he  had  broken
    the continuity of  his UK residence.

22. Since the circumstances of the claimant fall within regulation 3(2)  we
    are satisfied that by 30 April 2009 the claimant had acquired  a  right
    of right of permanent residence in the United Kingdom.

23. The next question relates to the impact on that right of the claimant's
    continued absence from the United Kingdom  until  June  2010.   Article
    16(4) (and regulation 15  (1A)(2))  provides  the  answer.  We  do  not
    consider it necessary therefore to examine the nature of the claimant's
    absence after he acquired the right of permanent  residence  unless  it
    can be said he was away for more than 24 months.  He returned 22 months
    after his departure and accordingly had not lost his right of permanent
    residence.

24. In the light of these findings it is  unnecessary  for  us  to  journey
    further into the questions posited at [7].

25. For the reasons we have given above the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
    error of law.  We set aside its decision insofar as the appeal  by  the
    claimant is concerned.  We allow  his appeal.




Signed                                  Date 2 October 2013
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


