
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          KK (Application of GJ) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00512 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination sent           |
|On 12 August 2013                             |On 30 September 2013         |
|Prepared on 13 September 2013                 |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between


                                     KK

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed by TRP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

There is no merit in the argument that the country guidance  given  by  this
tribunal in GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
UKUT 00319 (IAC) is not  rational  or  that  it  is  inconsistent  with  the
evidence which had been accepted by the tribunal.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who was born on 3 August 1985,  is  a  national  of  Sri
    Lanka.  He entered this country on a student visa on 24 June 2009.   On
    27 July 2011, he claimed asylum, but this was  refused  on  12  October
    2011.  The respondent also made a decision on the same date  to  remove
    the appellant as an illegal entrant.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before Immigration Judge Lobo, sitting at Taylor House on  22  November
    2011,  but  in  a  determination  prepared  on  25  November  2011  and
    promulgated shortly thereafter, Judge Lobo  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  against  this  decision,  and  was   granted
    permission  by  a  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  February  2012.
    Subsequently, following a hearing at Field House on 8 June 2012,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Allen found that there had been an error of law in Judge
    Lobo's  determination,  in  that  he  had  failed  to   give   adequate
    consideration to the guidance of this Tribunal in the country  guidance
    case of TK, but Judge Allen then went  on  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
    reconsideration.  It is not necessary for the purposes of  this  appeal
    to set out Judge Allen's reasons.

 4. The appellant appealed against Judge Allen's decision to the  Court  of
    Appeal, and was given permission  to  appeal  by  Moore-Bick  LJ  on  7
    January 2013, who observed that it was  "arguable  the  Upper  Tribunal
    failed properly to consider whether the authorities in Sri  Lanka  were
    likely to have a record of the [appellant's]  membership  of  the  LTTE
    and, if so, what the record would be likely to contain".  Moore-Bick LJ
    also considered that "it is also arguable  that  [the  Upper  Tribunal]
    failed properly to consider and explain why the  authorities  were  not
    likely to have a record of his detention".

 5. Subsequently, by consent, and without determining  the  merits  of  the
    appeal, it was ordered by the Court of Appeal that the  appeal  against
    the  determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (that  is  Judge  Allen's
    determination) dismissing the appellant's appeal was allowed  and  that
    determination set aside and that the case  be  remitted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal "for a re-determination on the basis set out at paragraph 5 of
    the accompanying statement of reasons".

 6. The aforesaid paragraph 5 provides as follows:

         "The parties agree that the Upper Tribunal erred  in  law  for  the
         reasons given in the grounds of  appeal.   They  accordingly  agree
         that  the  matter  should  be  remitted  to  the   Upper   Tribunal
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) for the Upper Tribunal to consider
         the applicability of the country guidance to the specific facts  of
         this case.  The findings of fact made  by  Immigration  Judge  Lobo
         remain undisturbed and should stand for the purposes of  the  Upper
         Tribunal's further decision."

 7. It is on that basis that this appeal is now before me.

 8. Following the hearing in the Court of Appeal, but  before  the  hearing
    before me, this Tribunal promulgated its determination in GJ  &  Others
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319,  in  which
    the Tribunal gave fresh country guidance in respect of  Sri  Lanka.   I
    note in particular that  at  paragraph  356(1)  of  this  determination
    (which is also set out at head note (1)), the Tribunal state  in  terms
    that "this determination replaces all existing country guidance on  Sri
    Lanka".   Accordingly,  subject  to  the  argument  advanced   on   the
    appellant's behalf by Mr Mackenzie, to which  I  refer  below,  I  must
    consider  whether,  on  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  Judge   Lobo
    (concerning which there is some debate, to which I  also  refer  below)
    this appellant would be  at  risk  in  light  of  the  current  country
    guidance contained within GJ.

The Hearing

 9. I heard submissions from Mr Mackenzie on behalf of  the  appellant  and
    also submissions on behalf of the respondent from Mr  Tarlow.   In  the
    course of his  submissions,  Mr  Mackenzie  relied  upon  the  skeleton
    argument which he had submitted prior to the hearing.   As  I  recorded
    the submissions contemporaneously, and these are contained  within  the
    Record of Proceedings, I shall not set out everything  which  was  said
    during the course of the hearing.  I have, however, had regard  to  all
    the submissions made, as well as to all the documents contained  within
    the file, whether or not these are referred to specifically below.

Judge Lobo's Findings of Fact

10. The first issue which arose concerned precisely what should be regarded
    as the findings  of  fact  made  by  Judge  Lobo,  which,  pursuant  to
    paragraph 5 of the statement of reasons referred to in the order of the
    Court of Appeal must "remain undisturbed and.... stand for the purposes
    of the Upper Tribunal's further decision".

11. At paragraph 20, under the heading "Findings of Fact"  Judge  Lobo  had
    made a number of findings, including:

    (a) the appellant was of Tamil ethnicity; (h) during 2008 the appellant
    was frequently stopped between his parents'  home  and  university  and
    accused of being an LTTE  member  but  was  always  released;  (i)  the
    appellant had been detained in March 2008 for  seven  days,  threatened
    with a gun but not beaten, and the COIS Report on  Sri  Lanka  of  June
    2008 "describes these routine detentions of large numbers  of  people".
    The appellant had been released after payment of a bribe  by  an  agent
    acting on behalf of a family member;  (j)  the  appellant  was  further
    detained in April 2007 from the camp Ramanathan, was removed  from  the
    camp, ill-treated and suffered scars on his back.  He was asked whether
    he was a member of the LTTE and about senior members of  the  LTTE  but
    gave no information.  Again he was released by the payment of a further
    bribe, arranged by his father through the same agent; (k) the appellant
    was released from both detentions,  but  never  charged  nor  taken  to
    court, nor officially "inducted"  or  required  to  do  anything  after
    release; (l) the appellant left Sri Lanka using his  own  passport  and
    went through the airport at Colombo, where although  his  passport  was
    taken and considered by the CID, it was handed back to him and  he  was
    allowed to leave.

12. Judge Lobo also found at paragraph 20(f) that the appellant had  become
    a member of the LTTE in 2000, when he was 15, but had  left  two  years
    later when he was 17, and at 20(g) that during the period he  lived  at
    home between January 2003 and February  2008,  he  had  encountered  no
    problems from either the Sri Lanka army or the LTTE.  Although at 20(m)
    Judge Lobo  states  (still  as  a  finding  of  fact)  that  in  cross-
    examination the appellant had mentioned for the first time that a photo
    album existed from which he could be identified, he does not appear  to
    make any finding as to whether or not he has accepted this evidence.

13. Then, under the heading "Conclusions", Judge Lobo  appears  to  make  a
    number of further findings, from paragraphs 21 to 29.   These  include,
    at paragraph 24, that the judge does "not accept that the appellant was
    in the front line of the LTTE as claimed", and at paragraph 26(a)  that
    although the appellant had been asked if he was a member of  the  LTTE,
    he had never admitted it and "there is no record that he  is  suspected
    or an actual member of the LTTE".  He also  finds  at  paragraph  26(b)
    that the appellant has no previous criminal  record  nor  is  there  an
    arrest warrant in existence, at (c) that he has not jumped bail, at (d)
    that he has not signed a confession statement, at (e) that he has never
    suggested that he was asked to become a secret informer and at (f) that
    he did not depart Sri Lanka illegally but departed on his own  passport
    and with a valid student visa to enter the United Kingdom "although  it
    is noted that this was obtained by false representations".

14. Then, at paragraph 28, Judge Lobo  records  his  conclusion  that  "the
    appellant would be returning to Colombo as a person with little  or  no
    national profile in Sri Lanka as an LTTE member".

15. Mr Mackenzie submits  that  the  "findings  of  fact"  referred  to  in
    paragraph 5 of the statement of reasons were essentially those findings
    contained within paragraph 20 of Judge Lobo's determination, and during
    the course of argument submitted that the other  findings  referred  to
    above, other than the finding at paragraph 24 that  the  appellant  had
    not been in the front line of the LTTE as claimed,  and  in  particular
    the conclusion at paragraph 26(a) that there was  no  record  that  the
    appellant was a suspected or an actual member of  the  LTTE,  were  not
    really "findings of fact" as such but rather "an inference  drawn  from
    the evidence".  When asked by the Tribunal how it could  be  said  that
    this was not a finding of fact, Mr McKenzie accepted that it might have
    been better if the order had said in terms that the  findings  of  fact
    were restricted to those made under paragraph 20, but that it could not
    have been intended that the conclusion at  paragraph  26(a)  should  be
    retained, because this would make a nonsense of Moore-Bick LJ's  reason
    for granting permission to appeal (that it was also arguable  that  the
    Upper Tribunal had failed properly to  consider  and  explain  why  the
    authorities were not likely to have a record of his detention).

16. Unsurprisingly, on behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow  submitted  that
    the "conclusions" at paragraphs 26 and 28 were findings  of  fact,  and
    that they should stand, in accordance with the terms of  the  order  of
    the Court of Appeal.

Appellant's Submissions

17. Mr Mackenzie's submissions on behalf of the appellant, contained in his
    oral submissions to the Tribunal and in his skeleton argument,  can  be
    summarised as follows.

18. Mr Mackenzie's first submission, as noted above, was that the "findings
    of fact" to be retained must be limited to those set out  at  paragraph
    20, although he accepted he could not go behind a  later  finding  that
    the appellant had not been in the front line of the LTTE.  However,  it
    could not be the case that this appeal had been remitted on  the  basis
    that a finding that there had been no record of his membership  of  the
    LTTE would stand, because in those  circumstances  the  remittal  would
    have been pointless.

19. Mr Mackenzie's position was that it was now for this Tribunal to make a
    finding as to whether or not there would be a record of his  membership
    of the LTTE, on the basis of what  Judge  Lobo  had  found  (presumably
    restricted to paragraph 20) and the current country guidance.

20. With regard to current country guidance, Mr Mackenzie accepted that  if
    the head note of GJ was determinative of the situation  in  Sri  Lanka,
    there were difficulties in the appellant's case.  However, it  was  the
    appellant's case first that the head note was not  a  complete  summary
    but more importantly, as the argument developed in the  course  of  his
    submissions, that in any event this  Tribunal  should  not  follow  the
    guidance given in GJ, for reasons which are discussed below.

21. In this case, there were certain findings which are not  now  disputed.
    The appellant was  in  the  LTTE,  as  a  child  soldier,  having  been
    recruited at the age of 15.  His case is  that  he  was  trained  as  a
    sniper; although Judge Lobo did not accept that he had been  posted  to
    the front line, he did accept that he was in the  LTTE.   He  had  been
    detained twice, in March 2008 when he was  released  on  payment  of  a
    bribe and again in 2009, at the end of the civil war, when he had  been
    detained in an internment camp.  He had then been picked up  and  taken
    to another place and tortured.  It was the appellant's case that he had
    been denounced.  Although there was no  finding  by  the  judge  as  to
    whether or not he had, the judge accepted that he was questioned  about
    his LTTE membership and tortured.  He was again released on payment  of
    a bribe.

22. It was on this  factual  basis  that  his  case  should  be  considered
    alongside country guidance.

23. Mr Mackenzie referred the Tribunal to paragraph 290 of  GJ,  where  the
    Tribunal had referred to the  UNHCR's  position,  as  set  out  in  its
    December 2012 guidelines.  These are set out at  paragraph  12  of  the
    skeleton argument.  Although the panel in GJ did  not  agree  that  the
    UNHCR guidelines were determinative, they were  still  quoted  in  some
    detail.  These guidelines set out a number of categories of people  who
    might be at risk, including those whose "previous (real  or  perceived)
    links [to the LTTE]..... go  beyond  prior  residency  within  an  area
    controlled by the LTTE".  These  include  "former  LTTE  combatants  or
    "cadres", which, it was submitted, would include this  appellant.   The
    panel in GJ had criticised the respondent  for  not  taking  the  UNHCR
    guidelines into account when preparing her guidance notes.

24. This Tribunal should take account of  parts  of  the  UNHCR  guidelines
    which had  not  been  quoted  in  GJ,  in  particular  with  regard  to
    information which had been published documenting cases of  mistreatment
    and torture of people in detention because of  their  or  their  family
    members' alleged former links with the LTTE.  Also, that people who had
    such a profile, depending on  the  individual  circumstances  of  their
    cases, were likely to be in need of international refugee protection on
    account of their (perceived) political opinion, usually linked to their
    ethnicity.  The UNHCR guidelines also state that the same is likely  to
    apply to family members and other dependants of individuals with  those
    profiles.

25. With regard to the head note in GJ, the Tribunal does not say that LTTE
    membership is not a risk factor, nor does it  say  in  terms  that  the
    UNHCR guidance should  not  be  followed.   However,  in  answer  to  a
    question from the Tribunal, Mr Mackenzie accepted that at head note (7)
    of GJ the Tribunal lists the current categories of person  whom  it  is
    said are at real risk of persecution or serious harm on return  to  Sri
    Lanka and it is not said that the current  categories  "include"  these
    persons.   However,  in  TK,  the  Tribunal  there  had   referred   to
    "categories"  and  the  difference  between  "categories"   and   "risk
    factors".  As the Tribunal also accepted (it was submitted)  the  UNHCR
    approach, that a risk specific assessment was needed of people who  did
    not fall within the risk category specified, with all  respect  to  the
    Tribunal, it was not clear what was  meant  by  the  expression  "fact-
    specific risk groups, some of which overlap with the general categories
    set out in the UNHCR guidelines generally".  It was not  clear  whether
    this was supposed to be fact-specific to individual cases or not.

26. This sentence had a "slightly obscure meaning".  The expression  "fact-
    specific risk groups" was  something  which  had  not  previously  been
    known.  This seemed to be a hybrid fact-specific risk assessment on the
    basis of risk factors and a non-fact-specific assessment based on  risk
    categories.  Going beyond the semantics one  had  to  ask  whether  the
    Tribunal was either saying that it accepted what the UNHCR had  put  in
    the guidelines or that it did not, because the UNHCR had got it  wrong.
    The Tribunal did not do so.

27. Mr Mackenzie also submitted that one needed to look at  the  Tribunal's
    assessment of the UNHCR guidelines in the  context  of  other  evidence
    which  was  considered,  and  accepted.   In  this  regard,  particular
    reliance was placed on the evidence of Dr Gunaratna.  The Tribunal  had
    expressly approved of Dr Gunaratna's evidence at paragraph 273.

28. In Appendix  K  to  the  determination  in  GJ,  Professor  Gunaratna's
    evidence is  recorded.   The  appellant  particularly  relied  on  sub-
    paragraphs (v) and (vi), and in particular  (vi)  where  it  is  stated
    that:

         "In his expert opinion, LTTE cadres deported from foreign countries
         are held in  detention,  investigated,  and  either  prosecuted  or
         rehabilitated.   The   criteria   had   changed:   in   2009,   the
         rehabilitation  programme  was  used  for   those   identified   by
         membership of and degree of involvement in the LTTE;  now,  it  was
         more nuanced and guided by concerns about  the  resurgence  of  the
         Tigers in the Tamil diaspora.  The decision whether to detain would
         be made after a fact-specific assessment by  the  police,  security
         and intelligence services".

29. Mr Mackenzie suggested that given what was known about the behaviour of
    the Sri Lankan security forces, a fact-specific assessment in Sri Lanka
    must involve the risk of ill-treatment.

30. What Dr Gunaratna was saying was that a decision as to whether  someone
    needed  to  be  rehabilitated  would  be  taken  after  detention   and
    investigation.  This was not reflected in the guidance contained in the
    head note.  That was one of the arguments which  was  advanced  in  the
    grounds which had been submitted in support of an application which had
    been made for permission to appeal against this decision.

31. It was the appellant's  case  that  it  followed  from  Dr  Gunaratna's
    evidence that anyone  known  to  be  a  former  LTTE  member,  as  this
    appellant was, would be detained soon after arrival  until  a  decision
    was then made on whether to send them either  to  be  rehabilitated  or
    prosecuted.  That initial detention and investigation would  itself  be
    accompanied by a risk of torture, as the Tribunal in GJ had accepted at
    paragraph 356(4) (this is in the head note at paragraph (4)).

32. It was accordingly the appellant's case that he would  be  at  risk  of
    persecutory treatment on return, if he was on record as having  been  a
    former member of the LTTE.  To the extent that it was said in  GJ  that
    this was not the case unless a returnee had been involved  in  diaspora
    activities, this was hard to understand because this was what had  been
    stated in evidence which they had accepted, in particular  that  of  Dr
    Gunaratna and the UNHCR guidelines.  To the extent  that  the  Tribunal
    had not accepted the guidelines set out by the UNHCR, there should have
    been a clear indication of the reasons why  these  guidelines  had  not
    been accepted.

33. In answer to a question from the Tribunal, as to whether he was  saying
    that as the Tribunal in GJ had accepted the evidence to  which  he  had
    just referred, it had then reached conclusions which were  contrary  to
    that evidence, Mr Mackenzie replied that although this might be a stark
    way of putting his case, that nonetheless was his case.

34. Mr Mackenzie then suggested that  this  Tribunal's  position  was  that
    although it would  normally  have  to  consider  and  apply  a  country
    guidance case unless there was a good reason not to,  "a  good  reason"
    was not restricted to situations where the  circumstances  had  changed
    since country guidance had been given.  It was his  case  that  because
    the guidance given in GJ was legally flawed, it should not be followed.
     In reliance on the submission that a Tribunal was not bound to  follow
    a previous country guidance decision which was itself  legally  flawed,
    Mr Mackenzie relied on the Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  KS  (Burma)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 67, especially at paragraph 19.

35. Again in answer to a question from the Tribunal,  Mr  Mackenzie  agreed
    that essentially it was his case that the findings of the  Tribunal  in
    GJ were not supported by the evidence which that Tribunal had accepted,
    and to that extent the findings as set out in the head  note  were  not
    rational.  Although at paragraphs 12.2 and  12.4  of  the  Presidential
    Practice Direction,[1] a Tribunal was required to follow  a  clear  and
    apparently applicable country guidance case, in this case, it  was  the
    appellant's position that this guidance  was  not  "clear".   This  was
    because the guidance was not consistent with the evidence.

The Respondent's Submissions

36. On behalf of the respondent, as well as submitting that  all  of  Judge
    Lobo's findings of fact should be retained, Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that
    there was no proper basis upon  which  the  Tribunal  could  refuse  to
    follow the guidance given in GJ.  In light of  that  guidance,  on  the
    basis of the findings of fact made by Judge Lobo,  even  if  there  had
    been a record of this appellant having previously been a member of  the
    LTTE, he would still not be  at  risk  on  return.   The  Tribunal  was
    reminded that at paragraph (8) of the head note, it was said  that  the
    Sri Lankan  authorities'  approach  was  now  "based  on  sophisticated
    intelligence"; there was no reason in this case for the authorities  to
    have any real interest in this appellant.

Discussion

37. For the purposes of this determination, I will consider the submissions
    on the basis that neither Judge Lobo's finding at paragraph 26(a)  that
    there is no record that the appellant is a suspected or  actual  member
    of the LTTE nor his finding at paragraph 28 that the appellant will  be
    returning to Colombo as a person with little or no national profile  in
    Sri Lanka as an LTTE member is retained.  However, when I consider  the
    other findings which Judge Lobo made, in particular that he was allowed
    to leave Sri Lanka using his own passport  even after his passport  was
    taken by the CID, who looked at it before then handing it back  to  him
    and allowing him to leave, were it necessary for me to  decide  whether
    or not there was any record of the appellant's membership of  the  LTTE
    between the ages of 15 and 17, I would not be satisfied on the basis of
    the findings of fact which have been made that there was.  I must  take
    into account the finding that the appellant was never charged nor taken
    to court, nor officially indicted nor required  to  do  anything  after
    release, and that at no stage has he  been  found  to  have  given  any
    information regarding either his membership of the LTTE or that of  any
    other members.  Further, Judge Lobo's findings include an acceptance of
    what is stated in the COI Report dated June 2008 that  detentions  such
    as the appellant's first detention were "routine".

38. When I take account also of the guidance  given  in  GJ  that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated intelligence,  I
    do not consider there is a sufficient  basis  upon  which  I  could  be
    satisfied that there is a real likelihood that there is any  record  of
    the appellant's very brief membership of the LTTE.

39. However, because it  is  likely  that  the  arguments  advanced  by  Mr
    Mackenzie, challenging the guidance given  in  GJ,  are  likely  to  be
    advanced in other cases, I deal with these arguments on their merits.

40. It is not suggested  that  this  appellant  falls  within  any  of  the
    categories set out within the guidance given at paragraph  356  of  GJ.
    Accordingly, his appeal must fail unless there is  a  good  reason  why
    this guidance should not be followed.

41. It is important to recognise that the head note  itself  sets  out  the
    Tribunal's findings, contained within the body of the determination  at
    paragraph 356,[2] following consideration of all the evidence which had
    been put before  it,  in  the  round.   The  UNHCR  Guidelines  and  Dr
    Gunaratna's evidence were but a  small  part  of  that  evidence.   The
    "current categories of persons at real risk of persecution  or  serious
    harm on return to Sri Lankan, whether in detention  or  otherwise"  are
    stated to be as follows:

         "(a)     Individuals who are, or who are perceived to be, a  threat
             to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state  because  they
             are, or are perceived to have a significant role  in  relation
             to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

         (b)  Individuals (whether in print or other media) or human  rights
             activists, who, in either case, have criticised the Sri Lankan
             government, in particular its human rights record, or who  are
             associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri  Lankan
             government.

         (c)  Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned and
             Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri Lankan  security
             forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in  alleged
             war crimes. Among those who  may  have  witnessed  war  crimes
             during the conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones in  May
             2009, only those who have  already  identified  themselves  by
             giving  such  evidence  would  be  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities and therefore  only  they  are  at  real  risk  of
             adverse attention or persecution on  return  as  potential  or
             actual war crime witnesses.

         (d)  A person whose name appears  on  a  computerised  'stop'  list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name appears on a 'stop list will be stopped
             at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri  Lankan
             authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant'."

42. It is important to note  that  this  is,  and  is  intended  to  be,  a
    definitive list of those persons who  'are'  at  risk  on  return;  the
    Tribunal did not find that those persons at risk 'included' people  who
    fell within one of the categories."

43. With regard to  Professor  Gunaratna's  evidence,  which  Mr  Mackenzie
    claims was "approved" by the Tribunal at paragraph 273  of  GJ,  it  is
    important to contrast what Mr Mackenzie says at  paragraph  15  of  his
    skeleton argument was approved by the Tribunal  in  GJ  with  what  the
    Tribunal  actually  said  there.   At  paragraph  15  of  his  skeleton
    argument, Mr Mackenzie submits as follows:

         "... at [paragraph] 273 the Tribunal [in GJ] approved evidence from
         Professor Gunaratna that (Appendix K, [paragraph] 4(vi)):

         LTTE cadres deported from foreign countries are held in  detention,
         investigated, and either prosecution or rehabilitated. The criteria
         had changed: in 2009, the rehabilitation  programme  was  used  for
         those identified by membership of and degree of involvement in  the
         LTTE; now, it was more nuanced and guided  by  concerns  about  the
         resurgence of the Tigers in the Tamil  diaspora.  The  decision  to
         detain will be made after a fact-specific assessment by the police,
         security and intelligence services."

44. What the Tribunal actually said at paragraph 273 is as follows:

         "Professor Gunaratna is an insider in relation to the GOSL and  his
         views are interesting as a reflection of its mindset.  He helped to
         design  and  assess  the  rehabilitation  programme,  although  his
         evidence lacks specifics  as  to  its  operation.   We  accept  his
         evidence that the government's concerns are now with  the  diaspora
         and that the LTTE within Sri Lanka is a spent force at present.  We
         also accept his evidence that the GOSL is more selective now as  to
         who requires rehabilitation in the present climate."

45. The Tribunal did not say in paragraph 273 that it accepted  all  of  Dr
    Gunaratna's evidence, nor did it specifically approve the evidence  set
    out in Appendix K  at  paragraph  4(vi)  as  Mr  Mackenzie  appears  to
    suggest.   The acceptance of Professor  Gunaratna's  evidence  was  far
    more limited.

46. What the Tribunal in GJ  did  was  to  consider  Professor  Gunaratna's
    evidence in the round but in the context  of  all  the  other  evidence
    which it also considered.  So for example, at paragraph 136,  Professor
    Gunaratna's evidence was summarised as follows:

         "He  explained  the   differences   between   how   selection   for
         rehabilitation was made in 2009 and now, but did not  give  details
         of the rehabilitation programme itself. Whereas all identified LTTE
         cadres had been rehabilitated  in  the  2009  tranche,  the  GOSL's
         approach in 2013  was  to  send  to  rehabilitation  those  who  it
         believed could benefit from it.  The  selection  was  nuanced,  and
         guided by  concerns  about  the  resurgence  of  the  LTTE  in  the
         diaspora.  The decision whether to detain and rehabilitate was made
         after a fact-specific assessment by the police,  the  security  and
         intelligence services working together.  ..."

47. This evidence, together with that part of Dr Gunaratna's evidence which
    was specifically accepted by the Tribunal, is  then  reflected  in  the
    Tribunal's ultimate findings.  These include  (implicitly)  that  other
    than for persons falling within the categories  set  out  at  paragraph
    356(7), returnees will not be at real risk of  persecution  or  serious
    harm on return. Although Mr Mackenzie  submits  that  "a  fact-specific
    assessment" must include interrogation, which gives rise to  real  risk
    of persecution, that is not what the Tribunal in GJ found.  Its finding
    was that it was only  persons  who  came  within  the  risk  categories
    identified at paragraph 356(7)  who  would  be  at  risk,  and  it  was
    specifically Dr Gunaratna's evidence  that  the  government's  concerns
    were now with the diaspora, and that the GSOL is more selective now  as
    to who requires  rehabilitation,  which  was  accepted.   There  is  no
    acceptance within GJ of any  evidence  to  the  effect  that  a  "fact-
    specific assessment by the  police,  the  security  and  the  interline
    services working together" requires  any  detention  or  interrogation.
    Indeed, the Tribunal specifically found that it was only  those  people
    contained within the categories set out who would be at  risk  of  such
    detention or interrogation;  this  is  apparent  from  its  finding  at
    paragraph 356(4) that if  a  person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    security services there remains a real risk of  ill-treatment  or  harm
    requiring international protection.

48. The Tribunal in GJ reached its findings following  consideration  of  a
    very large amount of evidence indeed, and submissions  lasting  several
    days.  Its determination, excluding appendices, runs to 457  paragraphs
    and 107 pages.  Amongst the evidence considered by  the  Tribunal,  but
    not accepted as a definitive statement of the risk on return,  was  the
    UNHCR Guidelines.  It is not the function of this Tribunal, when giving
    country guidance, merely to accept UNHCR Guidelines  without  scrutiny;
    if it was, then there would seem to be little purpose in giving country
    guidance. One could  just look at these guidelines. What the Tribunal's
    function is in these cases is to consider all the evidence in the round
    in order to give fact-based guidance which can then  be  relied  on  by
    other Tribunals until the  situation  in  any  particular  country  has
    changed.  In my judgment, in GJ, this is precisely  what  the  Tribunal
    has done, after conspicuous consideration and analysis of the vast body
    of evidence put before it.  There is, in  my  judgment,  absolutely  no
    proper reason why this or any other  Tribunal  should  not  follow  the
    guidance given in GJ until such time as good evidence is put  before  a
    Tribunal to suggest that circumstances in Sri Lanka have changed.

49. In summary therefore I find as follows:

        1) There is no merit in the argument that the country guidance
           given by this Tribunal in GJ is not rational or that it is
           inconsistent with the evidence which had been accepted by the
           tribunal.

        2) The country  guidance  given  in  GJ  is  authoritative  and  in
           accordance  with  the  President's  Practice  Direction   should
           continue to be followed  unless  and  until  there  is  material
           evidence put before a tribunal that the situation in  Sri  Lanka
           has changed.

50. It follows that this appellant's appeal must be  dismissed,  and  I  so
    find.



Decision

51. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.




Signed:                                 Date: 25 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
-----------------------
[1] 12.2   A reported determination of the Tribunal,  the  AIT  or  the  IAT
    bearing the letters "CG" shall be treated as an  authoritative  finding
    on the country guidance issue identified in  the  determination,  based
    upon the evidence before the members of the Tribunal, the  AIT  or  the
    IAT that determine  the  appeal.  As  a  result,  unless  it  has  been
    expressly superseded or replaced by any later "CG" determination, or is
    inconsistent with other authority that is binding on the Tribunal, such
    a country guidance case is authoritative in any subsequent  appeal,  so
    far as that appeal:-
           (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and
           (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.
...

12.4   Because of the principle that like cases should be  treated  in  like
    manner, any failure to follow a clear,  apparently  applicable  country
    guidance case or to show why it does not apply to the case in  question
    is likely to be regarded as grounds for appeal on a point of law.


[2] 356. Having considered and reviewed  all  the  evidence,  including  the
    latest UNHCR guidance, we  consider  that  the  change  in  the  GOSL's
    approach is so significant that it is preferable to  reframe  the  risk
    analysis for the present political situation in Sri Lanka.  We give the
    following country guidance:

       (1) This determination replaces all existing country guidance on Sri
          Lanka.

       (2) The focus of the Sri Lankan  government's  concern  has  changed
          since the civil war ended in May 2009.   The  LTTE  in  Sri  Lanka
          itself is a spent force and there have been no terrorist incidents
          since the end of the civil war.

       (3)    The government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
          activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism and
          to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in Amendment
          6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983, which  prohibits  the
          'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its  focus  is
          on preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or  any  similar
          Tamil separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war
          within Sri Lanka.

       (4)    If a person is detained by the Sri Lankan  security  services
          there remains a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
          international protection.

       (5)    Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka  for  a
          person at real risk from the Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
          government now controls the whole of  Sri  Lanka  and  Tamils  are
          required to return to a named address after  passing  through  the
          airport.

       (6)    There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only those
          whose names appear on a "stop" list  will  be  detained  from  the
          airport.  Any risk for those in whom the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
          are or become interested exists not  at  the  airport,  but  after
          arrival in their home area, where their arrival will  be  verified
          by the CID or police within a few days.

       (7)    The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution
          or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention  or
          otherwise, are:

          (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to  the
             integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they  are,  or
             are perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-
             conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a  renewal
             of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

          (b) Journalists (whether in print or other media) or human  rights
             activists, who, in either case, have criticised the Sri  Lankan
             government, in particular its human rights record, or  who  are
             associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri   Lankan
             government.

          (c)     Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned
             and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri   Lankan
             security forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities  in
             alleged war crimes.  Among those who  may  have  witnessed  war
             crimes during the conflict, particularly in the  No-Fire  Zones
             in May 2009, only those who have already identified  themselves
             by giving such evidence  would  be  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities and therefore only they are at real risk of adverse
             attention or persecution on return as potential or  actual  war
             crimes witnesses.

          (d) A person whose name appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of  those  against
             whom  there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped
             at the airport and handed over to the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan
             authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

       (8)     The  Sri  Lankan   authorities'   approach   is   based   on
          sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities within Sri Lanka
          and in the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities  know  that  many
          Sri Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
          that  everyone  in  the  Northern  Province  had  some  level   of
          involvement with the LTTE during the civil war.  In  post-conflict
          Sri Lanka, an individual's past history will be relevant  only  to
          the extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan  authorities  as
          indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state  or  the
          Sri Lankan Government.

       (9)    The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
          "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is not
          reasonably likely to be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
          monitored by the security services after his  or  her  return.  If
          that monitoring does not indicate that such a person  is  a  Tamil
          activist working to destabilise the unitary Sri  Lankan  state  or
          revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in question  is
          not, in general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security
          forces.  That will be a question of fact in each  case,  dependent
          on any diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.



       (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light  of
          an individual's activities and responsibilities during  the  civil
          war, the exclusion clauses are engaged (Article 1F of the  Refugee
          Convention and Article  12(2)  of  the  Qualification  Directive).
          Regard should be had to the categories for exclusion  set  out  in
          the  "Eligibility  Guidelines  For  Assessing  the   International
          Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka",  published  by
          UNHCR on 21 December 2012.


