
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Mohammed Alam Mamour) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department IJR [2014] UKUT 00512(IAC)

Heard at Field House


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                            mohammed alam mamour
                                                                   Applicant
                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant:  Mr B Bedford, instructed by Sultan Lloyd  Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr N Chapman, instructed by the Treasury  Solicitor

                                  JUDGMENT
                Given extempore at hearing of 9 October 2014

Introduction

1.   The  Applicant  brings  an  application  for  judicial  review  of  the
    Respondent's decision of 21 February 2013, and  supplementary  decision
    of 23  July  2013,  refusing  him  leave  and  refusing  to  treat  his
    representations as a fresh claim  pursuant  to  paragraph  353  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. Permission to bring these proceedings was granted on 11 July 2014 after
    an oral hearing by Mr Justice Cranston and Upper Tribunal Judge Storey.




 Factual background

 3. The factual backdrop to this case is both lengthy and complex but it is
    necessary to recite it with some particularity:


        . On 22 October 2005 the  Applicant  entered  the  UK  and  claimed
          asylum.
        . On 1 November 2005 he was assessed as being over the  age  of  18
          years.  His asylum  claim  was  processed  accordingly  and  then
          refused.  On  16  December  2005  his  appeal  was  dismissed  by
          Immigration  Judge  Elvidge.  Although  finding  the  Applicant's
          asylum claim not credible the judge found him to  be  a  minor  -
          likely to be aged 16.
        . In a file minute dated 9  August  2006  a  Home  Office  official
          stated that the Applicant had been found to be over  18  by  Kent
          Social Services, that the report relied  on  by  the  Immigration
          Judge finding him to be 16 years old "has an error of  margin  of
          two years" and that "the evidence is weighted in  favour  of  the
          Applicant being aged 18 plus".  As a result  the  Respondent  did
          not proceed to grant the  applicant  any  form  of  discretionary
          leave.
        . The Applicant then made  a  number  of  further  representations,
          beginning with a letter  of  February  2007,  all  of  which  the
          Respondent rejected.
        . In August 2010 the Applicant  applied  for  judicial  review;  an
          application which was eventually withdrawn after  the  Respondent
          agreed to withdraw her previous decisions.
        . On 13 February 2012  the  Respondent  refused  to  treat  further
          representations made by the Applicant as a fresh claim and, on  7
          March 2012, she issued directions to remove  the  Applicant  from
          the United Kingdom.
        . On 12 March 2012 the Applicant applied for judicial review of the
          abovementioned decisions.
        . On 13 March 2012  Mr  Justice  Beatson  ordered  a  stay  of  the
          Applicant's removal.
        . On 24 April 2012 HHJ McKenna, sitting as a  Judge  of  the  Upper
          Tribunal, refused to grant the Applicant permission to apply  for
          judicial review, discharged the order of Beatson  J  and  ordered
          that renewal of the application should not be treated as a bar to
          the Applicant's removal.
        . On 27 April 2012 the Applicant lodged a notice of renewal of  his
          claim for permission to bring judicial review proceedings and, on
          20 June, he submitted an application for a  stay  in  respect  of
          imminent directions for his removal.
        . On 22 June 2012 Upper Tribunal Judge  Gleeson  refused  to  grant
          such application.
        . On 9 July 2012 the Applicant's solicitors lodged further  grounds
          in support an application for a stay of  removal.   On  the  same
          date Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson refused a  further  application
          for a stay on removal [see paragraph 2 of the decision  of  Judge
          Storey].
        . The Applicant was removed to Afghanistan  on  10  July  2012  and
          currently remains living outside of the United Kingdom.
        . Permission to bring judicial review proceedings  was  granted  by
          Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan after an oral hearing on 18 September
          2012. On the same date Judge Jordan refused to  make  an  interim
          order requiring the Respondent to  use  her  best  endeavours  to
          return the Applicant to the United Kingdom.

 4. The substantive application challenging the  decision  of  13  February
    2012 was heard by Judge Storey on 24 January 2013 and,  in  a  decision
    handed down on 22 February 2013, the Secretary of State's decision  was
    quashed. However, Judge  Storey  refused  to  make  a  mandatory  order
    requiring the Respondent (i) to treat the  Applicant's  representations
    as a fresh claim and (ii) to use her  best  endeavours  to  return  the
    Applicant to the United Kingdom.


 5. The substance of Judge Storey's reasons for quashing the  Secretary  of
    State's decision is to be found in paragraphs 9 to 13 of his Judgment:

        "9. Save for one matter it seems to me that there was nothing wrong
        with  the  Respondent's  treatment  of  the   Applicant's   further
        representations.  As  regards  his  asylum  claim,  this  had  been
        rejected by IJ Elvidge as not credible and the  Applicant  made  no
        appeal against that decision.  In  recent  representations  he  has
        sought to argue that he still has a valid  asylum  claim  based  on
        further documents sent  from  Afghanistan  by  his  paternal  uncle
        recently.  However, the Respondent addressed those new materials in
        her refusal letters and the Applicant has failed to challenge  them
        in any of his  subsequent  grounds  for  permission  to  apply  for
        judicial review.  As regards the Applicant's  claim  based  on  his
        right to respect for private and family life, the  Respondent  gave
        careful consideration to the materials relied  on  in  support  and
        found them wanting.  Given the Applicant's relatively short  period
        of stay in the UK; his illegal entry; his  failure  to  appeal  the
        rejection by an Immigration Judge of his asylum appeal; the tenuous
        evidence he had submitted as to his ties with  friends,  relatives,
        etc., I consider that this aspect of the Respondent's decision  was
        based on seemingly cogent reasons.


        10.  However,  in  my  judgement  it  remains  that  there  is  one
        insurmountable difficulty with the Respondent's  refusal  decision,
        namely her failure to act without valid reason upon the Immigration
        Judge's finding that the Applicant was  a  minor  despite  her  own
        policy  instructing  a  grant  of  discretionary  leave   in   such
        circumstances (both parties were content for me to describe this as
        "the historic injustice" point).


        11. This difficulty has to be kept in context.  This is not a  case
        in which the Respondent failed to consider the  historic  injustice
        argument at all.  The  Applicant  in  further  representations  had
        raised it and in support had expressly sought to rely on the  Court
        of Appeal judgment in (AA Afghanistan) [2007] EWCA Civ 12.


        12.  The difficulty is rather in the way the  Respondent  chose  to
        address this argument.  At [24]  and  [25]  of  the  February  2012
        refusal letter it was stated:


             "24. You submit that  your  client  should  have  been  granted
             Discretionary Leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  following
             the Immigration Judge's finding that Mr Mamour was only sixteen
             years of age.


             25. Reference has been given to the case  of  AA  (Afghanistan)
             [2007] EWCA Civ 12 to consider whether  [Mr  Mamour]  has  been
             disadvantaged by failing to have the  opportunity  to  seek  to
             extend any leave granted under the Unaccompanied Asylum  Seeker
             Child (UASC) policy.  Any  entitlement  to  UASC  Discretionary
             Leave would have expired in June 2009, when your client reached
             the age of seventeen years  and  six  months.   As  his  asylum
             application was refused on 9th November  2005,  any  subsequent
             application for an extension of leave would, by now, likely  to
             have been refused.  It can therefore  be  concluded  that  your
             client has not been disadvantaged as  a  result  of  not  being
             granted Discretionary Leave which would not  have  expired  and
             your request fails to create a realistic prospect of success."


        13.  I am in  agreement  with  Mr  Bedford  that  this  passage  is
        deficient in at least two respects.  First, it treats  the  failure
        to make a  grant  of  Discretionary  Leave  as  being  no  kind  of
        disadvantage at all; whereas the Court  of  Appeal  in  AA  clearly
        regarded such a failure as in itself  a  significant  disadvantage.
        Second, by not considering it as  any  kind  of  disadvantage,  the
        letter failed to weigh in the assessment of the fresh claim in  its
        Article 8 aspect any detriment caused  to  the  Applicant  by  this
        disadvantage.  This amounted to failure  to  take  into  account  a
        potentially material relevant factor."


 6. Unbeknown to Judge Storey, by the time of his decision on  22  February
    2013  the  Secretary  of  State  had   reconsidered   the   Applicant's
    application. It is this reconsideration decision of  21  February  2013
    that is the subject of the instant application for judicial review.

Legal context

 7. Prior to turning to the decision of  21  February,  it  is  prudent  to
    briefly set out the relevant legal principles that lay at the heart  of
    cases such as the instant one.

 8. The general rule is that decision makers  are  required  to  deal  with
    applications on the basis of the law and policy prevailing at the  time
    of the making of their decision (R (Hamzeh) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 4113).

 9. There may be circumstances in which a decision  maker  is  required  to
    take into account the fact that an earlier  decision  was  unlawful  or
    that there has been a failure to carry out  a  duty  which  has  caused
    historic injustice to the individual (Rashid v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    799, as considered in, inter alia, R(S) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 546  and
    KA (Afghanistan)[2013] 1 WLR 6115.  As  explained  in  the  immigration
    context in R(S), earlier judicial decisions  resulting  in  conspicuous
    unfairness amounting to an abuse of power giving  rise  to  illegal  or
    unlawful decisions may amount to a relevant consideration in the taking
    of a later decision.

10. As to whether fresh representations are  to  be  treated  as  a  'fresh
    claim', this is regulated by paragraph 353  of  the         Immigration
    Rules which states:

        "When a human rights or asylum  claim  has  been  refused  and  any
        appeal relating to that claim is no longer  pending,  the  decision
        maker will consider any further submissions and, if rejected,  will
        then determine whether they amount to a fresh claim.


        The submissions will amount to a fresh claim if they are
        significantly different from the material that has previously been
        considered. These submissions will only be significantly different
        if the content:


        (i) has not already been considered; and
        (ii) taken together with the previously considered material,
        created a realistic prospect of success, notwithstanding its
        rejection."
Discussion

11. It is accepted by the Respondent that she ought to have, but  did  not,
    grant the Applicant Discretionary Leave to Remain ('DLR') in or  around
    December 2005 - as a consequence of Judge Elvidge's findings as to  the
    Applicant's age.


12. In her decision of 21 February 2013 the Respondent initially  sets  out
    the facts relevant to  her  consideration,  including  detailing  Judge
    Elvidge's findings both as  to  the  Applicant's  age  and  as  to  the
    credibility of the Applicant's evidence. She thereafter  gives  careful
    consideration to the issue of whether leave should be granted in  order
    to 'redress' any disadvantage caused to the Applicant by the failure to
    grant him DLR, including (i) the loss  of  the  opportunity  to  appeal
    against any refusal to grant him an  extension  of  the  DLR  (ii)  the
    failure of the Respondent to fulfil her tracing obligations  and  (iii)
    the consequences for the Applicant of not  being  given  permission  to
    work.

13. Mr Bedford attacks this limb of the Respondent's decision on the  basis
    that she placed insufficient weight on the prospects of  the  Applicant
    succeeding in either (i) the application for an extension of leave that
    he would have made had he been  granted  DLR  or  (ii)  in  any  appeal
    against a negative decision arising from such an extension application.



14. Despite the capable submissions made by Mr Bedford,  in  my  conclusion
    the Respondent's decision on this issue is one which falls well  within
    the range of reasonable responses open to her and consequently  it  has
    not been established that it is irrational.

15. Moving on to the Respondent's consideration of Article 8 of  the  Human
    Rights Convention. In her decision of 21 February the  Respondent  says
    as follows - at [25]:

         "Regard is given to your client's claims in relation to  Article  8
         of the ECHR.  It is noted that aside from a cousin he  at  no  time
         claimed to have any other family in the UK. Your client resided  in
         the UK for a relatively short period  of  less  than  seven  years,
         during which time he  presented  no  evidence  of  any  substantial
         private life. Regard is had to the  case  of  EB  (Kosovo)  v  SSHD
         [2008] which considered the bearing any delay  in  decision  making
         has on a person's right under Article 8. It is noted that the  case
         stated that delay in decision making  may  reduce  the  force  that
         removal is necessary in  the  interests  of  upholding  immigration
         control if the delay is shown to be a result  of  inconsistency  in
         outcomes which will  have  a  bearing  on  the  proportionality  of
         removal or requiring the applicant to apply out of country.  Whilst
         there  has  been  some   delay   in   adequately   addressing   the
         correspondence raised by your  client  during  the  course  of  his
         claim; for the reasons given in this letter it  is  not  considered
         that he has in any way been disadvantaged in light  of  this.  Your
         client adduced no evidence  that  he  had  substantial  private  or
         family life in the UK such to make his removal from the UK  in  any
         way disproportionate.  Your  client  was  returned  to  Afghanistan
         nearly seven months ago following an asylum claim in the  UK  which
         was found to have no basis.  He now has the opportunity to  rebuild
         his life in Afghanistan."

16. Mr Bedford submits that in coming to the aforementioned conclusion  the
    Respondent failed to give consideration to two relevant aspects of  the
    Applicant's circumstances - (i) the fact that the failure to grant  the
    Applicant DLR is a disadvantage of itself  requiring  consideration  in
    the proportionality balancing exercise, and (ii) the fact that the High
    Court and the Tribunal permitted the Applicant's removal in  July  2012
    on a mistaken basis of fact for which the Respondent was responsible.

17. Mr Chapman responded to the former by pointing to all of the aspects of
    the Applicant's Article 8  claim  that  the  Respondent  did  consider.
    Doing so, however, only served to highlight the  relevant  features  of
    the Applicant's  circumstances  that  the  Respondent  failed  to  give
    consideration to.

18. In my conclusion it is clear that  the  Respondent's  consideration  of
    Article 8 in her decision of 21 February 2013 is  fundamentally  flawed
    for the very same reasons as the 13  February  2012  was  found  to  be
    flawed. She failed to either explicitly or implicitly treat her failure
    to grant the Applicant Discretionary Leave as any kind of disadvantage.
    As Judge Storey identified, however, the failure to  make  a  grant  of
    Discretionary Leave is to be regarded,  in  itself,  as  a  significant
    disadvantage.

19. This flaw is not remedied in the  supplementary  decision  of  23  July
    2013, there being no reference at all to Article 8 in  this  letter.  I
    observe in passing that the terms of the 23 July letter do not,  in  my
    view, reflect the fact that a further open-minded assessment was  given
    to the Applicant's case at this stage, but rather point to  an  attempt
    to shore up the  Respondent's  position  pursuant  to  the  Applicant's
    persistence in pressing his claim.

20. Mr Bedford is also correct, in my conclusion, in his second  submission
    on this issue.  The decision of 21 February 2013 is further  flawed  in
    its consideration  of  Article  8  for  its  failure  to  consider  the
    relevance of the Applicant having been removed in  circumstances  where
    the attempts to resist such a removal were declined by  both  the  High
    Court and this Tribunal on the basis of a misstatement of fact made  by
    the Respondent.

21. This error has at its source the Respondent's initial  stance,  in  the
    judicial review proceedings relating to the  decision  of  13  February
    2012, that it was open to her not to have granted the  Applicant  leave
    in 2005/2006 despite the decision of Judge Elvidge, because  there  had
    been an age assessment undertaken by Kent Social Services on  9  August
    2006 concluding the Applicant to be over the age of 18. This  statement
    was inaccurate. There has never been such an assessment undertaken - as
    was identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan in  his  decision  of  18
    September 2012.

22. Mr Chapman urges me to find that there  is  no  causation  between  the
    Applicant's removal and the aforementioned misstatement of fact by  the
    Respondent. I do not accept that this is so, however.

23. As identified in the chronology above, Mr Justice Beatson  granted  the
    Applicant a stay of removal on 13 March 2012. This stay was  discharged
    by His Honour Judge McKenna on 4  April,  Judge  McKenna  having  first
    refused the Applicant permission to apply for judicial  review  on  the
    papers.  He did so, at least according to his order of 24  April  2012,
    having considered not only the decision under challenge  but  also  the
    Summary Grounds of Defence, both of which  wrongly  asserted  that  the
    Applicant's age had been re-assessed  by  Kent  Social  Services  on  9
    August 2006. Judge Gleeson placed  reliance  of  the  decision  of  HHJ
    McKenna when making her decisions.

24. It is sufficient to say  that  despite  the  strident  terms  of  Judge
    McKenna's decision, once the true factual  matrix  had  come  to  light
    permission to bring judicial review was granted  by  Judge  Jordan  and
    ultimately the underlying decision of 13 February 2012 was  quashed  by
    Judge Storey.

25. Mr Chapman submits, in the alternative, that  the  Respondent  was  not
    required to deal with this issue in her decision of  21  February  2013
    because the Applicant had  not  sought  to  place  reliance  on  it  in
    correspondence prior to the taking of this decision. This, in my  view,
    is a deeply  unattractive  position  for  the  Respondent  to  take  in
    circumstances where she has been found to have misstated relevant facts
    to both the High Court and Upper  Tribunal.  The  Respondent  was  well
    aware prior to the 21 February 2013 that  she  had  she  had  misstated
    facts to the Court and Tribunal in the circumstances identified above -
    particularly in light of the clear terms of Judge Jordan's decision  of
    18 September 2012.  Even if she did not take the view that this  played
    a role in the Applicant's removal, she ought, in my conclusion, to have
    given consideration to  this  matter  in  her  decision  letter  of  21
    February.

26. In any event, reliance was placed on  the  Respondent's  mis-statement,
    and its consequences, in the grounds of  claim  for  this  application.
    These were served on the Respondent prior to the supplementary decision
    of 23 July 2013, which the Respondent herself seeks to  place  reliance
    upon. Despite this, the Respondent did not engage with  this  issue  in
    her decision of 23 July.

27. For these reasons I quash the Respondent's  decisions  of  21  February
    2013 and 23 July 2013. The Secretary  of  State  failed  to  take  into
    account two material matters when coming  to  her  conclusions  not  to
    grant the Applicant leave on Article 8 grounds and  not  to  treat  the
    Applicant's representations as a fresh claim pursuant to paragraph  353
    of the Immigration Rules.  I make clear that I  do  not  conclude  that
    this is a case in which there is only one possible  outcome  i.e.  that
    the Respondent  ought  to  grant  the  Applicant  leave  or  treat  his
    representations as a fresh claim.  What she is required to do is make a
    decision on the  correct  legal  footing  and  take  into  account  all
    relevant matters. She has not done so thus far.


Relief


28. I quash the Respondent's decisions of 21  February  2013  and  23  July
    2013.

29. Mr Bedford submitted that I should also order the  Respondent  to  take
    all reasonable endeavours to return the Applicant forthwith.  In  doing
    so he drew attention to a statement drawn in the name of the  solicitor
    having conduct of the Applicant's case, dated  23  September  2014,  in
    which it was said that the Applicant had fled Afghanistan and  that  he
    is now residing in Turkey illegally with  friends  who  are  supporting
    him. Mr Bedford also submitted that (i) the Applicant would not be in a
    position, or as good a position, to pursue an asylum claim in the UK if
    he  remained  living  outside  the  United  Kingdom  (ii)  should   the
    Respondent  once  again  refuse  the  Applicant's  representations  the
    Applicant  would  be  in  significant  difficulty  in  challenging  the
    decision from abroad, particularly given the changes in the regulations
    relating to the provision to legal aid (iii) there  have  been  lengthy
    delays in the Applicant receiving a lawful decision and such delays are
    not attributable to the Applicant  (iv)  the  foundation  of  the  case
    involves the failure the Respondent to comply with her duties  to  both
    the Court and the Tribunal and (v) there would be no detriment  to  the
    Respondent in allowing the Applicant to return.

30. In reply Mr Chapman submitted that the balance of convenience  did  not
    lie in the Applicant being brought back to the United Kingdom.  He  has
    now been outside of the  United  Kingdom  for  over  2  years  and  the
    Respondent would make a fresh decision swiftly,  and  comply  with  any
    time limits placed upon her by the Tribunal in this regard.

31. I accept that I have jurisdiction to make the order sought.  In  coming
    to my conclusion as to  whether  to  do  so,  I  apply  the  principles
    identified by the Court of Appeal in R (YZ -  China)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1022. Having carefully considered all the submissions made to  me,  and
    the circumstances of the case as a whole, I conclude that  the  balance
    of convenience does not lie in making an order requiring the Respondent
    to facilitate the Applicant's return to the United  Kingdom.  Whilst  I
    have quashed the Respondent's decision, I have concluded that  this  is
    not a case where the only possible outcome of a  further  consideration
    by the Respondent is in the Applicant's favour. The Applicant  has  now
    been living outside of the UK for over 2 years, and he is not living in
    a country where he claims an immediate fear of  being  persecuted.  The
    Respondent has indicated she will make  another  decision  swiftly  and
    accepts that I have jurisdiction to confine her to a particular  period
    of time in which she must do so. Given the history of  this  case,  and
    the Applicant's current circumstances, I make an  order  requiring  the
    Respondent to make a fresh decision in  accordance  with  the  findings
    herein,  and  to  serve  such  decision  on   the   Applicant's   legal
    representatives no later than five weeks after this decision was orally
    delivered.

32. The fact that a  further  decision  will  be  made  by  the  Respondent
    imminently, when taken with my conclusion that this is not  a  case  in
    which the only possible outcome of the reconsideration is a decision in
    the Applicant's favour, leads me to conclude that I should not exercise
    my discretion to  make  an  order  requiring  the  Applicant's  return,
    despite all that is said by Mr Bedford in his submissions urging me  to
    conclude to the contrary.

33. Neither party sought permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  and,
    having considered this issue of myself as I am required to do  by  rule
    44(4B) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I  refuse
    to grant such permission.

