
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 00520 (IAC)


                                                  THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 August 2015                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Solebo, Legal Representative, Charles Hill & Co
Solicitors

      1. Essa rehabilitation principles are specific to decisions  taken  on
         public policy, public security  and  public  health  grounds  under
         regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.


      2. It is only if the personal conduct of the person concerned is found
         to represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
         affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society  (regulation
         21(5)(c)) that it becomes relevant to consider whether the decision
         is  proportionate  taking  into  account  all  the   considerations
         identified in regulation 21(5)-(6).


      3. There is no specific  reference  in  the  expulsion  provisions  of
         either  Directive  2004/38/EC  or  the  2006  EEA  Regulations   to
         rehabilitation, but it has been seen by the Court of Justice as  an
         aspect of integration, which is one of the factors referred  to  in
         Article 28(1) and regulation 21(6) (Essa (2013) at [23]).


      4. Rehabilitation is not  an  issue  to  be  addressed  in  every  EEA
         deportation or removal decision taken under regulation 21; it  will
         not be relevant, for example, if rehabilitation  has  already  been
         completed (Essa (2013) at [32]-[33]).


      5.  Reference  to  prospects  of  rehabilitation  concerns  reasonable
         prospects of a person ceasing  to  commit  crime  (Essa  (2013)  at
         [35]), not the mere possibility of rehabilitation. Mere  capability
         of rehabilitation is not to be equated with reasonable prospect  of
         rehabilitation.


      6. Where relevant (see (4) above) such prospects are a  factor  to  be
         taken into account in the proportionality  assessment  required  by
         regulation 21(5) and (6) ((Dumliauskas [41]).


      7. Such prospects are to be taken into account even if not  raised  by
         the offender (Dumliauskas [52]).


      8. Gauging such prospects requires assessing the relative prospects of
         rehabilitation in the host Member State as compared with  those  in
         the Member State of origin, but, in the absence of evidence, it  is
         not to be assumed that prospects are materially different  in  that
         other Member State (Dumliauskas [46], [52]-[53] and [59]).


      9. Matters that are relevant  when  examining  the  prospects  of  the
         rehabilitation   of   offenders    include    family    ties    and
         responsibilities, accommodation, education,  training,  employment,
         active membership of a community  and  the  like  (Essa  (2013)  at
         [34]).  However,  lack  of   access  to  a  Probation  Officer   or
         equivalent in the  other  Member  State  should  not,  in  general,
         preclude deportation (Dumliauskas [55])


     10. In the absence of integration and a right of  permanent  residence,
         the future prospects of integration  cannot  be  a  weighty  factor
         (Dumliauskas  [44]  and  [54]).  Even  when  such  prospects   have
         significant weight they are not a trump card, as what the Directive
         and the 2006 EEA Regulations require  is  a  wide-ranging  holistic
         assessment. Both recognise  that  the  more  serious  the  risk  of
         reoffending, and the offences that a person may commit, the greater
         the right to interfere with the right of residence (Dumliauskas  at
         [46] and [54]).

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   To what extent is the prospect  of  rehabilitation  to  be  taken  into
    account in an EEA deportation appeal?  To what extent do the  so-called
    Essa principles still hold good?  These  are  the  principal  questions
    raised by this appeal.

2.   The appeal is brought by the  appellant  (hereafter  the  Secretary  of
    State or SSHD) against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge Burnett allowing  the  respondent's  (hereafter  the  claimant's)
    appeal against the decision of 14 May 2014 to make a deportation  order
    in accordance with  regulations  19,  21  and  24  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended)  (hereafter  the
    2006 EEA Regulations). Regulation 21, which is the  main  provision  of
    concern in this appeal, provides:

         "Decisions taken on public  policy,  public  security  and  public
    health grounds
       21.-(1) In this regulation  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
       decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or
       public health.
       (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.
       (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person with
       a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 except on serious
       grounds of public policy or public security.
       (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
       grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-
       (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  at
       least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or
       (b) is under  the  age  of  18,  unless  the  relevant  decision  is
       necessary in his best interests, as provided for in  the  Convention
       on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General  Assembly  of  the
       United Nations on 20th November 1989.
       (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
       or public security it shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
       preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance with
       the following principles-
       (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;
       (b )the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal  conduct
       of the person concerned;
       (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned  must  represent  a
       genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  one  of
       the fundamental interests of society;
       (d) matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or  which
       relate to considerations of general prevention do  not  justify  the
       decision;
       (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do  not  in  themselves
       justify the decision.
       (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
       policy or public security in relation to a person who is resident in
       the  United  Kingdom  the  decision  maker  must  take  account   of
       considerations such as the age, state of health, family and economic
       situation of the person, the person's length  of  residence  in  the
       United Kingdom, the person's social and  cultural  integration  into
       the United Kingdom and the extent of the  person's  links  with  his
       country of origin.
       (7) In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds  of  public
       health-
       (a) a disease that does not have epidemic potential  as  defined  by
       the relevant instruments of the World Health Organisation or is  not
       a disease to which section 38  of  the  Public  Health  (Control  of
       Disease) Act 1984 applies (detention in hospital of a person with  a
       notifiable disease) shall not constitute grounds for  the  decision;
       and
       (b) if the person concerned  is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  diseases
       occurring after the three month period  beginning  on  the  date  on
       which he arrived in the United Kingdom shall not constitute  grounds
       for the decision."
3.   The claimant is a citizen of  Portugal  aged  30  who  claims  to  have
    arrived in the UK in May 2005.  His history of offending began in  July
    2008 when he was arrested for wounding.   On  9  January  2009  he  was
    sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment for an offence  of  wounding.
    In the same month the Home Office sent him a letter saying that  should
    he come to the adverse interest of the  authorities  again  they  would
    consider deporting him.  On 2 July 2013  he  was  convicted  of  sexual
    assault on a female and/or 24 July  he  was  sentenced  to  two  years'
    imprisonment and placed on the Sex Offenders register  for  ten  years.
    The sentencing judge considered it  was  a  disgraceful  offence  which
    happened late in the evening and involved the claimant grabbing a woman
    who was struggling at her front door to find  her  keys.   He  sexually
    assaulted her, then went away and came back, repeating the attack.   On
    16 September 2013 he was notified of his liability to deportation.   On
    14 May 2014 he was notified of  the  decision  to  make  a  deportation
    order.

4.   At the date of hearing before the FtT judge the claimant had  a  child,
    E, with a Ms M and a stepson K, aged 2 years 9 months.  His partner, Ms
    M, had two younger brothers aged 17 and  14,  and  another  child.  The
    claimant produced a number of items of evidence to the FtT including  a
    NOMS report and an OASys Report dated 29 October 2014  which  indicated
    the claimant's licence conditions ended in May 2015.  The  report  also
    disclosed that he had a conviction for an offence he had  committed  in
    Portugal aged 17.  At 2.6 this report stated that the claimant did  not
    accept responsibility for the wounding offence despite his guilty plea,
    he stating it was self-defence despite the fact  that  the  victim  was
    stabbed in the back.  The report noted  the  claimant's  problems  with
    alcohol and his drug misuse, including cocaine.

5.   The FtT judge held that  as  the  claimant  had  not  been  in  the  UK
    exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period of five years, he  was
    entitled only to the lowest level of protection set out  in  regulation
    21 ([100]).

6.   The FtT Judge concluded that  despite  the  claimant's  expressions  of
    remorse and contrition there was a real likelihood that he  may  offend
    again.  He concluded that the claimant represented a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently serious threat to one of the fundamental interests  of
    society ([101]).

7.   The judge then  turned  to  the  considerations  listed  in  regulation
    21(6).  He noted that the claimant had a mother in Portugal;  had  been
    educated in Portugal; his partner and her family were Portuguese; these
    considerations were seen by the judge to show he still had  social  and
    cultural links to Portugal.

8.   The judge considered the various children with whom  the  claimant  was
    involved as stepfather, uncle and father.  The judge considered he  had
    no real contact with his stepson and that he had exaggerated the extent
    of his ties with  his  sister's  children.   However,  as  regards  the
    claimant's daughter, he concluded that whilst his relationship with her
    would not prevent the risk of re-offending "it  may  yet  help  in  his
    rehabilitation and reduce the future risk of re-offending" ([98]),  and
    that "it is in the best interests of [X] to have her father in her life
    if he will successfully rehabilitate his offending  behaviour.   It  is
    too early to be conclusive about the risks that the [claimant] poses as
    to the future."

9.   The judge then turned to consider the  factor  of  rehabilitation  more
    specifically.   Citing  Essa  (Essa  (EEA:  rehabilitation/integration)
    [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC)), he described this factor as "the prospects of
    rehabilitation as between this country and Portugal and an awareness of
    the interest 'of the European Union in general'."  At [119] he referred
    to the reports in the case describing the "further work which is needed
    to address [the claimant's] motivation to address offending behaviour."
     At [120] he said that although the claimant's relationship with  Ms  M
    and their child had not stopped his offending in the past,  "this  does
    not mean that the claimant cannot rehabilitate  and  that  his  support
    would not help reduce the risk of offending in the future."

10.  At [122] he noted that the Presenting Officer had  sought  to  rely  on
    [35] of the Upper Tribunal decision in Essa where it  was  stated  that
    appellants who act with impulses to commit sexual or  violent  offences
    and the like, may well fall into the category where  little  weight  is
    given to rehabilitation as a factor.  The judge  responded  that  "[I]t
    should be remembered though that the sentencing judge did not impose  a
    sentence for the protection of the public which he could have,  if  the
    appellant posed such a risk".  At [123] - [127] he concluded:

         "123.    I have considered the potential result of a deportation to
             Portugal of the appellant and the  likely  diminution  of  the
             family support for the  appellant  and  a  withdrawal  of  the
             discipline of the licence conditions which he now faces  since
             his release and the benefits of  regular  supervision  in  the
             community.  I have  considered  whether  this  will  have  the
             capacity in the future to reduce the risk of  re-offending  he
             currently  presents.    If   this   combination   of   support
             significantly reduces the appellant's risk  of  offending,  it
             could undermine to a significant degree the proportionality of
             the appellant's removal.


         124. It appears to me that none of the  reports  suggest  that  the
             appellant  is  incapable  of  rehabilitation.  The   appellant
             however needs to fundamentally change his current attitude and
             approach.  The report suggests that Mr C's behaviour needs  to
             be monitored.  As between Portugal and the United  Kingdom,  I
             consider that the appellant is  more  likely  to  address  his
             offending behaviour in the United  Kingdom  with  the  current
             support he has around him.  The support factors can  encourage
             the appellant  to  develop  stability  in  his  life  and  his
             relationships and  these  support  factors  are  significantly
             stronger in the United Kingdom.


         125. The appellant can be under no doubt however what would be  the
             consequences if he offends again in the future.


         126. I have carefully balanced all the factors in this case and the
             issues  raised  in  respect  of  the  proportionality  of  the
             decision.   I  consider  though  that  the  decision  of   the
             respondent is not justified on the grounds of  the  prevention
             of disorder and of further crimes and is not  a  proportionate
             response.   Although  the  appellant  represents  a   genuine,
             present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  one  of   the
             fundamental interests of society his deportation would not  be
             proportionate.


         127. I allow the appeal under the EEA regulations."

11.  The judge went on to consider  the  claimant's  Article  8  grounds  of
    appeal, concluding at [129] that given his "findings of fact above", it
    was "difficult to see that a decision which is  disproportionate  under
    the Regulations would justify a  different  conclusion  in  respect  of
    Article 8".  Accordingly he  also  allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds as well.

12.  The SSHD's grounds of appeal were  twofold.   First  it  was  submitted
    that in allowing the appeal under the 2006 EEA Regulations the  judge's
    decision to treat the  prospect  of  rehabilitation  as  a  substantial
    relevant factor amounted to a misunderstanding of the guidance given in
    Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT  00316  (IAC).   The
    judge had wrongly  treated  Essa  (2013)  as  enunciating  the  general
    principle that every EEA national should be given the opportunity to be
    rehabilitated in the EU member state where the offences were committed.
    The judge had also misunderstood that the Tribunal in Essa  (2013)  had
    held that the prospect of rehabilitation could only be weighed  in  the
    balance against deportation in respect of  those  who  had  acquired  a
    right of permanent residence.  In the claimant's  case  the  judge  had
    found that he had not been exercising Treaty rights for  the  requisite
    five years.

13.  The SSHD's second ground averred that the  judge's  decision  to  allow
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds was flawed  by  inadequate  reasons  as
    well as a failure to consider this case under the Immigration Rules  or
    Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in  respect
    of the weight to be accorded to the public interest.

14.  In submissions to us, Mr Melvin sought permission to amend  the  SSHD's
    grounds so as to enable her to rely on  the  further  guidance  on  the
    issue of rehabilitation in EEA deportation cases given by the Court  of
    Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  Dumliauskas  &
    Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 145.  Mr Melvin submitted that if the judge had had
    the benefit of this guidance he would have concluded that little weight
    should be attached to the claimant's prospects of  rehabilitation.   In
    turn he would not have found a breach of Article  8  because  he  would
    have had to treat failure under the EEA  Regulations  as  strengthening
    the public interest in deportation.

15.  In amplifying the  original  grounds  Mr  Melvin  emphasised  that  the
    judge's findings on rehabilitation were  in  any  event  contradictory,
    finding on the one hand that the claimant was unlikely to  rehabilitate
    and on the other that he was likely to do so.

16.  Mr Solebo submitted that whereas the SSHD's written  grounds  had  said
    that the judge was wrong to treat rehabilitation as a  relevant  factor
    at all, now she was only challenging the degree  of  weight  the  judge
    attached to it.  Weight was a  matter  for  the  judicial  fact-finder.
    Further  the  judge's  determination  demonstrated  that  he  correctly
    concluded that none of the reports suggested the claimant was incapable
    of rehabilitation and that he did consider rehabilitation by  reference
    to factors that were relevant to it such  as  remorse  and  family  and
    children.

17.  Mr Solebo said that it is also clear from  the  analysis  conducted  by
    Sir Stanley Burnton in Dumliauskas  that  there  was  no  intention  to
    resile from the earlier statements of principle in  Daha  Essa  in  the
    Court  of  Appeal  that  EEA  deportation  cases  involve  a  "European
    dimension" in the sense  that  the  European  Union  has  a  collective
    interest in promoting the rehabilitation of all EU  citizens  who  have
    lapsed into crime.  It was emphasised that whilst therefore "all Member
    States have an interest in reducing criminality, and  that  deportation
    merely exports the offender, leaving him free to offend elsewhere":

18.  Mr Melvin in response pointed out that  the  judge  had  not  made  any
    clear findings about the comparative  prospects  of  rehabilitation  in
    Portugal, even though the judge found he was  educated  there  and  had
    family there.  There was nothing to show  the  claimant  would  not  be
    entitled to rehabilitative treatment there.  As regards Article 8,  the
    judge was obliged to consider not just  the  claimant's  interests  but
    also those of the wider society.

    Essa principles recast

19.  Invocation by both parties of "Essa" principles or criteria  highlights
    a common source of confusion arising  from  the  fact  that  there  are
    indeed three cases all relating to the same individual: Essa, R (on the
    application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration & Asylum Chamber) &  Anor
    [2012 EWHC 1533 (QB), 1 June 2012); Essa, R (on the application  Of)  v
    Upper Tribunal (Immigration & Asylum Chamber) & Anor  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1718 (21 December 2012); and Daha Essa v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2013] UKUT 316 (IAC) 3 June 2013).

20.  Daha Essa is a Somali by birth who became a Dutch national at an  early
    age.  He moved to the UK  at  the  age  of  12.   He  began  committing
    criminal offences when 17.  In the High Court judgment  of  June  2012,
    Lang J stated at [46] that:

         "In my judgment, the judgment of the ECJ in  Tsakouridis  [2011  C-
         145/09, 23 November 2010] establishes that the decision  maker,  in
         applying regulation  21  of  the  EEA  Regulations,  must  consider
         whether a  decision  to  deport  may  prejudice  the  prospects  of
         rehabilitation from criminal offending in  the  host  country,  and
         weigh that risk in the balance when assessing proportionality under
         regulation 21(5)(a).  In most cases, this will necessarily entail a
         comparison with the prospects of rehabilitation  in  the  receiving
         country, as illustrated by Batista v Secretary  of  State  for  the
         Home Dept [2010] EWCA Civ 896 where the Court of Appeal  considered
         that in the UK the claimant's English girlfriend might provide  the
         support which he needed to avert a 'drift back to  crime',  whereas
         such support would be 'practically non-existent' in Portugal."

21.  In rejecting the application  for  judicial  review  against  an  Upper
    Tribunal refusal of permission to appeal Lang J concluded that the  FtT
    had taken  the  factor  of  rehabilitation  into  account  and  reached
    sustainable conclusions.

22.  When this judgment  went  to  the  Court  of  Appeal,  Maurice  Kay  LJ
    referred at [9] to the "European dimension which  widens  consideration
    beyond the interests of the expelling Member State  and  those  of  the
    foreign criminal": see also [12].  Maurice Kay LJ  concluded  that  the
    FtT had not undertaken "a conscious consideration of the  prospects  of
    rehabilitation as between  this  country  and  the  Netherlands  or  an
    awareness of the interest 'of the European Union in general'."

23.  On remittal from the Court  of  Appeal  Daha  Essa's  case  came  again
    before the Upper Tribunal in Essa (2013). The  Tribunal  affirmed  that
    for any deportation to be  justified  the  claimant  must  represent  a
    present threat to public policy.  In cases short of  the  most  serious
    threats to public safety of the state,  this  tended  to  mean  that  a
    candidate for EEA deportation had to  represent  a  present  threat  by
    reason of a propensity to re-offend or an unacceptably high risk of re-
    offending ([32]).

24.  The Tribunal went on to distinguish two rehabilitation  scenarios:  (1)
    where there is acceptable evidence of completed rehabilitation; and (2)
    where rehabilitation is incomplete or uncertain  ([32]).   At  [33]  it
    stated that  "[i]t  is  only  where  rehabilitation  is  incomplete  or
    uncertain that  future  prospects  may  play  a  role  in  the  overall
    assessment". Having identified the most likely class of persons to whom
    rehabilitative consideration applies as being  young  adult  offenders,
    the Tribunal concluded at [34] - [35]:

         "34. If the very factors that contribute to  his  integration  that
             assist in rehabilitation of such offenders  (family  ties  and
             responsibilities,    accommodation,    education,    training,
             employment, active membership of a  community  and  the  like)
             will assist in the completion of a process of  rehabilitation,
             then that can be a substantial factor in the balance.  If  the
             claimant   cannot   constitute   a   present    threat    when
             rehabilitated, and is well-advanced  in  rehabilitation  in  a
             host state where there is a substantial degree of integration,
             it may well  very  well  be  disproportionate  to  proceed  to
             deportation.


         35.  At the other end of the scale,  if  there  are  no  reasonable
             prospects of rehabilitation, the claimant is a present  threat
             and is likely to remain  so  for  the  indefinite  future,  we
             cannot  see  how  the  prospects   of   rehabilitation   could
             constitute  a  significant  factor  in  the   balance.    Thus
             recidivist offenders, career criminals,  adult  offenders  who
             have failed to engage  with  treatment  programmes,  claimants
             with impulses to commit sexual or  violent  offences  and  the
             like may well fall into this category."

25.  In re-making the decision (having set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal) the panel also dealt with the interrelationship  between
    length of residence as a qualified person and rehabilitation.  At  [26]
    it stated:

         "We agree that the [Court of Justice's] reference [in  Tsakouridis]
         to genuine integration must be directed at  qualified  persons  and
         their family members who have resided in the host state as such for
         five years or more.  People who  have  just  arrived  in  the  host
         state, have not yet become qualified persons, or have  not  been  a
         qualified person for five years, can always  be  removed  for  non-
         exercise of  free  movement  rights  irrespective  of  public  good
         grounds to curtail free movement rights.  If their presence  during
         this time makes them a present threat to public policy it would  be
         inconsistent with the purposes of the Directive  to  weigh  in  the
         balance   against   deportation   their   future    prospects    of
         rehabilitation."

26.  At [28] the panel added "... the longer the residence the  greater  the
    degree of integration is likely to be, and the weightier the  prospects
    of rehabilitation would be as a factor against removal."

27.  The Upper Tribunal concluded at [57]:

         "Making our own assessment on the material now available to  us  we
         conclude:-


         i.   The appellant would constitute a threat to  public  policy  in
             this case if he were to commit a future violent  offence.   We
             consider that the current assessment of the risk of his  doing
             so is low and this assessment has been tested by  his  release
             into the community for over two years.


          ii. The appellant has resided in the United Kingdom for  13  years
             and just over half his life.  He has strong family connections
             here and is well integrated.  His prospects of preserving  and
             developing his rehabilitation are  significantly  improved  by
             continued residence  here.   Deportation  to  the  Netherlands
             would remove  important  support  factors  and  incentives  to
             behave and would appear to be positively  detrimental  to  his
             future rehabilitation.


         iii. In all the circumstances of his case, deportation now for  the
             conduct leading to his conviction would be disproportionate."

28.  In addition to these three cases on Essa, the recent  Court  of  Appeal
    judgment  in  Dumliauskas  has  significantly  recast  what  have  been
    referred to as Essa principles.   Whereas  the  Tribunal  in  Essa  had
    concluded that the prospects of rehabilitation in the  offender's  home
    state are relevant to the decision to deport only if he has acquired  a
    permanent right of  residence,  Sir  Stanley  Burnton  (LJJ  Floyd  and
    Jackson concurring) disagreed, stating at [46]:

         "Whilst I have considerable  sympathy  with  this  approach,  I  am
         unable to agree with it.  I can think of  no  other  example  of  a
         factor bearing on  proportionality  being  relevant  to  those  who
         qualify in a certain  respect  (here,  lawful  residence)  but  not
         others.  Once proportionality is engaged, the factors to  be  taken
         into account do not vary with the qualifications of the  individual
         concerned...  What is however affected by length of legal residence
         (in the sense used in Article 16.1) is the weight to  be  given  to
         the respective prospects of rehabilitation.  In addition, it  seems
         to me that the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Daha  Essa  is
         inconsistent with what was said by Maurice Kay LJ in Daha Essa."

29.  We do not understand Dumliauskas to have overruled the entirety of  the
    guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in Essa (2013); indeed Maurice Kay
    LJ expressly approved parts of it. However, in  light  of  the  further
    analysis provided in Dumliauskas it may assist if we seek to  summarise
    cumulatively what  these  principles  are,  as  now  modified  by  this
    judgment:-

    a. Essa rehabilitation principles are specific to  decisions  taken  on
       public policy, public  security  and  public  health  grounds  under
       regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.


    b.  It is only if the personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  is
       found to represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
       threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society
       (regulation 21(5)(c)) that it becomes relevant to  consider  whether
       the  decision  is  proportionate  taking  into   account   all   the
       considerations identified in regulation 21(5)-(6).


    c.  There is no specific  reference  in  the  expulsion  provisions  of
       either  Directive  2004/38/EC  or  the  2006  EEA   Regulations   to
       rehabilitation, but it has been seen by the Court of Justice  as  an
       aspect of integration, which is one of the factors  referred  to  in
       Article 28(1) and regulation 21(6) (Essa (2013) at [23]).


    d. Rehabilitation is  not  an  issue  to  be  addressed  in  every  EEA
       deportation or removal decision taken under regulation 21;  it  will
       not be relevant, for example, if  rehabilitation  has  already  been
       completed (Essa (2013) at [32]-[33]).


    e.  Reference  to  prospects  of  rehabilitation  concerns   reasonable
       prospects of a person ceasing to commit crime (Essa (2013) at [35]),
       not the mere possibility of rehabilitation.


    f. Where relevant (see (4) above) such prospects are  a  factor  to  be
       taken into account in the  proportionality  assessment  required  by
       regulation 21(5) and (6) ((Dumliauskas [41]).


    g. Such prospects are to be taken into account even if  not  raised  by
       the offender (Dumliauskas [52]).


    h. Gauging such prospects requires assessing the relative prospects  of
       rehabilitation in the host Member State as compared  with  those  in
       the Member State of origin, but, in the absence of evidence,  it  is
       not to be assumed that prospects are materially  different  in  that
       other Member State (Dumliauskas [46], [52]-[53] and [59]).


    i. Matters that are  relevant  when  examining  the  prospects  of  the
       rehabilitation   of    offenders    include    family    ties    and
       responsibilities, accommodation,  education,  training,  employment,
       active membership of a community and the like (Essa (2013) at [34]).
       However, lack of  access to a Probation Officer or equivalent in the
       other Member State should  not,  in  general,  preclude  deportation
       (Dumliauskas [55])


    j. In the absence of integration and a right  of  permanent  residence,
       the future prospects of  integration  cannot  be  a  weighty  factor
       (Dumliauskas  [44]  and  [54]).  Even  when  such   prospects   have
       significant weight they are not a trump card, as what the  Directive
       and the 2006 EEA Regulations  require  is  a  wide-ranging  holistic
       assessment. Both recognises  that  the  more  serious  the  risk  of
       reoffending, and the offences that a person may commit, the  greater
       the right to interfere with the right of residence  (Dumliauskas  at
       [46] and [54]).

    The claimant's case

30.  Mr Solebo did not resist Mr Melvin's application to amend the  grounds,
    but in any event we accept his application, as  it  originates  from  a
    proper concern that this Tribunal applies the law as it  has  now  been
    clarified by the Court of Appeal in Dumliauskas.

31.  The original ground relied on by the SSHD was that the judge  erred  in
    treating rehabilitation as a relevant factor notwithstanding  the  fact
    that  the  claimant   had   not   acquired   five   years'   residence.
    Understandably,  in  light  of  the  Court  of   Appeal   analysis   in
    Dumliauskas,  that  ground  is  now  abandoned  and  replaced  by   the
    contention that the judge erred  in  attaching  substantial  weight  to
    rehabilitation  notwithstanding  that  the  claimant  lacked  permanent
    residence.

32.  In the context of this amended ground two  things  are  clear.   First,
    the judge found the claimant not to have acquired  permanent  residence
    and it is not in dispute that he was right in  that  finding.   Second,
    the judge attached substantial weight to the  claimant's  prospects  of
    rehabilitation (see e.g. [123] as cited earlier at paragraph 10; indeed
    it was the only factor he appeared to weigh on the claimant's side when
    conducting the proportionality assessment enjoined by regulation 21.

33.  Given (i) that attaching substantial weight to rehabilitation  who  has
    not acquired permanent residence was found by the Court  of  Appeal  in
    Dumliauskas to be legally erroneous; and (ii) that it was only  because
    he attached substantial weight to this factor that  the  judge  allowed
    the appeal under the 2006 EEA Regulations, we are bound  to  find  that
    the judge materially erred in law in this case.

34.  We also think that the judge wrongly construed  the  existing  guidance
    as to what it meant by prospects of  rehabilitation.  We  have  already
    noted in the earlier summary  of  the  (recast)  Essa  principles  that
    prospects of rehabilitation must be reasonable prospects not simply the
    possibility of rehabilitation (see paragraph 29(5) above). Contrary  to
    that principle, the FtT judge treated as weighty to the claimant's case
    that the reports did not show he was "incapable of rehabilitation" (see
    e.g. [123]) above). Mere capability of  rehabilitation  is  not  to  be
    equated with reasonable prospect of rehabilitation and in  the  absence
    of the latter we cannot see that there can be anything of  significance
    to weigh in the balance.

35.  We would also observe that  the  judge's  conduct  of  the  comparative
    exercise was notably deficient in  that  he  simply  assumed  that  the
    prospects of rehabilitation would be worse for the claimant in Portugal
    than in the UK: see [124]. He did not refer to any  evidence  regarding
    the  situation  in  Portugal.  In  this  regard  we  find  particularly
    significant what was said by Maurice Kay LJ in Dumliauskas at [53] (see
    above paragraph 29(8)).

36.  In light of our conclusion that the judge materially erred  in  law  in
    allowing the appeal under the 2006 EEA Regulations, we do not  need  to
    address the second  ground.   We  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.

    Re-making the decision

37.  Both parties agreed that we were in a position to re-make the  decision
    if we chose to do so.  The claimant did  not  seek  to  adduce  further
    evidence.  We have very full evidence  about  his  history  and  recent
    circumstances from the body of materials placed before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Whilst we have set aside the decision of that Tribunal there
    has been no challenge by either party to the findings of fact  save  in
    respect of the issue of rehabilitation.

38.  On the logic of the Essa principles as revised by the Court  of  Appeal
    in Dumliauskas it is not open to a Tribunal re-making the  decision  in
    an appeal concerning an EEA national who  has  not  acquired  permanent
    residence  to  attach  substantial  weight  to  the  prospects  of  his
    rehabilitation.  In the claimant's case the  factors  weighing  against
    him in assessing the proportionality of the  deportation  decision  are
    very considerable. In addition to his  having  been  found  to  pose  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  fundamental
    interests of society ([101], he has been found  not  to  have  accepted
    responsibility for the 2013 offence; he had not been exercising  Treaty
    rights for five years  ([100]);  he  had  some  continuing  links  with
    Portugal (e.g. he had a mother who lived there); although he  has  been
    found to have significant family relationships  with  his  partner  and
    their child in the UK, it has also been  found  that  these  have  been
    exaggerated and that they had not prevented him  from  re-offending  in
    2013, and it was not accepted that  his  relationship  with  his  child
    would prevent the risk of him offending in the future ([98]).   He  has
    been found to continue to have problems relating to  alcohol  and  drug
    misuse ([82] - [83], [99], [106]).

39.  The claimant was found to have exaggerated his involvement with E,  his
    stepchild and his partner's children ([111] - [112]).  He was found  to
    have difficulties in his relationship with Ms M ([113]).  Although  the
    judge clearly thought the claimant's relationship with his child  would
    assist  his  prospects  of  rehabilitation,  he  also  found  the  best
    interests of the children,  including  this  child,  to  be  a  neutral
    factor.

40.  The factors weighing in favour of the  claimant  included,  of  course,
    the fact that he has been in the UK over 10 years; that he  has  family
    here and that in the time he has been here he has  integrated  into  UK
    society in a number of ways.  Given,  however,  the  very  considerable
    number of factors weighing against the claimant, we do not consider the
    factor of rehabilitation is one which either significantly adds to  the
    factors to be counted in his favour or alters the  overall  balance  of
    considerations. Whatever the state of the  relative  prospects  of  his
    rehabilitation in the UK as compared to  Portugal  (and  there  was  no
    evidence to show it would be significantly different),  such  a  factor
    cannot amount in his case to one which carries substantial weight.

41.  For the above reasons the claimant's  appeal  against  the  deportation
    decision cannot  succeed  as  that  decision  was  in  accordance  with
    regulation 21.

42.  As regards the claimant's Article 8 grounds of  appeal,  even  assuming
    they can be engaged in a case such as this, we  do  not  consider  they
    have any merit.  Although there are important differences  between  the
    criteria set out in the 2006 Regulations  and  those  applicable  under
    Article 8, separate examination of the latter would only  be  justified
    if there was some material basis for considering  that  the  Article  8
    assessment would be more beneficial to a claimant.  In  the  claimant's
    case, none has been shown and the principal basis on  which  the  judge
    allowed the Article 8 appeal - that the decision was not in  accordance
    with the EEA Regulations - has fallen away.

43.  For the above reasons:

    The FtT judge materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.


    The decision we re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

    An anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey


