
[pic]

|Upper Tribunal                                                              |
|Immigration and Asylum Chamber                                              |
|                                                                            |
|Judicial Review Decision Notice                                             |




R (on the application of MS) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
(excluded persons: Restrictive Leave policy) IJR [2015] UKUT 00539 (IAC)




          The Queen on the application of MS (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   applicant


                                   versus


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  respondent


                                     AND


         The Queen on the application of MBT (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   applicant




                                   versus


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  respondent




                   Before: The Honourable Mr Justice Dove
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill



            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms S Harrison QC of  Counsel,  Ms  C  Kilroy  of
Counsel for MS, Ms A Weston of Counsel for MBT and Ms J Anderson of  Counsel
for the respondent at a hearing at Field House on 6, 7 and 10 July 2015



   The Restrictive Leave to Remain ("RLR") policy


      i) With effect from 2 September  2011,  the  respondent  introduced  a
         policy pursuant to which  she  granted  RLR  to  persons  who  were
         excluded from the Refugee Convention but whose removal would be  in
         breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.  The  policy  is  stated  to  have
         three purposes, namely  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  the
         integrity of  immigration  control;  public  protection  to  ensure
         monitoring of where an individual lives and works and prevent their
         access to positions of trust, and upholding the international  rule
         of law by supporting broader international  obligations  to  remove
         individuals excluded from the Convention as soon as possible.


     ii) Under the RLR policy, the duration for which leave  is  granted  is
         usually a maximum of six months at a time, with  an  active  review
         prior to the expiry of the leave when  consideration  is  given  to
         whether the individual can  be  removed,  the  intention  being  to
         effect removal at the earliest opportunity.  The  RLR  policy  also
         provides for conditions to be imposed, usually as  follows:  (i)  a
         condition as to the place of residence,  specifying  the  frequency
         with which the individual  is  permitted  to  live  away  from  the
         designated place of residence; (ii)  a  condition  restricting  the
         individual's employment or occupation; (iii) a condition  requiring
         the individual to report to an Immigration Officer or the Secretary
         of State at regular intervals; and (iv) a condition prohibiting the
         individual from studying at an educational institution without  the
         prior consent of the Secretary  of  State.  The  RLR  policy  of  2
         September 2011  is  a  lawful  policy.  The  same  applies  to  the
         subsequent RLR polices dated 28 May 2012 and 23 January 2015.


    iii) There is sufficient flexibility within the RLR policy for  decision
         makers to depart from the usual rule of only  granting  RLR  for  a
         maximum of six months at a time  and  of  imposing  the  conditions
         described.  The flexibility is comprised, inter alia, in  the  need
         to consider which of the types of condition  are  appropriate,  the
         particular terms of the condition imposed and whether  or  not  the
         point has been reached  in  the  particular  case  where  the  only
         reasonable course available to the Secretary of State is  to  grant
         indefinite leave to remain ("ILR").


     iv) In considering the duration of the grant of leave and the type  and
         detail of the conditions to be imposed, it will  be  necessary  for
         decision makers to consider the impact on the best interests of any
         children as a primary consideration.


      v) Whilst the imposition of time limited leave may have an  impact  on
         the quality of family life, in that, it may be  stressful  for  all
         members of the individual's family  to  live  under  the  continual
         "threat"  every  six  months  of  the  individual  concerned  being
         removed, it does not interfere with the continuance of family life.




     vi) Very strong evidence would be needed to  prevail  over  the  public
         interest and  public  protection  considerations  which  are  given
         effect in the three purposes of the RLR policy so  as  to  make  it
         unreasonable for the respondent not to grant RLR for more than  six
         months or not to impose the usual conditions.


ILR: Consideration of whether the end point has been reached:


    (i)  The consideration of whether or not the  point  has  been  reached
        where the only reasonable course is to grant ILR will depend upon a
        variety of factors, including: (a) the reasons why  the  individual
        was excluded from the Refugee Convention; (b) whether the applicant
        has remained blamelessly in the United Kingdom for a lengthy period
        of time; (c) the prospect of removal of the applicant to his or her
        home country, involving an appraisal of the political circumstances
        of  the  home  country  bearing  in  mind  that  the  international
        reputation of the United Kingdom which can be  in  point  in  these
        cases and (d) the particular circumstances of the applicant and his
        life in the United Kingdom.


    (ii) This is not an exhaustive list. Failure to consider this aspect of
        the policy and provide reasons may  amount  to  an  error  of  law.
        However, there will be cases when the suggestion that the end point
        has been reached is so hopeless that reasons are  not  required  in
        relation to this aspect of the policy


The Discretionary Leave to Remain ("DLR") policy


    (i)  The current Discretionary Leave policy (applicable since  24  June
        2014) as well as its predecessor (the policy in place from at least
        November 2012)  states  that  the  RLR  policy  will  apply  unless
        exceptional circumstances justify divergence from the policy.  This
        overarching policy, of  not  diverting  individuals  from  the  RLR
        policy unless there  were  exceptional  circumstances,  is  also  a
        lawful and rational policy.


    (ii) The respondent is entitled to apply her overarching  policy.   She
        is therefore not obliged to  give  reasons  for  applying  the  RLR
        policy to an individual and not diverting him or  her  to  the  DLR
        policy, unless there are plainly  exceptional  circumstances  which
        she may have overlooked capable of outweighing the public  interest
        in the three purposes of the RLR policy.  If an individual  is  not
        diverted to the DLR policy, the transitional provisions in the  DLR
        policy will not be applicable to him or her.


Delay


          In cases where there has been a delay in making a decision  on  an
        in-time application for extension of leave and  where,  during  the
        period of the delay, the applicable policy for excluded persons who
        cannot be  removed  has  changed  from  the  DLR  policy  that  was
        applicable to such persons prior to 2 September  2011  to  the  RLR
        policy applicable since 2 September 2011, an  argument  based  upon
        "historic injustice" is not  available,  applying  by  analogy  the
        judgment of  the  Supreme  Court  in  TN  and  MA  (Afghanistan)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 40.

                                  Judgment
                      (Handed down on 4 September 2015)

Introduction


1. Both members of the panel have contributed to this judgment.

2. Both of these cases raise the question of the legality  of  the  adoption
   by the respondent of a policy known as the "Restrictive Leave to  Remain"
   ("RLR") policy, first  introduced  on  2nd  September  2011,  which  made
   provision for the duration for which leave is granted to persons who  are
   excluded from protection under the Refugee Convention but who  cannot  be
   removed due to Article 3 of the ECHR.  The RLR policy provided (in brief)
   that such persons will usually only be granted RLR for a maximum  of  six
   months at a time, with some or all of four types of conditions, namely, a
   condition as to place of residence and the  number  of  nights  that  the
   excluded person can be absent from the place of  residence;  a  condition
   restricting employment or occupation; a  condition  prohibiting  studies;
   and a condition requiring the individual  to  report  to  an  immigration
   officer or the Secretary of State at regular intervals.  The  RLR  policy
   has been updated twice since, i.e. with effect from  28th  May  2012  and
   23rd January 2015. Within the RLR policy, it was  stated  in  terms  that
   active reviews would be undertaken when  consideration  is  given  to  an
   application for extension of leave to ascertain  whether  the  individual
   can be removed, and if not, conditions normally imposed were to  maintain
   contact in order to facilitate removal when removal is  possible,  ensure
   that the individual does not gain access to  positions  of  influence  or
   trust and signal that the person should not  become  established  in  the
   United Kingdom.

3. Prior to the introduction of  the  RLR  policy  on  2nd  September  2011,
   persons who were excluded from protection under  the  Refugee  Convention
   but who could not be removed due to Article 3 of the  ECHR  were  granted
   leave as follows:

     (i) until 31 March 2003, exceptional leave to remain ("ELR"); and
     (ii)     from 1 April 2003, discretionary leave to remain ("DLR").

4. Conditions were not imposed when ELR was granted to excluded persons  who
   could not be removed.

5. The DLR policy has evolved over  time.  The  current  version  came  into
   force on 24th June 2014. The version  that  applied  before  the  current
   version was in place at least from November 2012.  This  is  the  version
   that was in place when the decisions that are the subject of these claims
   were made (2nd May 2014 in the case of MS and 21st  August  2013  in  the
   case of MBT). None of  the  versions  of  the  DLR  policy  provided  for
   conditions to be imposed on the leave granted  to  excluded  persons  who
   cannot be removed.

6. Having set out this brief overview of the RLR policy and the  DLR  policy
   (dealt with in greater detail below), we return to the questions that are
   raised in these claims. Besides the  legality  of  the  RLR  policy,  the
   claims also raise the question, assuming that the RLR policy  is  lawful,
   as to whether or not in  their  individual  cases  the  policy  has  been
   lawfully applied to them. The structure of this determination is  firstly
   that we shall set  out  the  facts  in  each  of  the  individual  cases,
   secondly, the respondent's evidence and the policy material is  set  out,
   thirdly, we shall identify the issues which  are  raised  in  each  case,
   fourthly, we shall deal with the lawfulness of the RLR policy and finally
   we turn to the lawfulness of the application of the RLR policy in each of
   the individual cases.

7. Because of the short-lived nature of decisions made under the RLR  policy
   and the length of time taken in the litigation, there have been  multiple
   decisions in respect of each applicant. Although the  challenge  in  each
   case relates to an earlier decision,  we  have  taken  into  account  the
   reasoning in the most recent decision in assessing the lawfulness of  the
   application of  the  RLR  policy,  given  the  iterative  nature  of  the
   successive decisions and the fact that the thrust of the  litigation  was
   directed at the lawfulness of the RLR policy.

8. We are indebted to counsel on all sides of the case for  the  conspicuous
   hard work and intellectual rigour that they have applied to their written
   and oral submissions in this case, without which our task would have been
   infinitely more difficult.


I. The Facts: MS

9. MS is a national of India who was born on 15th October 1972.  He  arrived
   in the United Kingdom in April 1995 and claimed asylum. That  application
   was refused on 11th August 1999 and his appeal was certified on  national
   security  grounds.  MS  appealed  to  the  Special  Immigration   Appeals
   Commission ('SIAC') and his appeal was allowed on Human Rights grounds on
   31st July 2000. SIAC determined that his removal to India would involve a
   breach of Article 3 of the ECHR as a result of his likely persecution  by
   the authorities in India. It was also determined  that  he  was  excluded
   under Article 1F  of  the  Refugee  Convention  for  his  involvement  in
   terrorist activity in support of Sikh separatism.

10. In the proceedings before SIAC MS was  identified  as  being  associated
   with the  Dam  Dami  Taksal  faction  of  the  International  Sikh  Youth
   Federation which was a violent Sikh extremist organisation in the  United
   Kingdom supporting the activities of the  Khalistan  Commando  Force  who
   were a paramilitary  group  operating  out  of  Pakistan.  The  Khalistan
   Commando Force was an extremist group committed to the  establishment  of
   an independent Sikh state in Khalistan in India by violent means. MS  was
   in particular  accused  of  being  engaged  in  a  conspiracy  with  Sikh
   extremists to arrange delivery of shipments of terrorist  equipment  from
   Pakistan to India. The Punjab police  arrested  individuals  involved  in
   this terrorist activity and it was contended that the  arrest  of  MS  in
   November  1998  and  his  detention  had  averted  arrangements  for  the
   terrorist attacks to be completed. At paragraph 24 of  the  determination
   from SIAC it was accepted that these  contentions  of  the  Secretary  of
   State had been 'proved to a high degree of probability' and that  MS  had
   endangered national security and was  a  continuing  danger  to  national
   security. Furthermore, it was concluded that the Secretary of  State  had
   shown it would be conducive to  the  public  good  in  the  interests  of
   national security for him to be deported. SIAC went on to  find  that  MS
   had been tortured  and  mistreated  whilst  in  custody  in  India.  SIAC
   concluded that there was a real risk that if returned to India  MS  would
   be subjected to torture and furthermore than the  general  assurances  of
   the Indian government that MS would enjoy the same legal  protection  and
   be subjected to the same due process of law as any  Indian  citizen  were
   not sufficient to ensure that the risk of torture was reduced  below  the
   threshold at which there would be a  breach  by  the  United  Kingdom  of
   Article 3 if MS were to be returned. SIAC went on to conclude that MS was
   excluded, as a result of the terrorist acts which they  had  found,  from
   the Refugee Convention by Article 1F(c).

11. Following his appeal being allowed, he was granted ELR on 30th  November
   2000 pursuant to the policy then applicable. Following  the  introduction
   of the DLR policy on 1st April 2003, MS was granted DLR on a rolling  six
   month basis most recently on 9th December 2004 for a period of six months
   until 8th June 2005. MS applied in time for the renewal of that leave  on
   each occasion it expired and the most recent grant was no  exception.  He
   applied for further leave to remain on 7th June 2005 requesting  that  he
   be granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  ("ILR"),  requests  that  were
   repeated by letters or applications dated  3rd  November  2010  and  28th
   April 2011, on the basis of the respondent's  policy  on  DLR  which  was
   operational at that time.

12. Correspondence  was  sent  regularly  by  MS's  solicitors  chasing  the
   respondent for a decision in his case. Holding letters were sent  by  the
   respondent in reply to this correspondence. In short, reliance was placed
   upon the fact that MS had been in the United Kingdom for 10 years and was
   entitled therefore to ILR under the terms of the DLR policy.  Neither  of
   these applications was determined by the respondent  and  on  31st  March
   2014 these proceedings were commenced based initially on the  failure  of
   the respondent to take any decision on MS's application of 7th June 2005.



13. In response to these proceedings  the  respondent's  acknowledgement  of
   service indicated an agreement to take a decision by 2nd May 2014.  By  a
   letter  dated  2nd  May  2014  with  an  accompanying  notice  under  the
   Immigration Act 1971 (the "1971 Act") Ms was granted RLR pursuant to  the
   RLR policy which had been introduced on 2nd September 2011. The pertinent
   parts of the decision letter provided as follows:

         Restricted Leave


         6.    On  31st  July  2000  the  Specialist   Immigration   Appeals
             Commission (SIAC) upheld the Home Office's decision  that  you
             should be refused asylum on grounds of exclusion under Article
             1F of the Refugee Convention.  However, SIAC also found you to
             be at risk of a breach of Article 3 of the European Convention
             of Human Rights (ECHR) if you were  to  be  returned  to  your
             country of origin.  The circumstances of  your  case  are  not
             considered to have changed...


         8.   In accordance with the published policy, you are being granted
             six months Restricted Leave to Remain.  This leave is  subject
             to  conditions  as  provided  under  s.3(1)(c)  of  the   1971
             Immigration Act.   These  are  detailed  in  the  accompanying
             Notice.  A person who knowingly fails to observe  a  condition
             of their leave commits an offence by virtue  of  s.24(1)(b)(i)
             Immigration Act 1971.  Where appropriate, this policy will  be
             enforced by the prosecution of individuals who do  not  comply
             with the conditions of their leave...


         12.  Notwithstanding the above, consideration  has  been  given  to
             your claim that you should  be  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
             Remain on the basis of your submissions regarding Article 8 of
             the ECHR


         Refusal of application to vary leave to remain to indefinite  leave
         to remain


         13.  Paragraph 322(2) and 322(12)  of  Immigration  Rules  set  out
             "grounds on which leave to remain and variation  of  leave  to
             remain enter or remain in the United Kingdom  should  normally
             be refused."


         14.  Your application has been considered under paragraph 322(5) of
             the Immigration Rules which states:


                  (v) the undesirability of permitting the person  concerned
                  to remain in the Untied Kingdom in light of his character,
                  conduct or associations or the fact that he  represents  a
                  threat to national security


         15.  The Secretary of State considers it undesirable to  vary  your
             leave to grant you indefinite leave to remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom in light of your character,  conduct  and  association
             for the reasons below.


         16.  It is noted that you have claimed asylum in April 1995.   Your
             claim was refused  as  you  were  excluded  from  the  Refugee
             Convention under Article 1F(c) in August 1999  as  there  were
             serious reasons for considering that you were guilty  of  acts
             contrary to the purposes and principle of the United  Nations.
             In  the  determination  of  the  Special  Immigration  Appeals
             Commission  (SIAC)  dated  31st  July  2000  agreed  with  the
             Secretary of State and upheld this decision:


                  "We accept the Secretary of State's submission  that  this
                  declaration and the materials supplied to us showed beyond
                  doubt that terrorism  is  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
                  principles of the United Nations.  It  followed  that  the
                  appellant's 'terrorist acts' exclude them from the Refugee
                  Convention, by virtue of Article 1F(c)  and  we  so  find"
                  (Paragraph 68).


         17.  It further states: "As to the second main issue  raised  under
             the Refugee Convention, namely,  whether  the  Appellants  are
             excluded  by  Article  33(2)  from  the  non   -   refoulement
             provisions of Article 33(1), we are satisfied for the  reasons
             already given that each of these Appellants is a danger to the
             security of the United Kingdom and cannot claim the benefit of
             the provision of Article 33(1)." (Paragraph 69).


         18.  It  also  states  that:  "That  the  Secretary  of  State  has
             demonstrated that each Appellant is a danger to  the  national
             security and that it is conducive to the public good to deport
             him' (paragraph 70).


         19.  The findings of SIAC  have  been  considered  with  regard  to
             paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.   It  is  concluded
             that it is undesirable for you to remain in the  UK  and  your
             application for ILR is refused.


         Article 8  consideration  under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
         Rules...


         23.  It is noted that you have a wife who is a British citizen  and
             three British children aged 11, 6 and  3  and  that  you  live
             together as a family unit.  Your parents also live  with  you.
             It is noted that you have lived in the UK for 18 years and  11
             months and that you have siblings who live in the UK.


         24.  Your suitability to be granted Indefinite Leave to  Remain  on
             the basis of Article 8 under the Immigration  Rules  has  been
             considered with reference to the following rules: S-ILR1.1 the
             application will be refused limited leave to remain on grounds
             of suitability if any of paragraphs S-ILR1.2-1.9 apply...


             S-ILR1.8 The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
             conducive to the public good because their conduct  (including
             convictions which do not fall within paragraphs S-ILR1.3-1.6),
             character, associations, or other reasons make it  undesirable
             to allow them to remain in the UK.


         25.  You are excluded from  the  Refugee  Convention  due  to  your
             previous acts of terrorism, a decision upheld by SIAC.  It  is
             noted that it was found that you were  a  danger  to  national
             security and that it was  conducive  to  the  public  good  to
             deport you.  It is noted that you have not  acknowledged  this
             fact in any of your representations since 2005.


         26.  Based on this evidence you fail to fulfil S-ILR1.8 of Appendix
             FM of the Immigration Rules and it  is  considered  that  your
             character,  associations  and  other  reasons,   namely   your
             involvement in terrorism, mean that it is undesirable for  you
             to remain in the UK.


         27.  Therefore you cannot  meet  the  requirements  for  Indefinite
             Leave to Remain as the  partner  of  a  British  citizen.   In
             addition your failure to satisfy  the  requirements  of  S-ILR
             also means that you cannot meet the requirements for leave  to
             remain as the parent of children who are British citizens.


         Consideration of exceptional circumstances


         ...


         29.  It is noted that you have been in the United  Kingdom  for  18
             years and 11 months and that you have a British wife and three
             British children under the age of 12.  It is noted that as  of
             2011 your parents live with you and you have  other  relatives
             in the United Kingdom.  You also claim that you have a lot  of
             friends in the Sikh and local school community  and  that  you
             undertake voluntary work at your local temple.  It is  further
             noted that you are to be granted Restricted Leave, which means
             that you will be able to continue living with your  family  in
             your present circumstances.


         30.  The Secretary  of  State  has  considered  interests  of  your
             children in light of the above case law and note that they are
             aged 11, 6 and 4 and that you live together.  It is noted that
             they are British Citizens and that this carries  great  weight
             in an Article 8 assessment.  Your children  are  dependent  on
             you as a parent.  However, it is noted  that  you  are  to  be
             granted Restricted Leave, which means that you will be able to
             continue living with your children and your wife as  a  family
             unit.  Your children's family life will therefore continue and
             their routine will  not  be  disrupted  as  a  result  of  the
             Restricted Leave decision.


         31.  It  is  noted  that  a  longer  period  of  limited  leave  or
             indefinite  leave  to  remain  might  arguably  be   in   your
             children's best interests because it would reduce the level of
             uncertainty regarding your status in the  UK.  However  it  is
             considered that your children's best interests in this  regard
             are outweighed by the public interest reasons for removing you
             from the UK to  maintain  an  effective  immigration  control,
             prevent crime and disorder and protect the rights and freedoms
             of others, specifically due  to  the  acts  of  terrorism  you
             previously committed and the need for the UK  not  to  act  as
             refuge for those who have committed acts  of  terrorism.   You
             are being granted leave to remain in the UK solely  as  it  is
             considered that your removal at this  time  would  breach  the
             UK's obligations under Article 3 of the ECHR  and  given  your
             character,  conduct  and   associations   it   is   considered
             appropriate to grant you leave for a short period in order  to
             review your circumstances in six months' time.


         32.  Therefore, it is considered  that  there  are  no  exceptional
             circumstances in your case because the decision to  grant  you
             six months' Restricted Leave will not result in  a  breach  of
             the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR,  and  having
             considered all the available evidence, it is  considered  that
             you do  not  qualify  for  leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
             Immigration Rules on the basis of Article 8.

14. The attached notice contained the record  that  the  grant  of  RLR  was
   subject to conditions as follows:

         B.   YOU MUST RESIDE AT THE ADDRESS SHOWN ABOVE AND YOU MUST NOTIFY
             THE SECRETARY OF STATE OF ANY CHANGES OF ADDRESS


         C.   YOU MUST NOT ENTER OR CHANGE EMPLOYMENT, PAID  OR  UNPAID,  OR
             ENGAGE IN ANY BUSINESS OR PROFESSION WITHOUT THE PRIOR WRITTEN
             CONSENT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE


         D.   YOU  MUST  REPORT  TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE  AT  (ADDRESS
             PROVIDED) on 2nd June 2014 and every six months thereafter...


         E.   YOU MUST NOT ENROL IN ANY COURSE OF STUDY  WITHOUT  THE  PRIOR
             CONSENT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE.

15. The issuing of this decision led to an amendment of the  proceedings  so
   as to challenge the respondent's decision of the 2nd May 2014.

16. On 16th January 2015 (responding to an application on 30th October  2014
   from MS for further leave to remain) a further period of six  months  RLR
   was granted. The same conditions were imposed, incorporating reasons  for
   them as follows:


         8.   The conditions to your leave are on  the  ASL.4526  Notice  of
             Restricted Leave  Subject  to  Conditions  letter.   They  are
             summarised as follows:


                . Residence restriction - in line with the Restricted Leave
                  policy, your case is  a  priority  for  removal.   It  is
                  therefore necessary  for  the  Home  Office  to  maintain
                  contact with you and be aware of your whereabouts so that
                  your removal can be effected when possible.


                . Employment restrictions - in  line  with  the  Restricted
                  Leave  policy  and  in  view  of  the  reasons  for  your
                  exclusion from the Refugee Convention,  that  there  were
                  serious reasons for considering that you were  guilty  of
                  acts contrary to the purposes and principle of the Untied
                  Nations, it  is  considered  appropriate  that  you  seek
                  permission prior  to  taking  up  employment.   Therefore
                  presumption that your employment should be restricted has
                  been applied in your case.


                . Reporting restrictions - although it  is  concluded  that
                  your immediate removal from the UK is not possible at the
                  present time, it is necessary to  maintain  contact  with
                  the Home Office for the duration of your leave.  In  line
                  with the presumption to impose  the  reporting  condition
                  and the circumstances in  your  particular  case,  it  is
                  considered that reporting condition  of  once  every  six
                  months is appropriate.


                . Restriction on studies -  in  line  with  the  Restricted
                  Leave policy, your case is a priority for  removal.   You
                  are in the UK temporarily and the restriction  placed  on
                  studies reflects the temporary nature of your leave  and,
                  in the event that the course  was  publicly  funded,  the
                  need to reduce pressure on  public  finances  and  ensure
                  that  the  course  spaces  were  available  for   British
                  Citizens and lawful migrants.

         9.   You may  apply  for  these  conditions  to  be  varied,  where
             necessary, at any time during the validity of your leave.


17. Similar reasons as had  been  previously  provided  were  reiterated  in
   relation to the consideration of MS's case under Article  8  both  within
   and outwith the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 395  (as
   amended) (the "Immigration Rules").

18. In witness statements dated 9th March 2015, MS and his wife explain  the
   difficulties associated with the conditions imposed upon MS's leave.  The
   round trip from MS's home to the reporting centre is  28  miles  and  the
   process of reporting was lengthy as the staff  at  the  reporting  centre
   when he attended on 2nd June 2014 did  not  initially  know  why  he  was
   there. At the time of the original grant of RLR, MS was a  self  employed
   mini cab driver. Shortly after the receipt of the  decision  on  8th  May
   2014, MS's solicitor contacted the Home Office to request permission  for
   his self employment to continue and consent was granted three weeks later
   on  29th  May  2014,  causing  anxiety  during  the  hiatus  between  the
   application and the decision. In relation to studying,  on  29th  October
   2014 MS's solicitor wrote to the Home Office seeking consent for  him  to
   take up a course of study as a domestic gas  engineer.  No  response  was
   received to that application and MS's solicitor chased the matter on 21st
   November 2014. A letter from the respondent was received on 26th November
   2014 from the  respondent  asking  for  confirmation  that  MS  had  been
   accepted onto the  course  of  study  and  on  12th  December  2014  MS's
   solicitor wrote again clarifying the course  provider  and  querying  why
   such information was necessary. At the time of MS's witness statement, no
   substantive response had been received to that correspondence and he  had
   been unable to start the course. He had borrowed money  to  pay  for  the
   course and was worried about losing his place and therefore that money.

19.  In  the  witness  statement,  he  expresses  his  anxiety   about   the
   possibility of prosecution for breach of any of the conditions.  He  also
   expresses his concern about the impact of the insecurity  of  his  status
   upon his wife and children (who it will be noted  are  British  Citizens)
   and the constraint placed upon his ability to travel abroad in the  light
   of his limited leave. These concerns are reinforced in a  statement  from
   MS's wife. In statements from his siblings, concern  is  expressed  about
   the imposition of conditions and the limited  nature  of  MS's  leave  to
   remain in the United Kingdom, bearing  in  mind  his  strong  family  and
   social ties to this country. The evidence is supported by  correspondence
   from the Gurdwara in which MS takes an active part.

20. The evidence in the case of MS also  includes  material  in  respect  of
   others who are subject to RLR. In particular,  in  a  statement  from  Mr
   Daniel Furner, evidence is provided in relation to a person who has  been
   anonymised in his own litigation as 'J1'. In J1's  case,  the  respondent
   has applied the RLR policy and  granted  RLR  with  conditions  as  being
   'necessary in the interests of national security'. J1  is  in  a  similar
   category of person to  MS  in  that  he  is  excluded  from  the  Refugee
   Convention but cannot be returned as to do so would give rise to a breach
   of Article 3 of the ECHR. In response to a Freedom of Information ("FOI")
   request of 28th November 2014,  the  Office  for  Security  and  Counter-
   Terrorism confirmed on 11th March 2015 that there were at  that  time  56
   people on RLR. All of those people had reporting,  prohibition  of  study
   without written consent and residence conditions imposed  upon  them  and
   all bar two had employment conditions imposed. All 56  had  been  granted
   RLR for a duration of six months at a time and none had been granted  RLR
   for a period more or less than six months.

21. There is in addition in MS's case a  witness  statement  from  Ms  Sonia
   Routledge, his solicitor, who indicates that prior to the introduction of
   the RLR policy where persons were granted time limited right to remain on
   Human Rights grounds, their leave would not  have  been  subject  to  any
   conditions. She also sets out matters in relation to the submissions made
   on behalf of MS to which we shall turn in due course in relation to  both
   the purpose of the imposition of the conditions and the  availability  of
   measures under the Terrorism Prevention and  Investigation  Measures  Act
   2011 ("TPIMA 2011") in respect of individuals  suspected  of  involvement
   with terrorism.

I. The Facts: MBT

22. MBT is a national of Tunisia who was born  on  20th  December  1966.  On
   19th January 1998, he was convicted along with a number of other Tunisian
   nationals  of  terrorism  related  offences  in  France.  These  offences
   included possession and transportation of unauthorised weapons along with
   unlawful entry to France, forgery of an official document and association
   with other malefactors. He was sentenced in August 1998  to  five  years'
   imprisonment but on the basis that he had already  served  a  substantial
   period of time on remand he was released in August 1998. On 13th May 1999
   he arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed  asylum  straight  away.  On
   22nd July 2004 the respondent refused his application for asylum  on  the
   grounds of his exclusion from the Refugee Convention under Articles 1F(b)
   and (c) but granted MBT six months DLR. Further DLR was granted to MBT on
   4th March 2005 and 17th February 2009.

23. On 30th July 2009, MBT applied for  further  leave  but  the  respondent
   lost his application. After a number  of  letters  from  MBT's  solicitor
   chasing an  outcome  to  this  application  which  were  unanswered,  the
   respondent requested on 25th March 2011 a further copy of the  30th  July
   2009 application which was duly provided. No decision was reached on this
   application by the time that MBT's solicitors wrote on 6th November  2012
   applying on his behalf  for  the  grant  of  ILR.  That  application  was
   supported by information demonstrating that, since MBT had arrived in the
   United Kingdom, he had married and had four children. His wife and  three
   sons had been granted ILR by the respondent and his daughter  and  eldest
   son were registered as British Citizens. He had met and married his  wife
   in the United Kingdom and all of the children had been born and  educated
   in the United Kingdom. The  application  was  supported  by  an  expert's
   report from Mrs Renee Cohen, a Psychotherapist, who  concluded  that  MBT
   had symptoms which 'strongly suggest  that  he  is  suffering  from  Post
   Traumatic Stress Disorder'. Mrs Cohen noted that he was depressed and had
   difficulty in sleeping and was easily angered.

24. No response was received to this application and  on  the  14th  January
   2013 MBT's solicitor sent a letter before claim  challenging  the  delays
   which had occurred in assessing his  applications.  The  judicial  review
   proceedings which were issued following that letter were compromised by a
   consent order of 10th July 2013 within which  the  respondent  agreed  to
   provide a decision within six weeks on MBT's pending application. On 21st
   August 2013 the respondent gave a decision on  the  application  granting
   MBT six months RLR subject to conditions.  The  letter  accompanying  the
   Notice of 21st August 2013 issued under the 1971 Act noted the RLR policy
   which had come into effect  on  2nd  September  2011  and  observed  that
   conditions were being imposed  under  s.3(1)(c)  of  the  1971  Act.  The
   conditions noted on the Immigration Act Notice provided as follows:


         B.   YOU MUST RESIDE AT THE ADDRESS SHOWN ABOVE AND YOU MUST NOTIFY
             THE SECRETARY OF STATE OF ANY CHANGE OF ADDRESS.


         C.   YOU MUST NOT ENTER OR CHANGE EMPLOYMENT, PAID  OR  UNPAID,  OR
             ENGAGE IN ANY BUSINESS OR PROFESSION WITHOUT THE PRIOR WRITTEN
             CONSENT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE.


         D.    YOU  MUST  REPORT  TO  AN  IMMIGRATION  OFFICER  AT  [ADDRESS
             PROVIDED]  on  21st  September  2013  at  12pm   and   monthly
             thereafter.


         E.   YOU MUST NOT ENROL ON ANY COURSE OF STUDY  WITHOUT  THE  PRIOR
             CONSENT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE.

25. Following a request on 2nd September 2013  from  MBT's  solicitors  that
   the conditions should be relaxed, on  1st  October  2013  the  respondent
   confirmed that there would be no relaxation of the restrictions which had
   been imposed. On 10th October 2013, MBT's solicitors  sent  a  pre-action
   protocol letter and on 25th  October  2013  the  respondent  refuted  the
   claim. In particular, it was contended that MBT could not  have  had  any
   expectations of being granted ILR and the letter observed as follows:


         The Home Office policy on discretionary leave states as follows:


              where a person is covered by one of the exclusion  categories,
             they will not become eligible for consideration for  settlement
             until they have completed ten years of discretionary leave.


         By your own admission, your client was first granted  a  period  of
        limited leave to remain in  2004.   It  should  therefore  be  self
        evident that your client cannot hope to have completed ten years of
        limited leave (including continuing leave) until next July  at  the
        earliest.  I can confirm that no such consideration  will  be  made
        until that time...


         As you are well aware  your  client  was  excluded  from  the  1951
        Refugee Convention under Article 1F(b)  and  (c)  in  2004  because
        there were serious reasons for considering that  he  had  committed
        acts contrary to the purpose and principles  of  the  UN,  and  was
        convicted of serious crime before arriving in  the  UK.   You  have
        stated that your client has not  committed  any  criminal  offences
        since arriving in the United Kingdom;  respectfully,  this  is  not
        relevant.

26. Judicial review proceedings were commenced on  20th  November  2013.  On
   19th February 2014, MBT applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  and  in
   response to that application he was  granted  RLR  on  20th  March  2015.
   Having noted his exclusion from the Refugee Convention and the  existence
   of the RLR policy the respondent's letter confirmed he was being  granted
   six months RLR subject to conditions. Further reasoning was  provided  in
   relation to the conditions as follows:


         10.  The conditions attached to your  leave  are  on  the  ASL.4526
             Notice of the Restricted Leave Subject to  Conditions  letter.
             These are summarised as follows:


                . Residence Restriction - in  line  with  Restricted  Leave
                  police (sic), your case is a priority for removal.  It is
                  therefore necessary  for  the  Home  Office  to  maintain
                  contact with you and be aware of your whereabouts so that
                  your removal can  be  effected  when  possible,  and  the
                  conditions imposed on you satisfy the need for the UK  to
                  maintain  effective  immigration  control  and  not  give
                  sanctuary to convicted terrorists.


                . Employment Restriction - in line  with  Restricted  Leave
                  policy and in view of the reasons for your exclusion from
                  the Refugee Convention, that you committed acts  contrary
                  to the principles and purposes of the United Nations,  it
                  is considered appropriate that you seek permission  prior
                  to taking up employment.  Therefore, the presumption that
                  your employment should be restricted has been applied.


                . Reporting Restrictions - although it  is  concluded  that
                  your immediate removal from the UK was not  possible,  it
                  is necessary for you to maintain contact  with  the  Home
                  Office for the duration of your leave.  In line with  the
                  presumption to impose the  reporting  condition  and  the
                  circumstances in your particular case  it  is  considered
                  that  a  reporting  condition  of  once  every  month  is
                  appropriate.   This  is  because  it  is  consider  (sic)
                  necessary for you to maintain regular  contact  with  the
                  Home Office, and the conditions imposed on you  satisfies
                  (sic)  the  need  for  the  UK  to   maintain   effective
                  immigration control and not give sanctuary  to  convicted
                  terrorists, who  have  been  excluded  from  the  Refugee
                  Convention.


                . Restriction on Studies -  in  line  with  the  Restricted
                  Leave policy, your case is a priority for  removal.   You
                  are in the UK temporarily and the restriction  placed  on
                  studies reflects the temporary nature of your leave  and,
                  in the event that the course  was  publicly  funded,  the
                  need to reduce pressure on  public  finances  and  ensure
                  that the course spaces are available for British citizens
                  and lawful migrants.

27. This decision in relation to MBT went on to consider  other  aspects  of
   his case. Firstly, the decision appraised MBT's claim to ILR on the basis
   of his submissions under Article 3. The decision provided as follows:

         13.   Your  application  has  been   considered   under   paragraph
             322(1C)(i) which lists one of the grounds as: they  have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             imprisonment for at least four years.   This  is  a  mandatory
             refusal and the Secretary of State has no discretion to  grant
             indefinite leave to remain to an individual who  falls  within
             this provision.


         14.  Therefore you do not qualify for indefinite  leave  to  remain
             due to your convictions and five year sentence in France.


         15.  Further, it is noted that you were refused asylum in  2004  on
             the basis that you were excluded from the  Refugee  Convention
             under Article 1F(b) and (c) as there  was  (sic)  reasons  for
             considering that  you  had  committed  acts  contrary  to  the
             purposes and principles of the United Nations.  Your exclusion
             is a strong adverse indication of your character, conduct  and
             associations and therefore your application  would  also  fall
             for refusal under paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.


         16.  In light of the above factors  your  presence  in  the  UK  is
             considered undesirable.  Your application to vary  your  leave
             and for ILR is therefore refused.

28. The letter went on to note that the  transitional  arrangements  in  the
   DLR policy excluded  those  who  were  the  subject  of  the  RLR  policy
   operational from 2nd September 2011. The respondent  therefore  concluded
   that MBT did not qualify for ILR in accordance with the DLR  transitional
   arrangements. The letter went on to assess  the  question  of  Article  8
   under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  decision  noted  as
   follows:

         20.  It is noted that your wife has been granted  Indefinite  Leave
             to Remain and that all four of your children who are aged  13,
             8, 12 and 10 are now British Citizens.  It is noted  that  you
             have lived in the UK for 16 years.


         21.  Your suitability to be granted Indefinite Leave to  Remain  on
             the basis of Article 8 under the Immigration  Rules  has  been
             considered with reference to the following rules:


         22.  S-ILR 1.1 the applicant  will  be  refused  limited  leave  to
             remain on grounds of suitability if any of paragraph S-ILR 1.2-
             1.9 apply...


         23.  S-ILR 1.8 the presence of the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
             conducive to the public good because their conduct  (including
             convictions which do not fall within the paragraphs S-ILR 1.3-
             1.6),  character,  associations  or  other  reasons,  make  it
             undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK.


         24.  You are excluded from  the  Refugee  Convention  due  to  your
             previous convictions and the nature  of  your  crime.   It  is
             noted that you were found to be party  to  acts,  methods  and
             practices of terrorism, which were contrary  to  the  purposes
             and principles of the United Nations.


         25.  Based on this  evidence  you  fail  to  fulfil  S-ILR  1.8  of
             Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as it is considered  that
             your character, associations and other  reasons,  namely  your
             involvement in terrorism, which means that it  is  undesirable
             for you to remain in the UK.


         26.  Therefore you cannot  meet  the  requirements  for  Indefinite
             Leave to Remain as the parent of children who has  (sic)  been
             registered as British Citizens.

29. Having excluded any claim by MBT on the basis of  his  private  life  as
   assessed under Rule 276ADE, the decision went on to consider  exceptional
   circumstances outside the Immigration Rules  and  s.55  of  the  Borders,
   Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  (the  "2009  Act").  The  decision
   records as follows:


         33.  It is noted that you have been in the UK for 16 years and that
             you have four children, all of  whom  who  have  been  granted
             British Citizenship.  It is therefore considered that you have
             established family life here in the UK.


         34.  It is noted you live with  your  wife  and  children.   It  is
             therefore considered that your grant of restricted leave  will
             not have an adverse effect on your  children's  wellbeing,  as
             you will continue to live with them and your wife as a  family
             unit, and therefore their routine will not be disrupted  as  a
             result  of  the  Restricted  Leave  decision.   Moreover  your
             children have been granted British Citizenship  in  line  with
             the current Immigration Rules.


         35.  It  is  noted  that  a  longer  period  of  limited  leave  or
             indefinite leave to remain may arguably be in your  children's
             best  interests  because  it  would  reduce   the   level   of
             uncertainty regarding your status in the UK.  However,  it  is
             considered that your children's best interests in this  regard
             are outweighed by the public interest reasons for removing you
             from the UK.


         36.  In light of this, it is considered that a grant of  Restricted
             Leave  is  consistent  with  obligations  under  s.55  of  the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 consideration.


         37.  Therefore, it is considered  that  there  are  no  exceptional
             circumstances in your case because the decision to  grant  you
             six months Restricted Leave will not result in a breach of the
             UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  and  having
             considered all the available evidence, it is  considered  that
             you do not qualify for leave to remain outside the Immigration
             Rules on the basis of Article 8.


         38.  The Secretary of State has an obligation to maintain effective
             immigration control, prevent crime and  disorder  and  protect
             the rights and freedoms of others,  specifically  due  to  the
             acts of terrorism you previously committed and  the  need  for
             the UK not to act as a refuge for those who are excluded  from
             the  Refugee  Convention  due  to  their  criminality  due  to
             committing acts of terrorism.


         39.  You are therefore being granted leave  to  remain  in  the  UK
             solely because it is considered that your removal at this time
             would breach the UK's obligations under Article 3 of the  ECHR
             and given your  character,  conduct  and  associations  it  is
             considered appropriate to grant you leave for a  short  period
             in order to review your circumstances in six months time.


30. The notice under the  1971  Act  which  accompanied  this  decision  re-
   imposed the same conditions subject to  which  MBT  had  been  previously
   granted RLR.

31. In a statement dated 22nd December 2014, which was  considered  as  part
   of the respondent's decision  of  20th  March  2015,  MBT  expresses  his
   concern about the impact upon him both of the temporary nature of the six
   months RLR which he has been granted and also the condition  in  relation
   to the prospects of him obtaining employment which in turn caused anxiety
   and insecurity to him and  his  family  as  a  result  of  the  financial
   pressure which it places them under. He states that in effect it has made
   it impossible for him to find work. He also expresses his  concern  about
   the reporting condition and provides evidence about an incident when as a
   result of stress caused by his being unsure as to  when  he  should  have
   reported, he suffered an episode of ill health and a subsequent period of
   anxiety and distress. He also explains that the limited  periods  of  the
   earlier DLR and current RLR preclude him from pursuing courses in  higher
   education which he would have wished to follow.

II. The respondent's evidence and policies

(a)  The respondent's DLR policy

32. We have evidence as to the  evolution  of  the  respondent's  policy  in
   relation to persons in the category of MS and MBT, namely people who  are
   excluded from the Refugee Convention but who it is not possible to return
   as a result of the protection afforded by Article 3. This is as follows.

33. In Asylum  Directorate  Instructions  dated  July  1998,  criteria  were
   established for the granting of exceptional leave to  remain.  Under  the
   "eligibility criteria" exceptional leave  to  remain  was  mandatory  for
   persons excluded from the Refugee Convention but who  cannot  be  removed
   due to Article 3 of the ECHR. The document describes that prior  to  27th
   July 1998 people granted  exceptional  leave  to  enter  or  remain  were
   normally given 12 months leave followed by two periods of three years but
   that after 27th July 1998 they  would  normally  be  granted  four  years
   leave.

34. On 1st April 2003, exceptional leave was  replaced  with  DLR  including
   for persons who were excluded from the Refugee Convention but  who  could
   not be removed due to Article 3 of the ECHR.  The  document  named:  "API
   March 2003 Discretionary Leave"  had  indicated  that,  in  the  case  of
   persons whose removal would be in breach of Article 3 of  the  ECHR,  DLR
   would be granted for a variable period  dependent  upon  the  basis  upon
   which it was being granted but initially for no longer than  three  years
   but if they are excluded from the Refugee Convention, the initial  period
   for which DLR is granted "should" be six months. The document went on  to
   observe that, where an extension of leave was sought after  a  period  of
   DLR, the request would be subject of an active review.


35. In relation to applications for settlement, the March 2003 API  provided
   that a  person  who  is  not  excluded  would  not  become  eligible  for
   settlement until they had completed six years of DLR. That  period  would
   be longer, at least 10 years, for those in  the  excluded  category.  The
   excluded  category  was  dealt  with  in  relation  to  applications  for
   settlement within section 8 of the document as follows:


         8.   Applications for settlement
              A person will normally become eligible for  consideration  for
             settlement   after   completing   six   continuous   years   of
             Discretionary Leave.  However, where a person is covered by one
             of the exclusion categories they will not become  eligible  for
             consideration for  settlement  until  they  have  completed  10
             continuous years of Discretionary Leave.   Any  time  spent  in
             prison would not  count  towards  the  six  or  10  years.   An
             individual may apply for ILR/settlement at the six or  10  year
             stay  shortly  before   Discretionary   Leave   expires.    The
             application will be considered in the  light  of  circumstances
             prevailing at that time.

36. In the period prior to  the  introduction  of  the  RLR  policy  on  2nd
   September 2011, the March 2003 API was replaced by  (it  would  seem)  at
   least two versions of the DLR policy (in force, it would seem, from  27th
   February 2007  and  18th  December  2008  respectively),  both  of  which
   provided that excluded persons who cannot be removed due to Article 3  of
   the ECHR should normally be granted DLR for  six  months  and  that  such
   persons were not eligible for consideration for settlement until they had
   completed at least 10 years' DLR.


37. In R (on the application of Mayaya and others) v Secretary of State  for
   the Home Department  [2011]  EWHC  3088  (Admin)  (25th  November  2011),
   Cranston J held  that  the  March  2003  API  breached  the  no-fettering
   principle by suggesting that a person  must  always  have  at  least  ten
   years' DLR to be granted ILR.  By an Order of the Court of Appeal in  the
   same case, sealed on 19 March 2013, parts of  the DLR policy that was  in
   force before 9th   July  2012  were  struck  down  by  consent  as  being
   unlawful, including the provision that excluded persons were not eligible
   for consideration for settlement until they had completed  ten  years  of
   DLR.


38. The next DLR policy that came into force was the  version  that  was  in
   force at least from November 2012. It  specifically  refers  to  the  RLR
   policy,  from  which  it  follows  that  it  came   into   force   either
   simultaneously with the RLR  policy  or  subsequent  to  the  RLR  policy
   introduced on 2nd September 2011. We shall refer to this policy hereafter
   as the "November 2012 DLR policy".  Unfortunately, the  precise  date  on
   which the November 2012 DLR policy came into force is not clear from  the
   papers before us.


39. The November 2012 DLR policy provides, inter alia, as follows:

         1.   Introduction


      Humanitarian  Protection  (HP)  and  Discretionary  leave  (DL)   were
             introduced on 1 April 2003 to  replace  Exceptional  Leave  to
             Remain (ELR).


     This instruction explains the limited circumstances in which it may  be
             appropriate to grant Discretionary Leave...


     With effect from 2 September 2011, a new  policy  of  Restricted  Leave
             replaced the grant  of  Discretionary  Leave  for  individuals
             refused asylum and  Humanitarian  Protection  on  Article  1F-
             related exclusion grounds but whose removal would be  contrary
             to the UK's ECHR obligations.


     Article 1F-related cases which were granted Discretionary Leave  before
             2 September 2011 should remain on their existing  leave  until
             it  falls  for  renewal.   When  the  renewal  application  is
             received, the application must be considered in line with  the
             Asylum Instruction on Restricted Leave and granted  Restricted
             Leave unless exceptional circumstances justify divergence from
             the published policy.

         3.3  Criminality and exclusion


             In all cases where leave is being considered  decision  makers
             must have regard to the criminality thresholds.  This  applies
             to consideration of initial  grants  of  Discretionary  Leave,
             further applications for Discretionary Leave and  cases  being
             handled under the Transitional Arrangements.


             Persons subject to any of the grounds of exclusion set out  in
             the AI on Exclusion under 1F of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
             thereby also excluded from a grant of Humanitarian  Protection
             must be considered under the policy of  Restricted  Leave  and
             not granted Discretionary Leave.




         5.   Duration of grants of Discretionary Leave


              ...


              From 9 July 2012 an applicant needs to complete at  least  120
             months, (i.e. a total of 10 years normally consisting of  four
             2.5 years periods of leave), before being  eligible  to  apply
             for settlement. Separate arrangements exist for cases  granted
             3  years  Discretionary  Leave  prior  to  9  July  2012.  see
             Transitional Arrangements below.


         7.   Applications for further leave


              This section applies to applications made on or after  9  July
             2012.


              ...


             Anyone granted Discretionary Leave prior to 2nd September 2011
             to whom  the  policy  on  Restricted  Leave  applies  and  who
             continues to be excluded from Asylum, Humanitarian  Protection
             and Discretionary Leave should be considered under the  policy
             guidance on Restricted Leave and must not be  granted  further
             Discretionary Leave.


         8.   Applications for settlement


              This section applies to applications made on or after  9  July
             2012.  See   Transitional   Arrangements   for   cases   where
             Discretionary leave was granted before 9 July 2012.


              A person will normally become eligible for  consideration  for
             settlement after completing 120 continuous months  (10  years)
             of Discretionary Leave The application will be  considered  in
             the light of the circumstances prevailing at that time.


         8.1  Consideration of application


              As with  an  extension  request,  the  application  should  be
             subject to an active review to consider whether  or  not  they
             still qualify for Discretionary Leave (or some other  form  of
             leave).


         8.2  Granting settlement


              Where a person has held Discretionary Leave for an appropriate
             period and continues to qualify for Discretionary Leave,  they
             should be granted settlement unless there are any  criminality
             or exclusion issues. See Criminality and/or Exclusion  section
             above.


         11.  Transitional Arrangements


              All decisions made on Discretionary Leave on or after  9  July
             2012 will be subject to the criteria set out in this guidance.




              Individuals granted Discretionary Leave on a date prior to and
             including 8 July 2012 may apply  to  extend  that  leave  when
             their period of Discretionary leave expires.  Decision  makers
             must apply the following guidance:


             Applicants granted Discretionary leave before 9 July 2012


              Those who, before 9 July 2012, have been granted  leave  under
             the Discretionary Leave policy  in  force  at  the  time  will
             continue to  be  dealt  with  under  that  policy  through  to
             settlement if they qualify for it (normally after  accruing  6
             years Discretionary Leave).


              ...


              Those  granted  Discretionary  Leave  for  six  month  periods
             because of the refusal or withdrawal of asylum or Humanitarian
             Protection on grounds of criminality  must  normally  wait  10
             years before  being  considered  for  settlement.  However,  a
             failure to accrue 10 years' leave cannot be the sole basis for
             refusal. The decision maker must consider  whether  there  are
             exceptional circumstances that merit  a  departure  from  this
             position.


40. With effect from  24  June  2014,  the  November  2012  DLR  policy  was
   replaced by the policy which continues to apply currently  and  which  we
   will refer to as the "June 2014 DLR policy". The  June  2014  DLR  policy
   provides, inter alia, as follows:


         1.   Introduction


      Humanitarian  Protection  (HP)  and  Discretionary  leave  (DL)   were
             introduced on 1 April 2003 to  replace  Exceptional  Leave  to
             Remain (ELR).


     This instruction explains the limited circumstances in which it may  be
             appropriate to grant DL....


     With effect from 2 September 2011, a new  policy  of  Restricted  Leave
             replaced the grant of DL for individuals  refused  asylum  and
             Humanitarian  Protection  on  Article   1F-related   exclusion
             grounds but whose removal would be contrary to the  UK's  ECHR
             obligations.


     Article 1F-related cases granted DL  before  2  September  2011  should
             remain on their existing leave until  it  falls  for  renewal.
             When  the  renewal  application  is  received,  it   must   be
             considered in line with the Asylum Instruction  on  Restricted
             Leave  and  granted  Restricted   Leave   unless   exceptional
             circumstances justify divergence from the published policy....

         2.5  Criminality and exclusion


             In all cases being considered for a grant of leave under  this
             policy  decision  makers  must  consider  the  impact  of   an
             individual's criminal history before granting  any  leave.   A
             person will normally be granted six months' DL where they:

             1.   Would have established that they were a refugee  but  are
                  not eligible for a grant of asylum either because:


                  a.   they fall to be excluded  under  Article  1F  of  the
                      Refugee Convention; and/or


                  b.   there are reasonable grounds for regarding them as  a
                      danger to the security of the United  Kingdom  within
                      the terms of paragraph 334(iii) of the Rules; and/or


                  c.   they have been convicted of  a  particularly  serious
                      within the terms of paragraph 334(iv) of  the  Rules;
                      and/or

             2.   Are excluded  from  Humanitarian  Protection  (HP)  under
                  paragraph 339D(iii) of the Rules or would be excluded from
                  HP if they were eligible; and/or

             3.   Cannot be removed because of the UK's  obligations  under
                  the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR); and

             4.   Do not fall within the Restricted Leave Policy.




         6.   Applications for further leave


             This section applies to applications made on or after  9  July
             2012.


              ...


             Anyone granted DL Leave prior to 2nd September  2011  to  whom
             the policy on Restricted Leave applies and who continues to be
             excluded from Asylum, Humanitarian Protection and DL should be
             considered under the policy guidance on Restricted  Leave  and
             must not be granted further DL.


         7.   Applications for settlement


              This section applies to applications made on or after  9  July
             2012.  see   Transitional   Arrangements   for   cases   where
             Discretionary leave was granted before 9 July 2012.


              A person will normally become eligible for  consideration  for
             settlement after completing 120 continuous months  (10  years)
             of DL providing any application for  further  leave  has  been
             made in accordance with section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971
             (as amended). See IDI Chapter 1 section 5.0 for guidance.  The
             application will be considered in the light  of  circumstances
             prevailing at that time.


         7.1  Consideration of application


              As with  an  extension  request,  the  application  should  be
             subject to an active review to consider whether  or  not  they
             still qualify for DL (or some other form of leave).


         7.2  Granting settlement


              Where a person has held  DL  for  an  appropriate  period  and
             continues to qualify for DL, they should be granted settlement
             unless there are any  criminality  or  exclusion  issues.  See
             Criminality and/or Exclusion section above.


         10   Transitional Arrangements


              All decisions made on Discretionary Leave on or after  9  July
             2012  will  be  subject  to  the  criteria  set  out  in  this
             guidance....


               Individuals granted DL on a date prior to  8  July  2012  may
             apply to extend that leave when their period  of  DL  expires.
             Decision makers must apply the following guidance:


              Applicants granted Discretionary leave before 9 July 2012
              Those who, before 9 July 2012, have been granted  leave  under
             the DL policy in force at the time will normally  continue  to
             be dealt with under that policy through to settlement if  they
             qualify for it (normally after  accruing  6  years  continuous
             DL). Further leave applications for  those  granted  up  to  3
             years DL before 9 July 2012 are subject to an active review.


              Consideration  of  all  further  leave  applications  will  be
             subject to a criminality check  and  the  application  of  the
             criminality thresholds, including in respect of cases awaiting
             a decision on a  further  period  of  DL  on  that  date.  See
             Criminality and Exclusion section above.


               Decision  makers  must  consider  whether  the  circumstances
             prevailing at the time of the original grant of leave continue
             at the date of the decision. If the circumstances  remain  the
             same and the criminality thresholds do not apply,   a  further
             period of 3 years DL should normally be granted....


              If there have been significant changes or the applicant  fails
             to  meet  the  criminality  thresholds  (see  criminality  and
             exclusion section above), the application  for  further  leave
             should normally be refused.


              Those granted DL for six month periods because of the  refusal
             or withdrawal of asylum or Humanitarian Protection on  grounds
             of criminality  must  normally  wait  10  years  before  being
             considered for settlement. However, a  failure  to  accrue  10
             years' leave  cannot  be  the  sole  basis  for  refusal.  The
             decision maker must consider whether there are any exceptional
             circumstances that merit a departure from this position.

41. Accordingly, it will be seen that the current DLR policy  provides  that
   the normal period for which DLR is granted under the DLR  policy  is  six
   months where the person is excluded from the Refugee  Convention,  cannot
   be removed due to the ECHR and does not fall within the RLR policy. Under
   the DLR policy, a person will normally become eligible for  consideration
   for settlement after completing 10 years continuous DLR unless there  are
   any criminality or exclusion  issues  and  provided  an  application  for
   further leave has been made in accordance with s.3C of the 1971 Act.


42. It is to be noted that there was nothing  in  any  version  of  the  DLR
   policy that provided for the imposition of conditions upon the  grant  of
   DLR.


   (b)    The RLR policy and guidance

43. On 2nd September 2011, there was a change in policy, as will be  evident
   from what we have set out  above.  It  is  important  to  understand  the
   taxonomy of the documents to  which we were referred during the course of
   argument and which forms the structure of  the  decision  making  process
   which we are considering. After the hearing, we received,  in  accordance
   with a direction given at the hearing, further evidence from Ms  Cole  in
   relation to the status of the documents which we received in the evidence
   and which we set out below bearing on the question of RLR.  That  witness
   evidence is not entirely clear but appears to support the descriptions of
   the status of the documents which we were given at the hearing and  which
   are reflected in what follows.

44.  Firstly, on 2nd September 2011  the  UKBA  issued  a  policy  statement
   entitled "Policy Statement on  Article  1F  of  the  Refugee  Convention:
   restricted  discretionary  leave".  The  policy  statement  provided   as
   follows:


         With effect from 2nd September 2011 all  cases  excluded  form  the
         protection of the Refugee Convention by virtue of  Article  1F  but
         who cannot be immediately removed from the UK due to Article  3  of
         the European Convention of Human Rights will be subject to  a  new,
         tighter, restricted leave policy.


         Such cases should usually only be granted restricted  discretionary
         leave to remain for a maximum of six months at a time, with some or
         all of the following restrictions:


             A condition restricting the person's employment  or  occupation
             in the UK


             A condition restricting where the person can reside


             A condition requiring the person to report  to  an  immigration
             officer or the Secretary of State at regular intervals;


             A condition prohibiting the person  studying  at  an  education
             institution


         In addition, relevant information on all Article 1F cases  will  be
         referred by the UK Border Agency to  the  Independent  Safeguarding
         Authority (ISA)  to  consider  whether  the  individuals  concerned
         should be barred from working/volunteering in ISA-regulated fields.




         This policy applies to all relevant individuals, whether  they  are
         seeking leave or renewal of leave to  remain,  including  cases  in
         which a previous grant of leave to remain was for a  period  longer
         than six months.


         The power to attach conditions to leave is provided by s.3(1)(c) of
         the Immigration Act 1971.  A person who knowingly fails to  observe
         a condition  of  their  leave  commits  an  offence  by  virtue  of
         s.24(1)(b)(ii) of the Immigration  Act  1971.   Where  appropriate,
         this policy will be enforced by the prosecution of individuals  who
         do not comply with the conditions of their leave.

45.  Pursuant  to  this  policy,  on  28th  May  2012  an  Asylum   Casework
   Instruction was published. The respondent's position in submissions  made
   to us was that was not policy but was guidance in order to assist in  the
   implementation of the RLR policy and decision making. This  is  supported
   by the subsequent evidence in the main. The summary of the policy was set
   out as follows:


         1.5  With effect from 2nd September 2011, all individuals  excluded
             from the protection of the Refugee  Convention  by  virtue  of
             Article 1F but who cannot be immediately removed from  the  UK
             due to Article 3 of the European Convention  of  Human  Rights
             (ECHR) are subject to a new, tighter, Restricted Leave  policy
             (formally known  as  Restricted  Discretionary  Leave).   Such
             individuals should usually only be granted Restricted Leave to
             remain for a maximum of six months at a time, with some or all
             of the following restrictions:


                  . on the person's employment or occupation in the UK;


                  . on where the person can reside;




                  . a requirement to report to an immigration officer or the
                    Secretary of State at regular intervals;


                  . a prohibition on the person studying at  an  educational
                    institution...


         1.8  The power  to  attach  conditions  to  leave  is  provided  by
             s.3(1)(c) of the Immigration Act 1971.  A person who knowingly
             fails to observe a condition of their leave commits an offence
             by  virtue  of  s.24(1)(b)(ii)  of  the   1971   Act.    Where
             appropriate, this policy will be enforced by  the  prosecution
             of individuals who do not comply with the conditions of  their
             leave.


         1.9  The policy imposes a short period  of  leave  and  appropriate
             conditions while  removal  options  continue  to  be  pursued.
             Persons   excluded   from   Refugee   Convention   (and   from
             Humanitarian Protection) continue to be a priority for removal
             even where removal cannot currently be enforced.   Such  cases
             will remain under close review by UK Border Agency and will be
             removed at the earliest opportunity.  These  reviews  will  be
             conducted at six monthly intervals as a minimum, prior to  the
             expiry of the Restricted Leave.


         1.10 The rationale for the imposition of these conditions is:


             . Public interest:  The public  interest  in  maintaining  the
               integrity of immigration control justifies  frequent  review
               of these  cases  with  the  intention  of  removing  at  the
               earliest opportunity.  Therefore we  want  to  ensure  close
               contact and give a clear signal that the person  should  not
               become established in the UK.


             . Public protection:  It is legitimate  to  impose  conditions
               designed to ensure that the UK  Border  Agency  is  able  to
               monitor where an individual lives and works  and/or  prevent
               access to positions of influence or trust


             . Upholding  the  rule  of  law  internationally.  The  policy
               supports the principle  that  those  excluded  from  refugee
               status, including war criminals, cannot establish a new life
               in  the  UK   and   supports   our   broader   international
               obligations.  It reinforces the message that  our  intention
               is to remove the individual  from  the  UK  as  soon  as  is
               possible.

             It is for these reasons that  only  Article  3  considerations
             will  normally  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   securing
             removal.  Where qualified rights are engaged, such as  Article
             8, only the strongest factors would prevail  over  the  public
             interest in removal.


46. In respect of children, the  Asylum  Casework  Instruction  provided  as
   follows:


         1.11 Some individuals excluded by virtue of Article 1F and  granted
             Restricted Leave will have dependent  children.   In  applying
             the policy the caseworker must have  regard  to  the  need  to
             safeguard and promote the welfare of children in  the  UK,  as
             provided by s.55 Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.
              In such cases, the decision maker must  have  regard  to  the
             likely impact the imposition of any  conditions  may  have  on
             dependent children and consider what is  appropriate  in  that
             particular case.  Conditions should be set  having  regard  to
             the published guidance on the s.55 duty.


47. Turning to the issue of the  duration  of  leave,  the  Asylum  Casework
   Instruction provided as follows:


         2.1  Restricted Leave should be limited to a maximum of six  months
             at a time, so  as  to  emphasise  its  short-term  nature  and
             because it would be at odds with the aim  of  this  policy  to
             permit such a person to re-enter the UK.  A grant of leave for
             longer than six months permits a person to leave the UK and to
             be readmitted during the validity  of  their  grant  of  leave
             (Article 13(2)(b) Leave to Enter and  Leave  to  Remain  Order
             2000).


         2.2  A shorter period than  six  months  should  be  granted  where
             removal appears to the decision maker to be reasonably  likely
             within six months or where, in  exceptional  cases,  the  risk
             posed by the individual warrants the  case  being  kept  under
             review more frequently than six monthly.


48. The Asylum Casework Instruction then proceeds  to  address  the  various
   categories of conditions.  In  relation  to  employment  it  provides  as
   follows:


         3.1  The presumption is that permission to work  will  normally  be
             restricted rather than denied outright where any condition  is
             imposed.


         3.2  Any employment restriction  should  also  apply  to  voluntary
             work, self employment or engagement in any kind  of  business,
             paid or unpaid.  The type of restriction imposed should be  in
             proportion  to  the  public  protection  risk  posed  by   the
             individual.  The options for restricting employment are:


             (i)  To notify the Secretary of State of  all  employment  and
                  volunteering roles.  This should be used for  the  lowest-
                  risk cases in order  that  UK  Border  Agency  can  notify
                  corporate partners, where appropriate, about the  person's
                  employment


             (ii)  To  apply  restrictions  on  working  or  in  particular
                  occupations/professions. Generally, this condition will be
                  expressed as a condition not to  take  any  employment  or
                  engage in any business unless the Secretary of  State  has
                  given prior consent in writing.  When  consent  is  sought
                  for a particular job, the  precise  type  of  work  to  be
                  restricted will depend entirely on the risk factors  posed
                  in individual cases.  The condition  should  generally  be
                  used to prevent the person  from  working  in  roles  with
                  unsupervised contact with vulnerable people, or  in  roles
                  which could be  inappropriate  according  to  the  alleged
                  crimes or acts for which the individual is being excluded,
                  e.g. working with migrant communities from the country  of
                  origin where war crimes were allegedly committed.   If  an
                  individual is already in employment (...) then details  of
                  that  employment  must  be  obtained  and  an   assessment
                  undertaken as to its continuing  suitability  prior  to  a
                  grant of Restricted Leave.


             (iii)    A total ban on employment in any capacity whether  as
                  paid or volunteer - this should be used  exceptionally  in
                  cases posing a particularly high public  protection  risk.
                  Such cases should also be referred  to  the  local  police
                  force for handling under the Potentially Dangerous  Person
                  (PDP) regime.


49. In respect of the residence condition, the Asylum Casework  Instructions
   provided as follows:


         4.1  These cases remain a priority for removal and it is consistent
             with the policy objectives to  ensure  the  UK  Border  Agency
             maintains contact with individuals.  A requirement  to  notify
             the Agency of a change  of  address  is  to  ensure  that  the
             individual can be located when removal is possible.  Requiring
             the person to live in a specific area where the  accommodation
             is publicly provided or funded may also be legitimate in order
             to reduce the cost of providing housing.


         4.2  One or both  of  the  following  residence  conditions  should
             usually be imposed:


             (i)  to notify the Secretary of State of the home address  and
                  any change of address, and or


             (ii) to seek the prior consent of the Secretary  of  State  to
                  any change of address.


         4.3  Option (i), to notify the Secretary of  State  of  changes  of
             address, should normally be imposed in all  cases.   In  cases
             requiring  the  additional  condition  in  option  (ii),   the
             individual will be  subject  to  a  requirement  to  seek  the
             consent of the Secretary of State before changing address...


         4.4  In deciding whether to give consent, decision makers must have
             regard to  known  risk  factors  and  consult  the  advice  of
             partners (e.g. police, local authorities)  where  appropriate.
             If specific risk factors are known, it may be  appropriate  to
             advise the individual that he will not be given permission  to
             live within a certain area.


         4.5  In this section, "residence" should be given  the  meaning  on
             habitual residence.  A person subject to a residence condition
             should also be subject to a condition to not spend  more  than
             three consecutive nights away from that  address  without  the
             prior written consent of the Secretary of State.  In addition,
             the person must not spend more than 10 nights away  from  that
             address in any rolling six month period...


         4.6  Each case should be considered on  the  individual  facts  and
             risks.  Particular risks may arise where:


                . the individual concerned  may  pose  particular  risks  to
                  individuals  in  the  community  on  the  basis  of   past
                  behaviour - for example, the UK Border Agency may wish  to
                  prohibit residence close to a school or other facilities;


                . there is a  significant  community  from  the  applicant's
                  country of origin in that locality.  The risk  may  be  to
                  the individual (e.g. from members of the community seeking
                  retribution), or there may be a general public order  risk
                  if it becomes known that  the  person  is  living  in  the
                  community.  It may also  be  suspected  that  an  excluded
                  individual will seek  to  use  his  influence  within  the
                  community  to  intimidate  others  or   to   exert   undue
                  influence.  Where that is a real concern,  the  individual
                  should be informed that permission will not be granted  to
                  live at an address within a specified area.

50. Turning to  reporting  restrictions,  the  Asylum  Casework  Instruction
   provided as follows:


         5.1  The presumption is that all cases subject to this policy  will
             be made subject to a condition  to  report  regularly  to  the
             Secretary of State.  This condition is  designed  to  maintain
             contact with the individual and monitor  compliance  with  the
             other conditions.  Contact management is  a  priority  because
             these cases remain under review for removal  at  the  earliest
             possible stage.


         5.2  The precise frequency and location of the reporting event will
             depend upon the following factors:


             . the imminence of removal;
             . the perceived risk of absconding;
             . the need to maintain contact with the individual to  monitor
               compliance with conditions,
             . the impact of the reporting requirement  on  the  individual
               taking into account

                    o the location of the reporting centre;
                    o health and ability;
                    o domestic responsibility;
                    o employment


         5.3  As a guide monthly reporting should be considered  the  normal
             standard for Restricted Leave cases.  This  frequency  can  be
             modified up or down, taking into account the factors specified
             above.  Where,  in  exceptional  circumstances,  it  would  be
             unreasonable to expect the individual to report each  time  in
             person, other  options  should  be  considered  such  as  home
             visits.

51. In terms of the restriction on studies, the Asylum Casework  Instruction
   stated as follows:


         6.1  Grants of Restricted  Leave  in  Article  1F  exclusion  cases
             should generally be subject to a condition which prevents them
             from undertaking a course of study, whether  by  attending  in
             person or remote learning.


         6.2  These individuals are in the UK on a temporary form of  leave,
             pending their removal from the UK when  circumstances  permit.
             The rationale for restricting study is that it underlines  the
             temporary nature of the leave.  It also  reduces  pressure  on
             public finances and, for  privately  funded  courses,  ensures
             that the person does  not  occupy  course  spaces  that  would
             otherwise be taken up by British Citizens or lawful  migrants.
             It is also  in  the  wider  public  interest  to  ensure  that
             migrants  who  are  welcome  in  the  UK  are   afforded   the
             opportunities that come from  education,  ahead  of  those  on
             Restricted Leave.

52. Finally, so far as is relevant to the arguments presented in  the  case,
   the Asylum  Casework  Instruction  provided  at  section  9  for  "active
   reviews". The content of the document in this respect is as follows:


         9.1  Grants of Restricted Leave  will  normally  fall  for  renewal
             every six  months.   It  remains  the  responsibility  of  the
             individual to apply for further  leave  to  remain,  but  case
             owners should review the case in good time before  the  expiry
             of the  leave  to  re-assess  any  protection  needs  and  the
             prospects of removal.  In many cases,  the  country  situation
             will not have changed sufficiently to  make  removal  possible
             within the next review period, but this must always be checked
             against COI at the time.  In this scenario, case owners should
             seek information either in writing or via  a  reporting  event
             about  the  person's  work  and  future  intentions  and,   on
             application consider a further grant of  Restricted  Leave  in
             line with this policy.  At the active review stage case owners
             should also review whether  the  conditions  attached  to  the
             leave remain appropriate.


         9.2  Where the circumstances have changed to the  extent  that  the
             individual's removal would  not  be  in  breach  of  our  ECHR
             obligations, the individual should be  refused  further  leave
             and appeal rights notified in the usual way  and,  subject  to
             those appeal rights, progressed to removal.


         9.3  Article 1F cases which were granted Discretionary Leave before
             2nd September 2011 should remain on their existing leave until
             it  falls  for  renewal.   When  the  renewal  application  is
             received, the application should be considered  in  line  with
             the policy on Restricted Leave and be granted Restricted Leave
             unless exceptional circumstances justify a deviation from  the
             published policy.

53. The Asylum Casework Instruction dated 28th  May  2012  was  updated  and
   replaced on 23rd January 2015  by  a  document  entitled  "Asylum  Policy
   Instruction: Restricted Leave". Again, this  document  enjoyed  the  same
   status as the Asylum Casework Instruction, namely, that it  was  guidance
   rather than  policy  and  provided  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  the
   application of the RLR policy. Much of the document  dated  23rd  January
   2015 simply reiterated what was in the document from 28th  May  2012.  By
   way of background the document observes as follows:


         1.1. Purpose of


         1.1  Purpose of instruction


         1.1.1    This guidance explains the circumstances in which the Home
             Office will consider granting restricted leave to  individuals
             who cannot be removed because this would breach  their  rights
             under the European Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
             Rights (ECHR)  and:


             ?    are excluded from the Refugee Convention for  Article  1F
                  reasons, or who would be excluded were a Convention reason
                  to  apply  (i.e.   those  excluded   from   a   grant   of
                  Humanitarian Protection), or


             ?    have been refused  asylum  under  Article  33(2)  of  the
                  Refugee Convention

         1.1.2    The instruction provides specific guidance on:

             ?    the categories of persons who may be  granted  restricted
                  leave under the policy;


             ?    the duration of leave and conditions that may be attached
                  to any grant of restricted leave;


             ?    conducting an active review in cases  granted  restricted
                  leave.

         1.2.4    As those who fall within the scope  of  this  policy  have
             committed serious  international  crimes  and/or  represent  a
             danger  to  the  security  of   the   UK,   only   Article   3
             considerations will normally outweigh the public  interest  in
             removing them because it is an absolute right and  the  extent
             of the public interest cannot be taken  into  account.   Where
             qualified rights are engaged, such as Article 8 ECHR, only  in
             the most  compelling  and  compassionate  circumstances  could
             their family  or  private  life,  or  medical  considerations,
             outweigh the public interest in removal in these cases.  It is
             expected there will be very few such cases but where there are
             such cases this policy applies.


         1.2.5    Such cases will be  reviewed  regularly  with  a  view  to
             removal  as  soon  as  possible  and   only   in   exceptional
             circumstances will individuals on Restricted Leave ever become
             eligible for  settlement  or  citizenship.   Such  exceptional
             circumstances are likely to be very rare.

54. A new feature of  the  "Asylum  Policy  Instruction:  Restricted  Leave"
   dated 23rd January 2015 was that it  provided  that  individuals  on  RLR
   would not be able to have recourse  to  public  funds  unless  they  were
   destitute. A further new addition was that the RLR policy now included  a
   section dealing with "applications for indefinite leave  to  remain".  In
   respect of such applications the document provided as follows:


         4.12.1    Those  excluded  from  the  Refugee   Convention   and/or
                Humanitarian Protection may make applications for indefinite
                leave to remain on the basis of long residence, for  example
                because they have lived in the UK lawfully for 10  years  or
                more.   The  requirements  are  at  paragraph  276B  of  the
                Immigration Rules.  Consideration must be given to  all  the
                factors listed  in  paragraph  276B(ii)  and  in  particular
                consideration must be given to the  person's  conduct  which
                led to them  being  excluded  from  the  Refugee  Convention
                and/or Humanitarian Protection when  looking  at  character,
                conduct  and  associations  under   paragraph   276B(ii)(c).
                Usually, given our international obligations to prevent  the
                UK from becoming a safe haven for those who  have  committed
                very  serious  crimes,  the  conduct  will  mean  that   the
                application should be refused, but decisions should be taken
                on a case-by-case basis...


         4.12.3   Excluded individuals may seek to rely  on  N,  R  (on  the
                application of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
                [2009] EWHC 1581 in which it was held at paragraphs  21  and
                22:


                    "This policy relating to those who are  not  within  the
                    protection of the Refugee Convention because of  Article
                    1F(b) seems  to  me  to  be  entirely  reasonable.   The
                    rationale behind it I have not had  spelled  out  before
                    me, but it seems obvious that what is desired is to keep
                    open the possibility of return and the need to  consider
                    at regular and relatively short intervals whether return
                    can be effected because, as a  general  approach,  those
                    who would not qualify because of  the  commission  of  a
                    serious offence should not generally be considered to be
                    able to remain within this country.  One can  understand
                    why that policy has been adopted.


                    Accordingly, in principle, to award only six  months  is
                    not in the least unreasonable.  But the policy  has,  as
                    it were, a cap.  It is recognised that there will come a
                    time when - provided the individual has behaved  himself
                    in this country - it would be proper to  regard  him  as
                    having  put  behind  him,  as  it  were,  the   original
                    offending.  Thus if someone has been here for  10  years
                    and subjected to a series of  discretionary  leaves  for
                    that period he will normally  be  able  to  remain  here
                    indefinitely.  He will, after all, be expected  by  then
                    to have made his life in this country, to  have  settled
                    here, perhaps to have established family life here.  The
                    view is, again as it seems to  me,  entirely  reasonably
                    taken that generally speaking - and of course each  case
                    has to be considered taken on its own merits -  such  an
                    individual will have leave to  remain  indefinitely  and
                    thus will be entitled to settle here."


         4.12.4   Decision-makers must carefully consider the  facts  of  an
                individual case against the specific facts in the case of  R
                on the application  of  N  to  determine  whether  they  are
                analogous and whether the principles set out  in  that  case
                are applicable to the case under consideration.


         4.12.5   Where a person does not qualify for  indefinite  leave  to
                remain,  consideration  must  be  given  to  whether   there
                continues to be an ECHR barrier to  removal.   If  there  is
                not, then the case must  be  prioritised  for  removal.   If
                there is, then the person must be granted  restricted  leave
                within the terms of this policy.

55. The  respondent  has  lodged  witness  statements.  Firstly,  a  witness
   statement has been provided dated 29th May 2015 by Ms Louise Cole who  is
   a  higher  executive  officer  at  the  Home  Office  working  in   their
   Criminality Policy Team. In her witness statement she contends  that  RLR
   is an immigration measure  and  not  a  national  security  measure.  She
   describes it as a means whereby the respondent  meets  her  international
   obligations (by not removing a person in  breach  of  the  ECHR)  without
   leaving them in limbo without leave to remain.

56. Ms Cole sets out the objectives of  the  RLR  policy  in  terms  of  the
   public interest in maintaining  the  integrity  of  immigration  control,
   public protection in relation to ensuring that the respondent is able  to
   monitor where an individual lives  and  works  together  with  preventing
   access to positions of influence or trust  and,  thirdly,  upholding  the
   rule of law internationally. She then observes the following in  relation
   to risk a person poses in deciding the conditions to be imposed:

         12.  So, although in some cases the risk  a  person  poses  may  be
             taken into account in  the  imposition  of  conditions  -  for
             example,  a  person's  risk  to  a  local  community  will  be
             considered  when  deciding  whether  to  impose  a   residence
             condition, and the  reason  a  person  is  excluded  from  the
             Refugee Convention may inform whether they  are  permitted  to
             take employment working with vulnerable members of  society  -
             conditions are primarily the means by which  the  Home  Office
             maintains contact with those whose removal from the UK remains
             a priority, notwithstanding that there are legal  barriers  to
             removal at the point Restricted Leave is granted.


         13.  Restricted Leave is not the only aspect  of  immigration  work
             which takes account of the risk a person poses.  The Secretary
             of State and the courts are  able  to  take  account  of  both
             immigration factors and the risk a person poses to others when
             making  decisions  relating  to  immigration   detention   and
             immigration bail.

57. Ms Cole then turns to consideration of the imposition of conditions.  In
   that regard, she observes as follows:


         14.  At paragraph 6 of Sonia Routledge's  witness  statement  dated
             25th March  2015  it  is  said  that  conditions  are  usually
             attached to limited leave which relate to the basis upon which
             that leave  has  been  granted.   That  is  correct,  and  the
             Restricted Leave policy is not inconsistent with that.


         15.  It seems to be contended that the conditions  permitted  under
             the Restricted Leave policy do not relate to  the  purpose  of
             leave, in contrast with, for example,  visitors  who  are  not
             permitted to work or have recourse to  public  funds.   It  is
             accepted that there is a difference between those who come  to
             the UK for a specific purpose to visit, study,  work  or  join
             family, for example, whereas those subject to Restricted Leave
             are in the UK solely because notwithstanding the intention  to
             remove them there are legal barriers preventing us from  doing
             so.  But the purpose of the leave is clear: a person cannot be
             left without leave when there is  a  legal  barrier  to  their
             removal.  The conditions which can be  imposed  in  Restricted
             Leave case all relate to that purpose: ensuring that a  person
             does not become established in the UK and can  be  removed  at
             the  earliest  opportunity  in  compliance   with   the   UK's
             international obligations.


         16.  At paragraph 5 of Sonia Routledge's  witness  statement  dated
             25th March 2015, it is stated that until the  introduction  of
             the Restricted Leave policy, those granted  limited  leave  to
             remain  on  Human  Rights  grounds  did  not  have  conditions
             attached to their limited leave.  This is correct.  However it
             is  entirely  appropriate  for  a  Government  to  decide   to
             formulate a  new  policy  which  is  different  from  previous
             policies.   In  addition,  since  the  introduction   of   the
             Restricted Leave policy on 2nd September 2011, the  Government
             has decided that those granted Limited Leave to Remain on  the
             basis of ECHR Article 8 under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix  FM
             of the Immigration Rules should not ordinarily  have  recourse
             to public funds.

58.  Turning  to  the  comparison  between  the  RLR  policy  and  Terrorism
   Prevention and  Investigation  Measures  ("TPIM")  Ms  Cole  observes  as
   follows:


         20.  At paragraph 10(10) and  paragraph  13  of  Sonia  Routledge's
             witness statement dated 25th March 2015,  it  is  stated  that
             there are no limits on the length of time for which Restricted
             Leave and associated  conditions  may  be  imposed.   This  is
             because it will often not be possible to know in  advance  how
             long the legal  barrier  to  removal  will  remain  in  place.
             However, at each review of  Restricted  Leave  the  caseworker
             will consider for how long the next period of leave should  be
             granted and whether or not any conditions  previously  imposed
             remain appropriate and proportionate.  The person  subject  to
             Restricted Leave can also apply for a variation of  conditions
             at anytime as  long  as  full  reasons  for  the  request  are
             provided.


         21.  It is  also  said  that  there  is  no  requirement  that  the
             Secretary  of  State  be   satisfied   to   the   balance   of
             probabilities, or a lower standard that a person continues  to
             be involved in terrorism - related activity.  That it  because
             Restricted Leave  is  an  immigration  policy  based  on  past
             conduct (i.e.  the reasons for refusal of asylum  pursuant  to
             Article 1F or Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention)  rather
             than a national security measure to  prevent  future  criminal
             offences.


         22.  At paragraph 10(11) it  is  said  that  the  Restricted  Leave
             policy appears to proceed on the basis that it  is  legitimate
             to impose conditions in all  Restricted  Leave  cases  because
             there are always public protection issues in play.  This is  a
             misrepresentation of the policy.  Conditions are imposed on  a
             case-by-case basis for immigration reasons and where there  is
             additionally a public protection issue in an individual  case,
             the  decision  letter  will  explain  the  reasons  for   that
             assessment  as   required   by   the   Immigration   (Notices)
             Regulations 2003.

59. A witness statement dated 28th May 2015 has been provided by  Ms  Louise
   O'Sullivan who is the Head  of  Terrorism  Prevention  and  Investigation
   Measures Policy and Litigation in the Office  for  Security  and  Counter
   Terrorism at the Home Office. In her witness statement, she describes the
   TPIM regime. She states that from the perspective of the TPIM  team,  the
   TPIM and RLR measures are not equivalent or alternative measures but have
   different purposes scope and statutory basis. She states that nationality
   and immigration status have no relevance to TPIM notices and that they do
   not have any immigration function. She notes TPIM  notices  can  be  made
   both against British nationals  and  foreign  nationals  irrespective  of
   their immigration status.

60. The third witness statement provided by the  respondent  is  dated  22nd
   May 2015 from Mr Chris Minchell who is a senior executive officer  within
   the Home Office. He provided  up-to-date  evidence  in  relation  to  the
   application of the RLR policy. He confirms in his evidence that there are
   a total of 62 individuals with leave under the RLR  policy,  of  whom  38
   were excluded from the Refugee Convention under Article  1F(a),  4  under
   Article 1F(b), 14 under Article 1F(c) and 6 excluded under two or more of
   the exclusion clauses.

   III. The Issues


61. Helpfully Ms Stephanie Harrison QC and Ms Charlotte Kilroy who  appeared
   on behalf of MS and Ms Amanda  Weston  who  appeared  on  behalf  of  MBT
   distilled the questions which they raised and therefore the issues  which
   arise in each of  these  judicial  reviews  claims  for  the  purpose  of
   focusing the hearing and assisting us  with  our  decision  making.  That
   exposition of the issues and the relief sought is set out below:

         1.   These claims raise two broad questions:


             (1)  Whether the RLR policy is lawful.


             (2)  Whether, if it is, it has been lawfully applied to MS and
                  MBT


                  A third question concerns relief.


             Question 1: The lawfulness of the RLR policy


             1.   The issues raised in relation to the  lawfulness  of  the
                  RLR policy are:


                  (1)  Is the policy  ultra  vires  the  enabling  power  in
                      s.3(1)(c) of the 1971 Act? MS argues that it is using
                      ordinary   principles   of   statutory   construction
                      (Grounds 1-3):


                      (a)  The wording of the section in the context of the
                           statutory scheme as a whole;


                      (b)  The statutory purpose;


                      (c)  The principle of legality;


                      (d)   The  existence  of  a   specifically   tailored
                           statutory scheme for those who cannot be  removed
                           from the UK but are assessed for public  interest
                           reasons to require restrictions.


                   (2) Is the policy in breach of  the  requirement  on  the
                      respondent at s.3(2) of the 1971 Act to set  out  how
                      she intends to exercise her discretion on  the  grant
                      of leave subject to conditions in  Immigration  Rules
                      (the Alvi point)? (Ground 4)


                  (3)  Does the policy unlawfully  fetter  the  respondent's
                      discretion? (Ground 5)


                  (4)  Does the law and policy  violate  Article  8(1)  ECHR
                      read alone and/or with Article 14 ECHR because it  is
                      arbitrary and not in  accordance  with  a  procedures
                      prescribed  by  law.   Alternatively  is  the  policy
                      compatible with Article  8(2)  because  even  if  the
                      interference  is  not  arbitrary  it  is  not  for  a
                      legitimate purpose  and/or  is  disproportionate  and
                      discriminatory? (Ground 6)


                  (5)  Is the policy compatible with s.55 of  the  2009  Act
                      and the duties to MS's 3 British children (Ground 7)


             Question 2: The lawfulness of the decisions to grant RLR to MS
             and MBT


             2.   The issues raised in relation to the  lawfulness  of  the
                  individual decision to grant MS RLR with conditions are:


                  (1)  Was it unlawful not to grant MS ILR, and  instead  to
                      grant him RLR, given that there was a nine-year delay
                      in considering his application for ILR from 2005-2014
                      and he was deprived of the benefit of  the  grant  of
                      ILR to which he was entitled  under  the  DLR  policy
                      from on and after 03.11.2011? (Ground 8)


                  (2)  Could the RLR policy rationally  be  applied  to  MS?
                      (Ground 9)


                  (3)  Did the decision to  grant  MS  RLR  with  conditions
                      violate his rights and the rights of his British wife
                      and children under Article 8 ECHR and/or breach  s.55
                      of the 2009 Act?


             3.   The issues raised in relation to the  lawfulness  of  the
                  individual decision to grant MBT RLR with conditions are:


                  (1)  Was it unlawful to refuse to grant  MBT  ILR  and  to
                      grant him RLR given that:


                      (i)  The Respondent refused to  consider  whether  he
                           should be granted ILR until he had  completed  10
                           years DL,


                      (ii) He had resided lawfully in the UK since  13  May
                           1999 as an asylum seeker, there was a delay of  5
                           years before he was granted  DLR  in  July  2004,
                           four years between his application  of  2005  and
                           grant  of  2009  and  four  years   between   his
                           application of 2009  and  grant  of  2013  during
                           which periods there was little or no contact from
                           the respondent;


                      (iii)    He had not  been  subject  to  any  national
                           security or other restriction, had lived  a  law-
                           abiding life in the UK and was 'rehabilitated';


                      (iv) He has a wife and four British citizen  children
                           all settled in the UK, the  children  knowing  no
                           life outside England.


                  (2)  Could the RLR policy rationally be applied to MBT?


                  (3)  Did the decision to grant  MBT  RLR  with  conditions
                      violate his rights and the rights  of  his  wife  and
                      British children under Article 8 ECHR  and/or  breach
                      s.55 of the 2009 Act?


             Question 3: Relief


             1.   In the event that the RLR policy is found to be  unlawful
                  for any of the reasons set out under Question 1 above:
                  (1)  A declaration setting out the basis of the finding of
                      unlawfulness;
                  (2)  An order quashing the RLR policy.
                  (3)  A declaration that the decisions to grant RLR  to  MS
                      were unlawful.
                  (4)  An order quashing those decisions
                  (5)  An order that MS be  granted  ILR/  alternatively  an
                      order that his  application  for  ILR  be  determined
                      under the DLR policy, without  reliance  on  the  RLR
                      policy.


             2.   In the event that the RLR  policy  is  not  found  to  be
                  unlawful, but the decision to impose RLR on MS is:


                  (1)  A declaration that the decisions to grant RLR  to  MS
                      were unlawful.
                  (2)  An order quashing those decisions
                  (3)  An order that MS be  granted  ILR/  alternatively  an
                      order that his application for ILR  be  re-considered
                      taking into account  all  relevant  factors  and  the
                      Court's judgment.


     In MBT's skeleton argument dated 23rd April 2014, the following  relief
was sought:


        (1)  An order to quash the decisions of 21st August 2013  and  23rd
             September 2013  to  impose  restrictions/conditions  on  MBT's
             grant of RLR.


        (2)  A mandatory  order  requiring  the  respondent  to  reconsider
             whether MBT should be granted ILTR.


        (3)  A declaration that the RLR policy is unlawful in whole  or  in
        part.


        (4)  Such further or other relief as the court considers fit.

IV. The Lawfulness of the Restricted Leave Policy

(a) Is the RLR Policy ultra vires the enabling power  in  s.3(1)(c)  of  the
1971 Act?

62. As will be seen from the list of  issues,  this  question  of  statutory
   construction is put in a number of ways. The argument  initially  focuses
   on the particular wording of the section and whether it can  sustain  the
   imposition of conditions in the circumstances of  persons  excluded  from
   the Refugee Convention. It examines the statutory purpose and whether  or
   not the use of conditions is outwith that statutory purpose examining, in
   particular,  the  availability  of  alternative  statutory  schemes   for
   achieving the objectives of the RLR policy.

63. The starting point for the consideration of these  arguments  is  s.3(1)
   which provides as follows:

         3    General provisions for regulation and control


         3(1) Except as otherwise provided by or under  this  Act,  where  a
             person is not a British Citizen...


             (b)  he may be given leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  (or,
                  when already there, leave to remain in the United Kingdom)
                  either for a limited or for an indefinite period;


             (c)  if he is given limited leave to enter or  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom, it may be given subject to all or  any  of
                  the following conditions, namely-


                  (i)  a condition restricting his employment or  occupation
                      in the United Kingdom;


                  (i)(a)   a condition restricting his studies in the United
                      Kingdom;


                  (ii) a condition requiring him to maintain and accommodate
                      himself, and any dependants of his, without  recourse
                      to public funds;


                  (iii)    a condition requiring him to  register  with  the
                      police;


                  (iv) a condition requiring him to report to an immigration
                      officer or the Secretary of State; and


                  (v)  a condition about residence.


64. The argument based upon the statutory language focuses on the  reference
   in s.3(1)(c) to leave  being  given  "subject  to"  the  conditions.  The
   submission made is in  essence  that  that  phrase  has  to  be  read  as
   requiring the leave to be subject to or  compliant  with  the  conditions
   which are imposed. In other words, the conditions which are imposed  must
   be integral to the grant of leave and if they are breached lead  to  that
   leave being curtailed. But for  those  conditions,  leave  would  not  be
   granted.  It is argued that, in the scenario  contemplated  by  the  1971
   Act, both the respondent's officers and the individuals  have  a  choice:
   the respondent has a choice whether to  grant  leave  to  enter  and  the
   individual has a choice as to whether to accept any  conditions.  If  the
   individual does not accept the conditions he/she is not permitted to  use
   the leave to enter. If the individual uses the leave to enter but  breaks
   the conditions he is liable to criminal prosecution.  The  following  two
   examples are given: entry clearance granted for the purpose of  study  is
   subject to restrictions on employment; entry clearance  granted  for  the
   purpose of visits is subject to restrictions on access  to  public  funds
   and employment. It is argued that the type of conditions in the  list  at
   s.3(1)(c) were designed to implement the  substantive  Immigration  Rules
   permitting leave to enter or  remain  to  be  granted  for  specific  and
   limited reasons whether to take employment, to study, or to  join  family
   and subject to meeting identified conditions as to duration and purpose.

65. Accordingly, it is argued  that  the  language  in  s.3(1)(c)  does  not
   mandate or justify the imposition of conditions on those  who  cannot  be
   removed because of acknowledged breaches of Article 3  that  would  arise
   from them being removed and therefore who must  be  granted  leave.  That
   leave cannot be contingent upon the imposition of  conditions  and  could
   not be curtailed if the conditions were  breached.  Attention  was  drawn
   during the course of argument to the cases of R v Somerset County Council
   ex parte Fewings [1995] 1 All ER 513 and R v Richmond Upon Thames  London
   Borough Council ex parte Watson [2001] QB 370 to support the  proposition
   that in order to act, and in particular to impose the conditions in these
   cases, specific statutory authority was required. It was  submitted  that
   in construing  statutory  powers  whose  exercise  restricts  fundamental
   common law rights a strict and narrow approach to construction should  be
   adopted (see R (Lumba) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2012] 1 AC 245.) In particular in  the  present  case,  in  that,  human
   rights were at stake, express language was required  from  Parliament  to
   justify a construction which would support interference with those rights
   (see R v Home Secretary ex parte Simms [2000] 2 AC, in particular in  the
   speech of Lord Hoffmann at page 131 E-G).

66.  All  of  these  broad  propositions  of  public   law   and   statutory
   construction are uncontroversial, in our view, and provide  an  important
   bedrock for  considering  the  nature  of  the  applicant's  submissions.
   However, we are satisfied that the statutory language, construed  against
   the principles set out above and in the light of  the  overall  statutory
   scheme provides power for conditions  to  be  imposed  on  the  leave  of
   individuals in the excluded category of the applicants. Our  reasons  for
   reaching this conclusion are as follows.

67. Firstly, the terms of  the  provision,  simply  but  strictly  construed
   empower the imposition of conditions whenever leave is granted. There  is
   nothing within the  language  of  the  statute  itself  that  limits  the
   imposition of conditions to certain types of leave or leave being granted
   in certain circumstances, nor is there  anything  in  the  language  that
   requires the conditions imposed to relate to the purpose for which  leave
   is being granted. Secondly,  it  is  important  to  appreciate  that  the
   statute does not create a general power to impose conditions of any  kind
   but only particular types of condition. Contrary to the submissions  made
   on behalf of the applicants, the types of conditions listed in  s.3(1)(c)
   are not simply directed to the classes of leave (for example to  work  or
   as a student) but are also directed to issues which are plainly  directed
   to enforcement; for example,  registration  with  the  police,  reporting
   conditions and residence conditions. These classes of condition  are  not
   therefore simply limited to regulating the purpose  for  which  leave  is
   being granted but also have a direct bearing on ensuring that if  removal
   is for whatever reason possible or necessary, enforcement of  immigration
   control can  be  more  easily  achieved.  Thus,  the  argument  that  the
   conditions imposed must somehow be integral to the grant of leave in  the
   sense of being referable to its purpose is not supported by the statutory
   language.

68. Thirdly, we are unable to accept  the  proposition  that  the  statutory
   language only mandates the imposition of conditions if  breach  of  those
   conditions would lead to leave being curtailed. Such an interpretation is
   impossible to reconcile with the fact that  s.3(1)(c)  expressly  permits
   the imposition of conditions  requiring  registration  with  the  police,
   reporting conditions and conditions as to residence. Furthermore, amongst
   the battery of enforcement measures available to the respondent  is,  for
   instance, the ability under s.24(1)(b)(ii)  to  prosecute  a  person  for
   breach of a condition on their leave. Thus there  may  be  a  variety  of
   sanctions for breach of condition which fall far short of the curtailment
   of leave. Thus, the fact that leave could not be curtailed in the case of
   an excluded person who cannot be removed such as the applicants  in  this
   case, does not justify the construction claimed, namely  that  conditions
   cannot be imposed on their leave because conditions could only be imposed
   which could lead to leave being curtailed.

69. These conclusions arise  simply  from  an  examination  of  the  statute
   itself and the statutory scheme of the 1971 Act.

70.  The  applicants'  submissions  went  on  to  support  their   suggested
   construction by means of other arguments  extraneous  to  the  1971  Act.
   Those arguments were as follows.

71. The first argument concerned the provisions of  two  Orders  made  under
   the 1971 Act. Under the Immigration (Leave to  Enter  and  Remain)  Order
   2000, provisions are  made  as  to  the  grant  of  entry  clearance.  In
   particular, article 3 thereof requires entry  clearance  to  be  endorsed
   with any conditions to which it is subject and under article 5  provision
   is made as to the imposition on leave of conditions empowered by  s.3  of
   the 1971 Act. By contrast the Immigration (Leave  to  Enter)  Order  2001
   addresses specifically by article 2(2) a person who seeks leave to  enter
   on asylum or human rights grounds. The 2001 Order does  not  contain  any
   mention whatsoever of the imposition of conditions. It is submitted  that
   this contrast between the two Orders points up the contrast between those
   who are granted leave to remain on human rights grounds where  conditions
   under s.3(1) cannot be imposed and other  types  of  persons  upon  whose
   leave conditions can be imposed.

72. This submission does not  persuade  us  to  depart  from  the  principal
   conclusion as to the appropriate construction of s.3(1)(c) that  we  have
   set out above. It is important to appreciate that these Orders were  made
   deploying the power under s.3A(2) of  the  1971  Act  which  provides  as
   follows:

         3A   Further provision as to leave to enter


         (1)  The Secretary of State may by  order  make  further  provision
             with respect to the giving, refusing or varying  of  leave  to
             enter the United Kingdom.


         (2)  An order under subsection (1) may, in particular, provide for:




             (a)  ...


             (b)  the form or manner in which leave may be  given,  refused
                  or varied;


             (c)  the imposition of conditions; ...

73. The first point which arises is that it  can  be  seen  from  the  power
   which is used that the Secretary of  State  is  not  obliged  to  provide
   Orders which deal exhaustively with all  categories  of  persons  or  all
   categories of leave and conditions which might arise. The second point to
   note is that s.3A(1) and (2) specifically envisage that conditions may or
   may not be imposed when leave is given (see the words: "in particular" in
   the opening line of s.3A(2)).

74. Thirdly, we accept the submission made on behalf of  the  respondent  by
   Ms Julie Anderson that the Orders do not  and  could  not  constrain  the
   proper use of power under the primary legislation as they are a piece  of
   secondary legislation.

75. The second argument raised by the applicants relates  to  considerations
   arising from the case of R (S and others) v Secretary of  State  for  the
   Home Department [2004] EWHC 1111  (Admin);  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1157.  The
   circumstances of that case were that the claimants were Afghan  nationals
   who hijacked an  internal  flight  in  Afghanistan  and  arrived  in  the
   aircraft in the United Kingdom where they were charged and  convicted  of
   various  offences  associated  with  the  hijacking  (albeit  that  those
   convictions were later quashed). They claimed asylum and their claim  was
   refused but it was concluded that  their  removal  to  Afghanistan  would
   violate their rights under Article 3 of the ECHR. The Secretary of  State
   refused to grant the  claimants  discretionary  leave  of  any  kind  and
   instead placed them on  temporary  admission.  This  was  pursuant  to  a
   modification  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy   on   humanitarian
   protection and discretionary leave whereby it was concluded that a person
   falling within the excluded category  would  not  be  granted  leave  but
   placed on temporary admission. Before Sullivan J (as  he  then  was)  the
   policy was declared unlawful  and  the  delays  involved  in  reaching  a
   decision which implemented the decision reached on the asylum appeal were
   also found to be unlawful. At paragraph 67 of Sullivan J's  judgment,  he
   records the following exchange during the course of argument:


         When I asked Mr Jay what was the difference in deciding that it was
         "inappropriate to grant" the  claimants  leave  and  refusing  them
         leave, Mr Jay replied that the former was a "purely  administrative
         decision" which did not formally refuse leave".  In response to the
         further question whether there  was  any  difference  in  substance
         between the two decisions, he pointed to the practical consequences
         which flow from a decision to grant temporary admission as  opposed
         to a  grant  of  discretionary  leave  to  enter.   Some  of  these
         practical consequences have been referred  to  above,  for  example
         that claimants  are  not  allowed  to  work,  and  are  subject  to
         reporting restrictions etc.  So far  as  removal  from  the  UK  is
         concerned, there is no difference  in  practical  terms  for  these
         claimants.  If they had been granted  discretionary  leave  for  an
         initial period of six months in accordance with  the  2003  policy,
         then that leave could have been extended for further periods of six
         months, or longer if it was thought appropriate.

76. The applicants rely upon this exchange to found the submission  that  in
   effect what was being observed during the course of argument in that case
   contained the implicit submission that those who were excluded  from  the
   Refugee Convention but who could not be returned  owing  to  breaches  of
   Article 3 could not have conditions imposed on their leave.  Furthermore,
   it was submitted that the effect of  this  case,  in  particular  in  the
   decision of the Court of Appeal, was that a person in that situation  had
   to be granted a form of leave to remain and therefore it  was  Article  3
   which created the right to remain further reinforcing the contention that
   such leave could not be made subject to conditions. The relevant  extract
   from the Court of Appeal's judgment in this respect was as  follows  from
   the leading judgment of Brooke LJ:


         44.  In these circumstances the judge was right to hold that it was
             not open to the  Secretary  of  State  to  determine,  without
             obtaining  the  necessary  authority  from  Parliament,   that
             someone in the position of the respondents could  be  kept  or
             placed on temporary admission.  Parliament created that status
             (by which someone who has in  fact  entered  this  country  is
             deemed not to have entered: see s.11 of  the  Immigration  Act
             1971) for those  persons  identified  in  para  21(1)  of  the
             Schedule.  For the reasons we have given they do  not  include
             persons who are in the position of the respondents.


         45.  That the statutory scheme of  immigration  control  postulated
             that someone who successfully maintained  that  their  removal
             would constitute a  violation  of  their  European  Convention
             Rights should be entitled  to  leave  to  enter,  for  however
             limited a period, became apparent from the  clear  submissions
             addressed to the court by Mr Rabinder Singh QC,  who  appeared
             for the respondents.  In short, the essence of his argument is
             that those who do not have the  "right  of  abode"  here  must
             obtain "leave" in order to enter the country (see  Immigration
             Act 1971, section 3(1)).  Asylum and human  rights  applicants
             (like everyone else who does not possess the right  to  abode)
             are subject to the same statutory controls on entry.  This  is
             reflected by the terms of the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter)
             Order 2001 which provides that both  categories  of  applicant
             may be granted "leave to enter", even if in  the  latter  case
             all they may have established is that they cannot lawfully  be
             removed without an infringement of their  European  Convention
             rights.


         46.  Mr Singh pointed out that, where such applicants  are  refused
             leave to enter, they have a right of appeal.  If their  appeal
             succeeds, on asylum or human rights grounds, they are entitled
             to leave to enter and remain here, in the latter  case,  until
             they  can  be  safely  returned  without  violation  of  their
             European Convention rights.  This status cannot be taken  away
             from them by the Secretary of State conferring on them  a  new
             status which does not in this manifestation form any  part  of
             the statutory scheme.  We accept Mr Singh's submission.


         47.  Nothing in this judgment should be interpreted as meaning that
             it would not be open to confer power on the Secretary of State
             to introduce a regime similar  to  the  regime  he  sought  to
             introduce through the August 2005 Discretionary Leave API  (so
             long as the arbitrary elements of it are removed).  If  it  is
             considered that a person (or a group of persons)  has  by  his
             conduct disentitled himself to any discretionary leave at all,
             then it would be open to Parliament, if  it  thought  fit,  to
             create a  new  statutory  category  to  accommodate  it.   The
             present  twilight  zone  occupied  by  persons   entitled   to
             temporary admission was not designed for him.  The only effect
             of the present judgment is that it was beyond  the  powers  of
             the Secretary of State  to  introduce  this  new  category  of
             "persons temporarily  admitted"  of  his  own  motion  without
             Parliamentary sanction.

77. We are unable to accept that the observations in this case  are  capable
   of bearing the weight and meaning attributed to them by  the  applicants.
   Paragraph 44 of the judgment draws attention to the fact that  Parliament
   created the status in question (i.e. someone who has in fact entered  the
   United Kingdom but is deemed not  to  have  entered)  for  those  persons
   identified in paragraph 21(1) of  Schedule  2  of  the  1971  Act.  Under
   Schedule 2 with particular reference to paragraphs 2(1), 16(1) and 21(1),
   an Immigration Officer had the authority  to  grant  temporary  admission
   instead of detaining persons who are required to  submit  to  examination
   pending a decision as to whether to give or refuse leave to  enter.  That
   was the purpose for which temporary admission could be given, whereas the
   Secretary of State had used the power to grant temporary admission  to  a
   different category of persons (those who could  not  be  removed  without
   infringing their ECHR rights).

78. Plainly, the case is authority for the proposition that persons who  are
   excluded from the Refugee Convention but who cannot  be  removed  due  to
   Article 3 of the ECHR cannot be granted temporary admission and  must  be
   granted some form leave. It is not  authority  for  the  proposition  the
   applicants seemingly advance, that conditions cannot be imposed on  those
   who must be granted leave. There is nothing in the judgment of Sullivan J
   in the High Court or Brooke LJ in the Court of Appeal that  supports  the
   proposition advanced by the applicants, nor is there  anything  in  those
   judgments that supports the suggestion that there is no power within  the
   1971 Act to grant RLR as contemplated by the RLR policy.

79. The final element of the applicants' argument in this part of  the  case
   is reliance on provisions in the Criminal  Justice  and  Immigration  Act
   2008 (the "CJIA 2008"), in particular ss.131-133. It is important to note
   that these sections have yet to be brought  into  force.  Under  s.131  a
   person is a "foreign criminal" if, amongst other circumstances, he or she
   is not a British citizen and is excluded from the Refugee  Convention  by
   virtue of Article 1F. Under s.130, the Secretary of State may designate a
   person (subject to certain exceptions) who is a foreign criminal and  who
   is liable to deportation but cannot be removed from  the  United  Kingdom
   because of s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. The effect of designation is
   described by s.132 as follows:


         132  Effect of designation


         (1)  A designated person does not have leave to enter or remain  in
             the United Kingdom


         (2)  For the purposes of a provision of the  Immigration  Acts  and
             any other enactment which concerns or refers to Immigration or
             nationality (including any provision which applies  or  refers
             to a provision of the Immigration Acts or any other  enactment
             about immigration or nationality) a designated person -


             (a)  is a person subject to immigration control,
             (b)  is not to be treated as an  asylum  seeker  or  a  former
                  asylum seeker, and
             (c)  is not in the United Kingdom in breach of the immigration
                  laws.


         (3)  Despite subsection 2(c), time spent in the United Kingdom as a
             designated person may not  relied  on  by  a  person  for  the
             purpose of an enactment about nationality.


         (4)  A designated person


             (a)   shall  not  be  deemed  to  have  been  given  leave  in
                  accordance  with  paragraph  6  of  Schedule  2   to   the
                  Immigration Act 1971 (c.77) (notice of leave or  refusal),
                  and
             (b)  may not be granted  temporary  admission  to  the  United
                  Kingdom under paragraph 21 of that Schedule...


    S.133 makes provisions in relation to the imposition of  conditions  as
    follows:


         133  Conditions


         (1)  The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may by notice
             in writing impose a condition on a designated person.


         (2)  a condition may relate to -


             (a)  residence
             (b)  employment or occupation, or
             (c)  reporting to the police, the Secretary  of  State  or  an
                  immigration officer.


         (3)  Section  36  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
             Claimants etc) Act 2004 (c.19) (electronic  monitoring)  shall
             apply in relation to conditions imposed under this section  as
             it applies to  restrictions  imposed  under  paragraph  21  of
             Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971...


         (4)  Section 69 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
             (c.41) (reporting restrictions: travel expenses)  shall  apply
             in relation to  conditions  imposed  under  subsection  (2)(c)
             above as it applies to restrictions imposed under paragraph 21
             of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

80. The section goes  on  to  provide  for  criminal  sanctions  if  without
   reasonable excuse a condition is breached.  Section 136 provides that the
   designation of a person as a foreign  criminal  lapses  upon  them  being
   granted leave to enter or remain amongst other circumstances.

81. The applicants' submission arising from  ss.131-133  of  the  CJIA  2008
   (albeit not yet in force) is that this status was designed  to  cure  the
   illegality of the policy in the case of  S.  Further,  and  perhaps  more
   importantly, the applicants draw attention to the fact that  under  s.133
   the conditions are imposed "on a designated person" and not on the  leave
   which they are granted. Thus, it is submitted that in circumstances which
   apply to the present  applicants,  namely  that  leave  must  be  granted
   because of the breach of Article 3 that would result from their  removal,
   it is not possible under the 1971  Act  to  impose  conditions  on  those
   persons in the way which has been done by the RLR policy. It is submitted
   that the only way that this could be achieved would be  by  the  specific
   statutory mechanism created under the CJIA 2008 to enable that to occur.

82. Again,  although  attractively  made,  we  are  unable  to  accept  that
   proposition. It may well be the case that the  designated  person  scheme
   was created under the CJIA 2008 in response to  S.  When  it  comes  into
   force, it will create a new category of persons who will not  have  leave
   and yet will not be treated as being in the United Kingdom in  breach  of
   the Immigration Rules. Since such persons will not  have  leave,  it  was
   necessary for specific statutory provision to be made for the  imposition
   of conditions on them. That is  the  reason  why  the  designated  person
   scheme created under the CJIA 2008 provides for conditions to be  imposed
   on the person. The existence of that separate statutory regime creating a
   particular class of person that did not exist previously does not justify
   construing differently the plain words of s.3(1) of the  1971  Act  which
   clearly in our view empower the imposition of certain types of  condition
   when leave is being granted. Again, the fact that leave has to be granted
   to persons in this category does not affect the power enabling conditions
   to be imposed. It is not legitimate to imply that the words "subject  to"
   justify the contention that conditions could only be  imposed  where  but
   for those conditions leave would be refused. In our view even where there
   is no choice other than to grant leave (in particular, for instance, as a
   result of the effect of the case of S) the leave which has to be  granted
   can be regulated by the imposition of the types of  condition  identified
   in s.3(1)(c).

83. The alternative way in which the submissions as to the vires of the  RLR
   policy are developed relates to the contention that the policy is outwith
   the statutory purpose. The principles of public law  applicable  in  this
   context are straightforward. A power cannot be construed in a  way  which
   widens the purpose of the Act containing it or departs from or varies its
   primary objective (see, for instance, Utah Construction  and  Engineering
   PTY Limited v Pataky [1966] AC 629 and R  (Public  Law  Project)  v  Lord
   Chancellor [2015] 1 WLR 262 paragraph 40 - 41.)

84. Here it is submitted that the conditions which  are  imposed  go  beyond
   any conditions necessary to give effect to the purpose of the  Act  which
   is an immigration measure. In particular,  attention  is  drawn  to,  for
   instance, the public protection element of the purpose of the RLR  policy
   and the use of conditions for instance to obviate the risk  of  potential
   radicalisation  of  communities  (through  the  imposition  of  residence
   conditions) or preventing contact with vulnerable  people  (through,  for
   instance, the conditions in relation to permission for work) as having an
   ulterior purpose, in particular related to threats to national  security,
   which are beyond the purpose of the 1971 Act and in particular s.3 of the
   1971 Act. It is in this connection that again attention is drawn  to  the
   provisions of the TPIMA 2011 and the  statutory  requirements  which  are
   created before a TPIM can be  imposed.   Section  2  of  the  TPIMA  2011
   requires the conditions within s.3 to be met. It is unnecessary  for  the
   purposes of this decision to set out each of the  five  conditions  which
   are identified. Suffice it to say that the Secretary of State  must  show
   that it is necessary to impose a TPIM  on  an  individual  "for  purposes
   connected with protecting members of the public from a risk of terrorism"
   and "preventing or restricting the individual's involvement in terrorism-
   related activities". In other words, individuals on  whom  TPIMs  may  be
   imposed present an active terrorist threat.

85. Within Schedule 1 of the TPIMA 2011 a range of  measures  are  provided.
   They include measures in relation to  overnight  residence,  measures  in
   relation to  travel,  exclusion  from  particular  areas  or  places  and
   measures connected with the restriction of work and study. The  existence
   of these measures is relied upon by the applicants  to  demonstrate  that
   the RLR policy has in  effect  developed  an  enlarged  ulterior  purpose
   engaged with threats to national security which are outwith  the  purpose
   of s.3 of the 1971  Act  as  an  immigration  instrument.  Whilst  it  is
   accepted by the applicants that considerations of public  protection  can
   arise in detention  and  deportation  cases  this  dimension  is,  it  is
   submitted, specifically recognised in s.3(6) of the 1971  Act.  Detention
   is a parasitic power upon this particular purpose of  the  1971  Act.  By
   contrast it is submitted there is nothing in s.3(1) which justifies or is
   referable to public protection.


86. In her submissions in response,  Ms  Anderson  draws  attention  to  the
   three purposes set out at [56]  above  (namely  the  public  interest  in
   maintaining the integrity of immigration control,  public  protection  to
   ensure monitoring of where an individual lives and works  and  preventing
   their access to positions of trust, and upholding the international  rule
   of  law  by  supporting  broader  international  obligations  to   remove
   individuals excluded from the Convention as soon as possible)  which  are
   the specific rationale for the RLR policy. She contends that they do  not
   directly identify current active national security protection.


87. In our view, the key is to understand  the  different  purposes  of  the
   TPIMA 2011 and the RLR policy. As we have said, individuals on whom TPIMs
   may be placed present  an  active  terrorist  threat;  the  measures  are
   imposed to protect members of the public from a  risk  of  terrorism  and
   preventing or restricting  the  individual's  involvement  in  terrorism-
   related activities. In contrast, those who are subject only  to  the  RLR
   policy may not present an active terrorist  threat  notwithstanding  that
   one purpose of the RLR policy  is  stated  to  be  public  protection  in
   furtherance  of  which  conditions  are  imposed  to  monitor  where  the
   individual lives and works and/or  prevent  the  individual's  access  to
   positions of trust. It is perfectly rational and lawful for the Secretary
   of State to seek to  impose  such  conditions  on  those  who  have  been
   involved  in  terrorism-related  activities  in  the  past  but  may  not
   currently  present  an  active  terrorist  threat.  Although  individuals
   subject only to the RLR policy may not be considered by the Secretary  of
   State to be an active terrorist  threat,  it  is  nevertheless  perfectly
   rational and lawful for her to protect the public by imposing  conditions
   to ensure that contact is maintained with them whilst  they  are  in  the
   United Kingdom as well as prevent them gaining  positions  of  trust  and
   therefore influence until such time as removal is possible or  they  must
   be granted settlement. The necessity to do so arises from the  fact  that
   they engaged in terrorism-related activities in the past.

88. There may be certain individuals who are within the purview of both  the
   TPIM regime and also the RLR policy, and to whom both regimes may  apply.
   However, that does not in our view justify the conclusion  that  the  RLR
   policy is outwith the purpose of the 1971 Act. We are therefore unable to
   accept the implicit submission that there  is  a  covert  or  unspecified
   purpose of the RLR policy related to national security  which  is  to  be
   inferred and which is illegitimate.


89. In our view, each of the three purposes which have  been  identified  as
   the rationale for the imposition of conditions pursuant to the RLR policy
   are obviously and self evidently  part  of  the  purpose  of  immigration
   control which is enshrined within the 1971 Act. We are unable  to  accept
   some distinction or ring fencing of the engagement of  public  protection
   as a purpose  of  immigration  control  or  the  contention  that  public
   protection is irrelevant to the imposition of conditions upon  the  grant
   of leave. It is not a  consideration  which  is  solely  and  exclusively
   confined to the consideration of deportation under s.3(6) but,  where  it
   arises in the circumstances of any individual case, is a factor which  is
   clearly engaged in the purpose of having  immigration  control  which  is
   efficient and effective. Therefore, insofar as the RLR  policy  seeks  to
   impose conditions on the basis of public protection, it  does  not  stray
   beyond the  purpose  of  the  1971  Act  in  controlling  and  regulating
   immigration. Insofar as there may be some individuals who are subject  to
   the RLR policy and who also, simultaneously, present a current and active
   national security risk, then  there  may  be  some  overlap  between  the
   objectives of immigration and also national security objectives which are
   the subject of the TPIMA 2011. The existence of those individuals and the
   possibility that parallel measures would be  required  does  not  justify
   concluding that the use of  conditions  under  the  RLR  policy  for  the
   purpose of national security takes the RLR policy beyond the  purpose  of
   the Act. It is simply the statement that in those cases there will  be  a
   public protection dimension to their  cases  which  comprehends  national
   security.


90. The final  argument  under  this  particular  heading  deployed  by  the
   applicants is the contention that the existence of a  specific  statutory
   power, namely that which is contained within the  TPMIA  2011,  precludes
   the use of the RLR policy  in  relation  to  the  purpose  of  protecting
   national security and renders it  unlawful.  It  is  contended  that  any
   general power under the 1971 Act  to  impose  conditions  should  not  be
   deployed where there  is  a  specific  power  under  the  TPIMA  2011  to
   accomplish the end in  mind.  The  generality  of  this  proposition  was
   supported  by  reference  to  R   (Lapporte)   v   Chief   Constable   of
   Gloucestershire [2007] 2 AC 105 and in  particular  the  speech  of  Lord
   Bingham at paragraph 46. Whilst this authority related to  the  potential
   intervention of the common law over and above powers and duties carefully
   defined by Parliament  (which  was  considered  illegitimate)  there  are
   authorities which bear more closely on the circumstances of this case and
   the concern that general powers should not be used if  a  specific  power
   has been provided for the purpose. In  particular,  the  applicants  drew
   attention to Birmingham City Council v Shafi  [2009]  1  WLR  1961  which
   concerned a local authority's application for an injunction  under  s.222
   of the Local Government Act 1972 instead of their use of powers  provided
   to them under the Crime and Disorder Act  1998  to  seek  an  anti-social
   behavior order. In the leading judgment of Sir Anthony Clarke MR and  Rix
   LJ the following was observed:


         43.  In Hein's case [2005] LGR 797, which was a very  unusual  case
             on its facts, Waller LJ considered the decision of this  court
             in Worcester County Council v Tongue [2004] Ch  236,  where  a
             local authority was seeking orders which would  enable  it  to
             enter land in order to rescue animals which were  at  risk  of
             being cruelly treated.  It was ultimately decided  that  there
             was no power to fill gaps in the  criminal  law  but,  in  the
             course of his judgment, Peter Gibson LJ quoted at para 29 this
             statement by Hoffmann J in Chief Constable of Leicestershire v
             M [1989] 1 WLR 20, 23: "The recent and detailed  interventions
             of Parliament in this field suggest that the court should  not
             indulge in parallel creativity by  the  extension  of  general
             common law principles."


             That principle was applied in the context of animal cruelty in
             Hein's case: see per Waller LJ at paras 66-70.  See  also  per
             Clarke LJ at para 48.


         44.  The significance of the principle stated by Hoffmann J in this
             appeal is this.  The terms of the injunction  sought  in  this
             action are typical of an ASBO and, as  already  indicated,  on
             the facts of this case they are identical or almost  identical
             to the terms of an ASBO.  We have already referred to what  is
             in our view a striking feature of the  council's  approach  in
             this case, namely that it seeks ASBOs against those  under  18
             and injunctions in identical  terms  against  those  over  18.
             Parliament has laid down a  number  of  specific  requirements
             which  apply  to  ASBOs,  some  of  which  may  not  apply  to
             injunctions granted at common law.  In so far  as  it  may  be
             said that it is easier to obtain an injunction than  an  ASBO,
             the granting of an injunction in such circumstances  would  in
             our view be to infringe Hoffmann J's principle.  In any event,
             it  appears  to  us  that  where,  as  here,  Parliament   has
             legislated in detail to deal with a  particular  problem,  the
             courts should in general leave the matter to be dealt with  as
             Parliament  intended  and,   save   perhaps   in   exceptional
             circumstances, refuse to grant injunctive relief of  the  kind
             which can be obtained by an ASBO.

91. Similar arguments were also deployed in the case of Langley v  Liverpool
   City Council [2006] 1 WLR 375. That was a case concerned  with  emergency
   protection orders under s.44 of the Children Act 1989  (the  "1989  Act")
   and the emergency powers given to the police to  remove  and  accommodate
   children in cases of emergency under s.46 of the 1989 Act. The  Court  of
   Appeal concluded that  in  the  light  of  the  specific  provisions  and
   safeguards of s.44  it  had  primacy  within  the  statutory  scheme  and
   therefore where there was an emergency  protection  order  in  place  the
   court held that the s.46 powers should not be exercised unless there were
   compelling reasons to do so.

92. Against the background of these principles it was  contended  on  behalf
   of the applicants that the existence of the powers to impose a TPIM under
   the TPIMA 2011, that was the  measure  which  should  be  used  in  cases
   engaging national security and that the use of the  RLR  policy  in  such
   cases was unlawful because of the existence of this alternative statutory
   power. It was observed as part of these submissions that the power  under
   the TPIMA 2011 contained specific safeguards and procedures  which  could
   be circumvented by the imposition of the RLR policy.

93. We  are  not  persuaded  that  there  is  validity  in  the  applicants'
   submissions in this respect. The TPIMA 2011 applies to  British  citizens
   and foreign nationals alike, provided they present  an  active  terrorist
   threat. The RLR policy applies only to foreign nationals, since they must
   be granted some form of leave (whereas British citizens obviously do  not
   require leave) and the purpose of the RLR policy is to set out the policy
   and guidance concerning the duration of the leave and the  conditions  to
   be imposed. It follows that foreign nationals  who  are  subject  to  the
   TPIMA measures present an active terrorist threat whereas those  who  are
   not subject to TPIMA measures but whose leave is granted  under  the  RLR
   policy may not present such a threat, notwithstanding that there  may  be
   public protection issues in their case  in  the  sense  that  their  past
   involvement in terrorism-related  activity  justifies  the  Secretary  of
   State imposing conditions to ensure that contact is maintained with  them
   and prevent their access to positions of trust and  therefore  influence.
   Thus it is  important  to  observe  that,  so  far  as  concerns  foreign
   nationals who are excluded and cannot be removed, the  TPIMA  2011  could
   only potentially apply to those who present an active  terrorist  threat.
   There will be very  many  persons  who  are  excluded  from  the  Refugee
   Convention and who cannot be returned for Article 3 reasons who will  not
   present any such threat (and the applicants in the present cases are  two
   such examples).

94. Secondly, it is important to appreciate that  the  RLR  policy  and  its
   public protection dimension may in some cases have  a  national  security
   content but it is in reality an immigration  measure  in  which  national
   security may in some limited number  of  cases  be  a  dimension  of  its
   purpose. That is very distinct from the TPIM regime which is unarguably a
   national security measure which has no immigration  dimension  to  it  at
   all. These two regimes are therefore fulfilling two very different  roles
   in the regulation of particular individuals. That  is  not  to  say  that
   there may not be cases, as Ms Anderson submitted, where both regimes  may
   be in play. There may be an  excluded  foreign  national  individual  who
   cannot be removed for Article 3 reasons who is  properly  regarded  as  a
   threat to national security as a result of active engagement in terrorist
   activities. Such a person would be granted RLR and consideration given to
   the imposition of conditions upon them. They could simultaneously be  the
   subject of a TPIM notice. Consideration in both regimes would need to  be
   given to the  imposition  of  conditions  and  no  doubt  duplication  of
   conditions and the avoidance of it would be part of the consideration  in
   relation to exercising those powers. However, it is clear to us that  the
   existence of the separate TPIM regime and the powers  which  it  contains
   does not obviate the need for the RLR policy and the limitations which it
   places on the extent of leave being  granted  and  the  conditions  under
   which it is being imposed.

95. In summary therefore we are entirely satisfied that the  RLR  policy  is
   not, for any of the reasons offered by the applicants,  ultra  vires  the
   1971 Act.

(b) Is the policy in breach of the requirement  under  s.3(2)  of  the  1971
Act?

96. The nature of this argument is that, by virtue of  s.3(2)  of  the  1971
   Act, the Secretary of State ought to have placed the  RLR  policy  before
   Parliament for endorsement before  its  lawful  operation.  The  starting
   point for this argument is, of course, s.3(2) itself  which  provides  as
   follows:


         3    General provisions for regulation and control


         (2)  The Secretary of State shall from time to time (and as soon as
             may be) lay before Parliament statements of the rules,  or  of
             any changes in the rules, laid down by him as to the  practice
             to  be  followed  in  the  administration  of  this  Act   for
             regulating the entry into and stay in the  United  Kingdom  of
             persons required by this Act to have leave to enter, including
             any rules as to the period for which leave is to be given  and
             the conditions to be attached in different circumstances;  and
             s.1(4) above shall not be taken to require  uniform  provision
             to be made by the rules as regards admissions of persons for a
             purpose or in a capacity specified in  section  1(4)  (and  in
             particular, for this as well as other purposes  of  this  Act,
             account may be taken of citizenship or nationality).

97. The effect of s.3(2) and the requirement to lay rules before  Parliament
   was considered by the Supreme Court in  the  case  of  R  (Alvi)  v  Home
   Secretary [2012] 1 WLR 2208. Lord Hope analysed the effect  of  the  1971
   Act and the requirements  in  relation  to  s.3(2)  at  paragraph  41  as
   follows:


         41.  There is, of course, no enabling statute in  this  case.   But
             the 1971 Act must now be seen as  the  source  of  the  powers
             vested in the Secretary of State, and  it  is  the  Act  which
             provides the statutory  machinery  for  their  exercise.   The
             content of the rules is prescribed by sections 1(4)  and  3(2)
             of the 1971 Act in a way that leaves matters other than  those
             to which they refer to her discretion.  The scope of the  duty
             that then follows depends on the meaning that is given to  the
             provisions of the statute.  What s.3(2) requires is that there
             must be laid before Parliament statements of the rules, and of
             any changes to the rules, as to the practice to be followed in
             the administration of the Act for regulating  the  control  of
             entry into and stay in  the  United  Kingdom  of  persons  who
             require leave to enter.  The  Secretary  of  State's  duty  is
             expressed in broadest terms.  A contrast may be drawn  between
             the rules and the  instructions  (not  inconsistent  with  the
             rules) which the Secretary of State may  give  to  immigration
             officers under paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the  1971  Act.
             As Sedley LJ said in ZH (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State  for
             the  Home  Department  [2009]  Imm  AR  450,  para   32,   the
             instructions do not have, and cannot be  treated  as  if  they
             possessed, the force of law.  The Act does not  require  those
             instructions or documents which give guidance of various kinds
             to caseworkers, of which there  are  very  many,  to  be  laid
             before Parliament.  But the  rules  must  be.   So  everything
             which is in the nature of a rule as  to  the  practice  to  be
             followed in the administration of the Act is subject  to  this
             requirement. Resort to the technique of referring  to  outside
             document, which the Scrutiny Committee can ask to be  produced
             if it wishes to see them, is not in itself objectionable.  But
             it will be objectionable if it enables the Secretary of  State
             to avoid her statutory obligation to lay any  changes  in  the
             rules before Parliament.

98. Lord Hope went on to consider the  definition  of  those  matters  which
   pursuant to s.3(2) should be  laid  before  Parliament  and  observed  at
   paragraph 63 of his judgment as follows:

         63.  Various expressions have been used to identify the test  which
             should be used to determine whether or  not  material  in  the
             extraneous document is a rule which requires to be laid before
             Parliament.  It is not easy to find a word or phrase which can
             be used to achieve the right result in  each  case.   I  agree
             with Lord Dyson JSC (see  para  88,  below)  that  it  is  not
             helpful to say that there  is  a  spectrum.   A  more  precise
             expression is needed.  The word "substantive"  was  identified
             by Foskett J in the English UK case and by Singh J in  Ahmed's
             case.  But even this word needs  some  explanation.   I  would
             prefer to concentrate on the word "rule" which, after  all  is
             the word which  s.3(2)  uses  to  identify  the  Secretary  of
             State's duty and to apply  the  test  described  in  para  57,
             above.   The  Act  itself  recognises  that  instructions   to
             immigration officers are not to be treated as rules  and  what
             is simply guidance to sponsors and applicants can  be  treated
             in the same way.  It ought to be possible to identify from  an
             examination of the material in question, taken  in  its  whole
             context, whether or not it is of the character of a rule or is
             just  information,  advice  or  guidance   as   to   how   the
             requirements of a rule may be met in particular cases.

99. In his judgment agreeing with Lord Hope, Lord Dyson JSC  concluded  that
   the approach should be as follows:


         94.  In my view, the solution which best achieves these objects  is
             that a rule is any requirement which a migrant must satisfy as
             a condition of being given leave to enter or leave to  remain,
             as well as any provision "as to the period for which leave  is
             to be given and the conditions to  be  attached  in  different
             circumstances" (there can be no doubt about the  latter  since
             it is expressly provided for in s.3(2)).  I would exclude from
             the definition any procedural requirements which do  not  have
             to be satisfied as a condition of the grant of leave to  enter
             or remain.  But it seems to me that any requirement which,  if
             nor satisfied by the migrant, will lead to an application  for
             leave to enter or remain being refused is a  rule  within  the
             meaning of s.3(2).  That is what Parliament was interested  in
             when it enacted s.3(2).  It wanted to have a say in the  rules
             which set out the basis on which these applications were to be
             determined.

100. These principles  were  also  engaged  in  the  case  of  R  (Munir)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] 1 WLR 2192.  That  case
   concerned policy DP5/96 which was withdrawn  in  2008  and  the  claimant
   contended that its withdrawal was unfair and further amounted to a change
   in the Immigration Rules within the meaning of s.3(2) that ought to  have
   been laid before Parliament. In giving his judgment (with which all other
   judges sitting in the Supreme Court agreed) Lord Dyson JSC  concluded  as
   follows:


         44.  In my view, it is the 1971 Act itself which is the  source  of
             the Secretary of State's power to  grant  leave  to  enter  or
             remain outside the immigration rules.  The Secretary of  State
             is given a wide discretion  under  ss.3,  3A,  3B  and  3C  to
             control the grant and refusal of leave to enter or remain: see
             paras 4-6 above.  The language of these provisions, especially
             s.3(1)(b)(c), could not be wider.  They  provide  clearly  and
             without qualification that, where a person is  not  a  British
             citizen, he  may  be  given  leave  to  enter  or  limited  or
             indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   They
             authorise the Secretary of State to grant leave  to  enter  or
             remain  even  where  leave  would  not  be  given  under   the
             immigration rules.


         45.  The  question  remains  whether  DP5/96  was  a  statement  of
             practice within the meaning of  s.3(2).   If  a  concessionary
             policy statement says that the applicable rule will always  be
             relaxed in specified circumstances, it  may  be  difficult  to
             avoid the conclusion that the statement is itself a  rule  "as
             to the practice to be followed" within the meaning  of  s.3(2)
             which should be laid before Parliament.  But if the  statement
             says that the rule may be relaxed if  certain  conditions  are
             satisfied, but that whether it will be relaxed depends on  all
             the circumstances of the case, then in my  view  it  does  not
             fall within the scope of s.3(2).  Such  a  statement  does  no
             more than say when  a  rule  or  statutory  provision  may  be
             relaxed.  I have referred to DP5/96 at para 9 above.   It  was
             not a statement of practice within the meaning of s.3(2).   It
             made clear that it was important that  each  case  had  to  be
             considered on its merits and that  certain  specified  factors
             might (not would) be of particular  relevance  in  reaching  a
             decision.  It was not a statement as to the  circumstances  in
             which overstayers will be allowed to stay.  It did not have to
             be laid before Parliament.


         Conclusion


         46.  For the reasons that I have given, I will  reject  Mr  Swift's
             submission that the issuing  of  a  concessionary  policy  (or
             indeed the waiving  of  a  requirement  in  the  rules  in  an
             individual case) is an exercise of prerogative power which for
             that reason does not come within the scope  of  s.3(2).   But,
             subject to the constraints to which I have  referred  and  any
             relevant public law principles,  the  Secretary  of  State  is
             authorised by the 1971 Act to make policies  setting  out  the
             principles by which she may, as a matter of discretion,  grant
             concessions in individual cases  to  those  seeking  leave  to
             enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  less   the
             flexibility apparent in  the  concessionary  policy  the  more
             likely it is to be a statement  "as  to  the  practice  to  be
             followed" within  the  meaning  of  s.3(2)  and  therefore  an
             immigration rule.  But  DP5/96  was  amply  flexible  and  was
             therefore not an immigration rule and did not have to be  laid
             before Parliament.

101. The question of whether or not the RLR policy ought to  have  been  the
   subject of the s.3(2) procedure was considered by Patterson J in the case
   of R (YA) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWHC  3229
   (Admin). For reasons which we do not need to go into, the judge concluded
   that the claim which was before her was academic. She nonetheless went on
   to consider the substantive grounds on which the claim had been  brought,
   amongst other things on the basis that the RLR policy was caught  by  the
   Alvi principle, but her conclusions were  (as  she  herself  observed  in
   paragraph 39 of the judgment) all obiter dicta. Her conclusions  in  this
   respect were set out in her judgment from paragraph 58-70 as follows:


         58.  Applying the test posed in Alvi at paragraphs 94 and  97,  and
             the words of Lord Clarke at paragraph 120  together  with  the
             approach of Lord Dyson in  Munir  at  paragraphs  45  and  46,
             whilst I accept that the Restricted Discretionary leave policy
             applies to  all  cases  who  are  excluded  from  the  Refugee
             Convention by virtue of Article 1F but who cannot  be  removed
             by virtue of Article 3 of ECHR I find that the policy  is  not
             dealing with whether leave to remain has to be granted.   That
             has to be taken as a given because of the contravention of the
             Human  Rights  Act  should  deportation  be  exercised.    The
             objective of the policy is to guide decision makers as to  how
             long leave should be granted for and what, if any,  conditions
             need to be attached to the grant of leave.  As such  it  is  a
             concessionary policy concerning the grant of leave to  persons
             outside the immigration rules.  In other words the  policy  is
             dealing with how the grant of restricted  discretionary  leave
             should be administered.  In dealing with that issue the policy
             does not lay down a rigid framework which has to be  followed.
             Rather, it provides guidance to assist the decision  maker  as
             to the duration  of  leave  and  which  conditions  should  be
             attached but it does not compel any particular outcome in  all
             cases.


         59.  That is evident from the flexibility within the policy itself.
              In the summary of the policy at paragraph 1.4  it  refers  to
             the cases usually only being granted restricted  discretionary
             leave to remain for a maximum of six months  at  a  time.   It
             follows from that that the duration of the leave could be  any
             period up to six months in a normal case but even beyond  that
             should  the  case  require  it.   The  matter  is  within  the
             discretion of the decision maker.


         60.  The attachment of some or all of the  conditions  relating  to
             employment, residence, reporting or studying to the  grant  of
             leave again is a matter for the decision maker.  The rationale
             for the imposition of the conditions is explained in paragraph
             1.6 but again does not predicate any  particular  outcome  and
             certainly contains no requirement that they  all  have  to  be
             imposed on all grants of leave to remain.


         61.  In relation to employment, s.3 makes it clear  that  there  is
             the option of a total ban on employment in any capacity  which
             should be used exceptionally in cases imposing a  particularly
             high public protection risk and the option of restrictions  on
             working in particular occupations or professional fields.  The
             nature of the work and degree of restriction depends  on  what
             is, in effect, a risk assessment.  There is guidance as to the
             giving of consent to proposed employment under  paragraph  3.5
             but that goes to inform the judgment which the decision  maker
             has to take  in  the  particular  case.   Whilst  there  is  a
             presumption under paragraph 3.6 that a person subject  to  the
             policy should not be permitted to work or volunteer  in  roles
             that require a standard or an enhanced CRB check it is  not  a
             prohibition.


         62.  There is mandatory language used in paragraph  3.2  about  the
             operation of  employment  restrictions  but  that  is  in  the
             context of the  procedural  requirement  that  a  letter  must
             accompany the immigration  status  document  to  explain  that
             consent to employment will only be given in  relation  to  one
             specific job or business related activity.  If the  individual
             seeks to change his employment or take up another role he  has
             to apply for fresh consent.  Because that is dealing with  the
             procedure to be followed  it  does  not  compel  a  particular
             decision but goes to how the decision which is made is  to  be
             implemented.


         63.  Section 4 deals with residence restrictions.  Having  set  out
             that it may be legitimate to require a person  to  live  in  a
             specific area to reduce the cost of providing housing it  then
             contains in paragraph 4.2 a series of  options  for  residence
             conditions.  Paragraph 4.4 says that the first of the  options
             should usually be imposed in all cases.  Option 1 is to notify
             the Secretary of State of the Home Office of  any  address  or
             change in address.  The language is of preference rather  than
             compulsion.   Paragraph  4.8  reads:  "Each  case  should   be
             considered on the individual facts and risks...."  That  makes
             it clear that in dealing with the residence restriction  there
             is inherent flexibility and each case should  be  individually
             considered on its own merits.


         64.  Paragraph 4.9 reads "residence restriction may also be imposed
             where it would facilitate the case for  removal".   Again  the
             language is of discretion.  Whilst there are parts of s.4, for
             example 4.7 which reads,


                  "a person subject to condition (iv) must also  be  subject
                  to a condition not to spend more  than  three  consecutive
                  nights away from that address without  the  prior  written
                  consent of the  Secretary  of  State.   In  addition,  the
                  person must not spend more "than ten nights away from that
                  address in any rolling six month period.  These conditions
                  must be specified in the letter explaining the  conditions
                  attached to the leave."


             That follows the pattern in s.3 when  mandatory  language  was
             used in relation to the procedural requirements as opposed  to
             the discretion given as to the decision to be reached.


         65.  Section 5 deals with  reporting  restrictions.   It  opens  by
             setting a presumption that all cases  subject  to  the  policy
             will be subject to a condition to report.  But  a  presumption
             is not determinative.  It leaves discretion with the  decision
             maker.


         66.  The section then goes on to provide criteria against which the
             precise frequency and location of the reporting event  are  to
             be determined.  Paragraph 5.2 then sets  as  a  guide  monthly
             reporting restrictions but makes it clear that  the  frequency
             can be modified up or down taking into  account  the  criteria
             which are to be  considered  in  deciding  the  frequency  and
             location of the reporting event.


         67.  Paragraph 5.5 says in terms reporting conditions are  not  set
             in stone.  An individual may  apply  for  a  condition  to  be
             varied to take into  account  domestic  or  work  commitments.
             Such requests are to be considered in line  with  the  overall
             aims of the policy and, if appropriate, the conditions  should
             be amended in writing.  That wording makes it clear that there
             is an inherent flexibility which is of ongoing adaptability to
             the individual circumstances of the case.


         68.  Section 6 deals with the restriction on studies.  Again,  that
             sets out an approach which should generally be followed.


         69.  Section 7 of the guidance is dealing with matters of  quality,
             assurance and oversight.  They are not  determinative  of  the
             outcome in any particular case.


         70.  It follows from the analysis of the provisions of  the  policy
             that it is flexible.  There are some presumptions but they are
             clearly rebuttable.  It is providing a framework  of  guidance
             to   enable   caseworkers   administering    the    restricted
             discretionary leave policy to determine the nature and,  where
             relevant,  duration  of  conditions  to  be  attached  to  any
             decision on leave.  It does not compel a  particular  outcome.
             In my judgment  it  is  a  concessionary  policy  outside  the
             immigration  rules  and  did  not  have  to  be  laid   before
             Parliament.

102. The contentions of the applicants in relation to this part of the  case
   were advanced principally by Ms Weston. She submitted both orally and  in
   writing that the RLR policy was in truth in the nature of a  rule  for  a
   number of reasons. Firstly, it is inflexible in that every person who  is
   excluded from the Refugee Convention but who would be at risk of a breach
   of Article 3 if they were returned is made the subject of the RLR  policy
   and will only be granted RLR. This demonstrates inflexibility in the  RLR
   policy making it in effect a rule. Further she relied upon  the  evidence
   obtained under the FOI request which demonstrated that in  all  cases  of
   this kind RLR had been granted and without exception for a period of  six
   months. The inflexibility of the RLR policy was demonstrated therefore in
   its application to all persons irrespective apparently of their  personal
   circumstances. Furthermore, it appeared from  the  decision  letters  and
   other correspondence in MBT's case that the fact that a  person  had  not
   reoffended in the United Kingdom was irrelevant and further the existence
   of dependent children did not  appear  to  deflect  the  respondent  from
   applying the RLR policy. Submissions were also made both in this part  of
   the case and elsewhere contending that the conditions were inflexible  as
   they were uniformly applied and although the detail of  conditions  might
   vary, the types of condition contemplated by the RLR policy  (restricting
   residence, employment, reporting for example) were applied in all  cases.
   This approach was borne out,  again,  by  the  evidence  which  had  been
   obtained under the FOI request and that within the respondent's evidence.

103. Clearly the key question for determining whether or not the RLR  policy
   is caught by the s.3(2) procedure is the question of whether or not it is
   flexible. Is it drafted and designed to operate as being in the nature of
   a rule? Whilst her observations were, as set out above, obiter  dicta  we
   have no difficulty in accepting the conclusions  which  were  reached  by
   Patterson J in YA insofar as they bore upon the question  of  flexibility
   contained within the RLR policy so far as conditions were  concerned.  We
   would respectfully adopt the reasoning which has been set out above  from
   her judgment in paragraphs 59-70. There are however a number  of  matters
   which we would wish to add to her conclusions.

104. Firstly, when Patterson J observed that  she  accepted  "that  the  RLR
   policy applies to all cases who are excluded from the Refugee  Convention
   by virtue of Article 1F but who cannot be removed by virtue of Article  3
   of ECHR I find that the RLR policy is not dealing with whether  leave  to
   remain has to be granted," she was not to be taken to be concluding  that
   the question of the application of s.3(2) did not arise at  all.  In  our
   view, the question plainly does arise because s.3(2) is directed, amongst
   other matters, to rules which address the imposition of conditions. Thus,
   insofar as the RLR policy is concerned with the imposition of  conditions
   the question needs to be asked as to whether or not it is in  the  nature
   of a rule that ought to be placed before Parliament.  Our  conclusion  in
   this respect is reinforced  by  the  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   O'Connor in R (on the application of Fakih) v Secretary of State for  the
   Home  Department  [2014]  UKUT  0513  (IAC).  That  case  concerned   the
   application of a condition prohibiting an applicant  having  recourse  to
   public funds where the  policy  in  respect  of  the  imposition  of  the
   condition was so inflexible that the judge concluded it was in the nature
   of a rule which ought to have been placed before Parliament  pursuant  to
   the s.3(2) procedure.

105. Secondly, in the most recent iteration of  the  guidance  (the  "Asylum
   Policy  Instruction:  Restricted  Leave"   dated   23rd   January   2015)
   accompanying the RLR policy (which was not before Patterson J), it is not
   correct to conclude that, although the  RLR  policy  will  apply  to  all
   persons in the  excluded  category  that  the  outcome  will  always  and
   inevitably be the grant of RLR. Paragraph 1.2.5 observes that although it
   is likely to be  a  very  rare  occurrence,  there  will  be  exceptional
   circumstances  in  some  cases  where  eligibility  for  settlement   and
   subsequently citizenship may arise. That is further elaborated in section
   4.12 of the guidance adopting the principles set out in  the  case  of  N
   which, it will be recalled, recognise that there would come a  time  when
   in some individual cases that the grant of ILR might be appropriate. Thus
   as presently formulated the policy has  additional  flexibility  to  that
   which was noted by Patterson J.

106. Thus, in summary, whilst the RLR policy is an  instrument  about  which
   the  s.3(2)  question  should  be  posed,  we  are  satisfied  that   the
   combination of the flexibility in the RLR policy,  flexibility  which  is
   further enhanced in the most recent policy effective from 23 January 2015
   indicating that there will be some albeit rare cases in  which  RLR  will
   not be  imposed,  together  with  the  flexibility  in  relation  to  the
   conditions noted by Patterson J, lead us to the conclusion that  the  RLR
   policy is not in the nature of a rule which should have been laid  before
   Parliament. True it is that the evidence obtained by  the  applicants  in
   response to the FOI request which is described at [20]  (showing that all
   56 people currently granted  RLR  had  reporting,  prohibition  of  study
   without written consent and residence conditions imposed upon  them,  all
   bar two had employment conditions imposed, all 56 had  been  granted  RLR
   for a duration of six months at a time and none had been granted RLR  for
   a period more or less than six months) suggests that  in  the  relatively
   limited number of cases in which the RLR policy has been applied, similar
   outcomes in respect  of  the  various  applicants  have  arisen.  We  are
   satisfied that, whilst the outcomes show that the decision makers  placed
   weight (which  they  were  fully  entitled  to  do,  as  the  individuals
   concerned had engaged in terrorist-related activity in the past)  on  the
   presumption that the duration of leave will usually be six months and the
   presumption in favour of the imposition of all four conditions, the  fact
   is that employment restrictions were not imposed on two out of  fifty-six
   individuals. In our view, this does not show inflexibility but  it  shows
   weight being placed on the presumption.  It is also important in our view
   to examine the RLR policy itself and its terms to see whether  it  is  in
   reality a rule as to the practice to be  followed  in  respect  of  these
   cases. On examination of the RLR policy, we are satisfied that it is not.



(c) Does the RLR policy unlawfully fetter the respondent's discretion?

107. The leading case in relation to  the  principles  in  respect  of  this
   ground is R v SSHD ex parte Venables [1998] AC 407 where  at  page  496-7
   Lord Browne-Wilkinson explained as follows:


         When Parliament confers a discretionary power exercisable from time
         to time over a  period,  such  power  must  be  exercised  on  each
         occasion in the light  of  the  circumstances  at  that  time.   In
         consequence, the person on  whom  the  power  is  conferred  cannot
         fetter the future exercise of his discretion by committing  himself
         now as to the way in which  he  will  exercise  his  power  in  the
         future.  He cannot exercise the power nunc pro tunc.  By  the  same
         token, the person on whom  the  power  has  been  conferred  cannot
         fetter  the  way  he  will  use  that  power  by  ruling   out   of
         consideration on the future exercise of that  power  factors  which
         may then be relevant to such an exercise.


         These considerations do not preclude the person on whom  the  power
         is conferred from developing and applying  the  policy  as  to  the
         approach which he will adopt in the generality of cases:... But the
         position is different if the policy adopted is such as to  preclude
         the person on whom the power is conferred from departing  from  the
         policy or from taking into account circumstances which are relevant
         to the particular case in relation to which the discretion is being
         exercised.  If such an inflexible and invariable policy is adopted,
         both the policy and the decisions taken  pursuant  to  it  will  be
         unlawful.

108. Similar reasoning can be found in the case  of  A-G  ex  rel  Tilley  v
   Wandsworth London Borough Council [1981] 1 WLR 854 in which there  was  a
   challenge to a policy adopted by a local authority  that,  where  it  had
   been determined that a family  with  young  children  were  intentionally
   homeless if a  subsequent  approach  was  made  to  its  social  services
   department assistance with alternative  housing  would  not  be  provided
   under the provisions of the Children and Young Persons  Act  1963  albeit
   consideration would be given to the reception into care of  the  children
   if the circumstances warranted it. Templeman LJ observed  at  page  857H-
   858D as follows:


         Construction being out of the way, we have to consider whether  the
         council can properly order its committees and its officials not  to
         provide alternative housing under the Act [of 1963] in the case  of
         children of  parents  who  are  intentionally  homeless.   On  well
         recognised principles public authorities are not entitled to fetter
         the exercise of discretion or to fetter the manner in which they're
         empowered to discharge the many duties that  are  thrust  on  them.
         They must at all times, in every particular case, consider  how  to
         exercise their discretion and how to perform their duties.


         Although  the  resolution  appears  to  be  mandatory  and  prevent
         alternative housing being provided under  the  Children  and  Young
         Persons Act 1963,  nevertheless  Mr  Beloff  said,  and  the  judge
         accepted that there was evidence, that exceptions were in  practice
         made to the resolution.  On a question of ultra vires the  practice
         of making exceptions is irrelevant, but, for my part, even  if  the
         resolution had provided for exceptions and even if,  as  Mr  Beloff
         urged, this was a general policy and not  a  mandatory  order,  the
         resolution would not get rid of the vice that  a  local  authority,
         dealing with individual children should not make  a  policy  or  an
         order that points towards fettering its discretion in  such  a  way
         that the facilities offered to the  child  do  not  depend  on  the
         particular circumstances of that child, or of the  child's  family,
         but follow some policy which  is  expressed  to  apply  in  general
         cases.

109. It is important to observe that both Brandon LJ and  Lawton  LJ  agreed
   in the decision with Templeman LJ but on the  basis  that  the  Council's
   resolution laid down a policy without making any exceptions  at  all  and
   was invalid. In his very short judgment Brandon LJ reserved  his  opinion
   as to whether a resolution which  laid  down  a  general  policy  with  a
   specific number of exceptions would also be invalid. That reservation was
   shared by Lawton LJ. We accept  this  authority  as  demonstrating  quite
   clearly that a policy which admits of no exception  and  which  therefore
   fetters the operation of a discretion  is  unlawful;  we  are  unable  to
   accept that it is binding authority for  a  broader  proposition  that  a
   policy containing exceptions is an unlawful fetter upon  discretion.  The
   essential question is whether there is sufficient flexibility.

110. A further  case  cited  to  us  in  respect  of  this  issue  was  R  v
   Warwickshire County Council ex parte Collymore [1995] ELR 217. This was a
   case  concerning  the  award  of  discretionary  grants  to  students  in
   particular those training for the legal profession. The  evidence  before
   the court demonstrated that whatever the individual circumstances of  the
   case every application of  such  discretionary  award  was  automatically
   rejected but along with the rejection there  was  notification  that  the
   applicant might seek a review of the decision. That notification included
   the following:


         You should note that the decision to refuse your  application  will
         only be amended on an  individual  basis  if  there  are  the  most
         extraordinary circumstances that justify treating your  application
         differently from all others.

   The evidence demonstrated that all reviews had failed and the  submission
   was made that the terms and effect of the policy were so as to unlawfully
   fetter the discretion of the education authority. Judge  J  (as  he  then
   was) concluded as follows at page 226F-H in respect of those  submissions
   having referred to the ex rel Tilley case:

         Applying that principle to this case, a policy  in  absolute  terms
         prohibiting any discretionary  awards  could  not  be  remedied  by
         evidence that on occasions  exceptions  might  be  permitted.   The
         policy would remain unlawful.  However  in  the  present  case,  as
         already indicated, the conclusion to be drawn from the evidence  as
         a whole is that although  the  policy,  generally,  was  to  refuse
         applications for discretionary awards, an integral aspect of it was
         the review and appeal procedure.  Although in one sense that  could
         be regarded as an exception to the overall policy, in my  judgment,
         it was not an exception in the sense regarded in  Attorney  General
         ex rel Tilley v London Borough of Wandsworth as  unacceptable,  but
         rather the implementation of the principle that the  policy  should
         not be applied rigidly or inflexibly. If the applicant's  case  had
         been regarded as exceptional then,  as  a  matter  of  policy,  her
         application would have  been  granted  and  funds  made  available.
         Accordingly I do not accept that the Attorney General ex rel Tilley
         v London Borough of Wandsworth principle applies to this case.


         My reservation about the policy arises from a different  aspect  of
         the evidence, and is encapsulated in  the  language  used  by  Lord
         Scarman in Re Findlay sub nom Findlay v Secretary of state for  the
         Home Department [1985] 1 AC 318 at page 336:


             '(2) Consideration of the case not being excluded by a  policy
                  which  provides   that   "exceptional   circumstances   or
                  compelling reasons must be shown"'.


         If the only permitted exceptions are those where the  circumstances
         are 'most extraordinary' the authority appears to be very close  to
         instituting a blanket policy which while  in  theory  admitting  of
         exceptions, may not, in reality, result in the proper consideration
         of each individual case and its merits.  In other words, while  the
         approach set out in the letter of 15th April 1993 to Miss Collymore
         would be, in my judgment satisfactory, I have  grave  doubts  about
         the language in the form attached to  it.   It  is  unnecessary  to
         resolve this issue, but I should not want the respondents to regard
         to fact that on the basis of all the evidence before me I have  not
         struck down the policy as unlawful to lead them to conclude that  I
         have approved the  phrase  'most  extraordinary  circumstances'  as
         indicating a proper approach in this type of case...


         Without suggesting that, in this case, what happened resulted  from
         the adoption of an unavowed rule to refuse all cases, or bad faith,
         it is impossible to escape the  conclusion  that  in  practice  the
         policy has been implemented far too rigidly and that, as a  result,
         Miss Collymore's application was not properly considered.

111. Similar propositions in relation to the inflexibility of the policy  as
   were advanced in relation to the Alvi point set out above  were  made  in
   this part of the case. It was submitted that the inflexible  features  of
   the RLR policy rendered  it  an  unlawful  fettering  of  discretion  and
   further with reference to the Collymore case that the evidence which  was
   available as to how the RLR policy had been operated showed that  it  was
   implemented far too rigidly and as a result proper consideration was  not
   being given to individual cases.

112. We have already set out  above  our  conclusions  in  relation  to  the
   flexibility inherent in the RLR  policy.  It  is  in  our  view  entirely
   understandable that when dealing with individuals who have been  excluded
   from the Refugee Convention as a result of Article 1F that the RLR policy
   will refer, as it does, to exceptional circumstances in relation  to  the
   consideration of settlement for such individuals. It is unsurprising that
   the number of  individuals  in  this  class  of  persons  qualifying  for
   settlement would be "rare". We have already set out above, drawing on the
   conclusions of Patterson J in YA our agreement with her findings that the
   approach to the conditions to be applied under the  RLR  policy  provides
   for flexibility as to  how  those  conditions  are  firstly  applied  and
   secondly tailored to the circumstances of the individual. The application
   of the RLR policy in  accordance  with  the  guidelines  in  the  "Asylum
   Casework Instruction" dated 28 May 2012 (and also the recent "the "Asylum
   Policy  Instruction:  Restricted  Leave"   dated   23rd   January   2015)
   facilitates that approach. Although there  is  some  evidence  that  some
   features of the RLR policy have been applied in a similar fashion to  all
   cases (for instance the provision of six months and  nothing  other  than
   six months leave) and also that certain conditions such as reporting, not
   studying without written consent from the respondent and not being absent
   from home for more than three  nights  consecutively  or  more  than  ten
   nights in a rolling six month period have been consistently  applied  the
   detail in relation to the conditions does, on  the  evidence,  vary  from
   case to case.

113. For all of these reasons, we are not satisfied  that  the  approach  to
   decision making set  out  in  the  RLR  policy  results  in  there  being
   insufficient flexibility and that the discretion of the decision maker is
   illegitimately fettered so as to render the RLR policy unlawful.

(d) Article 8

114. The first  element  of  the  challenge  brought  by  the  applicant  in
   relation to Article 8 is the contention  that  the  purpose  of  the  RLR
   policy in placing obstacles in the way of the development of  family  and
   private life so as to facilitate removal is not  a  legitimate  aim.  The
   provision of obstacles was contrary to the objective of Article  8  which
   was to secure the development of a  full  private  and  family  life.  In
   support of this submission the applicants commenced their arguments  with
   reference to the case of Marckx v Belgium [1979] 2 EHRR 330 in which  the
   European Court of Human Rights observed as follows ([31]):

         By proclaiming in paragraph 1 the right to respect for family life,
         Article 8 signifies firstly that the State  cannot  interfere  with
         the exercise of that right otherwise than in  accordance  with  the
         strict conditions set out in paragraph 2.  As the Court  stated  in
         the  Belgian  Linguistic  case,  the  object  of  the  Article   is
         'essentially' that of protecting the individual  against  arbitrary
         interference by the public authorities (judgment of 23  July  1968,
         Series A no.  6, p.  33, para.   7).   Nevertheless,  it  does  not
         merely compel the State  to  abstain  from  such  interference:  in
         addition to this  primarily  negative  undertaking,  there  may  be
         positive obligations inherent in an effective 'respect' for  family
         life.


115.  It  was  the  "positive  obligations"  that  were  the  focus  of  the
   applicants' submissions.  In a domestic context, our attention was  drawn
   to the case of Pawandeep Singh  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  New  Delhi
   [2005] QB 608 in which, in the course of delivering the leading  judgment
   in the Court of Appeal, Dyson LJ (as he then was) observed as follows:

         38.  One final point.  Mr Garnham submits  that  it  is  irrelevant
             that it is the decision under challenge (in the  present  case
             the refusal of entry clearance) that prevents the  development
             of family life.  He submits that the obligation under  article
             8 to grant entry clearance could only arise if  the  existence
             of family life had been established in the first  place.   The
             source for this submission is the statement  in  Marckx  (para
             31): "By guaranteeing the right to respect  for  family  life,
             Article 8 presupposes the existence of a family".  Mr  Garnham
             submits that, with the exception of the decision in Pini,  the
             ECtHR has recognised  that  "potential"  family  life  may  be
             relevant in determining whether family  life  exists  for  the
             purposes of article 8 only in the context of a child  and  his
             natural father (see Nekvedavicius v Germany  App  No  46165/99
             (2004) 38 EHRR CD 12 and Nyluind v Finland  App  No  27110/95,
             decision of 29 June 1999).  But  as  we  have  seen  (para  29
             above), the  decision  in  Pini  (para  143)  shows  that  the
             potential for  development  of  family  life  is  relevant  in
             determining whether family life already exists, and that  this
             is not confined to cases involving children and their  natural
             parents.  I cannot see in  principle  why  the  potential  for
             development may only be taken  into  account  in  relation  to
             family life between children and their natural parents.   Para
             143 of Pini is plainly inimical to such a restricted  view  of
             the scope of the  principle.   I  acknowledge,  however,  that
             unless some degree of family life is already established,  the
             claim to family life will fail and will not be  saved  by  the
             fact that at some time in the future it could  flower  into  a
             full-blown family life, or that the applicants have a  genuine
             wish to bring this about.

116. Against the background of this approach to Article  8,  the  applicants
   submitted that the rationale of the RLR policy, namely placing  obstacles
   in the way of the establishment of family and private life, could not  be
   a legitimate aim and therefore the RLR  policy  was  not  compliant  with
   Article 8 and unlawful. This submission was reinforced by the  importance
   of children who were British citizens being able to develop their  family
   life as part and parcel of the Article 8 rights at stake.

117. We propose to deal with this submission before turning to questions  of
   discrimination and proportionality which were raised  by  the  applicants
   under the Article 8 heading. Our approach would in the first instance  be
   governed by examining first the principles in relation to the question of
   whether or not the RLR policy pursues a legitimate aim. In  that  respect
   the starting point must be the seminal statement of the law  in  relation
   to the questions arising under Article 8 provided by Lord Bingham in  the
   case of R (Razgar) v Home Secretary [2004] 2 AC 368. At paragraph  17  of
   his speech he analysed the position as follows:


         17   In a case where removal is resisted in reliance on article  8,
             these questions are likely to be:


             (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
                  authority with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to
                  respect for his private or (as the  case  may  be)  family
                  life?


             (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences  of  such
                  gravity as potentially to engage the operation of  article
                  8?


             (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


             (4)  If so, is such interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
                  society in the  interests  of  national  security,  public
                  safety or the economic well-being of the country, for  the
                  prevention of disorder or crime,  for  the  protection  of
                  health or morals, or for the protection of the rights  and
                  freedoms of others?


             (5)   If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to   the
                  legitimate public end sought to be achieved?

118. In dealing in passing with the requirement that the  interference  with
   Article 8 be in accordance with the law, we have already addressed  above
   questions associated with whether or not the  RLR  policy  is  lawful  in
   terms of being within the powers provided by the 1971 Act and whether  or
   not there are other aspects  of  illegality  such  as  the  fettering  of
   discretion or being beyond the purposes of the statute. The  question  of
   legitimate aim arises under the fourth limb  of  the  five-step  approach
   explained in Razgar. We are in no doubt for reasons  which  will  already
   have become obvious that the interference  which  arises  under  the  RLR
   policy, both as to time limited periods of  leave  and  also  as  to  the
   conditions which are imposed upon that leave, is   necessary  for  public
   safety, the economic wellbeing of the country, the  prevention  of  crime
   and disorder and, in some cases, national  security.  Leaving  aside  the
   fact sensitive assessment of proportionality,  we  see  no  objection  in
   principle to the interference with  Article  8  rights  which  may  arise
   through the limitation of the time period for  leave  or  the  conditions
   placed upon it. The reasons why they are necessary are appropriately  and
   adequately  explained  in  the  guidelines  in   the   "Asylum   Casework
   Instruction" dated 28 May 2012 (and also the recent "the  "Asylum  Policy
   Instruction: Restricted Leave" dated 23rd  January  2015)  providing  the
   rationale for the RLR policy. Understood in this way  and  in  accordance
   with the approach in Razgar, the interferences with Article 8 which occur
   are lawful and within the scope of Article 8. Although  as  a  generality
   Article 8 may contain in its application some positive obligations, it is
   a qualified right. The issue in relation to any interference with Article
   8, or any obstacle to the development or enhancement of Article 8 rights,
   is whether that interference is necessary in the various interests  of  a
   democratic society set out above. Once it has been concluded that  it  is
   necessary then the interference is justifiable and within  the  scope  of
   the Article 8 right.

119. We would have reached  these  conclusions  without  the  assistance  of
   other authority. However, it is important  to  recall  that  observations
   were made by the Court of Appeal in the case of R (on the application  of
   Kardi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  934
   in which the question of the  RLR  policy  and  its  application  to  the
   claimant was the subject of a judicial review. It needs to  be  borne  in
   mind, as was observed by Ms Harrison, that the Court of  Appeal  in  that
   case were not concerned, as we are, with a challenge to the  validity  of
   the RLR policy itself. The ambit of the challenge in that case was to its
   application to the particular  circumstances  of  that  claimant's  case.
   Moreover, as part and parcel of that challenge, it was accepted that  the
   imposition of the RLR policy did interfere with Article 8  rights.  There
   is no question therefore but that Article 8 rights are  in  play  in  the
   application  of  the  RLR  policy.  Bearing  these  points  in  mind   we
   nevertheless have derived support for  our  conclusions  in  relation  to
   whether or not the RLR policy is in pursuit of a legitimate aim  for  the
   purposes of Article 8 from the observations made in the leading  judgment
   of the Court of Appeal by Richards LJ as follows:

         29.  The various elements  of  the  stated  rationale  are  all  in
             principle legitimate aims, though  it  will  be  necessary  to
             consider the extent to which they are specifically engaged  in
             the appellant's case.  More needs to be said,  however,  about
             the stated wish to give a clear signal that the person  should
             not become established in the United Kingdom.   The  rationale
             of the previous discretionary leave policy  was  described  by
             Cranston J in R (Mayaya) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2011] EWHC 3088 (Admin), [2012] 1 All ER 1491,  at
             paragraph 57, as being "not simply to ensure  regular  reviews
             so that foreign national prisoners [the specific  category  of
             persons in issue in that case] can be removed from the  United
             Kingdom when the opportunity arises", but also "to plant  road
             blocks in the  way  of  foreign  national  prisoners  settling
             here", though settlement might in practice  still  occur.   In
             other words, the grant of short periods  of  leave  emphasised
             the intended impermanence of the  individual's  stay  in  this
             country and made it more difficult to put down roots here  and
             to build up a private life,  thus  reducing  the  prospect  of
             removal  being  prevented  on  Article  8  grounds  when   the
             opportunity   otherwise   arose.    The   current   restricted
             discretionary leave policy, by providing for the imposition of
             specific conditions on the grant  of  leave,  is  intended  to
             reduce further the opportunity to put down roots  and  thereby
             to reinforce the road blocks planted in the way of  settlement
             here.  It does not prevent the establishing of a private  life
             but makes it more difficult and so increases the  chance  that
             the delay before removal can be effected does not  operate  to
             prevent removal altogether.  That is a  legitimate  aspect  of
             immigration control.

120. We are therefore satisfied that the RLR  policy  is  in  pursuit  of  a
   legitimate aim for the reasons set out above.


121.  Turning  to  questions  of  discrimination  and  proportionality,  the
   applicants place reliance on the case of A  and  others  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2005] 2 AC 68.  That  case  concerned  the
   position of foreign nationals who were suspected  of  terrorism  and  who
   were made the subject of detention under the  Anti-Terrorism,  Crime  and
   Security Act 2001 (the "ATCSA 2001"). The arguments before the  House  of
   Lords ranged across, amongst other matters, whether or not  the  measures
   involved in that case were proportionate and whether  or  not  they  were
   unlawfully  discriminatory.  Dealing  firstly  with   the   question   of
   proportionality,  the  leading  speech  of  Lord  Bingham  commenced  his
   consideration with citation  of  de  Freitas  v  Permanent  Secretary  of
   Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries, Lands and Housing [1999] 1 AC 69 said
   (at [30]):

         In determining whether a limitation is arbitrary or excessive,  the
         court must ask itself:


             'whether:  (i)  the  legislative  objective  is   sufficiently
             important to justify limiting a fundamental  right;  (ii)  the
             measures  designed  to  meet  the  legislative  objective  are
             rationally connected to it; and (iii) the means used to impair
             the right  or  freedom  are  no  more  than  is  necessary  to
             accomplish the objective'.

122. In order to understand the conclusions reached  by  Lord  Bingham  with
   whom the majority of the House of Lords agreed, it is  necessary  to  set
   out his summary of the appellant's argument under  proportionality  which
   he accepted as being entirely  valid.  The  argument  was  summarised  in
   paragraph 31 of his speech as follows:

         31.  The appellants' argument under this head can, I  hope  fairly,
             be summarised as involving the following steps:


             (1)  Part 4 of  the  2001  Act  reversed  the  effect  of  the
                  decisions in Hardial Singh [1984] 1  WLR  704  and  Chahal
                  (1996) 23 EHRR 413 and was apt to address the problems  of
                  immigration  control  caused  to  the  United  Kingdom  by
                  article 5(1)(f) of the Convention read  in  the  light  of
                  those decisions.


             (2)  The public emergency on which the United  Kingdom  relied
                  to derogate from the Convention right to personal  liberty
                  was the threat to  the  security  of  the  United  Kingdom
                  presented by Al-Qaeda terrorists and their supporters.


             (3)  While the threat to the security of  the  United  Kingdom
                  derived predominantly and most  immediately  from  foreign
                  nationals, some of whom could not be deported because they
                  would face torture or inhuman or  degrading  treatment  or
                  punishment in their home countries and who  could  not  be
                  deported to any third country willing to receive them, the
                  threat to the United Kingdom did not  derive  solely  from
                  such foreign nationals.


             (4)  Sections 21 and 23 did not rationally address the  threat
                  to the security of the United  Kingdom  presented  by  Al-
                  Qaeda terrorists and their supporters because (a)  it  did
                  not address the threat presented by UK nationals,  (b)  it
                  permitted foreign nationals suspected  of  being  Al-Qaeda
                  terrorists or their supporters to pursue their  activities
                  abroad if there was any country to which they were able to
                  go, and (c) the sections permitted the  certification  and
                  detention of persons who were not suspected of  presenting
                  any threat to the security of the United  Kingdom  as  Al-
                  Qaeda terrorists or supporters.


             (5)  If the threat presented to the  security  of  the  United
                  Kingdom  by  UK  nationals  suspected  of  being  Al-Qaeda
                  terrorists or their supporters could be addressed  without
                  infringing their right to  personal  liberty,  it  is  not
                  shown why similar measures could  not  adequately  address
                  the threat presented by foreign nationals.


             (6)  Since the right to personal liberty  is  among  the  most
                  fundamental  of  the  rights  protected  by  the  European
                  Convention,  any  restriction  of  it  must   be   closely
                  scrutinised  by  the  national  court  and  such  scrutiny
                  involves no  violation  of  democratic  or  constitutional
                  principle.


             (7)  In the light of such  scrutiny,  neither  the  Derogation
                  Order nor ss.21 and 23 of the 2001 Act can be justified.

123. Lord Bingham accepted the validity of these arguments and concluded  in
   relation to proportionality in paragraph 43 of his speech as follows:

         43.  The appellants' proportionality challenge  to  the  Order  and
             s.23 is, in my opinion, sound, for all the reasons  they  gave
             and also for those given  by  the  European  Commissioner  for
             Human Rights and the Newton Committee.  The  Attorney  General
             could give  no  persuasive  answer.   In  a  discussion  paper
             "Counter-Terrorism Powers: Reconciling Security and Liberty in
             an Open Society" (Cm 6147) (February 2004)  the  Secretary  of
             State replied to one of the Newton Committee's  criticisms  in
             this way:


             '32.  It  can  be  argued  that  as  suspected   international
                  terrorists  their  departure  for  another  country  could
                  amount to exporting terrorism: a point made in the  Newton
                  Report at para 195.  But that is a natural consequence  of
                  the fact  that  Part  4  powers  are  immigration  powers:
                  detention is  permissible  only  pending  deportation  and
                  there is no other power available to  detain  (other  than
                  for the purpose of police enquiries) if a foreign national
                  chooses voluntarily to leave the UK.  (Detention in  those
                  circumstances is limited to 14 days after which the person
                  must be either charged or released.) Deportation  has  the
                  advantage moreover of disrupting  the  activities  of  the
                  suspected terrorist.'


             This answer, however, reflects the central complaint  made  by
             the appellants: that the choice of an immigration  measure  to
             address a  security  problem  had  the  inevitable  result  of
             failing adequately to address that problem (by allowing non-UK
             suspected terrorists to leave the country  with  impunity  and
             leaving British suspected terrorists at large) while  imposing
             the severe penalty of indefinite  detention  on  persons  who,
             even if reasonably suspected of having  links  with  Al-Qaeda,
             may harbour no hostile intentions towards the United  Kingdom.
             The conclusion that the Order  and  s.23  are,  in  Convention
             terms, disproportionate is in my opinion irresistible.


124. Lord Bingham then turned to the question of discrimination.  The  issue
   of discrimination was advanced on the basis of breaches of Article 14  of
   the ECHR. That article sets out as follows:

         ARTICLE 14


         Prohibition of discrimination


         The enjoyment  of  the  rights  and  freedoms  set  forth  in  this
         Convention shall be secured without discrimination  on  any  ground
         such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political  or  other
         opinion, national or social origin,  association  with  a  national
         minority, property, birth or other status.

125. Lord Bingham's conclusions in relation to this aspect of the case  were
   as follows:

         52.  The Attorney  General  submitted  that  the  position  of  the
             appellants should be compared with that  of  non-UK  nationals
             who represented a threat to the security of  the  UK  but  who
             could be removed to their own or to safe third countries.  The
             relevant difference between them and the appellants  was  that
             the  appellants  could  not  be  removed.   A  difference   of
             treatment of the two groups was accordingly justified  and  it
             was reasonable and necessary to  detain  the  appellants.   By
             contrast, the appellants' chosen  comparators  were  suspected
             international  terrorists  who   were   UK   nationals.    The
             appellants pointed out that they shared with  this  group  the
             important characteristics (a) of being suspected international
             terrorists and  (b)  of  being  irremovable  from  the  United
             Kingdom.  Since these were the  relevant  characteristics  for
             purposes of the comparison, it was  unlawfully  discriminatory
             to detain non-UK  nationals  while  leaving  UK  nationals  at
             large.


         53.  Were suspected international terrorists who are UK  nationals,
             the  appellant  has  chosen  comparators,  in   a   relevantly
             analogous situation to the appellant's? The question, as posed
             by Laws LJ in R (Carson) v Secretary of  State  for  Work  and
             Pensions [2003]  3  All  ER  577,  para  61,  is  whether  the
             circumstances of X and Y are so similar as  to  call  (in  the
             mind of a rational and fair  minded  person)  for  a  positive
             justification  for  the  less  favorable  treatment  of  Y  in
             comparison with X.  The Court of Appeal  thought  not  because
             (per Lord Woolf CJ, para 56) "the nationals have  a  right  of
             abode in this jurisdiction but the aliens only  have  a  right
             not  to  be  removed".   This  is,  however,  to  accept   the
             correctness of the Secretary of State's immigration control as
             a means to address the Al-Qaeda  security  problem,  when  the
             correctness of that choice is the issue to be resolved.  In my
             opinion,  the  question   demands   an   affirmative   answer.
             Suspected international terrorists who are UK nationals are in
             a situation analogist with  the  appellants  because,  in  the
             present context, they share the most relevant  characteristics
             of the appellants.


         54.  Following the guidance in the Belgian Linguistic Case  (no  2)
             it is then  necessary  to  assess  the  justification  of  the
             differential treatment of non-UK nationals "in relation to the
             aims and effects of the  measure  under  consideration".   The
             undoubted aim of the relevant measure, s.23 of the  2001  Act,
             was to protect the UK against the risk of Al-Qaeda  terrorism.
             As noted above (para 32) that risk was thought to be presented
             mainly by non-UK nationals and to a significant extent  by  UK
             nationals also.  The effect of the measure was to  permit  the
             former to be deprived of their liberty  but  not  the  latter.
             The appellants  were  treated  differently  because  of  their
             nationality or immigration status.  The  comparison  contended
             for by the Attorney General might be reasonable and  justified
             in an immigration context, but cannot in my opinion be so in a
             security context  since  the  threat  presented  by  suspected
             international terrorists did not depend on  their  nationality
             or immigration status.

126.  Having  considered   the   submissions   in   respect,   firstly,   of
   discrimination, we are not satisfied that there is any  relevant  analogy
   to be drawn from the case of A or that the principles  involved  in  that
   case are engaged in the  consideration  of  the  lawfulness  of  the  RLR
   policy.  The purpose of the RLR Policy  is  not  simply  to  protect  the
   United Kingdom against the threat of terrorism (as was the  ATCSA  2001).
   True it is that one of the purposes of  the  RLR  policy  engages  public
   protection and that as part of that aspect of the RLR policy on  occasion
   questions of national security may be engaged. But the purpose of the RLR
   policy is far broader and is directed at  the  undesirability  of  having
   persons excluded from the Refugee Convention under Article 1F within  the
   United Kingdom, in that, as their removal cannot be achieved for  Article
   3 reasons, measures should be taken to maintain contact and to facilitate
   removal at the first opportunity  notwithstanding  that  leave   must  be
   granted in the interim. That is the operational objective of the  policy.
   It is, as we have emphasised above, an  immigration  measure  and  not  a
   national security measure where considerations of the kind raised in  the
   case of A arise. The underlying purpose of the RLR policy  is  to  retain
   the ability to remove  the  individuals  concerned  if  and  when  it  is
   possible to do so. Insofar as the applicants have sought to compare their
   position with British nationals who  have  engaged  in  terrorist-related
   activity in the past but  who  no  longer  present  an  active  terrorist
   threat, the reality is that British nationals do not  require  leave  and
   cannot be removed. They are therefore not an appropriate comparator.

127. Turning to questions of proportionality, as we  have  already  observed
   in relation to the conditions which were imposed in the  particular  case
   the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Kardi  concluded  that  the
   application of the RLR policy and conditions which flowed from it were in
   that case proportionate. It is unnecessary given that  the  consideration
   was specific to the  circumstances  of  that  claimant  to  set  out  the
   conclusions reached in paragraphs 34-44  but  it  suffices  to  cite  the
   overall conclusion reached by Richards LJ in paragraph 47 as follows:


         47.  Pulling the various strands together, I am satisfied that  the
             judge was right to dismiss the appellant's claim under Article
             8.  Whether one looks  individually  or  cumulatively  at  the
             limitation  on  the  period  of  leave  and  the  restrictions
             imposed, they give rise to only a  limited  interference  with
             the  appellant's  private  life  and  their   imposition   was
             justified, in terms of legitimate aim and proportionality,  on
             the information available to the Secretary  of  State  at  the
             time of the decision.  The restriction on study will  have  to
             be revisited, in the light of the additional  information  now
             available, when a decision is taken  on  the  application  for
             further leave, but my concerns on that issue do not provide  a
             basis for striking down the decision of 1 March 2012.

128. The essence of the conclusions of the Court of  Appeal  in  Kardi  were
   that the restrictions in that case had a limited impact and  were  slight
   restrictions. The factual circumstances of the instant cases (to which we
   shall turn below) illustrate that the  imposition  of  short  periods  of
   leave together with restrictions of the kind described by the RLR  policy
   can have greater impacts than they did in that case. However, there are a
   number of important points which need to be made about the RLR policy  in
   connection with Article 8.

129. Firstly, the decision to grant, if this is the case, six  months  leave
   to remain does not interfere with  the  development  of  family  life  in
   principle. At its height, it may have an impact on the  quality  of  that
   family life bearing in mind the potential insecurity which being  granted
   successive periods of time limited leave may create. However, bearing  in
   mind the  objective  of  retaining  the  opportunity  to  remove  someone
   excluded from the Refugee Convention by  virtue  of  Article  1F  at  the
   earliest opportunity, the provision of such time limited leave is not  in
   and of itself disproportionate in so far as it  may  interfere  with  the
   quality of the development of Article 8  rights  and  insofar  as  it  is
   subject to the overall governing consideration  that  there  may  come  a
   point in time when the failure to grant ILR will be unreasonable  bearing
   in mind the particular circumstances of the case.


130. Secondly, similar considerations apply to the  restrictions  which  can
   be imposed by way of conditions on the time limited leave. In our view in
   principle they are a proportionate interference provided  that  they  are
   carefully measured against the individual circumstances of the  case  (as
   required by the policy itself) and are  no  more  than  is  necessary  to
   achieve the objective of the policy set out above. This  conclusion  does
   not mean that in each and every case the imposition of time limited leave
   and  all  of  the  conditions  contemplated  by  the  policy   would   be
   proportionate. The policy must be applied in a fact sensitive manner on a
   case by case basis.


131. Given that family life may  continue  notwithstanding  a  time  limited
   grant of RLR, very strong evidence would be needed to  prevail  over  the
   public interest and public  protection  considerations  which  are  given
   effect in the three purposes of the RLR policy (see [56] above) so as  to
   make it unreasonable for the respondent not to grant RLR  for  more  than
   six months or not to impose the usual conditions.  This is only likely to
   occur very rarely indeed, save that it may be easier,  depending  on  the
   circumstances, for an individual to establish a case for  departing  from
   the usual condition prohibiting studies than the other  three  conditions
   mentioned.

(e) Is the RLR policy compatible with s.55 of the 2009 Act?

132. Section 55 of the 2009 Act provides as follows:


         55   Duty regarding the welfare of children


         (1)  The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
             that -


             (a)  the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
                  having regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                  welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom, and


             (b)  any services  provided  by  another  person  pursuant  to
                  arrangements which are made by the Secretary of State  and
                  relate  to  the  discharge  of  a  function  mentioned  in
                  subsection (2) are provided having regard to that need.


         (2)  The functions referred to in subsection (1) are -


             (a)  any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                  immigration, asylum or nationality;


             (b)  any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration
                  Acts on an immigration officer...


133. The application of this duty was considered by the Supreme Court in  ZH
   (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department. The appellant in
   that case was a national of Tanzania who had two  children  born  in  the
   United Kingdom who were both British  citizens.  By  the  time  the  case
   reached the Supreme Court it had been conceded by the Secretary of  State
   that it would be disproportionate in  the  circumstances  to  remove  the
   appellant from the United Kingdom. However, the case proceeded so  as  to
   establish general principles in relation to the s.55 duty and Article  8,
   bearing in mind that any decision maker would need to have regard to  the
   interests of not simply an appellant  but  all  those  members  of  their
   family with whom they shared family life. Lady Hale's  judgment  contains
   the following analysis of the approach which should be taken.


         31   ... They [the claimant's children] are British children;  they
             are British, not just through the  "accident"  of  being  born
             here, but by descent from  a  British  parent;  they  have  an
             unqualified right of abode here;  they  have  lived  here  all
             their lives; they are being educated  here;  they  have  other
             social links  with  the  community  here;  they  have  a  good
             relationship with their father here.  It is not enough to  say
             that a young child  may  readily  adapt  to  life  in  another
             country.  That may well be so, particularly if she moves  with
             both her parents to a country which they know well  and  where
             they can easily re-integrate in their own community ... But it
             is very different in the case of children who have lived  here
             all their lives and are being expected to move  to  a  country
             which they do not know and will be  separated  from  a  parent
             whom they also know well.


         32.  Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship  be  played
             down.  As citizens these children have rights which they  will
             not be able to exercise if they move to another country.  They
             will lose the advantages of growing up and being  educated  in
             their own country, their own culture and their  own  language.
             They will have lost all this when they come back as adults...


         33.  We now have a much greater understanding of the importance  of
             these issues in assessing the overall well-being of the child.
              In making the proportionality assessment under Article 8, the
             best interests of the child must be a  primary  consideration.
             This means that they must be considered first.  They  can,  of
             course, be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other
             considerations.    In   this    case,    the    countervailing
             considerations  were  the  need  to  maintain  firm  and  fair
             immigration  control,  coupled  with  the  mother's  appalling
             immigration history and the  precariousness  of  her  position
             when family life was created.  But, as  the  Tribunal  rightly
             pointed out, the children were not to be blamed for that.  And
             the inevitable result of removing their primary carer would be
             that they had to leave with her.  On the facts, it is as least
             as strong a case as Edore v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2003] EWCA Civ 716; [2003] 1 WLR 2979 where  Simon
             Brown LJ held that "there really is only room  for  one  view"
             (at [26]).  In those circumstances, the Secretary of State was
             clearly right to concede that there could be only one answer.

134. We have already dealt with the submissions that the terms  of  the  RLR
   policy are such that there was  insufficient  flexibility  and  that  the
   decision maker's discretion was unlawfully fettered. These arguments were
   also advanced in relation to the duty under s.55. There  is  no  need  to
   repeat our assessment in the context of the s.55 duty. We turn now to the
   contention that the existence of the RLR policy itself gives  rise  to  a
   breach of the duty under s.55. That is a proposition which we are  unable
   to accept. Firstly, it is important to recall that  the  requirements  of
   the duty are specifically referred to in the guidance with respect to the
   RLR policy itself together with a cross reference to  other  guidance  in
   respect of the application of the s.55 duty.  Secondly,  we  can  see  no
   reason why the RLR policy is in principle in conflict with the s.55 duty.
   There is no doubt, in the light of the principles which are to be derived
   from ZH, that the best interests of any children including in  particular
   children who are British citizens must be a  primary  consideration  when
   decision makers consider the imposition  of  a  period  of  RLR  and  any
   associated conditions. As we have set out above, whilst the imposition of
   time limited leave may have an impact on the quality of family life, that
   is a matter which can, consistent with the s.55 duty, be  properly  taken
   into account at the time  when  decisions  are  reached.  Similarly,  the
   imposition of any conditions which might impinge upon the best  interests
   of a child (such as a residence condition) will  also  require  the  best
   interests of the child to be a primary consideration. We  note  that  the
   need to have regard to  the  s.55  duty  is  specifically  recognised  in
   paragraph 4.5.9 of the current version of the RLR  policy.  Nevertheless,
   given that family life may continue notwithstanding the imposition of the
   conditions, very strong evidence would be  needed  to  prevail  over  the
   public interest and public  protection  considerations  which  are  given
   effect in the three  purposes  of  the  RLR  policy  so  as  to  make  it
   unreasonable for the respondent not to grant RLR for more than six months
   or not to impose the usual conditions. This is only likely to occur  very
   rarely indeed, save that, in our view, it may be easier, depending on the
   circumstances,  to  demonstrate  unreasonableness  in  relation  to   the
   restriction on studies.

135. For these reasons  we  are,  therefore,  not  able  to  accede  to  the
   proposition that the  RLR  policy  is  unlawful  as  being  in  principle
   inconsistent with the s.55 duty. That is not to say, in a similar vein to
   our conclusions in relation to Article 8, that in each individual case  a
   careful evaluation of the best interests of any children involved in  the
   decision making process should not be  a  primary  consideration  in  the
   Article 8 assessment of an individual case.

V. Was the decision in respect of MS lawful?

136. As will be clear from the distillation of the  issues  arising  in  the
   case, there are a number of facets to the argument in relation to whether
   or not the decision to grant MS RLR under the RLR policy was lawful.  The
   first of those is an argument related to the extensive delays involved in
   his case including  in  particular  the  nine  years  which  it  took  to
   determine his application for ILR during the course of which,  and  as  a
   result of the introduction of the RLR policy on 2 September 2011, he  was
   deprived of the potential benefit  of  the  respondent's  DLR  policy  in
   respect of the grant of ILR under the DLR policy. It is important that it
   is remembered that when MS's claim was originally launched, it was  based
   on the delays in dealing with his application and  commenced  at  a  time
   when there was no decision in  his  case.  It  was  a  claim  which  was,
   understandably, formulated on the basis of both illegality in the overall
   delay in dealing with his claim and "historic injustice" on the basis  of
   a change in policy. This latter point was thrown into sharp focus by  the
   decision reached in his case on 2nd May 2014 applying the RLR policy.

137. For some time there has clearly been unease in the courts  in  relation
   to arguments based upon "historic injustice" or the argument that because
   of procedural default or changes in policy a benefit that a person  might
   have had had procedures been  properly  operated  or  decisions  promptly
   reached has evaporated putting them  in  a  less  advantageous  position.
   These issues were recently considered by the Supreme Court in TN  and  MA
   (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  UKSC
   40. During the course of the leading judgment of the Supreme Court  given
   by Lord Toulson JSC consideration was given  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
   decision in R (Rashid) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2005] EWCA 744 which was subsequently criticised in R (S) v Secretary of
   State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 546. In Rashid it was  held
   that the conspicuous unfairness which arose  from  the  withdrawal  of  a
   policy which would have afforded the claimant refugee  status  which  was
   withdrawn by the final stage of the decision  making  process  outweighed
   the Ravichandran principle that asylum appeals should  be  determined  by
   reference to the position at the time  when  the  appellate  decision  is
   being reached (Ravichandran v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
   [1996] Imm AR 97). Lord Toulson's analysis of Rashid and S is to be found
   in paragraph 42 of his judgment as follows:


         42.  The reasoning in Rashid has  been  criticised.   In  R  (S)  v
             Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  ...  para  39
             Carnwarth  LJ  described  the  reasoning  as  "not  altogether
             convincing", and that it appeared to  turn  "abuse  of  power"
             into a factor able to achieve remedial results not open to the
             courts in other instances of illegality.  He also  had  doubts
             about the weight placed  by  the  court  on  the  Department's
             conduct.   The  court's  proper  sphere  is  illegality,   not
             maladministration.  If the  earlier  decision  to  refuse  the
             asylum application  was  unlawful,  it  was  the  unlawfulness
             rather than the cause of it  (whether  bad  faith  or  muddle)
             which justified the  court's  intervention  and  provided  the
             basis for the remedy.  Having made these criticisms, Carnwarth
             LJ said that  the  court's  task  was  to  try  to  extract  a
             principled basis for the decision, which must be found in  the
             majority judgment of Pill LJ.  Although Pill  LJ  appeared  to
             have expressed the  result  as  an  exercise  of  the  court's
             remedial  discretion,  the  court  had  no  power   to   grant
             indefinite leave to remain; the power  and  discretion  rested
             with the Secretary of State, and it was not open to the  court
             to  assume  that  function.   The  principled  basis  for  the
             decision must be that it was open to the  court  to  determine
             that  a  legally  relevant  factor  in  the  exercise  of  the
             discretion was the correction of injustice,  and  that  in  an
             extreme case the court could find that the unfairness and  the
             remedy was so plain that there  was  only  way  in  which  the
             Secretary of State could exercise his discretion.

138. Having reviewed this conundrum and other cases in  which  the  question
   of "historic injustice" had arisen particularly in the factual context of
   the case, Lord Toulson returned to resolving the position at paragraph 70-
   72 as follows:


         70.  I turn next to Ravichandran  and  Rashid.   The  principle  in
             Ravichandran is sound.  As Simon Brown, LJ said in that  case,
             on  an  asylum  appeal  the  subject  matter  is  whether  the
             appellant requires refugee protection.  The  function  of  the
             court is quite unlike  its  function  when  adjudicating,  for
             example, on a private law claim  for  breach  of  contract  or
             tort.  A claimant who establishes that there has been a breach
             of contract or tort is entitled to be put, so far as the court
             is able to do so, in the same position as if the wrong had not
             been committed.  In Ravichandran the court rightly  held  that
             on an asylum appeal the question is  one  of  present  status:
             does the appellant meet the criteria of the Refugee Convention
             or is he in need of humanitarian protection?


         71.  I agree with the criticisms made of Rashid by Carnwath LJ in R
             (S) v Secretary of  State  for  Home  Department  and  by  Sir
             Stanley Burnton in EU (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for
             the Home Department.  In Rashid the sloppiness  of  procedures
             in the Home Office resulted in the  appellant  being  unfairly
             denied refugee status when he  applied  for  it;  but  refugee
             status is not bound to endure for ever.  By the time that  his
             case reached the Court of Appeal the source of persecution  in
             Iraq had been  overthrown,  and  the  effect  of  the  court's
             decision was to give him a right which he did not need for his
             personal  protection.   Because  the   Rashid   exception   to
             Ravichandran  lacks  a  satisfactory  principle,  it  is  also
             impossible to state its scope with any degree of clarity.   In
             KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             Maurice Kay LJ  (para  17)  described  it  as  a  "complicated
             question" whether the facts of the cases  under  consideration
             gave rise to the Rashid principle, and the court struggled  in
             its attempt to articulate what needed  to  be  shown  for  the
             principle to apply.


         72.  I would hold that the Ravichandran principle  applies  on  the
             hearing of asylum appeals without exception, and Rashid should
             no longer be followed.  The  question  whether  the  appellant
             qualifies for asylum status is not a question  of  discretion.
             It is one which must be decided on  the  evidence  before  the
             tribunal or court, and there is  no  legal  justification  for
             approaching  that  question  with  a  presumption   that   the
             appellant is credible arising from a failure of the respondent
             properly to discharge her obligation  in  relation  to  family
             tracing.   Discretionary  leave  by  definition   involves   a
             discretion, but it  is  a  discretion  which  belongs  to  the
             respondent and not to  the  court.   The  respondent  must  of
             course exercise her discretion lawfully, with proper regard to
             any policy which she has established, but  I  agree  with  Sir
             Stanley Burnton that it is not proper for a court  to  require
             the respondent to grant unconditional leave  to  an  appellant
             who would not be entitled to such relief under current  policy
             (or have a current right to remain in the UK on other grounds,
             such as article 8), as a form of relief for an  earlier  error
             or breach of obligation.

139. We have formed the view that this recent decision of the Supreme  Court
   effectively disposes of the arguments raised in MS's case in relation  to
   the delays in his case and the intervening cancellation of the DLR policy
   in his case as giving rise to any viable argument based upon a  "historic
   injustice". Whilst Ms Harrison sought  to  contend  that,  by  virtue  of
   paragraph 42 of Lord Toulson's judgment, the approach which was taken  by
   the Court of Appeal in S was still good law, in our view paragraphs 70-72
   of Lord Toulson's judgment made plain that the Rashid line  of  authority
   (including the case of S) are no longer to be followed or be regarded  as
   representing the law. The Ravichandran principle applies and the question
   arising in relation to any review is  whether  the  decision  was  lawful
   measured against the relevant facts and any relevant policy as they stand
   at the date of the review. In that context, the question  of  whether  or
   not there has been lengthy delay and whether or not a claimant  has  lost
   an advantage as a result of an intervening  change  in  the  respondent's
   policy, simply does not arise. Clearly there may be cases when the delays
   involved are so egregious as to amount  to  illegality.  But  that  is  a
   separate point and we shall examine it separately below  in  relation  to
   MS's case. Incompetent delay and inefficient  decision  making  processes
   which may lead to the loss of benefit which might  have  arisen  under  a
   superseded policy can no longer amount to a basis of claim. There is,  of
   course, a symmetry between this approach and the approach which was taken
   by the House of Lords in Odelola  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2009] 1 WLR 1230 in relation to the effect of changes to  the
   Immigration Rules and the impact of those changes upon an applicant whose
   application is still current at the time when the Immigration  Rules  are
   changed.

140. In deference to the submissions which were made  in  relation  to  this
   aspect  of  the  case,  we  would  simply  wish  to  add  the   following
   observations albeit that for the reasons we  have  already  given  we  no
   longer think it sustainable for MS to argue that the delays coupled  with
   the change in policy on 2 September 2011 from the DLR policy to  the  RLR
   policy for excluded persons who cannot be removed from the United Kingdom
   due to Article 3 of the ECHR entitles him to substantive relief.


141. The causative delay on which MS could rely is  the  delay  between  the
   date when his application for further leave to remain  was  made  on  7th
   July 2005 and 2nd September 2011 when the RLR policy was introduced. That
   is the delay which occurred prior to the change in the policy upon  which
   his contentions depend. We would not regard that six year delay as  being
   sufficient to amount to illegality on the part of the respondent per  se.
   It is undoubtedly incompetence for such a significant period of delay  to
   occur without any explanation being offered by the respondent in  respect
   of it. However, the incompetence involved does not extend to illegality.

142. The second element of the case specific to MS is  whether  or  not  the
   RLR  policy  has  been  properly  understood  and  applied  to  him.   As
   articulated in the skeleton, the case  is  put  on  the  basis  that,  if
   contrary to MS's contentions, it was appropriate for him to be considered
   to fall within the  RLR  policy,  there  was  no  proper  basis  for  the
   imposition of the conditions and a time limited period of leave. For  the
   reasons which we have already given, we  regard  the  RLR  policy  as  in
   principle lawful and there can be no doubt that MS is within the class of
   persons to which it applies. The question of the imposition of conditions
   we propose to deal with when dealing with the  Article  8  dimensions  of
   MS's case.

143. The aspect of the decision  making  process  in  MS's  case  which  has
   caused us considerable misgivings is that related  to  the  time  limited
   period of leave and the question posed by Collins J in N and  recited  in
   the most recent iteration of the guidance, namely whether a time had come
   in MS's case "when - provided the individual has behaved himself in  this
   country - it would be proper to regard him as having put behind  him,  as
   it were, the original offending." The arrival of this end point was  also
   specifically contemplated in Kardi in Richards LJ's judgment at paragraph
   32:


         32   ... There may of course come a point where the  appellant  has
             been in the United Kingdom for so long and/or the prospect  of
             his removal to Tunisia is so  remote,  that  the  only  course
             reasonably open to the Secretary of  State  is  to  grant  him
             indefinite leave to remain.

144. As explored during the course of argument the consideration of  whether
   or not this end point to the reasonable application of the RLR  has  been
   reached will depend upon a wide variety of factors.  These  will  include
   not simply the question alluded  to  by  Collins  J  as  to  whether  the
   applicant has remained blamelessly in the United Kingdom  for  a  lengthy
   period of time or the prospect of removal of the applicant to his or  her
   home country identified by Richards LJ  but  also  an  appraisal  of  the
   political  circumstances  of  the  home  country  bearing  in  mind   the
   international reputation of the United Kingdom which can be in  point  in
   these cases, and other case specific issues concerned with the particular
   circumstances of the original  reason  for  exclusion  from  the  Refugee
   Convention and the particular circumstances of the applicant and his life
   in the  United  Kingdom.  This  is  not  an  exhaustive  list  since,  in
   particular, any consideration of this aspect of the case  would  need  to
   engage probably first  and  foremost,  with  the  current  state  of  the
   Immigration Rules in relation to long residence cases. Whilst it  may  be
   in relatively rare cases that this point  is  reached,  nevertheless  the
   inclusion of consideration of this issue within the RLR policy is for the
   reasons which we have given above an important feature of its flexibility
   in the context of the arguments as to its lawfulness. We add that it will
   also be necessary to take account of the reasons why the  individual  was
   excluded from the Refugee Convention. In some cases, the  end  point  may
   never come.

145. The difficulty which we have with the decision  which  was  reached  in
   MS's case, in particular in the most  recent  decision  of  16th  January
   2015, is that there is no evidence of any consideration of this aspect of
   the RLR policy having been considered. The best that Ms Anderson could do
   was to point to the sentence in paragraph 6 of the decision letter noting
   that MS remained a priority for removal owing to his exclusion  from  the
   Refugee Convention. In our view, that  simply  does  not  amount  to  any
   evidence of consideration of this aspect of the RLR policy.  Further,  we
   do not consider that the case of MS is one where it is  so  obvious  that
   consideration of this aspect of the RLR policy is so unrealistic that  no
   assessment should be made of it. It should be recalled that by  the  time
   of this decision MS had been in the United Kingdom for nearly  20  years.
   There will be cases when the suggestion  that  the  end  point  has  been
   reached is so hopeless that reasons are not required in relation to  this
   aspect of the policy. However, this is not one of those cases  (see  also
   [150]). We are satisfied that consideration of the point raised in N  and
   Kardi (set out above) should have been considered in his  case  and  that
   there is no evidence that it was, and the failure to do so  was  a  legal
   error, in that, it was a failure to apply the respondent's RLR policy  to
   his case.

146. Turning to the conditions which were imposed, we do not consider  that,
   in the light of the legitimate purposes of the RLR policy which  we  have
   set out above, it was disproportionate to  require  MS  to  reside  at  a
   particular address subject to restrictions that he could not  spend  more
   than three consecutive nights away for ten nights away within a six month
   period without the prior written consent of the  respondent.  Bearing  in
   mind the respondent's desire to prioritise removal of MS, being aware  of
   his whereabouts to the extent required by the condition is proportionate.




147. Similarly, requiring consent to work is  not  disproportionate  as  the
   Court of Appeal concluded in  Kardi  at  paragraph  35  of  Richard  LJ's
   judgment. It does not preclude obtaining work  but  rather  requires  the
   respondent's approval to it bearing  in  mind  MS's  exclusion  from  the
   Refugee Convention and the reasons for that exclusion. Further, we do not
   consider that requiring MS to report on a six monthly basis is in any way
   disproportionate.


148. Turning to the question of restrictions on study, whilst concerns  were
   expressed by Richards LJ in  paragraphs  41-44  of  his  judgment,  those
   concerns were not as to the principle of such a condition but rather that
   at least specific application for consent  would  need  to  be  carefully
   justified by the respondent if study was to  be  restricted.  Unlike  the
   position in Kardi, the condition imposed in MS's case is not an  absolute
   prohibition but rather  one  which  requires  him  to  seek  consent.  No
   explanation has been provided for why his application to take up a course
   as a domestic gas engineer should be precluded in order  to  fulfill  the
   purposes of the RLR policy and we would have difficulty in accepting that
   it would be proportionate in the circumstances to prevent MS studying  in
   order to obtain a skill which would potentially be  as  relevant  to  his
   life abroad as it would in the United Kingdom. It is  important  to  note
   that the course of study about which he sought consent is vocational  and
   of short duration.

149. We do not consider that the imposition of any of these  conditions  was
   precluded or affected by the s.55 duty. Whilst the time limited character
   of the leave granted will obviously engage a consideration  of  the  best
   interests of  the  children,  that  was  a  matter  which  was  expressly
   considered in particular in paragraphs 20  and  21  of  the  most  recent
   decision in MS's case which started from consideration of the  children's
   best interests and the extent to which they would be  undermined  by  the
   uncertainty created by the grant  of  time  limited  leave  but  counter-
   balanced that with the public interest in the  removal  of  MS  from  the
   United Kingdom. We can see nothing unlawful in that  approach  save  that
   for the reasons set out above we remain concerned about  the  failure  to
   engage with the possibility of  an  end  point  having  been  reached  as
   contemplated by N and Kardi and the RLR policy itself in which  the  s.55
   duty will also be at large.

150. It follows from what we have set out above  that  we  do  not  consider
   that there is substance in the arguments raised in respect of  delay  and
   the change on 2 September 2011 of the respondent's  policy  for  excluded
   persons who cannot be removed from the United Kingdom from the DLR policy
   to the RLR policy in MS's case. In any event additional  to  the  matters
   which we have set out above we are not persuaded that we could  grant  MS
   relief on the  basis  of  those  submissions.  Insofar  as  it  could  be
   concluded that the delays in his case were unlawful, that  would  entitle
   him to a fresh decision which has already occurred  not  once  but  twice
   since proceedings were commenced. We are satisfied that the imposition of
   the conditions which were imposed in his case were compliant with Article
   8 and the s.55 duty. Our  concern  is  in  relation  to  the  failure  to
   consider whether or not the end point had been reached in his case.  This
   is not on the basis that we consider that it  has  been  reached  in  his
   case: that is a matter for the respondent to reach a  decision  based  on
   the particular merits of his case and for her to  explain.  For  example,
   she may be aware of details of the reasons for MS's  exclusion  from  the
   Refugee Convention not made known to us. She may have other reasons.  Our
   point is that undertaking a review of the legality of  the  decision,  we
   cannot be satisfied that the respondent has applied this  aspect  of  the
   RLR policy in considering MS's case.


151. The failure to apply the RLR policy is an  error  of  law  which  would
   ordinarily  lead  to  that  decision  being  quashed  and  retaken.   The
   difference in the present case is that, as a result of the  time  of  the
   limited nature of the decision which was made, by the time  our  decision
   is published a further application for leave to  remain  will  have  been
   made by MS and the respondent will in any event be  required  to  take  a
   decision upon it.  Therefore  the  grant  of  relief  in  the  particular
   circumstances of this case would be otiose. We do not consider  therefore
   that it is necessary in the circumstances of the case to quash a decision
   the effect of which has already expired and where a fresh  decision  will
   inevitably have to be taken. It will no doubt need to be taken bearing in
   mind the matters which we have raised in our adjudication on MS's case.

152. We have also considered whether in the circumstances we should grant  a
   declaration to the effect that the decision  reached  in  MS's  case  was
   unlawful as a result of the failures in the  application  of  the  policy
   that we have identified. However, declaratory relief is discretionary and
   in our view there are good reasons for exercising our discretion  not  to
   grant a declaration in this case. The decision in  the  present  case  is
   time-limited and indeed has expired during the course of this litigation.
   There will inevitably be a further decision to be made, and it will  have
   to be made in the context of the conclusions that we have reached in  our
   decision. That context will include in particular the views that we  have
   expressed about the proper interpretation of the policy and the questions
   which will have to be addressed in applying it to the particular facts of
   MS's case. In those circumstances there would be little  purpose  to  the
   grant of a declaration. The reality here is that the effect of the lawful
   decision is now time-expired and the  respondent  will  have  to  make  a
   further decision taking account of the substance of this decision in  any
   event.

VI. Was the RLR policy lawfully applied to MBT?

153. The first tranche of issues raised in MBT's case again  relate  to  the
   delays involved in dealing with the  application  for  further  leave  to
   remain in his case and the change on  2  September  2011  in  the  policy
   applicable to excluded persons who cannot  be  removed  from  the  United
   Kingdom from the DLR policy to the RLR policy which occurred  whilst  his
   application was being considered. For the reasons which we have  set  out
   above in relation to the case of TN, we do not consider that an  argument
   of this kind based on delay and  the  loss  of  a  potential  benefit  or
   advantage as a result of such a change in policy during  that  delay  are
   sustainable. We therefore do not consider that the  arguments  raised  in
   MBT's case on this basis are anymore viable  than  those  which  we  have
   already dismissed in the case of MS. However, akin to the case of MS,  we
   propose to offer some observations on the points in any event.

154. It will be recalled that MBT was first granted DLR for  six  months  on
   22nd July 2004. Further periods were granted including on  17th  February
   2009. The application with which we are concerned was made on  30th  July
   2009 and then lost by the respondent. It was re-submitted on  25th  March
   2011 and a decision made on 21st August 2013. Again, for the purposes  of
   considering delay causative of prejudice or disadvantage in  MBT's  case,
   the focus must be upon the period which elapsed from  the  submission  of
   the application to the alteration of the policy on 2nd September 2011. In
   his case, that was a period of a little over two years and we  would  not
   regard that as a delay which could properly be characterised as unlawful.
   Indeed, at the time when the policy changed, he had not accrued ten years
   of DLR and, in any event, even if he had for the reasons  which  we  have
   expressed above in the case of MS  any  grant  of  ILR  would  have  been
   discretionary as opposed to an entitlement.

155. Ms Weston submitted that the respondent unlawfully failed  to  consider
   whether the DLR policy as opposed to the RLR policy should be applied  at
   MBT. It was argued that it was necessary for the respondent to conduct  a
   balancing  exercise  and  consider  proportionality  to  reach  a  lawful
   decision as to whether the DLR policy or the RLR policy should be applied
   to him. Ms Weston put the argument in terms of MBT having been unlawfully
   diverted from the DLR policy or an unlawful failure to  consider  whether
   he should be diverted from the RLR policy.


156. At the date of the decision in MBT's case (21st August 2013),  the  DLR
   policy that was in place was the November 2012 DLR  policy  and  the  RLR
   policy in place was the RLR policy of 28th May 2012. It was stated in the
   November 2012 DLR policy (fourth paragraph of  the  "Introduction")  that
   the RLR  policy  will  apply  unless  exceptional  circumstances  justify
   divergence from  the  RLR  policy.  On  its  face,  this  may  appear  to
   contradict the following sections of  the  same  policy  quoted  at  [39]
   above:


     (i) the last paragraph under  section  3  which  states  that  excluded
         persons must be considered under the RLR policy;
     (ii)     the second paragraph of section 7 which states  that  excluded
         persons must  not be granted further DLR; and
      (ii)      the   second   paragraph   of   section   11   (transitional
         arrangements)  which  states:  "Decision  makers  must  apply   the
         following guidance" in the cases of persons granted DLR on  a  date
         prior to 8 July 2012.


157. However, in our  view,  when  the  RLR  policy  of  28th  May  2012  is
   considered alongside the November 2012 DLR policy, it is plain  that  the
   respondent's policy was that  all  excluded  persons  who  could  not  be
   removed were to be dealt with under the  RLR  policy  unless  there  were
   exceptional circumstances in which case they were to be diverted  to  the
   DLR policy. In other words, the respondent had  what  was  in  effect  an
   overarching  policy  of  applying  the  RLR  policy  and  not   diverting
   individuals  from  the  RLR  policy   unless   there   were   exceptional
   circumstances. That is a lawful and rational policy.


158. True it is that, once an individual has been diverted to  the  November
   2012 DLR policy, the provisions of the November 2012  DLR  policy  as  to
   what is to happen then was unclear, in that,  whilst  the  "Introduction"
   envisaged that individuals may be diverted from the RLR policy to the DLR
   policy, section 3 said that the RLR policy applied  and  section  7  said
   that DLR must not be granted.


159. This problem has been rectified in  the  June  2014  DLR  policy  which
   replaced the November 2012  DLR  policy.  The  fourth  paragraph  of  the
   "Introduction" provides, as did the November 2012 DLR  policy,  that  the
   RLR policy is to apply to excluded persons who cannot be  removed  unless
   there are exceptional circumstances to justify diverting  them  from  the
   RLR policy.  The June 2014 DLR policy  then  goes  on  to  make  specific
   provision, in section 2.5, for  those  excluded  persons  who  cannot  be
   removed due to Article 3 of the ECHR and who do not fall within  the  RLR
   policy, i.e. it makes specific provision for those persons who have  been
   diverted from the RLR policy.


160. Considering the policies as a whole, it is plain,  in  our  view,  that
   the sentence: "Decision makers must apply the following guidance" in  the
   section entitled: "Transitional Arrangements" in the  November  DLR  2012
   and the June 2014 DLR policies only applies to those who fall under these
   polices, i.e. the DLR polices. They do not apply to individuals  who  are
   subject to the RLR policy and have not been diverted from it.


161. Thus,  in  our  view,  Ms  Weston's  submission,  that  the  respondent
   unlawfully failed to consider whether the DLR policy as  opposed  to  the
   RLR policy should be applied to MBT, is misconceived. It presupposes that
   MBT had some right to have the status quo of being considered  under  the
   DLR policy continue or that he had some right to be considered under  the
   DLR policy, whereas the correct position is that the policy which applied
   to him was the RLR policy unless the  respondent  considered  that  there
   were exceptional circumstances  to  justify  diverting  him  to  the  DLR
   policy.  Accordingly, it is not the  case  that  the  respondent  had  to
   justify diverting MBT from the DLR policy. To the contrary, any diversion
   of MBT from the RLR policy had to be justified. It  is  implicit  in  the
   respondent's decision to apply the RLR policy to MBT that she  considered
   that there were no exceptional circumstances  to  justify  diverting  him
   from the RLR policy. She did not  need  to  give  reasons  to  apply  her
   overarching policy (see R (Mohammed) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
   Department [2014] EWHC 98 (Admin), Lewis J),  unless  there  are  plainly
   exceptional circumstances  which  she  may  have  overlooked  capable  of
   outweighing the public interest in the three purposes of the RLR policy.

162. Another argument advanced in MBT's case is that  the  respondent  erred
   in failing to apply the transitional arrangements in the  DLR  policy  to
   him.  However, as we have explained, the DLR policy was not applicable to
   him. Accordingly, the transitional arrangements did not apply to him.

163. Turning to the  application  of  the  policy  in  MBT's  case,  and  in
   particular whether the  point  had  been  reached  where  ILR  should  be
   granted, in his case in the most  recent  decision  of  20th  March  2015
   specific consideration was given to whether or not ILR should be  granted
   in response to the application,  at  paragraphs  11-18  of  the  decision
   letter. In those paragraphs the provisions of the Immigration  Rules  are
   considered and applied in particular in the context of  MBT's  conviction
   and five year sentence in France. We are satisfied therefore that in  his
   case this dimension of the RLR policy has been considered and a  decision
   reached which is fully reasoned and rational. In respect of  this  aspect
   of the case, Ms Weston drew attention to the respondent's  reply  to  the
   pre-action protocol letter in this case dated 25th October 2013 in  which
   it was suggested that MBT would not be considered at all in  relation  to
   ILR until he had completed ten years of limited leave. It is  unclear  to
   us why that observation was made but in any event whether or not  it  was
   correct for that observation to be made, consideration has now been given
   to the question of whether ILR should be granted to MBT. Ms  Weston  also
   pointed out the suggestion within that letter that the fact that MBT  had
   not committed any criminal offences since arriving in the United  Kingdom
   was irrelevant. In our view that observation was clearly erroneous in the
   light of Collins J's observations cited above in respect of the potential
   relevance of the absence of further  criminal  convictions,  but  in  any
   event it appears to have played no  part  in  the  most  recent  decision
   reached in MBT's case.

164. Whilst Ms Weston made submissions in respect of  the  s.55  duty,  that
   duty has been adverted to and applied in  the  most  recent  decision  in
   MBT's case in paragraphs 32-36 of the decision.  The  reasoning  provided
   explains  that  the  children's  best  interests  in  the  resolution  of
   uncertainty in respect of MBT's immigration status in the United  Kingdom
   are outweighed by the public interest reasons for removing him  from  the
   United Kingdom.  We  are  unpersuaded  that  that  reasoning  process  is
   inconsistent or falls foul of the approach to be taken to the  s.55  duty
   expressed in ZH. Thus,  in  our  view,  the  policy  in  respect  of  the
   provision of time limited leave in MBT's case has been  lawfully  applied
   subject to the consideration of the conditions imposed to  which  we  now
   turn.

165. It will be recalled that in MBT's case he was made  the  subject  of  a
   residence condition, the requirement that he notify the respondent  prior
   to taking up or changing employment, that he report on  a  monthly  basis
   and that he not enrol on a course of study without the respondent's prior
   consent.

166. We have set out above the evidence  which  has  been  provided  in  the
   context of the case as to the effect of the imposition of the  conditions
   on MBT. We recognise that the imposition  of  conditions  in  respect  of
   employment has presented difficulties for MBT in securing a job and  that
   that has undoubtedly placed him in a stressful position  in  relation  to
   his financial circumstances.  However,  it  has  to  be  noted  that  the
   condition does not preclude MBT from working or obtaining a  job  and  we
   are satisfied that the imposition of this condition along with  the  time
   limited nature of his leave is a proportionate response to his status  as
   someone who is excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention. We
   do not underestimate the difficulties that MBT may face in obtaining work
   but having considered his evidence those issues are  multi-factorial  and
   the condition and the limited nature of his leave  are  part  but  by  no
   means all of the problem. We are not satisfied  that  this  condition  is
   disproportionate.


167. There is, further, evidence which MBT provides in  relation  to  stress
   which he was caused by the reporting condition. However, the frequency of
   the reporting is at a low level and again bearing in mind the purpose  of
   the  RLR  policy  which  we  have  identified  as  being  legitimate  the
   imposition of the condition is not disproportionate.


168. So far as the restriction on studies is concerned, on the  evidence  as
   it currently stands, there is little or no specific evidence of a  course
   which MBT would wish to pursue.  Therefore,  on  the  evidence  presently
   presented, we are not satisfied that the  requirement  for  him  to  seek
   permission is disproportionate.


169. Furthermore, although MBT expresses his concern about the  restrictions
   placed upon him in terms of not  spending  more  than  three  consecutive
   nights away from his home or more than ten nights away in any rolling six
   month period, it is important to observe  that  that  condition  contains
   within it the opportunity for him to seek the consent of  the  respondent
   to spend longer  away  than  this.  Whilst  that  may,  as  he  observes,
   constrain spontaneity, it does  not  necessarily  involve  a  prohibition
   unless having notified the respondent she has good reason consonant  with
   the policy for preventing it. In that respect, there is  no  evidence  of
   any application having been made. We are unable to conclude that, in  the
   particular circumstances of his case, the imposition of this condition is
   disproportionate.

170. It follows from what has been set out above that  we  do  not  consider
   that in the specific instance of MBT's case and the  evidence  pertaining
   to it that the application of the RLR policy has been unlawful  nor  that
   there is any illegality in the conditions which have  been  imposed  upon
   him.


Conclusions

171. Our conclusions are as follows:

     (i) For the reasons which we have set out above we are  satisfied  that
         the RLR policy originally published on 2nd September  2011  and  as
         understood and applied by virtue of the guidance published  by  the
         respondent is lawful.

     (ii)     We are also satisfied that RLR was  lawfully  applied  in  the
         case of MBT.

     (ii)     In the case of MS, we are not satisfied that  the  policy  was
         applied lawfully, in that, in granting RLR  for  a  period  of  six
         months, the respondent has failed to consider whether the end point
         has been reached in his particular circumstances. In  addition,  in
         imposing the restriction on studies, we are not satisfied that  the
         respondent has considered his  request  that  he  be  permitted  to
         undertake a course of study as a domestic  gas  engineer.  However,
         for the reasons we have given and on the basis that there will need
         to be, following on  from  the  receipt  of  our  determination,  a
         further decision in his case in which these  legal  errors  can  be
         addressed, we do not consider it to be expedient to grant relief in
         this case.







Signed                                  Date: 4 September 2015


Mr Justice Dove

