
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Weldemichael and another (St Prix  [2014]  EUECJ  C-507/12;  effect)  [2015]
UKUT 00540 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 February 2015                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                        1) MIZAN MAHDER WELDEMICHAEL
                           2) GEORGE ODIJIE OBULOR
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                 AIRE CENTRE
                                                                  Intervener

Representation:

For the First Appellant:        Ms O Umoh-Abudu, Solicitor
For the Second Appellant:  no appearance or representation
For the Intervener:        Mr A Berry, Counsel, instructed by the AIRE
Centre
For the Respondent:        Ms J Smyth Counsel, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor




                            DECISION AND REASONS

An EEA national woman will retain continuity of residence for  the  purposes
of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the  2006  EEA
Regulations) for a period in which she  was  absent  from  working  or  job-
seeking owing to the physical constraints of the late  stages  of  pregnancy
and the aftermath of childbirth if, in line with the decision  of  the  CJEU
in Jessy St Prix:

      a) at the beginning of the relevant period she was either a worker  or
         seeking employment;

      b) the relevant period commenced no more  than  11  weeks  before  the
         expected  date  of  confinement  (absent  cogent  evidence  to  the
         contrary that the woman was physically constrained from working  or
         seeking work);

      c) the relevant period did not extend beyond 52 weeks; and,

      d) she returned to work.

So long as these requirements are met,  there  will  be  no  breach  of  the
continuity of residence for the purposes of regulation  15.  Time  spent  in
the United Kingdom during such periods counts for the purposes of  acquiring
permanent residence.

 1. These appeals have been heard together as  they  raise  similar  issues
    regarding the interpretation and applicability of Jessy St Prix  v  DWP
    [2014] CJEU C-507/12 (hereafter St Prix). As the  parties  agreed,  the
    appeals are concerned with the continuity of residence for the purposes
    of  acquiring  permanent  residence  under  the  immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   ("the   EEA   Regulations"),   not
    entitlement to benefits. In both appeals, whether or not there has been
    lawful residence for the required continuous five year period turns (to
    a greater or lesser extent) on how time spent out of employment due  to
    the relevant EU national's pregnancy is characterised.

 2. We are aware that the  Administrative  Appeals  Chamber  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal has also been considering the impact of  St  Prix  in  appeals
    CIS/204/2013, CIS/1288/2012, CH/1312/2013 & CH/1440/2013.

    The Appellants

 3. Ms Weldemichael, the First Appellant, is a citizen of  the  Netherlands
    born on 15 December 1979 who entered the  United  Kingdom  in  February
    2006. In June/July 2012 she applied to the respondent for  a  residence
    card  as  confirmation  of  her  right  of  permanent  residence.  That
    application was refused 16 January 2013, and her  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 11 May 2013.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    was granted on 10 July 2013.

 4. Mr Obulor, the Second Appellant, is a citizen of Nigeria. On 4 November
    2006 he married Ms Jurgita Pocuite, a citizen of Lithuania who has been
    resident in the United Kingdom since 5 May 2004. On 30 November 2012 he
    applied for a residence card as confirmation of his right of  permanent
    residence. That application was refused  on  15  April  2013,  and  his
    appeal against that decision was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in a determination promulgated on 25 October 2013. Permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 17 December 2013

 5. Subsequent to the grants of permission, there have  been  a  number  of
    case  management  hearings,  and  directions   issued.   In   addition,
    permission was granted  to  the  AIRE  centre  to  intervene.  It  was,
    however, only on the morning of the hearing that Mr Obulor  let  it  be
    known that he would not be attending for personal reasons; he confirmed
    to Court staff that he was content for the matter  to  proceed  in  his
    absence. With our agreement,  and  without  demur  from  Ms  Smyth,  he
    submitted additional material to which we refer below.

Preliminary Matter - withdrawal of the respondent's concession in Obulor

 6. As a preliminary issue,  Ms  Smyth  sought  permission  to  withdraw  a
    concession made before the First-tier Tribunal in  Mr  Obulor's  appeal
    that Ms Jociute had been working/exercising Treaty Rights between  2004
    and 2008, it being submitted that it was open to us  to  do  so,  there
    being no prejudice to the appellant.

 7. In the circumstances of his non-attendance, we  deferred  consideration
    of that matter, and it is dealt with below.

    Legislative framework

 8. The EEA Regulations provided, as at  the  date  of  decision  in  these
    appeals and as far as is relevant, as follows:

    6.- "Qualified person"[1]

       (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a person who is an
       EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

         (a) a jobseeker;

         (b) a worker;

         (c) a self-employed person;

         (d) a self-sufficient person; or

         (e) a student.

       (2) Subject to regulation 7A (4), a person who is no longer  working
       shall not cease to  be  treated  as  a  worker  for  the  purpose  of
       paragraph (1)(b) if-

         (a) he is temporarily unable to work as the result of an illness or
       accident;

         (b) he is in duly recorded involuntary  unemployment  after  having
         been  employed  in  the  United  Kingdom,  provided  that  he   has
         registered as a jobseeker with the relevant employment office and-

             (i) he was employed for  one  year  or  more  before  becoming
           unemployed;

             (ii) he has been unemployed for no more than six months; or

             (iii) he can provide evidence that he is seeking employment in
             the United Kingdom and has a genuine chance of being engaged;

         (c) he is involuntarily unemployed and has embarked  on  vocational
       training; or

         (d) he has voluntarily ceased working and  embarked  on  vocational
         training that is related to his previous employment.

       (3) A person who is no longer in self-employment shall not  cease  to
       be treated as a self-employed person for  the  purpose  of  paragraph
       (1)(c) if he is temporarily unable to pursue his activity as a  self-
       employed person as the result of an illness or accident.

       (4) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker" means a person
       who enters the United Kingdom in order to  seek  employment  and  can
       provide evidence that he is seeking  employment  and  has  a  genuine
       chance of being engaged.

    15.- Permanent right of residence

       (1) The following persons shall acquire the right to  reside  in  the
       United Kingdom permanently-

         (a) an EEA national who  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
         accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period  of  five
         years;

         (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not  himself  an  EEA
         national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
         national in accordance with  these  Regulations  for  a  continuous
         period of five years;

         (c) a worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity;

         (d) the family member of a worker or self-employed person  who  has
         ceased activity;

         (e) a person who was the family member of a worker or self-employed
         person where-

           (i) the worker or self-employed person has died;

           (ii) the family member resided with him immediately  before  his
         death; and

           (iii)  the  worker   or   self-employed   person   had   resided
           continuously in the United Kingdom for at least  the  two  years
           immediately before his death or the death was the result  of  an
           accident at work or an occupational disease;

         (f) a person who-

           (i) has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  these
           Regulations for a continuous period of five years; and

           (ii) was, at the end of that period, a  family  member  who  has
           retained the right of residence.
           ...

    3.- Continuity of residence

       (1) This regulation applies for the purpose of calculating periods of
       continuous residence in the United Kingdom under regulation 5(1)  and
       regulation 15.

       (2) Continuity of residence is not affected by-

         (a) periods of absence from the United Kingdom which do not  exceed
         six months in total in any year;

         (b) periods of absence from the United Kingdom on military service;
       or

         (c) any one absence from the United Kingdom  not  exceeding  twelve
         months for an important reason such as  pregnancy  and  childbirth,
         serious illness,  study  or  vocational  training  or  an  overseas
         posting.

       (3) But continuity of residence is broken if a person is removed from
       the United Kingdom under these Regulations

 9. Given that it is argued that the EEA Regulations do not, in these cases
    (and more particularly in the light of St Prix reflect  the  provisions
    of European Law, we consider that these too must be set out.

10. The relevant provisions of European Union law are  article  45  of  the
    TFEU  and  the  Directive  2004/38/EC  ("the  Citizenship  Directive").
    Article 45 enshrines the principle of freedom of movement  for  workers
    and requires 'the abolition of any discrimination based on  nationality
    between  workers  of  the  Member   States   as   regards   employment,
    remuneration and other conditions  of  work  and  employment'.  Neither
    article 45 TFEU nor the Citizenship Directive defines 'worker'.

11. The recitals to the Citizenship Directive provide:

         (1) Citizenship of the Union confers on every citizen of the  Union
         a primary and individual right to move and reside freely within the
         territory of the Member States,  subject  to  the  limitations  and
         conditions laid down in the Treaty and to the measures  adopted  to
         give it effect.

         (2) The free movement of persons constitutes one of the fundamental
         freedoms of the internal market, which comprises  an  area  without
         internal frontiers, in which freedom is ensured in accordance  with
         the provisions of the Treaty

         ...

         (9) Union citizens should have the right of residence in  the  host
         Member State for a period not exceeding three months without  being
         subject to  any  conditions  or  any  formalities  other  than  the
         requirement to hold a valid  identity  card  or  passport,  without
         prejudice to a more favourable treatment applicable to  job-seekers
         as recognised by the case-law of the Court of Justice.

         (17) Enjoyment of permanent residence by Union  citizens  who  have
         chosen  to  settle  long  term  in  the  host  Member  State  would
         strengthen the feeling of Union citizenship and is a key element in
         promoting  social  cohesion,  which  is  one  of  the   fundamental
         objectives of the Union. A  right  of  permanent  residence  should
         therefore be laid down for all  Union  citizens  and  their  family
         members who have resided in the host  Member  State  in  compliance
         with the conditions laid down in this Directive during a continuous
         period of five years  without  becoming  subject  to  an  expulsion
         measure.

12. The Citizenship Directive provides at Article 1(a):

         This Directive lays down:

         (a)      the conditions governing the exercise of the right of free
         movement and residence within the territory of the Member States by
         Union citizens and their family members.

         Article 7 states:

         1.      All Union citizens shall have the right of residence on the
         territory of another Member State for a period of longer than three
         months if they:

         (a)      are workers or self-employed persons in the  host  Member
         State ...

         ...

         3.       For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), a Union citizen who is
         no longer a worker or self-employed person shall retain the  status
         of worker or self-employed person in the following circumstances:

             (a)      he/she is temporarily unable to work as the result of
         an illness or accident;

             (b)      he/she is in duly recorded involuntary  unemployment
             after having been employed for more  than  one  year  and  has
             registered  as  a  job-seeker  with  the  relevant  employment
             office;

             (c)      he/she is in duly recorded involuntary  unemployment
             after completing a fixed-term employment contract of less than
             a year or after having become involuntarily unemployed  during
             the first 12 months and has registered as  a  job-seeker  with
             the relevant employment office. In this case,  the  status  of
             worker shall be retained for no less than six months;

           (d)      he/she embarks on vocational training. Unless he/she is
           involuntarily unemployed, the retention of the status of  worker
           shall require  the  training  to  be  related  to  the  previous
           employment.

       Articles 16(1) and (3) of the same directive provide:

         1.      Union citizens who have resided legally for  a  continuous
         period of five years in the host Member State shall have the  right
         of permanent residence there. ...

         ...

         3.      Continuity of residence shall not be affected by temporary
         absences not exceeding a total of six months a year, or by absences
         of a longer duration for compulsory military  service,  or  by  one
         absence of a maximum of 12 consecutive months for important reasons
         such  as  pregnancy  and  childbirth,  serious  illness,  study  or
         vocational training, or a posting in  another  Member  State  or  a
         third country.




Facts as agreed in Weldemicheal

13. Ms Weldemichael arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2006. Between
    19 October 2006 and 6 September 2007 she was in receipt of Income-based
    Job-seeker's Allowance ("JSA (IB)"). From 3  September  2007  until  10
    April 2009 she was employed first by "Language Matters" then "S Three".
    She was made redundant from S Three and from  19  April  2009  until  9
    August 2009 she was in receipt of JSA (IB).  From that  point,  as  she
    was pregnant, she claimed Maternity Allowance until 8 May 2010; her son
    was born on 2 November 2009.  Once she was  no  longer  in  receipt  of
    Maternity Allowance, she then claimed JSA from  5  May  2010  until  30
    August 2011, the date on which she started work. Ms Weldemichael ceased
    employment on 9 April 2012.

14. The parties agree that Ms Weldemichael  was   residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a qualified person under the EEA Regulations:

      a) From 19/10/06 to 6/09/07  as a job-seeker under reg. 6 (1) (a);

      b)  From 3/09/07 to 10/04/09 as a worker under reg. 6 (1)(b);

      c) From 10/04/09 to 9/08/09 as a "retained worker" under reg. 6 (2);

      d) From 05/05/10 to 30/08/11 as a jobseeker under regs. 6(5) and  (6);
         and

      e) From 30/08/11 to 09/04/12 as a worker under reg 6 (1) (b)

Discussion

15. The parties and the intervener accept, the light of the decision of the
    CJEU in St Prix, that a woman who  gives  up  work,  or  seeking  work,
    because of the physical constraints of the late stages of pregnancy and
    the aftermath of childbirth retains the status of 'worker'  within  the
    meaning of article 45, provided she returns to work  or  finds  another
    job within a reasonable period after the birth of her child. Where they
    differ is in the requirements that must  be  met  at  the  end  of  the
    period, how long it can last; and,  whether  lawful  residence  accrued
    during the period of not working or seeking employment is to  be  taken
    into account in the acquisition of permanent residence.

16. The issues can, we consider, be identified as follows:-

      a) What status must a woman have at  the  beginning  of  a  reasonable
         period of absence of work (or seeking work), owing to the  physical
         constraints of the late stages of pregnancy?

      b) When does the reasonable period begin?

      c) When does the reasonable period end?

      d) What conditions must the woman meet at the end  of  the  reasonable
         period in order to benefit from it?

17. To answer these questions requires consideration of how the judgment in
    St Prix is to be interpreted. Much  of  the  argument  and  submissions
    received relates to this issue and we therefore attach a copy. We turn,
    therefore to that decision but not  without  noting  that  the  parties
    appeared to proceed on the basis that the ruling requires there to be a
    period of fixed duration applicable in  all  cases,  albeit  that  they
    differed  on  its  lengths  and  other  possible   criteria   for   its
    application. The validity of that assumption is a matter  on  which  we
    will expand upon below.

18. We consider that the best starting point for our analysis of St Prix is
    the conclusion at paragraph 47:
         47      In the light of  all  the  foregoing  considerations,  the
         answer to the questions referred for a preliminary  ruling  by  the
         referring court is that Article 45 TFEU  must  be  interpreted  as
         meaning that a woman who gives up work, or seeking work, because of
         the physical constraints of the late stages of  pregnancy  and  the
         aftermath of childbirth retains the status of 'worker', within  the
         meaning of that article, provided she  returns  to  work  or  finds
         another job within a reasonable  period  after  the  birth  of  her
         child.


19. We observe that after the CJEU handed down its decision, the appeal was
    settled by consent and so did not come before the Supreme Court  again.
    The CJEU had, however, assumed that it would - see paragraph [42]:

        42   In order to determine  whether  the  period  that  has  elapsed
        between childbirth and  starting  work  again  may  be  regarded  as
        reasonable, the national court concerned should take account of  all
        the specific circumstances of the case in the main  proceedings  and
        the applicable national rules on the duration of maternity leave, in
        accordance  with  Article 8  of  Council  Directive  92/85/EEC  of
        19 October 1992  on  the  introduction  of  measures  to  encourage
        improvements in the safety and health at work  of  pregnant  workers
        and workers who have  recently  given  birth  or  are  breastfeeding
        (tenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1)  of
        Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ 1992 L 348, p. 1)

20.  It  is  readily  apparent  on  the  basis  of  this   reasoning   (and
    uncontroversial) that in order to qualify for entry into the  protected
    period identified in St Prix, a woman must (a) either be  a  worker  or
    seeking work; and (b) have ceased work or looking for work  because  of
    the physical constraints of the late stages of pregnancy.

21. We do not consider  that  it  is  necessary  to  undertake  a  detailed
    analysis of the meaning of "worker"  or  "seeking  work".  There  is  a
    substantial body  of  case  law  on  the  subject.   We  summarise  the
    jurisprudence as follows:-

      i) the term 'worker' within article 45 covers, to a greater or  lesser
         extent, not only actual workers but also:

               1) those  entering  a  state  for  the  first  time  to  seek
                  employment  ('first-time' job  seekers')  (see  Antonissen
                  [1997]  ECR  1-441,  AG  and  others  (EEA-jobseeker-self-
                  sufficient person-proof) Germany [2007]  UKAIT  00075  and
                  Begum (EEA - worker  -  jobseeker)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT
                  00275(IAC));

               2) those who have had  a  job  and  are  again  seeking  work
                  ('second-time job seekers'), (see Case 75/63 Hoekstra (nee
                  Unger) [1964] ECR 177, Case 66/85 Lawrie-Blum  [1986]  ECR
                  2121, Bernini v Minister van  Onderwijs  en  Wetenschappen
                  [1992] ECR I-1071, Case C-85/96 Martinez Sala v  Freistaat
                  Bayern [1998] ECR I-2691); ( Shabani  (EEA  -  jobseekers;
                  nursery education) [2013] UKUT 315 (IAC)).

               3) vocational or occupational trainees ( see Lair  v  Hanover
                  University [1988] ECR 3161, [1989] 3  CMLR  545,  Brown  v
                  Secretary of State for Scotland [1988] ECR 3205  [1988]  3
                  CMLR 403);  the involuntarily unemployed  and sick), Lair,
                  Case  C-302/90  Caisse  Auxiliare   d'Assurance   Maladie-
                  Invalidite v Faux [1991] ECR I-4875); (see  FMB  (EEA  reg
                  6(2)(a) - 'temporarily unable to work') Uganda [2010] UKUT
                  447  (IAC));

               4) injured and retired workers (FMB (Uganda) supra); and,

               5) women who, because of the physical constraints of the late
                  stages of pregnancy and the aftermath of childbirth,  give
                  up work or job-seeking, provided they return  to  work  or
                  find another job within  a  reasonable  period  after  the
                  birth of her child (St Prix);

               6) The amount of time given to jobseekers to find work is not
                  fixed although Member States may  require  them  to  leave
                  their territory  after  a  reasonable  period  unless  the
                  person concerned produces evidence:-

                      (a) that he or she is continuing to  seek  employment
                      (Shabani, AG & Others ; and,

                      (b)  has  a  genuine   chance   of   being   employed
                      (Antonissen; EC Commission v  Belgium  Case  C-344/95
                      [1997] 2 CMLR 187).

Period prior to birth

22. It is sensible to analyse first what period of absence from  employment
    or seeking employment prior to the expected date of confinement ("EDC")
    is permissible. It was not submitted that in  any  individual  case,  a
    woman need prove that she gave up work due to the physical  constraints
    of the late stages of childbirth. It was common  ground  that  from  11
    weeks before "EDC a woman cannot be expected to work, that timing being
    fixed, in order, as a matter of policy to protect pregnant women."  The
    period of 11 weeks is established by domestic law  in  order  to   give
    effect to "Council Directive  92/85/EEC  of  19  October  1992  on  the
    introduction of measures to encourage improvements in  the  safety  and
    health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently  given
    birth or are breastfeeding" ("Directive 92/85/EC"). In any event it  is
    not clear that it was part of the remit of the CJEU in St Prix to  give
    guidance as to how  a  pre-childbirth  absence  from  work  was  to  be
    assessed.

23. We do not rule out that  the  physical  constraints  of  pregnancy  may
    require ceasing work or seeking employment  before  11  weeks  if,  for
    example,  it  was  a  multiple  pregnancy  or  there  were   particular
    requirements of the work in question.  That would, however need  to  be
    proved by cogent evidence.

Period post childbirth

24. We next consider how long a period after childbirth is permissible, and
    what other criteria must be satisfied in order for a woman  to  benefit
    from what for ease we refer to as  a "St Prix Extension" or SPE.

25. Ms Smyth for the respondent submits that the  CJEU  simply  interpreted
    "worker" within article 45 TFEU so as to entail that women who give  up
    work, or seeking work, because of the physical constraints of the  late
    stages of pregnancy and the aftermath of childbirth retain  the  status
    of 'worker', within the meaning of that article, provided  they  return
    to work or find another job within a reasonable period after the  birth
    of their child. She submits that the Court did not seek  to  alter  the
    meaning of article 7 (3) of the Citizenship Directive. We do not accept
    that is so; it is clear from [47] of St Prix that the Court refers to a
    woman who has ceased work (or looking for work) as retaining the status
    of a worker following the wording of article 7 (3).

26. This is potentially important as the transition on moving from a SPE to
    Job seeking is thus from one "retained"  status  to  another  "retained
    status", not from worker to a retained status.

27. It follows that, in any event, St Prix establishes  that  a  woman  who
    takes time off retains her status as a worker for a period, subject  to
    certain conditions.  By definition, a period must have a beginning  and
    an end.

28. Ms Smyth submitted that the end point must be when the woman returns to
    work and that returning to work is a condition precedent  to  acquiring
    the benefit of a "St Prix Period". She accepted that it  followed  from
    that  requirement,  that  entitlement  to  the  period  could  only  be
    determined ex post facto.

29. Ms Smyth further submitted that the permissible period could only be 26
    weeks in length; 11 weeks before the expected date  of  birth,  and  15
    weeks thereafter, the relevant period to be taken  into  account  being
    thereby in line with entitlement to Maternity Allowance.

30. Mr Berry submitted that, properly understood, the decision of the  CJEU
    does not  require  a  woman  to  return  to  work  as  a  condition  of
    entitlement to a SPE, nor can  entitlement  be  established  only  post
    facto.  He submitted  that  a  woman  who  returns  to  job-seeking  is
    entitled to benefit from the SPE.

31. Mr Berry submitted that the duration of the SPE is not  limited  to  26
    weeks as submitted by the respondent,  that  being  the  period  during
    which Income Support may be payable, but is 52 weeks,  that  being  the
    period of 26 weeks  Ordinary  Maternity  Leave  ("OML")  and  26  weeks
    Additional Maternity Leave ("AML") permitted pursuant  to  sections  71
    and 73 respectively of the Employment Rights Act 1996.

32. We pause to recall that at [42] in  St  Prix  the  CJEU  held  that  in
    assessing what is reasonable involves a consideration of other  factors
    in addition to the relevant national maternity leave provisions. We are
    not assessing whether any legislative provision is compatible  with  EU
    law; the United Kingdom has not yet amended the EEA Regulations to give
    effect to the decision in St Prix.

33. Ms Smyth submitted that in order to be entitled to an SPE, a woman must
    make a return to  employment  and  it  is  that  which  retrospectively
    regularises her position. The corollary of that latter  proposition  is
    that viewed from a standpoint during the SPE as opposed to after it,  a
    woman does not have the status of a worker.  In St Prix it was  not  in
    doubt  that  the  appellant  had  returned  to  work;  so  too  did  Ms
    Weldemichael, but not Ms Pociute, the wife of Mr Obulor.  The  argument
    in that case is that her status as a worker continued to a point during
    her SPE where she acquired the permanent right of residence.

34. Both of Ms Smyth's propositions require careful analysis  and  we  turn
    first to the issue of whether a  return  to  work  is  a  condition  of
    benefiting from an SPE.

35. We accept as we must that the CJEU does refer to the  SPE  ending  when
    the woman finds a job although they expressly held a woman need only be
    seeking work at the beginning of the period.  We  recall  the  specific
    facts of St Prix where it was not in  question  that  Ms  St  Prix  had
    returned to work shortly after the birth of her child.  The  Court  was
    considering whether her continuity of residence had  been  broken.  The
    specific questions put to the CJEU were  answered  in  the  context  of
    whether or not a woman who had ceased employment (or  actively  seeking
    employment) due to the physical problems arising from the  late  stages
    of pregnancy and the aftermath of childbirth, could  be  seen  to  have
    left the employment market. The Court was not asked  to  consider  what
    her status had been when assessed at any particular  point  during  her
    absence from work - that is a matter to which we turn later.

36. The CJEU clearly envisaged (see paragraph [42]) that there would be  an
    extensive, fact sensitive evaluation of whether a woman  has  left  the
    employment market. Viewed in this context, a return to  work  within  a
    reasonable period is a fact establishing that  she  has  not  left  the
    employment market.

37. The CJEU held at [41] and [42]:

        41      The fact  that  she  was  not  actually  available  on  the
        employment market of the host Member State for a few months does not
        mean that she has ceased  to  belong  to  that  market  during  that
        period, provided she returns to work or finds another job  within  a
        reasonable period after confinement (see, by  analogy, Orfanopoulos
        and Oliveri, C-482/01 and C-493/01, EU:C:2004:262, paragraph 50)

        42   In order to determine  whether  the  period  that  has  elapsed
        between childbirth and  starting  work  again  may  be  regarded  as
        reasonable, the national court concerned should take account of  all
        the specific circumstances of the case in the main  proceedings  and
        the applicable national rules on the duration of maternity leave, in
        accordance  with  Article 8  of  Council  Directive  92/85/EEC  of
        19 October 1992  on  the  introduction  of  measures  to  encourage
        improvements in the safety and health at work  of  pregnant  workers
        and workers who have  recently  given  birth  or  are  breastfeeding
        (tenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1)  of
        Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ 1992 L 348, p. 1)

38. In Orfanopoulos & Oliveri [2004] EUECJ C-481/01 as cited by the CJEU in
    St Prix [41], the CJEU stated at [50]:

        Moreover,  in  respect  more  particularly  of  prisoners  who  were
        employed  before  their  imprisonment,  the  fact  that  the  person
        concerned was not available on the  employment  market  during  such
        imprisonment does not mean, as a  general  rule,  that  he  did  not
        continue to be duly registered as belonging to the labour  force  of
        the host Member State during that period, provided that he  actually
        finds another job within a reasonable time after his  release  (see,
        to that effect, Case C-340/97 Nazli [2000] ECR I-957, paragraph 40).

39. This judgment predates the Citizenship Directive, but the fact that  it
    is cited is illustrative of  the  CJEU's  approach  in  St  Prix  which
    proceeds from the primacy of article 45  (Ex  article  39).  The  Court
    appears to take the view that the protections set out in article 7  (3)
    are an articulation or distillation of the jurisprudence of  the  court
    on what is required to give effect to the right  of  free  movement  of
    workers. It is to be noted also that recital (9) is indicative that the
    Directive is not a complete codification.  It would thus  appear,  that
    they did not consider that the list within article 7 (3) is exhaustive.
    That analysis is, we consider, consistent with what the Court  observed
    at [31]-[33]:
        31      However, it does not follow from either Article 7 of
        Directive 2004/38, considered as a whole, or from the other
        provisions of that directive, that, in such circumstances, a
        citizen of the Union who does not fulfil the conditions laid down
        in that article is, therefore, systematically deprived of the
        status of 'worker', within the meaning of Article 45 TFEU.
        32      The codification, sought by the directive, of the
        instruments of EU law existing prior to that directive, which
        expressly seeks to facilitate the exercise of the rights of Union
        citizens to move and reside freely within the territory of the
        Member States, cannot, by itself, limit the scope of the concept of
        worker within the meaning of the FEU Treaty.
        33      In that regard, it must be noted that, according to the
        settled case-law of the Court, the concept of 'worker', within the
        meaning of Article 45 TFEU, in so far as it defines the scope of a
        fundamental freedom provided for by the FEU Treaty, must be
        interpreted broadly (see, to that effect, N., C-46/12, EU:
        C:2013:97, paragraph 39 and the case-law cited).

40. We consider that the language used by the CJEU in St  Prix  echoes  the
    manner in which it has enunciated principles relating to jobseekers  in
    Antonissen at [21]:

         21. In the absence of a Community provision prescribing the periods
         during which Community nationals seeking  employment  in  a  Member
         State may stay there, a period of six months, such as that is  laid
         down in the national legislation at issue in the main  proceedings,
         does not appear in principle  to  be  insufficient  to  enable  the
         persons concerned to apprise themselves, in the host Member  State,
         of  offers  of  employment  corresponding  to  their   occupational
         qualifications and take, where appropriate, the necessary steps  in
         order to  be  engaged  and,  therefore,  does  not  jeopardise  the
         effectiveness of the principles of free movement. However, if after
         the expiry of that period of the person concerned provides evidence
         that he is continuing to seek employment and that he has a  genuine
         chances of being engaged,  he  cannot  be  required  to  leave  the
         territory of the Member State.

41. It is apparent from this that the underlying issue  identified  by  the
    CJEU was whether a woman has left the employment market, an issue which
    would appear primarily to be evidential. They considered  that  if  she
    has not, then her continuity of status as a worker has not been broken.
    The questions that the CJEU  considers  the  national  court  concerned
    should consider [42] must be viewed in that context. The exercise to be
    undertaken is thus, as the court  considered,  an  evaluative  process,
    albeit  one  which  is  relatively  closely  circumscribed  given   the
    reference to "physical constraints of the late  stages  of  pregnancy",
    the "aftermath of childbirth" and the proviso of a return to  work.  It
    is a narrower exercise than assessing job-seeking although there is, we
    consider, no reason in principle why  the  approach  in  assessing  the
    reasonableness of an SPE should not be analogous to or analysed in  the
    same way in which job-seeking is assessed; finding a job is  indicative
    that prior to that point, an individual  seeking  work  had  a  genuine
    chance of being engaged but it is not determinative.

42. That observation is subject to this important caveat:  given  that  the
    purpose of the maternity leave  period  is  to  provide  protection  to
    women, it is difficult (absent evidence of a  clear  intention  of  the
    part of the woman not return to work) to  envisage  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect a woman to have returned to work before the end of
    the relevant maternity leave.

    Length of SPE period

43. We consider next the length of the SPE period. The principle difference
    between the parties over whether the total length should be  26  weeks,
    in line with social security provision, as submitted by the respondent,
    or 52 weeks on analogy with the length of maternity leave a  worker  is
    permitted to take by statute, as submitted by the  appellants  and  the
    intervener.

44. While we bear in mind Ms Smyth's submissions on the differences between
    OML and AML,  we consider that as a woman is  entitled  (absent  a  few
    minor exceptions) to return to the same employer after  either  OML  or
    AML, the difference being that she can return to  the  same  particular
    job after the former, that there is no difference in substance in their
    provisions  for  the  assessment  of  a  continuity  of  an  employment
    relationship, the substance of which  remains  unchanged  although  its
    precise terms may vary.

45. We note from the material  provided  to  us  that  maternity  provision
    varies widely across the EU; in most cases  it  is  substantially  less
    than the 52 weeks allowed in the United  Kingdom  although  the  period
    before birth shows less variance. We are aware that it  can  be  argued
    that such a wide divergence post-birth will mean that the SPE will vary
    substantially across the EU but that is nothing new; that  variance  in
    the protection of women who have recently given birth already exists.

46. Ms Smyth relies in part on the opinion of Advocate-General Wahl  in  St
    Prix in particular from paragraph 37 onwards, in support  of  the  view
    that the SPE should be limited to those periods where a woman cannot be
    compelled to look for work. It is, however, evident that the Court  did
    not used the language of compulsion in formulating its test, preferring
    to emphasis the law on maternity leave rather than the relevant  social
    security legislation referred to by the Advocate-General.  We  consider
    that to be a conscious preference.

47. We would observe also, as Mr Berry submitted, that it is evident that a
    lone parent is not compelled to return to seeking employment  in  order
    to qualify for benefits, for a substantial period  after  the  26  week
    period in which maternity allowance is paid.

48. It is submitted by Ms Smyth that the OML or  the  period  of  26  weeks
    permitted under social security legislation  is  sufficient  to  comply
    with Directive 92/85/EC, and to protect women who are in the  aftermath
    of childbirth. She did not, however, direct us to any  relevant  policy
    or statement to that effect, and  if  correct  it  would,  in  all  the
    circumstances, be difficult to understand the purpose of AML. We  note,
    however, that the phrase "aftermath of childbirth" appears to  cover  a
    wider  set  of  circumstances  than  "the   physical   constraints   of
    pregnancy"; the latter in the  use  of  "physical"  would,  apparently,
    exclude psychological problems.

49.  Subject  to  that  general  observation,  we  consider  that  what  is
    "reasonable"  requires  an  individual  consideration  of   a   woman's
    circumstances, taking into account additional factors which may  render
    a longer period between the date of birth and the commencement of  work
    reasonable. The CJEU did not indicate that  any  of  the  factors  they
    identified should be determinative,  or  of  necessarily  holding  more
    weight. That said, the protection of  women  workers  is  a  thread  of
    concern running through the decision  of  the  CJEU,  and  it  is  thus
    difficult to hold that any reasonable period could be  less  than  that
    laid down by domestic law in conformity with Directive 92/85/EC.

50. We do note, in reaching this conclusion, that Mr Berry  submitted  that
    there is no bright line identified by the  CJEU.  While  we  have  some
    sympathy with that submission, we consider that the scope for  variance
    in assessing what is reasonable is  constrained  significantly  by  the
    reference to Directive  92/85/EC  and  the  consequent  minimum  length
    thereby indicated. There is also the express reference to finding work.

51. We consider that it must not be forgotten that  although  pregnancy  is
    not an illness, illness during pregnancy or afterwards which prevents a
    woman from working, or job-seeking, may engage regulation 6 (2) of  the
    EEA Regulations in any event.

    Status during the SPE

52. The CJEU did not directly address the issue of a woman's status  during
    the SPE. As noted above, the respondent submits that a return  to  work
    is a condition necessary to establishing  an  SPE,  the  continuity  of
    status as a worker is granted only retrospectively.

53.  That  proposition  does  not  raise  significant  problems  when   the
    evaluation of whether an  SPE  has  been  established  is  carried  out
    retrospectively once there has been a return to work, but it does raise
    a significant difficulty when the evaluation has to be carried out at a
    date within an SPE. That is because, if status  as  a  worker  is  only
    reinstated retrospectively at the end of the SPE when a woman  restarts
    employment, it cannot be ascertained at any point prior to that  event,
    that a woman is entitled to the SPE.  She  could  not  thus,  during  a
    period of several months, know whether she was here  lawfully  or  not,
    thus placing her in precisely the sort of precarious circumstances  the
    CJEU sought to prevent by their ruling  - see paragraph [44]:

         44.  As the Commission contends, a Union citizen would be  deterred
         from exercising her right to freedom of movement if, in  the  event
         that she was pregnant in the host State  and  gave  up  work  as  a
         result, if only for a short period, she risked losing her status as
         a worker in that State.

54. If anything her situation would be even less certain as  would  be  the
    position of her family.  It could not  be  known  whether  any  non-EEA
    members were here lawfully because their position may be  dependent  on
    the EEA national woman. The uncertainty that would flow  from  adopting
    the respondent's position would, we consider,  undermine  significantly
    the  effect  of  the  decision  of  the  CJEU  and  would  introduce  a
    substantial degree of legal  uncertainty.  Further,  a  woman  who  had
    arranged to take up employment again but was prevented from doing so on
    account of, for example, serious illness of a child or spouse, would on
    the respondent's analysis be deprived of the period up to  that  event,
    even if she (and her family) might, by then have accrued 5 years lawful
    residence  under  the  EEA  Regulations  and  thus  acquired  permanent
    residence, a status which cannot, under  the  EEA  Regulations  or  the
    Citizenship Directive be lost except through two year's absence  or  an
    expulsion decision.

55. The proposition does not, we consider,  derive  any  support  from  the
    decision of the CJEU; on the contrary. As well as what the Court  noted
    at [44] and [45], they observed [33] that the concept of worker  is  to
    be interpreted widely and while the return to work is emphasised, it is
    in the context of an analogy with Orfanopoulos & Oliveri  as  discussed
    above. Further it would follow from Ms Smyth's proposition that a woman
    would cease to have the status of a worker the minute she stopped  work
    which is inconsistent with the approach of the court  as  expressed  at
    [41].

56. Drawing these strands together, we consider that if an evaluation of  a
    woman's status is to be carried out at a point during a potential  SPE,
    so long as it is shown that she ceased work or looking for  work  owing
    to the physical constraints of the late stage of pregnancy, in  effect,
    11 weeks or less before the EDC, then there is a presumption  that  she
    has not left the employment market. That presumption could be  rebutted
    by clear evidence of an intention not to return. If there is no  return
    to work within the year starting 11 weeks before EDC, that is likely to
    be an indication that there had been no intention  to  return  although
    account would need to be taken to evaluate attempts  to  find  work  in
    that period. Further, a woman may well have intended to return to work,
    but due to a supervening event such as serious illness or an  accident,
    have been unable to do so. While it may well be that she has  left  the
    employment market as a result, it does not mean that she  did  so,  and
    her continuity of residence ceased at the moment  she  ceased  work  or
    looking for work; her intentions may have changed much  later,  and  in
    such circumstances, a careful fact-sensitive analysis is required.

57. Ms Smyth submitted that only  time  accrued  under  article  7  of  the
    Citizenship Directive could be counted when assessing whether permanent
    residence has been acquired and that thus  time  spent  during  an  SPE
    could not be taken into account.

58. We do not consider that time spent by a woman during a SPE  period  can
    be discounted in assessing continuity of residence. We note that  there
    is no indication that other, temporary absences from work as identified
    in regulations 6 to 7 (and indeed by article 7) interrupt continuity of
    working; such a restriction could only apply to women and would thus be
    inherently discriminatory.  Further,  it  presupposes  that  article  7
    contains a closed list which at [31]-[33] of the judgment of the  Court
    in St Prix indicates it is not.

59. Drawing these conclusions together, we consider that the  questions  we
    posed at the outset can be answered as follows:-

    A woman will retain continuity of residence for  the  purposes  of  the
    2006 EEA Regulations for a period in which she was absent from  working
    or job-seeking if, in line with the decision of the CJEU  in  Jessy  St
    Prix:

      a) at the beginning of the relevant period she was either a worker  or
         seeking employment;

      b) the relevant period commenced no more  than  11  weeks  before  the
         expected  date  of  confinement  (absent  cogent  evidence  to  the
         contrary that the woman was physically constrained from working  or
         seeking work);

      c) the relevant period did not extend beyond 52 weeks; and,

      d) she returned to work,

    The individual appeals

60. We now turn to applying our  conclusions to the facts of the appeals

    Ms Weldemichael

61. Ms Umoh-Abudu submitted that Ms  Weldemichael  had  demonstrated  that,
    through a combination of periods spent as a worker,  as  a  job-seeker,
    and when in receipt of maternity benefit, she had resided in the United
    Kingdom  lawfully  in  accordance  with  the  EEA  Regulations  for   a
    continuous period in excess of 5 years  and  was  thus  entitled  to  a
    residence card as confirmation of this.  It was submitted the maternity
    period did not interrupt her continuity of residence as her entitlement
    to draw on the benefit is based on her  eligibility  for  that  due  to
    being a worker.

62. It is further submitted that, despite being in receipt of benefits,  Ms
    Weldemichael had not been  an  unreasonable  burden  on  public  funds,
    relying on Teixeira v Lambeth [2010] EUECJ C-480/08  as  she  had  been
    legitimately  entitled  to  the  allowances,  maternity  allowance  not
    falling within the definition of "public funds".

63. Ms Umoh-Abudu further submitted that it is inconsistent for the  United
    Kingdom to conclude that the appellant is entitled to social assistance
    as a job-seeker which requires  her  to  show  that  she  is  genuinely
    seeking and is available for work, yet to deny her rights under the EEA
    Regulations for doing so.

64. We are not persuaded that the payment of benefits  to  Ms  Weldemichael
    which, as here, are paid partly on the basis of prior contributions  is
    of assistance in determining whether, as a matter of EU  law,  she  was
    lawfully resident.

65. On the facts of Ms Weldemichael's case, as set out above, she  did  not
    return to work until well over a year after the birth of a child.  Even
    assuming that the relevant maternity period is 12 months (including the
    11 weeks before EDC), we are not satisfied that this could be seen as a
    reasonable period. Assuming the start of an SPE to be 11  weeks  before
    20 November 2009, then the appellant would  require  an  SPE  nearly  2
    years to be accepted in order to show a continuity of residence.  While
    we note the submissions made on her behalf, we are not  persuaded  that
    there are reasons of substance sufficient  to  explain  why  such  long
    period before returning to work should be accepted.

66. It follows from the above that Ms Weldemichael's  appeal  was  properly
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law.

    Mr Obulor

67. Mr Obulor's case is that his wife, Ms Jociute, was, for the purposes of
    the Citizenship Directive[2], lawfully resident as a  worker  from  her
    arrival here on 5 May 2004 until 21 November  2008.   When  the  appeal
    came before the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Broe having  summarised  the
    evidence  at  [9]  to  [13]  noted  the  following  concession  by  the
    respondent:


         14.  For the Respondent, Mr Pennington-Benton said that  there  was
         no dispute that the Appellant's wife  had  been  exercising  treaty
         rights in this country from 2004 to 2008. She had not however  been
         doing so thereafter.

68. Judge Broe found:


         17. There is little if any dispute as to the factual background  to
         this matter. The Appellant is... married to a  Lithuanian  citizen.
         She came to this country on 5 May 2004 and the  Respondent  accepts
         she was exercising treaty rights in this country until she left her
         job on 21 November 2008. She left work because  she  was  pregnant.
         She had not worked since then...

69. The respondent now submits on the basis of  evidence  submitted  by  Mr
    Obulor in response to directions that  the concession had been made  in
    error and seeks to withdraw  it,  it  being  noted  that  the  material
    supplied to the First-tier Tribunal and  subsequent  evidence  obtained
    from the Department for Work and Pensions demonstrates that:


        a. there is no documentary evidence to show that Ms Jociute  earned
           any income in the Tax Year ending 5 April 2006;
        b. Ms Jociute  received  Maternity  Allowance  from  June  2005  to
           December  2005  and  Income  Support  from  January  2006  until
           February 2007; and,
        c. Ms Jociute received Income  Support  from  November  2007  until
           April 2014.

70.  As Ms Smyth accepted, whether we should permit the withdrawal  of  the
    concession is a matter for our discretion.

71. In considering whether we should exercise our discretion, we note as  a
    preliminary point that there has yet to be a determination  of  whether
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law. That is a matter which we consider must be determined first.  A
    withdrawal of the factual concession is, in effect,  a  request  for  a
    reopening  of  the  fact-finding  exercise;  that  is   generally   not
    permissible absent a finding that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    can be set aside on the basis of an error. We  accept,  following  E  v
    SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ  49, R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982  and  Ladd  v
    Marshall[1954] EWCA Civ 1 that an error of fact can be an error of law,
    but the prerequisites for such a finding are not present  here.   While
    we do not rule out the possibility that the Upper Tribunal may permit a
    concession to be withdrawn at the stage of deciding whether there is  a
    material error of law, it  is  difficult  to  see  how  that  could  be
    permitted,  except  possibly  on  an  analogy  with  Ladd  v   Marshall
    principles.

72. We find that whilst the First-tier Tribunal did err in law  in  finding
    that ceasing work due to pregnancy  did  interrupt  the  continuity  of
    residence, given the decision  in  St  Prix  but  that  error  made  no
    material difference because, for the reasons we develop below,  on  the
    facts as found by Judge Broe, Mr Obulor would not  have  been  able  to
    show that his wife had exercised Treaty Rights for a continuous  period
    of five years.

73. That said, even assuming that Ms Jociute  had  been  exercising  Treaty
    Rights until 2008, she ceased working well before her second child  was
    born in April 2009. While we accept that any SPE  starts  at  11  weeks
    before EDC, in this case Ms Jociute stopped work on 21  November  2008,
    over 20 weeks before the child was born. It is said that this  was  due
    to illness in the early to middle stages  of  pregnancy,  and  while  a
    letter from her doctor to that effect has been  produced,  it  was  not
    before the First-tier Tribunal. In any event,  it  is  lacking  in  any
    relevant detail. It does not give  the  dates  between  which  she  was
    unable to work, nor any proper indication of why that was so.

74. In the circumstances, we are not persuaded that on the evidence  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  there  was  any  rational  basis   for
    concluding that the period Ms Jociute spent without employment  between
    21 November 2008 and the date 11 weeks before the birth of  her  second
    child was due to illness. We find that this period  falls  outside  the
    scope of the  ruling  in  St  Prix.  Further,  there  was  insufficient
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to show that in that period she
    was otherwise entitled to be  treated  as  a  worker,  given  that  the
    evidence indicated that she had given up work  voluntarily.  There  was
    insufficient evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to show  that  she
    was not entitled to be treated as a worker by the provisions of article
    7 of the Citizenship Directive or that she was seeking  work.  She  did
    not therefore meet the qualifying criteria  at  the  beginning  of  the
    period commencing 11 weeks period ending with the EDC  and  thus  could
    not benefit from an SPE.

75. As it is not in dispute that Ms Jociute had not returned to work,  even
    on the basis of the concession made, her continuity of lawful residence
    ceased in November 2008, and she was  not  able  to  benefit  from  the
    decision in St Prix. Even if she were, there is still a substantial gap
    between her seeking work in November 2008  and  the  beginning  of  any
    applicable SPE. She ceased working almost 9 weeks before the  date  (11
    weeks before the EDC) from which she would  be  entitled  to  maternity
    leave. Such a substantial extension to the period falls clearly outside
    what could be considered reasonable in the terms of the decision of the
    CJEU in St Prix.

76. The appellant has, as we  noted  above,  sought  to  adduce  additional
    material which was not before the First-tier Tribunal. On  that  basis,
    it is not admissible on that ground alone. In addition to evidence of a
    third child born in 2014, we note also that much of it  relates  to  Ms
    Jociute's studies at Greenwich College from 2013  onwards.  That  could
    not assist in showing a  continuity  of  residence  in  2008  to  2009.
    Further the  evidence  of  her  studies  is  not,  absent  evidence  of
    comprehensive sickness insurance, evidence of  her  being  a  Qualified
    Person; the evidence shows cover only from 2014.

77. For these reasons, whilst we consider as  explained  above  that  Judge
    Broe misdirected himself in law as to whether Ms Jociute  ceasing  work
    due to pregnancy broke the continuity of lawful residence here, it  was
    not capable of affecting the outcome  of  the  appeal  and  so  is  not
    material. The decision must therefore stand.

78. As no material error of law was found, it would not be apt to  exercise
    our discretion to permit the respondent to withdraw the concession.  As
    there is no further possibility of making further findings of  fact  it
    would be unfair to the appellant who would be unable to adduce  further
    evidence.

79. Accordingly, for these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error of law and we uphold it.

    SUMMARY OF DECISIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in dismissing Ms Weldemichael's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of law and we uphold it.

 2. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  dismissing  Mr  Obulor's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of law and we uphold it.






Signed                                  Date:  14 September 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                                  Appendix

                    JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
                              19 June 2014 (*)
      (Reference for a preliminary ruling - Article 45 TFEU - Directive
 2004/38/EC - Article 7 - 'Worker' - Union citizen who gave up work because
     of the physical constraints of the late stages of pregnancy and the
                          aftermath of childbirth)
In Case C-507/12,
REQUEST for a preliminary ruling under Article 267 TFEU  from  the  Supreme
Court of the United Kingdom, made by decision of 31 October 2012,  received
at the Court on 8 November 2012, in the proceedings
Jessy Saint Prix
v
Secretary of State for Work and Pensions,
intervening party:
AIRE Centre,
                         THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano (Rapporteur), President  of  the  Chamber,  A. Borg
Barthet, E. Levits, M. Berger and S. Rodin, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Wahl,
Registrar: M.-A. Gaudissart, Head of Unit,
having regard to the  written  procedure  and  further  to  the  hearing  on
14 November 2013,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
-        Ms Saint Prix,  by  R. Drabble  QC,  instructed  by  M. Spencer,
Solicitor,
-        AIRE Centre, by J. Stratford  QC,  and  M. Moriarty,  Barrister,
instructed by D. Das, Solicitor,
-        the United Kingdom Government, by V. Kaye and A. Robinson, acting
as Agents, assisted by B. Kennely and J. Coppel, Barristers,
-        the Polish Government, by B. Majczyna and M. Szpunar, acting  as
Agents,
-        the European Commission, by C. Tufvesson, and by J. Enegren  and
M. Wilderspin, acting as Agents,
-        the EFTA Surveillance Authority, by X. Lewis, and by M. Moustakali
and C. Howdle, acting as Agents,
after hearing the  Opinion  of  the  Advocate  General  at  the  sitting  on
12 December 2013,
gives the following
Judgment
1        This request for a preliminary ruling concerns the  interpretation
of 'worker' for the purposes of Article 45 TFEU and Article 7 of Directive
2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of  29 April  2004
on the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to  move  and
reside freely within the territory of the Member States amending  Regulation
(EEC)  No 1612/68  and  repealing   Directives   64/221/EEC,   68/360/EEC,
72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC,  75/35/EEC,  90/364/EEC,  90/365/EEC  and
93/96/EEC (OJ 2004 L 158, p. 77, and corrigenda OJ 2004 L 229, p. 35, and
OJ 2005 L 197, p. 34).
2        The request has been made in the context  of  proceedings  between
Ms Saint Prix and the Secretary  of  State  for  Work  and  Pensions  ('the
Secretary of  State')  concerning  the  latter's  refusal  to  grant  income
support to Ms Saint Prix.
 Legal context
 EU law
3        Recitals 2 to 4 and 31 in the preamble to Directive  2004/38  read
as follows:
'(2)      The free movement of persons constitutes one of  the  fundamental
freedoms of the internal market, which comprises an  area  without  internal
frontiers, in which freedom is ensured in accordance with the provisions  of
the [EC] Treaty.
(3)      Union citizenship should be the fundamental status of nationals of
the Member States when they  exercise  their  right  of  free  movement  and
residence. It is therefore necessary  to  codify  and  review  the  existing
Community  instruments  dealing  separately  with   workers,   self-employed
persons, as well  as  students  and  other  inactive  persons  in  order  to
simplify and strengthen the right of free  movement  and  residence  of  all
Union citizens.
(4)      With a view to remedying this sector-by-sector, piecemeal approach
to the right of free movement and residence and  facilitating  the  exercise
of this right, there needs to be a single legislative act to  amend  Council
Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 of 15 October 1968 on freedom of movement  for
workers within the Community  [(OJ  English  Special  Edition  1968(II),  p.
475), as amended by Regulation (EEC) No 2434/92 of 27 July 1992  (OJ  1992
L 245, p. 1)],  and  to  repeal  the  following  acts:  Council  Directive
68/360/EEC of 15 October 1968 on the abolition of restrictions on  movement
and residence within the Community for workers of Member  States  and  their
families [(OJ Engish Special Edition 1968(II), p. 485)], Council  Directive
73/148/EEC of 21 May 1973 on the abolition of restrictions on movement  and
residence within the Community for nationals of Member  States  with  regard
to establishment and the provision of services [(OJ 1973  L 172,  p. 14)],
Council Directive 90/364/EEC of 28 June 1990 on the right of residence [(OJ
1990 L 180, p. 26)], Council Directive 90/365/EEC of 28 June 1990 on  the
right of residence for employees and self-employed persons who  have  ceased
their occupational activity [(OJ 1990 L 180, p. 28)] and Council Directive
93/96/EEC of 29 October 1993 on the right of residence  for  students  [(OJ
1993 L 317, p. 59)].
...
(31)      This Directive respects the fundamental rights and  freedoms  and
observes  the  principles  recognised  in  particular  by  the  Charter   of
Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union.  In   accordance   with   the
prohibition of  discrimination  contained  in  the  Charter,  Member  States
should  implement  this  Directive  without   discrimination   between   the
beneficiaries of this Directive  on  grounds  such  as  sex,  race,  colour,
ethnic or social origin,  genetic  characteristics,  language,  religion  or
beliefs, political or other  opinion,  membership  of  an  ethnic  minority,
property, birth, disability, age or sexual orientation'.
4        Article 1(a) of Directive 2004/38 states:
'This Directive lays down:
(a)      the conditions  governing  the  exercise  of  the  right  of  free
movement and residence within the territory of the Member  States  by  Union
citizens and their family members'.
5        Article 7 of that directive, entitled 'Right of residence for more
than three months', provides in paragraphs 1 and 3:
'1.      All Union citizens shall  have  the  right  of  residence  on  the
territory of another Member State for a period of longer than  three  months
if they:
(a)      are workers or self-employed persons in the host Member State ...
...
3.       For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), a  Union  citizen  who  is  no
longer a worker or self-employed person shall retain the  status  of  worker
or self-employed person in the following circumstances:
(a)      he/she is temporarily unable to work as the result of  an  illness
or accident;
(b)      he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment  after  having
been employed for more than one year and  has  registered  as  a  job-seeker
with the relevant employment office;
(c)      he/she  is  in  duly  recorded  involuntary  unemployment   after
completing a fixed-term employment contract of less than  a  year  or  after
having become involuntarily unemployed during the first 12  months  and  has
registered as a job-seeker with the  relevant  employment  office.  In  this
case, the status of worker shall be retained for no less than six months;
(d)      he/she  embarks  on  vocational  training.   Unless   he/she   is
involuntarily unemployed, the  retention  of  the  status  of  worker  shall
require the training to be related to the previous employment.'
6        Article 16(1) and (3) of the same directive provides:
'1.      Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period of
five years in the host Member  State  shall  have  the  right  of  permanent
residence there. ...
...
3.      Continuity of residence shall not be affected by temporary absences
not exceeding a total of six months a year,  or  by  absences  of  a  longer
duration for compulsory military service, or by one absence of a maximum  of
12  consecutive  months  for  important  reasons  such  as   pregnancy   and
childbirth, serious illness, study or vocational training, or a  posting  in
another Member State or a third country.'
 United Kingdom law
7        The  legislation  which  governs  income  support  is  the  Social
Security  Contributions  and  Benefits  Act  1992  and  the  Income  Support
(General) Regulations 1987.
8        Income support  is  a  means-tested  benefit  granted  to  various
categories of persons which include, by virtue of regulation  4ZA  of  those
Regulations, in conjunction with paragraph 14(b) of  Schedule  IB  thereto,
women who are or have 'been pregnant but only for the period  commencing  11
weeks before [their] expected week of confinement and ending 15 weeks  after
the date on which [their] pregnancy ends'.
9        The granting of income support requires, inter alia, according  to
section 124(l)(b) of the Social  Security  Contributions  and  Benefits  Act
1992, that the income of the beneficiary should not  exceed  the  prescribed
'applicable amount'. Where that amount is 'nil', no benefit is granted.
10      Under paragraph 17 of Schedule 7 to the Income  Support  (General)
Regulations 1987, the  applicable  amount  prescribed  for  a  'person  from
abroad' is 'nil'.
11      Regulation 21AA(1) of those  regulations  defines  a  'person  from
abroad' as being 'a claimant who is not habitually resident  in  the  United
Kingdom ...'.
12      According  to  regulation  21AA(2)  of  those  regulations,  to  be
considered as habitually resident in the United Kingdom, the income  support
claimant must have a 'right to reside' in that Member State.
13      According to regulation 21AA(4) of those regulations:
'A claimant is not a person from abroad if he is -
(a)      a worker for the purposes of [Directive 2004/38];
(b)      a self-employed person for the purposes of that Directive;
(c)      a person who retains a status referred to in sub-paragraph (a)  or
(b) pursuant to Article 7(3) of that Directive;
(d)      a person who is a family member of a person referred  to  in  sub-
paragraph (a),  (b)  or  (c)  within  the  meaning  of  Article 2  of  that
Directive;
(e)      a person who has a right  to  reside  permanently  in  the  United
Kingdom by virtue of Article 17 of that Directive.'
 The dispute in the main proceedings  and  the  questions  referred  for  a
preliminary ruling
14      Ms Saint Prix is a French national who entered the United  Kingdom
on 10 July 2006 where she worked, mainly  as  a  teaching  assistant,  from
1 September 2006 until 1 August 2007. She then enrolled on a Post-Graduate
Certificate in Education course at the University of London,  the  envisaged
period of study being from 17 September 2007 until 27 June 2008.
15      During that period she became pregnant, with an  expected  date  of
confinement of 2 June 2008.
16      On 22 January 2008, hoping to  find  work  in  secondary  schools,
Ms Saint Prix registered with an employment agency and, on 1 February 2008,
she withdrew from the course that she had been attending at  the  University
of London. As no secondary  school  work  was  available,  she  took  agency
positions working in nursery schools. On 12 March 2008, when she was nearly
six months pregnant, Ms Saint Prix  stopped  that  work,  however,  on  the
grounds that the demands of caring for nursery school  children  had  become
too strenuous for her. She looked for a few days, without success, for  work
that was more suited to her pregnancy.
17      On 18 March 2008, that is, 11 weeks before her  expected  date  of
confinement, Ms Saint Prix made a claim for income support. As  that  claim
was refused by the Secretary of  State  by  decision  of  4 May  2008,  she
brought an appeal before the First Tier Tribunal.
18      On 21 August 2008, namely three months after the premature birth of
her child, Ms Saint Prix resumed work.
19      By decision of 4 September 2008, the First Tier Tribunal upheld her
appeal. However, on 7 May  2010,  the  Upper  Tribunal  upheld  the  appeal
brought by the Secretary of  State  against  that  decision.  The  Court  of
Appeal confirmed the decision of the Upper Tribunal and Ms Saint Prix  then
brought the matter before the referring court.
20      That court asks whether a pregnant woman who temporarily  gives  up
work because of her pregnancy  is  to  be  considered  a  'worker'  for  the
purposes of the freedom of movement for workers as laid down in  Article 45
TFEU and of the right of residence  conferred  by  Article 7  of  Directive
2004/38.
21      In that regard, the referring court states that neither Article 45
TFEU nor Article 7 of that directive defines 'worker'.
22      The referring court thus considers, in essence, that whereas,  when
adopting that directive, the EU legislature intended to codify the  existing
legislation and case-law, it nevertheless did not intend to exclude  further
development of the concept of 'worker' that takes  into  account  situations
not expressly considered when it was  adopted.  The  Court  may,  therefore,
taking into account  special  circumstances  such  as  those  characterising
pregnancy and the immediate aftermath of childbirth, decide to  extend  this
concept to pregnant women who give up work for a reasonable period.
23      In those circumstances  the  Supreme  Court  decided  to  stay  the
proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court:
'1.      Is the right of residence conferred upon a "worker" in  Article 7
of [Directive 2004/38] to be interpreted as applying only to  those  (i)  in
an existing employment relationship, (ii) (at least in  some  circumstances)
seeking work, or (iii) covered by the extensions in Article 7(3)  [of  that
directive], or is [Article 7 of that directive] to be  interpreted  as  not
precluding the recognition of further persons who remain "workers" for  this
purpose?
2.      (a)   If the latter, does it extend to a woman who reasonably gives
up work, or seeking work, because of the physical constraints  of  the  late
stages of pregnancy (and the aftermath of childbirth)?
(b)      If so, is she entitled  to  the  benefit  of  the  national  law's
definition of when it is reasonable for her to do so?'
 Consideration of the questions referred
24      By its questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the
referring court  asks,  in  essence,  whether  EU  law,  and  in  particular
Article 45 TFEU and Article 7 of Directive 2004/38, are to be  interpreted
as meaning that a woman who gives up work, or seeking work, because  of  the
physical constraints of the late stages of pregnancy and  the  aftermath  of
childbirth, retains the status of  'worker'  within  the  meaning  of  those
articles.
25      In order to answer those questions, it  should  be  stated  at  the
outset that it is apparent from recitals 3 and 4 in  the  preamble  to  that
directive that the aim of the directive is to  remedy  the  sector-by-sector
piecemeal approach to the primary and individual right of Union citizens  to
move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States,  in  order
to facilitate the exercise of that right by providing a  single  legislative
act codifying and revising the instruments of EU  law  which  preceded  that
directive (see, to that  effect,  Ziolkowski  and  Szeja,  C-424/10  and  C-
425/10, EU:C:2011:866, paragraph 37).
26      In that regard, it is  apparent  from  Article 1(a)  of  Directive
2004/38 that that directive is intended to set out the conditions  governing
the exercise of that right, which include, where residence is desired for  a
period of longer than three months, in particular the  condition  laid  down
in Article 7(1)(a) of that directive that Union citizens must be workers or
self-employed persons in the host Member State (see, to that  effect,  Brey,
C-140/12, EU:C:2013:565, paragraph 53 and the case-law cited).
27      Article 7(3) of Directive 2004/38 provides that, for the  purposes
of paragraph 7(1)(a) of that directive, a Union citizen who is no longer  a
worker or self-employed person  shall  nevertheless  retain  the  status  of
worker or self-employed  person  in  specific  cases,  namely  where  he  is
temporarily unable to work as the result of an illness or  accident,  where,
in certain situations, he is in involuntary unemployment,  or  where,  under
specified conditions, he embarks on vocational training.
28      However, Article 7(3) of  Directive  2004/38  does  not  expressly
envisage the case of a woman who is in a  particular  situation  because  of
the physical constraints of  the  late  stages  of  her  pregnancy  and  the
aftermath of childbirth.
29      In that regard, the Court has consistently held that pregnancy must
be clearly distinguished from illness, in that pregnancy is not in  any  way
comparable with a pathological condition (see to that  effect,  inter  alia,
Webb, C-32/93, EU:C:1994:300, paragraph 25 and the case-law cited).
30      It follows that a woman in the situation  of  Ms Saint  Prix,  who
temporarily gives up work because of the late stages of  her  pregnancy  and
the aftermath of childbirth, cannot be  regarded  as  a  person  temporarily
unable  to  work  as  the  result  of  an  illness,   in   accordance   with
Article 7(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38.
31      However, it does not follow from  either  Article 7  of  Directive
2004/38, considered as a  whole,  or  from  the  other  provisions  of  that
directive, that, in such circumstances, a citizen of the Union who does  not
fulfil  the  conditions  laid  down   in   that   article   is,   therefore,
systematically deprived of the status of 'worker',  within  the  meaning  of
Article 45 TFEU.
32      The codification, sought by the directive, of the instruments of EU
law existing prior to that directive, which expressly  seeks  to  facilitate
the exercise of the rights of Union  citizens  to  move  and  reside  freely
within the territory of the Member States,  cannot,  by  itself,  limit  the
scope of the concept of worker within the meaning of the FEU Treaty.
33      In that regard, it must be noted that,  according  to  the  settled
case-law of the Court, the  concept  of  'worker',  within  the  meaning  of
Article 45 TFEU, in so far as it defines the scope of a fundamental freedom
provided for by the FEU Treaty, must be interpreted broadly  (see,  to  that
effect, N., C-46/12, EU:C:2013:97, paragraph 39 and the case-law cited).
34      Accordingly, the Court has held  that  any  national  of  a  Member
State, irrespective of his place of residence and of  his  nationality,  who
has exercised the right to freedom of movement for workers and who has  been
employed in a Member State other than that of  his  residence  falls  within
the scope of Article 45 TFEU (see, inter  alia,  Ritter-Coulais,  C-152/03,
EU:C:2006:123,  paragraph 31,  and  Hartmann,   C-212/05,   EU:C:2007:437,
paragraph 17).
35      The Court has thus also held that, in the  context  of  Article 45
TFEU, a person who, for a certain period of time, performs services for  and
under the direction of another  person  in  return  for  which  he  receives
remuneration must  be  considered  to  be  a  worker.  Once  the  employment
relationship has ended, the person concerned, as a rule,  loses  the  status
of worker, although that  status  may  produce  certain  effects  after  the
relationship has ended, and a person who  is  genuinely  seeking  work  must
also  be  classified  as   a   worker   (Caves   Krier   Frres,   C-379/11,
EU:C:2012:798, paragraph 26 and the case-law cited).
36      Consequently, and for the purposes of the present case, it must  be
pointed out that freedom of movement  for  workers  entails  the  right  for
nationals of Member States to move freely  within  the  territory  of  other
Member States and to stay there  for  the  purposes  of  seeking  employment
(see, inter alia, Antonissen, C-292/89, EU:C:1991:80, paragraph 13).
37      It follows that classification as a worker under Article 45  TFEU,
and the rights deriving from such status, do not necessarily depend  on  the
actual or continuing existence of an employment relationship (see,  to  that
effect, Lair, 39/86, EU:C:1988:322, paragraphs 31 and 36).
38      In those circumstances, it cannot be argued, contrary to  what  the
United Kingdom Government contends, that Article 7(3) of Directive  2004/38
lists exhaustively the circumstances in which a migrant  worker  who  is  no
longer in an employment relationship may nevertheless  continue  to  benefit
from that status.
39      In the present case, it is clear from the order  for  reference,  a
finding not contested by the parties in the main proceeding, that  Ms Saint
Prix was employed in the territory of the United Kingdom  before  giving  up
work, less than three months before the birth of her child, because  of  the
physical constraints of the late  stages  of  pregnancy  and  the  immediate
aftermath of childbirth. She returned to work three months after  the  birth
of her child, without having left the territory of that Member State  during
the period of interruption of her professional activity.
40      The fact that such constraints require a  woman  to  give  up  work
during the period needed for recovery does not, in  principle,  deprive  her
of the status of 'worker' within the meaning Article 45 TFEU.
41      The fact that she was not  actually  available  on  the  employment
market of the host Member State for a few months does not mean that she  has
ceased to belong to that market during that period, provided she returns  to
work or finds another job  within  a  reasonable  period  after  confinement
(see,  by  analogy,  Orfanopoulos  and  Oliveri,  C-482/01   and   C-493/01,
EU:C:2004:262, paragraph 50).
42      In order to determine whether the period that has  elapsed  between
childbirth and starting work  again  may  be  regarded  as  reasonable,  the
national  court  concerned  should  take  account  of   all   the   specific
circumstances of the  case  in  the  main  proceedings  and  the  applicable
national rules on the  duration  of  maternity  leave,  in  accordance  with
Article 8 of  Council  Directive  92/85/EEC  of  19 October  1992  on  the
introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and  health
at work of pregnant workers and workers who have  recently  given  birth  or
are  breastfeeding  (tenth  individual  Directive  within  the  meaning   of
Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ 1992 L 348, p. 1).
43      The approach adopted in paragraph 41 of the  present  judgment  is
consistent with the objective pursued by  Article 45  TFEU  of  enabling  a
worker to move freely within the territory of the other  Member  States  and
to stay there for the purpose of employment  (see  Uecker  and  Jacquet,  C-
64/96 and C-65/96, EU:C:1997:285, paragraph 21).
44      As the Commission contends, a Union citizen would be deterred  from
exercising her right to freedom of movement if, in the event  that  she  was
pregnant in the host State and gave up work as  a  result,  if  only  for  a
short period, she risked losing her status as a worker in that State.
45      Furthermore, it must be pointed out that EU law guarantees  special
protection for women in  connection  with  maternity.  In  that  regard,  it
should be noted that Article 16(3) of Directive 2004/38 provides,  for  the
purpose of calculating the continuous period of five years of  residence  in
the host Member State allowing  Union  citizens  to  acquire  the  right  of
permanent  residence  in  that  territory,  that  the  continuity  of   that
residence is not affected, inter alia, by an absence  of  a  maximum  of  12
consecutive months for important reasons such as pregnancy and childbirth.
46      If, by virtue of that protection, an absence for an important event
such as pregnancy or childbirth does not affect the continuity of  the  five
years of residence in the host Member State required  for  the  granting  of
that right of residence, the physical constraints  of  the  late  stages  of
pregnancy and the immediate aftermath of childbirth, which require  a  woman
to give up work temporarily,  cannot,  a  fortiori,  result  in  that  woman
losing her status as a worker.
47      In the light of all the foregoing considerations, the answer to the
questions referred for a preliminary ruling by the referring court  is  that
Article 45 TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that a woman  who  gives  up
work, or seeking work, because of  the  physical  constraints  of  the  late
stages of pregnancy and the aftermath of childbirth retains  the  status  of
'worker', within the meaning of that article, provided she returns  to  work
or finds another job within a reasonable  period  after  the  birth  of  her
child.
 Costs
48      Since  these  proceedings  are,  for  the  parties  to  the   main
proceedings, a step in the action pending before  the  national  court,  the
decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred  in  submitting
observations to the Court, other than the costs of those  parties,  are  not
recoverable.
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 45 TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that a woman  who  gives  up
work, or seeking work, because of  the  physical  constraints  of  the  late
stages of pregnancy and the aftermath of childbirth retains  the  status  of
'worker', within the meaning of that article, provided she returns  to  work
or finds another job within a reasonable  period  after  the  birth  of  her
child.



-----------------------
[1] This version of regulation 6 was correct until 31 December 2013. It  has
since been amended extensively as to who qualifies as a jobseeker,  and  for
how  long.  The  amendments  also  restrict  the  period  during  which   an
individual, recorded as being in involuntary unemployment, is treated  as  a
worker.
[2] Although a citizen of Lithuania which did not become a Member  State  of
the EU until 2006, time spent here prior to accession  must  be  taken  into
account for the purpose  of  the  acquisition  of  the  right  of  permanent
residence under Article 16(1) of Directive 2004/38, provided  those  periods
were completed in compliance with the conditions laid down in  Article  7(1)
of the directive - see Ziolkowski [2011] EUECJ C-454/10.

