
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Barry (conduct of hearing) [2015] UKUT 00541 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 September 2015                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                THIERNO BARRY
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:  Mr S Walker, Senior Office Home Presenting Officer
Respondent: Ms F Shaw, of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Charles  Allotey  &  Co
             Solicitors

In  appropriate  cases,  for  example  appeals  in  which  the  grounds  and
arguments involve an unmeritorious  challenge  to  the  rationality  of  the
decision of the FtT, Upper Tribunal Judges, bearing in mind  the  overriding
objective, should not hesitate to determine the appeal without hearing  from
the Respondent's representative.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Framework of this appeal

 1. The Respondent is a national of  Guinea,  now  aged  31  years.  On  18
    February 2011, following his conviction in respect of  the  offence  of
    wounding with intent to do grievous  bodily  harm,  which  attracted  a
    sentence of three years imprisonment, he received the customary "minded
    to deport" notice from the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    (the "Secretary of State") inviting him to make his  case  setting  out
    why he fell within any of the exceptions to automatic deportation under
    section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007.   The  Respondent  replied
    accordingly.  This appeal has its origins in the  ensuing  decision  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, dated 06 June 2013, determining  that
    the Respondent must be deported from the United Kingdom.

 2. On appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT"),  the  Respondent
    succeeded.  The appeal was allowed under Article 8 ECHR.  This decision
    and its underlying reasoning appear in the following passages  (wherein
    the present nomenclature is reversed):

         "Having weighed up all the relevant factors before us, we  conclude
         that there exist  exceptional  circumstances  that  out  weigh  the
         strong public interest in deportation.  In  short  terms  ...   the
         harsh  consequences  of  deportation  are  not  justified  in  this
         particular case.  A close  family  unit  comprising  of  [sic]  the
         Appellant, his wife and their two sons would be split up, very much
         to the latter's [sic] best interests.  They will loose [sic]  their
         father for at least ten years in practice and of course through  no
         fault of their own.  Their mother will lose  her  husband  and  she
         will  be  forced  into  single-[sic]  parenthood.   The   Appellant
         committed  a  'one-off'  offence,  the  seriousness  of  which   is
         mitigated by the facts of his case.  There is a  low  risk  of  him
         ever doing anything similar again."


    Followed by:


         "The combination  of  these  factors  goes  to  outweigh  what  are
         obviously the very weighty matters resting in the Respondent's side
         of the scales."

    Having recognised that displacement of the public interest in cases  of
    this genre "will inevitably be rare", the Tribunal continues:


         "We are clear that this case is an example of a very  strong  case,
         in all of the circumstances and relative to  many  of  the  appeals
         seen by the Tribunal and the higher courts.  It does not succeed by
         a great distance; but that is perhaps never going to be the case in
         light of the current statutory and jurisprudential landscape."

      [Emphasis added]

          Giving rise to the omnibus conclusion:

         "The appeal is allowed on the  basis  that  there  are  exceptional
         circumstances under paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules and that
         the   Appellant's   deportation   would   be   a   disproportionate
         interference with his family life."


 3. We construe the grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  as
    identifying the following arguable errors of law in the decision of the
    FtT:

    (a)     Whereas the FtT concluded that there were factors  other  than
         those in paragraphs 399 and 399A sufficient to outweigh the  public
         interest in deportation, it arguably erred in law  "....   in  that
         the circumstances were not,  properly  understood,  exceptional  at
         all, those being characteristic of what  would  be  experienced  by
         most families facing being broken up as a consequence of one parent
         becoming a foreign criminal".

          (b)     The next permitted ground is self-explanatory:

             "Also, the emphasis of  [on?]  the  low  risk  of  reoffending
             arguably indicates that the Judge had lost sight of  the  fact
             that the public interest in deportation  arises   because  the
             appellant is a foreign criminal, which  he  is  because  of  a
             single act of  offending  and  that  public  interest  is  not
             diminished because he may not reoffend in the future."

    (c)    The permission Judge then highlighted the following  passage  in
         the FtT's determination:

             "Taking everything set out above into account,  we  find  that
             whilst the offence was indeed serious, and while there can  be
             no excuse for the violent and intentional assault,  there  are
             in this case significant mitigating factors in the Appellant's
             favour (in particular his mental  health  at  the  time)  that
             render the incident less serious than it otherwise might  have
             been."

          This prompted the permission Judge to state:

         "A  similarly  flawed  approach  is  arguably  apparent  in  [this]
         reasoning which sits uncomfortably with the  legislative  objective
         of characterising the  offences  as  serious  such  as  to  justify
         deportation."

          Permission to appeal was granted accordingly.

Consideration and Conclusions

 4. We have set out the terms of  the  grant  of  permission  quite  fully,
    mainly for the purpose of highlighting that it exceeds by  some  margin
    the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal, but  also  because  of  its
    questionable exclusive concentration  on  one  side  of  the  balancing
    scales only. We contrast the grant of permission with the following key
    passages in the grounds:

           "The Secretary of State submits that the public interest has not
           been properly balanced  against  the  Appellant's  circumstances
           .....


           The Judge has placed a great deal of weight on his finding  that
           there  is  a  low  risk  of  re-offending  in  relation  to  the
           Appellant.  However, risk of re-offending is not the only factor
           to be considered ....


           It is submitted that while the Judge has made reference  to  the
           other facets of the public interest, they have not been properly
           considered and weighed in the balance  against  the  Appellant's
           circumstances  ....  The  Appellant's  circumstances   are   not
           exceptional  so  as  to  render  the   Appellant's   deportation
           disproportionate."

      It is appropriate to highlight the adjective "properly" in  the  above
      excerpts.  We further draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  while  the
      grounds of appeal contain  the  sweeping  contention  that  the  FtT's
      assessment of the public interest is "fundamentally flawed", this bare
      statement is followed by no particulars or elaboration, giving rise to
      a manifest deficiency in content.

 5. To summarise, the essential thrust of  the  grounds  of  appeal  is  to
    complain about the weight which the FtT attributed to various  factors.
    This analysis was confirmed by the  presentation  of  the  appeal.   Mr
    Walker, on behalf of the Secretary of State, intimated  that  the  main
    focus of the challenge is [115] of the determination  of  the  FtT.  We
    reproduce this in its entirety:

           "Taking everything set out above  into  account,  we  find  that
           whilst the offence was indeed serious, and whilst there  can  be
           no excuse for the violent and intentional assault, there are  in
           this case significant  mitigating  factors  in  the  Appellant's
           favour (in particular his mental health at the time) that render
           the incident less serious than it might otherwise have been."

      Within  the  immediately  preceding  paragraphs  the  FtT  noted   the
      psychiatric  evidence  to  which  the   panel   proposed   to   attach
      "significant weight", the objective fact that the Respondent  was  the
      subject of a mental health assessment immediately following his arrest
      and the  Respondent's  genuine  remorse.  The  panel  also  noted  the
      substantial  credit  which  the  sentencing  judge  accorded  to   the
      Respondent's  guilty  plea,  his  previous  good  character  and   the
      selection of a sentence belonging to the lower levels of the  relevant
      guidelines.   Furthermore,  the  panel,  having  described  the  index
      offence in a little detail, commented that it was "clearly  a  serious
      violent act".  In short, [115] of the determination must be considered
      in its full context.

 6. In his submissions, Mr Walker was disposed  to  recognise  the  panel's
    evaluation  of  the  Respondent's   offending   as   plainly   serious.
    Reflecting and confirming our analysis of the  grounds  of  appeal,  Mr
    Walker submitted that the Judge should have given greater weight to the
    seriousness of the  Respondent's  offending  and  less  weight  to  the
    mitigating factors.  There is no suggestion that the panel  misdirected
    itself in  law.   Equally  important,  Mr  Walker  concurred  with  the
    suggestion that the panel had left nothing  material  out  of  account.
    Accordingly, this is an  unvarnished  irrationality  challenge,  giving
    rise to the elevated threshold associated therewith.

 7. At the conclusion of Mr Walker's submissions, given the analysis above,
    we did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  hear  from  the  Respondent's
    representative.  We pronounced ourselves  satisfied,  for  the  reasons
    elaborated above, that no error  of  law  had  been  demonstrated.   In
    circumstances  where  all  material  facts  and   considerations   were
    identified (indisputably so), the  duty  imposed  on  the  FtT  was  to
    attribute to these such weight  as,  within  the  extensive  bounds  of
    rationality,  it  considered  appropriate  and  in  harmony  with   the
    statutory regime. We are satisfied that this duty was  duly  performed.
    The decision of the FtT neither lapsed into the prohibited territory of
    irrationality nor defied the statutory imperatives.

 8. By way of guidance we would add the following.  In  appropriate  cases,
    for example appeals in which  the  grounds  and  arguments  involve  an
    unmeritorious challenge to the rationality of the decision of the  FtT,
    Upper Tribunal Judges, bearing in mind the overriding objective, should
    not  hesitate  to  determine  the  appeal  without  hearing  from   the
    Respondent's representative.

Decision

 9.  Accordingly, we dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.










                                                   [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                    Date:  22 September 2015

