
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Alubankudi (Appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 00542 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  16 September 2015                         |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


                                   Between

                          ALHAJA ALARAPE ALUBANKUDI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:        Ms C. Charlton of Bhogal Partners Solicitors
Respondent:             Ms  J.  Isherwood,  Senior  Office  Home  Presenting
             Officer


   i)  One  of  the  important  elements  of  apparent  bias  is  that   the
      hypothetical fair minded observer is properly informed  and  possessed
      of all material facts.

  ii) The  interface  between  the  judiciary  and  society  is  of  greater
      importance nowadays than it has ever been.   Judges  must  have  their
      antennae tuned to the immediate and  wider  audiences,  alert  to  the
      sensitivities and perceptions of  others,  particularly  in  a  multi-
      cultural society.  Statements such as that made by the  FtT  Judge  in
      this case that "the United Kingdom is not a retirement  home  for  the
      rest of the world" had the potential to cause offence  and  should  be
      avoided.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Framework of Appeal

 1. This appeal originates in a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department  (the  "Secretary  of  State")  dated  28
    February 2014, whereby the application of the Appellant, a national  of
    Nigeria now aged 71 years, for Indefinite Leave to Remain in the United
    Kingdom outwith the framework of  the  Immigration  Rules  (hereinafter
    "the Rules") was refused.

 2. The decision maker first considered whether the Appellant qualifies for
    leave to remain under the Rules. In  doing  so,  the  relevant  history
    summarised was that the Appellant last entered the United Kingdom on 16
    July 2009, pursuant to a 180 day multi-entry visitor visa issued on  26
    August 2008 and valid until 26 August 2013.  The  application  made  on
    behalf of the Appellant was dated 24 October  2013.   It  was  decided,
    firstly, that a  refusal  under  paragraph  322(1)  of  the  Rules  was
    appropriate on the basis that variation of leave to enter or remain was
    sought for a purpose not covered by the Rules.  Next, having regard  to
    the terms of the multi-entry visitor visa and the  Appellant's  failure
    to honour "any declaration or undertaking given orally, or in  writing,
    as  to  the  intended  duration  and/or  purpose  of  ....  stay",  the
    application was further refused  under  paragraph  322(7).   The  third
    conclusion made was that the application did not satisfy the Article  8
    ECHR provisions of the Rules, specifically paragraphs 276ADE, 277C  and
    Appendix FM.  The decision continues:

         "Notwithstanding  the  above  your  application   has   also   been
         considered on compassionate and compelling factors".

    The considerations which were then identified are the  Appellant's  age
    (70); her state of health (general  age  related  ailments  only);  her
    family connections with the United Kingdom (a daughter only); the death
    of her husband in 1997; her ability to live in Nigeria during  most  of
    the period between 1997 and 2009; and the absence of evidence that  she
    would be exposed to ill treatment in the event of returning there.  The
    decision continues:


         "It is not considered that you have provided any  evidence  showing
         that your circumstances have significantly changed since  you  last
         left Nigeria on 16 July 2009, or that you would be  living  in  the
         most exceptional compassionate circumstances should you  return  to
         Nigeria.   All  your   representations   have   been   taken   into
         consideration and it is the view  that  you  have  not  raised  any
         exceptionally  compelling  or  compassionate  factors  that   would
         warrant a grant of leave in the UK."

     The application was refused accordingly.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") dismissed the ensuing appeal.   Its
    assessment  was  that  the  impugned  decision  interfered   with   the
    Appellant's right to respect for private and family life  but  was  "in
    accordance with the law and necessary for the economic  well  being  of
    society".  In considering the issue of proportionality, the Judge noted
    the applicability of section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"), proceeding to highlight the following
    facts and factors: the absence of evidence that  the  Appellant  speaks
    English; her "accessing" NHS medical treatment, to which  her  daughter
    knew she was not entitled,  since  first  registering  with  a  General
    Medical Practitioner in 1997; the inevitability of further recourse  to
    free  NHS  treatment;  the  absence   of   evidence   of   "substantial
    integration" into life in the United Kingdom or of an extensive private
    life outside the family unit.

 4. Next, having  highlighted  the  evidence,  including  several  doctors'
    letters, relating to the Appellant's state of health, the  Judge  noted
    the absence of any claim that she required long term personal  care  to
    perform everyday tasks.  The Judge was satisfied that such longer  term
    personal care as the Appellant may require, will be available to her in
    Nigeria.  He also noted the ability  of  the  Appellant's  daughter  to
    continue to support her mother financially, evidenced by,  inter  alia,
    her second home in the United Kingdom. The Judge further found that the
    Appellant would not be at risk of any ill treatment in Nigeria,  noting
    in particular the evidence of both the Appellant and her daughter  that
    in 2009 the Appellant fully intended to return there.  In summary,  the
    status quo ante 2009  would  be  re-established  upon  the  Appellant's
    return to Nigeria.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "The decision as a whole displays cogent evidence based  reasoning.
         However, the grounds argue bias and lack of a fair  hearing  rooted
         in the Judge's remark at paragraph 51 that 'there is a  great  deal
         of authority to the  effect  that  the  United  Kingdom  is  not  a
         retirement home for the rest of the world'.  While this by no means
         discloses any clear error of law, particularly  taken  against  the
         content of the rest of the decision, the need  for  justice  to  be
         seen to be done on balance renders the ground arguable."

     [Emphasis added]

     Thus the issue for us is whether the decision of the FtT is tainted  by
apparent bias.

Governing Legal Principles

 6. Every litigant enjoys a common law  right  to  a  fair  hearing.   This
    entails fairness of the procedural, rather than  substantive,  variety.
    Where a breach of this right is demonstrated,  this  will  normally  be
    considered a material error of law warranting the setting aside of  the
    decision of the FtT: see AAN (Veil) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT  102  (IAC)
    and MM (Unfairness; E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC). The fair  hearing
    principle may be viewed as the unification of the two common law maxims
    audi alteram partem and nemo judex in causa sua, which combine to  form
    the doctrine of natural justice, as it was formerly  known.  These  two
    maxims are, nowadays, frequently expressed in the terms of a right  and
    a prohibition, namely the litigant's right to a fair  hearing  and  the
    prohibition which precludes a Judge from  adjudicating  in  a  case  in
    which he has an interest.

 7. Further refinements of the fair hearing principle have resulted in  the
    development of the concepts of apparent  bias  and  actual  bias.   The
    latter equates with the prohibition identified immediately  above.   In
    contrast, apparent bias, where invoked, gives rise to a  somewhat  more
    sophisticated and subtle challenge.  It entails the application of  the
    following test:

         "The  question  is  whether  the  fair  minded   observer,   having
         considered  the  facts,  would  conclude  that  there  was  a  real
         possibility that the tribunal was bias."

     See Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67, at [103].

    In Re Medicaments [2001] 1 WLR 700, the Court of  Appeal  provided  the
    following exposition of the task of the appellate, or review, court  or
    tribunal:


         "The Court must first ascertain all the circumstances which have  a
         bearing on the suggestion that the Judge was bias.   It  must  then
         ask whether those  circumstances  would  lead  a  fair  minded  and
         informed observer to conclude that there was a real possibility ...
          that the Tribunal  was  bias.   The  material  circumstances  will
         include any explanation given by the Judge under review as  to  his
         knowledge or appreciation of those circumstances."

    In Lawal  v  Northern  Spirit  [2003]  UKHL  35,  the  House  of  Lords
    reiterated the importance of first identifying the circumstances  which
    are said to give rise to apparent bias.


 8. The  authorities  place  due  emphasis  on  the  requirement  that  the
    hypothetical reasonable observer is duly informed.  This connotes  that
    the observer is in possession of all material facts.  See, for example,
    Taylor v Lawrence [2002] EWCA Civ 90, at [61] - [63].  Furthermore, the
    hypothetical  fair  minded  observer  is  a  person  of   balance   and
    temperance,  "...  neither   complacent   nor   unduly   sensitive   or
    suspicious",  per  Lord  Steyn  in  Lawal  at  [14].   Finally,  it  is
    appropriate to emphasise that the doctrine of  apparent  bias  has  its
    roots in a principle  of  some  longevity  and  indisputable  pedigree,
    namely the requirement that justice not only be done but manifestly  be
    seen to be done: see, for example, Davidson v Scottish Ministers [2004]
    UKHL 34.


Decision

 9. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Charlton submitted that  the  "retirement
    home" comment was indicative of the Judge's adverse inclination against
    her client's case which, she suggested, was manifest in  certain  other
    parts of the operative passages in  the  determination.  In  developing
    this argument, she relied on:

    (a)  The  Judge's  statement  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
         Appellant spoke English and that this would be considered a barrier
         to integration.

     b) His observation that if the Appellant were to find  medication  and
        personal assistance expensive in Nigeria, her daughter's  financial
        resources could be deployed to this end  and,  in  particular,  her
        daughter's second home in the  United  Kingdom  could  be  sold  if
        necessary.


     c) The indifference to the interests of others viz  the  daughter  and
        grandchildren which this statement displayed.

    Focusing particularly on the "retirement  home"  comment,  Ms  Charlton
    submitted that this  was  belittling  to  and  insulting  of  both  the
    Appellant and her daughter and, further, overlooked that thanks to  the
    daughter the Appellant had at all times been fully self-supporting.

10. The question in this appeal is whether  the  decision  of  the  FtT  is
    vitiated by apparent bias and, hence, unsustainable in law by reason of
    the passage quoted in [5] above.  We are satisfied that the  assessment
    of the hypothetical  fair  minded,  reasonable  and  properly  informed
    observer would be as follows.  First, there is no suggestion (much less
    any evidence) that the Judge has, or had,  any  predisposition  against
    persons such as this Appellant or is anti-immigrant or anti-immigration
    generally.  Second, as the permission Judge noted,  the  determination,
    read as a whole, displays "cogent evidence based reasoning".   To  this
    we add the  modest  adjustment  that,  at  the  stage  of  the  Judge's
    reasoning, evidence had, of course, matured into findings, an important
    distinction: see MK Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC).   Furthermore,
    there is no challenge to any of the judge's findings on  the  basis  of
    irrationality or the disregard of material evidence or the intrusion of
    immaterial factors.  We observe that  the  presence  of  any  of  these
    vitiating  elements  could,  in  principle,  lend  sustenance  to   the
    Appellant's complaint of apparent bias. However, none is evident.

11. The hypothetical observer would also note the balanced, considered  and
    neutral terms in which the Judge has expressed himself in a  series  of
    important passages, beginning  at  [40]  and  ending  at  [53].  It  is
    noteworthy that within these passages  the  Judge  has  accurately  and
    adequately summarised the medical and other evidence adduced on  behalf
    of the  Appellant.   No  issue  is  taken  with  these  assessments  or
    summaries. Furthermore, the language throughout these passages is  that
    of the dispassionate, disinterested adjudicator giving primacy  to  the
    requirement of impartiality enshrined in the statutory judicial oath of
    office.  We further consider that the observer would not be troubled by
    the other passages in the determination highlighted on  behalf  of  the
    Applicant, noted in [9] above, either singly or in  combination.  These
    passages embody statements  which  are  unexceptional,  considered  and
    balanced.

12. At this juncture, we consider it appropriate to reproduce the  relevant
    paragraph, [51] in its entirety:

         "While [the daughter's] desire to care for the Appellant in the  UK
         is natural and understandable neither could have had any legitimate
         expectation that the Appellant would be allowed  to  remain  unless
         she was able to  bring  herself  within  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  There is a  great  deal  of  authority  to  the
         effect that the UK is not a retirement home for  the  rest  of  the
         world."

     The immediately ensuing paragraph begins with the following:

         "I have not been satisfied that the Appellant would be returned  to
         Nigeria in a state of destitution  or  that  there  are  compelling
         and/or compassionate circumstances such that she should be  granted
         leave outside the Immigration Rules."

    The hypothetical reasonable  observer  would,  in  our  view,  find  an
    element of   empathy   in  the  passages  of  the  FtT's  determination
    reproduced above. The observer would further  take  into  account  that
    superior courts have expressed themselves in terms comparable to  those
    of the challenged statement and would readily conclude that  the  Judge
    had in mind pronouncements of  this  genre  in  the  "retirement  home"
    sentence in [51].

13. Such pronouncements are exemplified particularly in EV (Phillipines)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, at [60]:

         "Just as we cannot provide medical treatment to the  world  so  we
         cannot educate the world".


    Somewhat comparable is the statement of  Lord  Nicholls  in  N  v  SSHD
    [2005] UKHL 31, at [17]:


         "But, as the Strasbourg jurisprudence confirms, Article 3 cannot be
         interpreted as requiring contracting states to admit and treat AIDS
         sufferers from all over the world for the rest of their lives ....


         True it is that a person who  comes  here  and  receives  treatment
         while his application is  being  considered  will  have  his  hopes
         raised.  But it is difficult to see why this  should  subject  this
         country to a greater obligation than it would  to  someone  who  is
         turned away at the port of entry and never receives any treatment."

    We bear in mind that one of the traits of the hypothetical observer  is
    that he is properly informed.  He would, therefore, be aware  of  these
    other judicial pronouncements, emanating from higher courts  and  would
    conclude that this is what the FtT Judge must have had in mind when  he
    made the "retirement home" comment.  The consideration that the Judge's
    statement can be traced to authoritative judicial sources would fortify
    the observer's confidence in the impartiality of the  Tribunal.   Still
    further reassurance would be provided  by  the  truism  that,  day  and
    daily, there are countless examples in the FtT and  Upper  Tribunal  of
    cases not dissimilar to that of the Applicant failing on Article 8 ECHR
    grounds, properly so.  The hypothetical observer would also  take  into
    account the stream of judicial  pronouncements,  spanning  many  years,
    that Article 8 confers no right to select  the  country  in  which  one
    wishes to enjoy and develop family life.    Finally,  the  hypothetical
    observer would be influenced by the assessments and  considerations  in
    [11] and [12] above.

14.  We consider that the linguistic  formula  selected  by  the  Judge  was
    unfortunate.  It had the potential to cause offence and we accept that,
    in this instance, it did so.  It was insensitive.  It further  had  the
    potential to convey to the Appellant and  her  mother  an  unfavourable
    impression of the legal  process  in  which  they  had  been  involved,
    generating a sense of unease.   We  are  satisfied  that  it  had  this
    effect.  The interface between the judiciary and society is of  greater
    importance nowadays than it has ever been.   In  both  the  conduct  of
    hearings and the compilation  of  judgments,  Judges  must  have  their
    antennae tuned to the immediate and wider audiences.  As  the  decision
    in AAN demonstrates, Judges must be  alert  to  the  sensitivities  and
    perceptions of others, particularly in a  multi-cultural  society.   We
    consider that statements of the kind  which  stimulated  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal in  the  present  case  should  be  avoided.   The
    interaction of most litigants with the judicial system is  a  transient
    one and it is of seminal importance that the fairness, impartiality and
    detached objectivity of the judicial office holder  are  manifest  from
    beginning to end.

15.  Drawing the various strands together and given our analysis in  [10]  -
    [14] above, we are  satisfied  that  the  hypothetical  observer  would
    conclude, following careful and informed reflection, that the  decision
    of the FtT is fair, balanced, considered  and,  above  all,  impartial.
    We, in turn, conclude without reservation that the challenge  based  on
    apparent bias is devoid of merit and substance.

Conclusion

16.  We dismiss the appeal accordingly and affirm the decision of the FtT.







                                    [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                  Date:    23 September 2015
