
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Hammed Mohammed Alhammadi) v Secretary of State
for the Home Department (FCJR) [2013] UKUT 00540(IAC)


|Heard at Field House                          |Judgment sent on             |
|On 20 August 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

          The QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF HAMMED MohAmmed AlHAMMADI

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr A Slatter, instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Ms C Rowlands, instructed by the Treasury Solicitors





                                  JUDGMENT


1.   This is an application for  judicial  review  by  which  the  applicant
    challenges the respondent's decision made on 22 June 2012 that  further
    submissions made on 16 May 2012  did  not  amount  to  a  fresh  claim.
    Permission was granted on 14 May 2013 and on 23 May 2013 the  applicant
    with leave submitted amended grounds.  The documents relied on  are  in
    an agreed bundle ('AB')

Background

2.   The applicant claimed asylum on 26 January 2011, asserting that he  had
    made a clandestine entry into the UK on 25 January 2011 by lorry.   His
    application was refused for the reasons set  out  in  the  respondent's
    decision letter of 18 March 2011 (AB 162-170).  The  applicant  claimed
    that he had been a resident of the United Arab Emirates (UAE)  and  was
    stateless.  He said that he had been ill-treated by a sheikh because he
    had inadvertently  told  his  girlfriend  about  the  sheikh's  illicit
    activities.  He was detained and ill-treated to such an extent,  so  he
    claimed, that he had to be taken to hospital.  He escaped and was  able
    to leave the UAE with the help of an agent.  He feared that if returned
    there his life would be at risk or he would be wrongly imprisoned.   At
    one stage in his asylum interview he had said he was a Yemeni  national
    but later retracted that.  The respondent did not find the  applicant's
    account to be credible and it was her  view  that  he  was  in  fact  a
    citizen of Yemen.   His  application  was  refused  and  the  applicant
    appealed.

3.   His appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 28 April 2011.   The
    determination of DIJ McClure  (AB  171-179)  dismissed  his  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights  grounds.   The  judge
    found that the applicant had failed to prove that he was a  citizen  of
    the UAE, not least as he had used a Yemeni passport over  a  number  of
    years to travel to a number of different countries.  It was  his  claim
    that the true owner of the passport had allowed him to use it  but  the
    judge did not find this to be credible.   He  did  not  find  that  the
    applicant told the truth about the circumstances in which he claimed to
    have been caused to leave the UAE.  He did not find that the  applicant
    had been mistreated and said that in all the circumstances he could not
    accept anything he had said as being either credible or being the truth
    in any way at all.  He was satisfied that  the  respondent  had  proved
    that the applicant was in fact a Yemeni national and that his true name
    was Waheed Mohammed Sharif.

4.   There  was  no  application  for  permission  to  appeal  against  this
    decision but on 17 May  2012  further  submissions  were  made  on  the
    applicant's behalf, and further documents were submitted in support  of
    his assertion that he had been born in and  had  resided  in  the  UAE.
    These included school reports, a police letter, a letter from  HSBC,  a
    hospital identity card, a further witness statement dated  8  May  2012
    and a medico-legal report prepared by Dr Cornell dated  13  April  2012
    with six further medical letters dated between  14  June  2011  and  20
    January 2012.  The respondent reviewed this evidence but  came  to  the
    view that it did not amount to a fresh claim and  would  not  create  a
    realistic prospect of success if brought before an immigration judge.


The Grounds

5.   In order to understand the submissions it will be helpful  to  set  out
    in full the amended grounds for challenging the respondent's decision:

         "1.  The defendant misdirected herself with regard to  the  medical
             evidence  from  the  Medical  Foundation.   Contrary  to   the
             guidance set out by Buxton LJ in WM (DRC) v SSHD  [2006]  EWHC
             Civ 1495 at [11], the defendant did not treat either  her  own
             view only as a starting point, nor did she treat  the  adverse
             credibility findings of the previous immigration judge only as
             a starting point for the hypothetical  judge.   The  defendant
             did not consider properly or at  all  whether  a  hypothetical
             immigration  judge,  giving  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  whole
             package of evidence then  presented,  could  properly  ascribe
             more weight to Dr Cornell's evidence than that to which he was
             prepared to attribute.


         2.   Further, the defendant misdirected herself  upon  the  Medical
             Foundation report by treating the  findings  made  therein  as
             'add-ons'  to  the  adverse  credibility  findings.   This  is
             contrary to the approach in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 365
             as endorsed in SA (Somalia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 116 at [32]-
             [33].  It is evident from the defendant's consideration of  Dr
             Cornell's findings on (1) the type of compression fracture (2)
             the anal fissure and  (3)  as  to  the  post-traumatic  stress
             disorder  ('PTSD')  diagnosis  -  see  pages  189-192  of  the
             claimant's bundle.


         3.   The defendant erred in rejecting as  unreliable  Dr  Cornell's
             PTSD diagnosis.  The Medical Foundation doctor  was  qualified
             to give the diagnosis he made in accordance  with  established
             criteria.   That  diagnosis   would   necessarily   affect   a
             hypothetical judge's approach to the claimant's evidence,  yet
             because of the defendant's mistake of  fact  amounting  to  an
             error of law and her  Wednesbury  unreasonable  approach,  the
             defendant did not consider at all the significance of the PTSD
             diagnosis to the question of whether the  further  submissions
             could be said  to  be  'significantly  different'  within  the
             meaning of para 353 of HC 395 (as amended).


         4.   The defendant erred in  so  far  as  she  considered  that  Dr
             Cornell's assessment was entirely dependent upon  the  account
             given to him by the claimant.  The Medical  Foundation  doctor
             was provided, inter alia, with the judge's decision, accounted
             for  the  possibility  of  fabrication,  drew  upon  his   own
             experience, used the clinical methodology and made an  overall
             evaluation as required by established criteria.


         5.   The defendant has misdirected herself in her approach  to  the
             documentary evidence  submitted  in  support  of  C's  claimed
             identity and country of  habitual  residence  in  the  UAE  by
             failing to consider whether a hypothetical  immigration  judge
             could consider the evidence corroborative of C's  claims  when
             taken in the round together with the other  evidence.   In  so
             far as Judge  McClure's  nationality  findings  are  centrally
             premised upon mistakes of  facts  [42-54  determination],  the
             hypothetical immigration judge would be bound  not  to  follow
             them."




Submissions on behalf of the Applicant

6.   Mr Slatter initially sought permission to  produce  a  further  witness
    statement from the applicant dated 5 August 2013.   He  submitted  that
    this was relevant  to  issues  arising  from  the  applicant's  use  of
    passports as considered in the judge's determination and referred to in
    the applicant's second interview.   It  also  related  to  whether  his
    evidence had been correctly recorded and therefore properly taken  into
    account.  Ms Rowlands objected to further evidence  being  admitted  at
    this stage, and in any event submitted that it could have no bearing on
    whether the respondent's decision was properly open to her on the basis
    of the evidence submitted to her.   This  was  not  a  case  where  the
    Tribunal was rehearing the  appeal  but  considering  whether  judicial
    review should be granted.  I am not  satisfied  that  further  evidence
    should be admitted.  The evidence  goes  to  issues  of  fact.   As  Ms
    Rowlands  rightly  points  out,  I  am  concerned  with   whether   the
    respondent's decision of 22 June 2012 should be quashed.   The  further
    evidence has no material bearing on that issue and in any  event  there
    has been ample opportunity to produce all the evidence the parties seek
    to rely on.

7.   Mr Slatter dealt firstly with ground 3,  arguing  that  the  respondent
    had erred in rejecting the PTSD diagnosis on the basis that Dr  Cornell
    had no apparent psychiatric qualifications or experience (AB  189-190).
    He referred to the rebuttal report by Dr Cole at [AB 230]  which  notes
    that Dr Cornell appended his CV to his report and this  clearly  stated
    that as an experienced GP he had extensive experience in  psychological
    and psychiatric medicine and the note below his signature said that the
    author had undergone training in psychiatric assessment  and  diagnosis
    and had had specific  training  in  identification,  documentation  and
    evaluation of scars and  the  physical  and  psychological  effects  of
    torture in accordance with the precepts of the Istanbul protocol.

8.   He submitted that the significance of the diagnosis of PTSD  was  bound
    up with the  issue  of  credibility.   If  it  was  accepted  that  the
    applicant was suffering from PTSD, the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  be
    obliged to treat him as a vulnerable individual in accordance with  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note number 2 of 2010 and  would  therefore
    need to give anxious scrutiny to Judge McClure's credibility  findings,
    the reasons for them and the decision-making process that led  to  them
    in the light of the  applicant's  vulnerability.   He  referred  to  JL
    (Medical  reports  -  credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT  00145  and  in
    particular to [26]-[27].  Discrepancies  in  the  applicant's  evidence
    when interviewed in respect of his asylum  claim  had  weighed  heavily
    with the judge and in particular his admission at one stage that he was
    a Yemeni national even  though  later  withdrawn.   He  argued  that  a
    diagnosis of PTSD could affect a judge's assessment of that evidence.

9.   Mr Slatter then dealt with ground 4.  He submitted that the  respondent
    had erred by treating the findings of Dr Cornell as simply an add-on or
    as a separate exercise assessed only after the decision on  credibility
    had been made.  This was in breach of the approach set out in Mibanga v
    Secretary of State [2005] 1 INLR 377 as  endorsed  in  SA  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary of State [2006] EWCA Civ 1302.  He referred in particular  to
    the comment of the respondent in the decision letter at AB 188 that  it
    was noted that the account upon which all of the  doctors  were  basing
    their assessment was the applicant's own anecdotal account and,  as  he
    was known to have lied about his experiences in the past, so too it was
    concluded that Dr Cornell's assessment  was  based  upon  a  fabricated
    account.  The report had followed the guidance given  in  the  Istanbul
    protocol  and  did,  so  he  argued,  indicate  a   separate   critical
    consideration by the doctor.

10.  So far as ground 2 was concerned, Mr Slatter submitted that  the  judge
    had failed to follow the guidance in Mibanga and the evidence about the
    compression fracture, the anal fissure and  the  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder had been  wrongly  rejected  simply  on  the  basis  that  the
    conclusions were based on fabricated evidence and  the  fact  that  the
    applicant had previously been found to have lied.

11.  Finally, Mr Slatter dealt with grounds 1 and 5.  He submitted  that  no
    proper consideration had been given to  whether  an  immigration  judge
    giving anxious scrutiny to the whole package of evidence could properly
    ascribe more weight to Dr Cornell's evidence than  the  respondent  was
    prepared  to  give  to  it.   He  referred   in   particular   to   the
    Administrative Court judgment in R (ST) v  Secretary  of  State  [2012]
    EWHC 988 (Admin) where HHJ Anthony Thornton QC,  sitting  as  a  Deputy
    High Court Judge set out a comprehensive review of the approach to  the
    matters  to  be  considered  when  evaluating  a   challenge   to   the
    respondent's decision on a fresh claim.

12.  He submitted that the respondent in the  present  case  had  failed  to
    give sufficient consideration  to  what  the  hypothetical  immigration
    judge's view would be as opposed to reaching her own  decision  on  the
    matter.  There was a two-stage test and he argued that  in  respect  of
    the medical evidence that assessment had not been properly carried  out
    and to this extent the respondent's decision was fundamentally  flawed.
    There had been significant reliance on the previous  finding  that  the
    applicant's evidence lacked credibility but the judge had proceeded  on
    a mistaken calculation of the dates, taking the view  at  [44]  of  his
    determination that the applicant had visited America in  2010  and  not
    2009.  This had been a central matter in the judge's assessment of  the
    evidence.  He submitted that the respondent,  having  wrongly  rejected
    the diagnosis of PTSD, had then failed to carry out a proper assessment
    of how a judge would view that evidence and how  it  would  affect  his
    view of the previous findings.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

13.  Ms Rowlands prefaced her submissions by emphasising  that  a  challenge
    to the respondent's decision had  to  be  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    Wednesbury unreasonable.  This set a high hurdle  which  she  submitted
    the applicant had failed  to  reach.   It  had  to  be  shown  that  no
    reasonable Secretary of State, looking at  the  evidence  as  a  whole,
    could  have  reached  the  decision  she  did.   She  argued  that  the
    respondent's decision should not be subjected to  a  pedantic  exegesis
    and even if it was shown that there had been any mistake of  fact  when
    the evidence was being assessed by Judge McClure it would still have to
    be demonstrated that the error would have had a material bearing on the
    outcome.

14.  So far as Dr Cornell's diagnosis of PTSD was concerned,  she  submitted
    that the respondent was entitled to take into account that he  did  not
    have the relevant qualifications even if he had  experience  as  a  GP.
    She referred to Shala v Birmingham City Council [2007] EWCA Civ 624 and
    in particular to [18] where Sedley LJ, when considering the evidence of
    a doctor who was a registered medical practitioner in general practice,
    noted that in his CV under mental health experience he made no claim to
    specialist training but had pointed out that general practice  required
    regular contact with  a  wide  range  of  mental  illness.   Sedley  LJ
    commented that those who relied on his opinions would need to  bear  in
    mind that, notwithstanding the  doctor's  wide  experience  in  general
    practice, he was not a qualified psychiatrist.

15.  Ms Rowlands submitted that the respondent  was  entitled  to  make  the
    point that Dr Cornell had not referred in his  report  to  the  adverse
    credibility findings made against the applicant.  He had  set  out  the
    applicant's account of events but had said nothing about any assessment
    of credibility or taking any other  factors  into  account.   In  these
    circumstances, the respondent was entitled to say that he had relied on
    the applicant's say-so and that there was no critical analysis of other
    aspects of the evidence.  In relation to the anal fissure,  Dr  Cornell
    had failed to make any further assessment of whether it was  caused  by
    constipation and had failed to take into account the  previous  medical
    examination at AB 70-72 that there was no evidence of injury.   It  had
    been incorrect for Dr Cornell to say that the previous doctor  had  not
    been looking for anything.

16.  When considering the compression injury to the  back,  the  doctor  had
    failed to give any consideration to whether it might have  been  caused
    by a road traffic accident, and in this context she referred to  AB  85
    and  to  the  reference  to  the  false  accusation  in  this  respect.
    Therefore, in relation to the three main aspects of the medical report:
    on PTSD, the doctor did not have the relevant  qualifications;  on  the
    anal fissure, relevant matters had been left out of account; and so far
    as the back injury was concerned, there was evidence at AB 69 of an old
    fracture.

17.  She submitted that the respondent was entitled to take as her  starting
    point the decision of the previous immigration judge.  Such  errors  of
    fact as had been identified would have had no bearing on the outcome of
    his decision.  He had found the story given  by  the  applicant  to  be
    inherently improbable and had taken into account the  discrepancies  in
    the interview and most significantly the fact that at one point he  had
    asserted that he was a Yemeni national.  There  were  huge  credibility
    gaps for the applicant to meet in relation to the  use  of  the  Yemeni
    passport and the credibility of his  account  of  events  in  the  UAE.
    These were all part  of  the  background  properly  to  be  taken  into
    account.

18.  So far as the decision letter was  concerned  she  submitted  that  the
    respondent had clearly asked herself the correct  questions.   She  had
    been entitled to comment on the documents submitted in support  of  the
    application, which Ms Rowlands characterised as bizarre, to reject  the
    witness statement and to take the view that the  medical  evidence  was
    not reliable and would not give rise to a realistic prospect of success
    before an immigration judge.  She submitted that there was no substance
    in  the  argument  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to whether there was  a  realistic  prospect  of  success
    before an immigration judge.  This was not a difficult feat  of  mental
    gymnastics, but an assessment based on the evidence before her.

The Law

19.  I remind myself of the guidance  in  WM  (DRC)  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2006] EWCA Civ  1495  at  [11]  where  Buxton  LJ  observed  that  the
    respondent must ask herself the right question and said:

         "The question is not whether the Secretary of State himself  thinks
         that the new claim is a good one or  should  succeed,  but  whether
         there is a realistic prospect of an adjudicator, applying the  rule
         of anxious scrutiny, thinking that the applicant will be exposed to
         a real risk of persecution on return ... The Secretary of State  of
         course can, and no doubt logically should, treat his  own  view  of
         the merits as a starting point for that enquiry: but it is  only  a
         starting  point  for  the  consideration  of  a  question  that  is
         distinctly different from the exercise of the  Secretary  of  State
         making up his own mind.  Second, in addressing that question,  both
         in respect of the evaluation of the facts and  in  respect  of  the
         legal conclusions to be drawn from these facts, has  the  Secretary
         of State satisfied the requirement of  anxious  scrutiny?   If  the
         Court cannot  be  satisfied  that  the  answer  to  both  of  those
         questions is in  the  affirmative,  they  will  have  to  grant  an
         application for review of the Secretary of State's decision."

     I have also been referred to and taken into  account  the  judgment  of
    HHJ Anthony Thornton QC in R (ST) v Secretary of State.  He has set out
    a comprehensive review of the relevant legal principles at [41]-[71] of
    his judgment.

Discussion

20.   Mr  Slatter's  submissions  are  primarily  focused  on  the  way  the
    respondent dealt with the medical evidence.  He made it  clear  in  his
    submissions that he was  not  seeking  to  argue  a  general  point  of
    principle on whether the respondent had erred in law  by  not  carrying
    out a proper assessment of whether there was a  realistic  prospect  of
    success before an immigration judge save in so far  as  her  assessment
    related to the treatment of the medical evidence.  I will consider  the
    grounds individually in the same order as Mr Slatter took them  in  his
    submissions, although there is  inevitably  some  overlap  between  the
    grounds, and then look at the position overall.



Ground 3

21.  In ground 3 it is argued that the defendant  was  wrong  to  reject  Dr
    Cornell's diagnosis of PTSD as unreliable on the basis that he was  not
    qualified in that area.  The respondent dealt  with  the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD at AB 189-190, referring to HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306  and
    to AE & FE (PTSD - internal relocation) Sri Lanka [2002]  UKIAT  05237.
    She then said:

         "It is considered that it is the overriding duty  of  a  doctor  to
         cite areas within their expertise and to cite areas  that  are  not
         within their  expertise.   It  is  therefore  considered  that  the
         diagnosis of PTSD cannot be considered reliable when a doctor  does
         not have the appropriate psychiatric qualifications."

     Mr Slatter refers to the fact that the doctor has  experience  of  PTSD
    arising from his general practice, but nonetheless the fact that he  is
    not a qualified psychiatrist  is  something  that  the  respondent  was
    entitled to take into account for the reasons given in Shala.  However,
    as submitted by Ms Rowlands, the diagnosis of  PTSD  depends  upon  the
    applicant being truthful about his account of his symptoms, and in this
    context the view likely to be taken of the applicant's  credibility  is
    important.  This point is made in the citation from HH (Ethiopia) at AB
    189 that diagnosis is  largely  dependent  on  an  assumption  that  an
    account given by an applicant was to be believed.  It is clear from  Dr
    Cornell's report that he has proceeded on  the  basis  of  the  account
    given by the applicant: both on the history at [5]-[29] and on his past
    health history at [30]-[53].  I am not satisfied  that  there  was  any
    error made by the respondent which undermines her findings or that  her
    approach to the medical  evidence  on  PTSD  can  be  characterised  as
    Wednesbury unreasonable.

Ground 4

22.  This ground argues that the respondent erred in so far  she  considered
    that the medical assessment was entirely  dependent  upon  the  account
    given by the applicant whereas the doctor was provided with the judge's
    decision, accounted for the possibility of fabrication, drew  upon  his
    own  experience  and  made  an  overall  evaluation  as   required   by
    established criteria. As I have already indicated,  the  fact  that  Dr
    Cornell based his assessment on the account given by the applicant  was
    a factor properly taken into account but this was clearly not the  sole
    factor. The respondent commented on and considered what was said  about
    the PTSD, the anal fissure and the back  injury.  The  grounds  do  not
    satisfy  me  that  there  was  any  error  of  approach  or  that   the
    respondent's decision was "entirely dependent" on the account given  by
    the applicant.  I am satisfied that she looked at the medical  evidence
    in the light of the evidence as a whole.

Ground 2

23.  Ground 2 argues that the judge treated the medical evidence  merely  as
    add-ons to the adverse credibility findings contrary to the approach in
    Mibanga v Secretary of State.  It is argued that the relevance  of  the
    evidence of the type of compression fracture, the anal fissure and  the
    post-traumatic stress disorder was dismissed in respect of each on  the
    basis that the applicant had previously been found  to  be  lacking  in
    credibility and that the evidence was wrongly compartmentalised  rather
    than looked at as a whole.

24.  Mr Slatter referred in particular to the decision letter at AB 188  and
    189 on the medical evidence generally, where the respondent said:

         "It is also noted that the account upon which all  of  the  doctors
         are basing their assessments, is  [the  claimant's]  own  anecdotal
         account ... as you are known to have lied about your experiences in
         the past, so too it is concluded that Dr  Cornell's  assessment  is
         based upon a fabricated account which you have provided to him."


     and in respect of the compressed fracture:

         "As  your  account  has  been  found  to  be  wholly   lacking   in
         credibility,  the  findings  of  Dr  Cornell  in  this  regard  are
         considered to add no weight to your claim."


    and in respect of the anal fissure:


         "Again as you have been found not to be a witness of  truth  it  is
         considered that Dr Cornell's conclusions are based upon  fabricated
         information."

25.  However, the respondent's findings on  the  medical  evidence  must  be
    considered as a whole.   It  is  correct  that  the  report  refers  to
    evidence of a compression fracture of the first lumbar vertebra  and  a
    small prolapsed disc between the fifth and sixth lumbar vertebrae.  The
    applicant claimed to have sustained this injury by being pushed into an
    empty swimming pool during his detention.  Dr Cornell  noted  that  the
    applicant was unclear about whether he was pushed, forced  to  jump  or
    slipped, and says that there was "no antecedent history of back pain or
    mobility problems".  The respondent was entitled to comment  that  this
    was based on the applicant's own account.  Dr Cornell  said  that  this
    type of compression fracture was  highly  consistent  with  landing  on
    one's feet on hard ground and indeed it was unlikely to  have  occurred
    in any other manner, especially in a previously fit young man,  but  he
    could consider an alternative scenario in which he may have jumped from
    a height and landed on his feet, but people tended to avoid doing  this
    through a common sense fear of injury.

26.  The respondent commented that, as Dr Cornell said, common  sense  would
    normally prevent a person from inflicting  this  sort  of  injury  upon
    themselves but it was not for Dr Cornell to assess whether or not  this
    applied to the applicant, and whilst the  injury  was  consistent  with
    landing on feet on hard ground, there were numerous ways  in  which  it
    could have occurred, whether deliberate or accidental, and even  if  it
    took place as part of an assault, it did not demonstrate that  such  an
    assault was part of a systemic campaign of persecution  rather  than  a
    one-off attack.  These comments were properly open to the respondent.

27.  So far as the claimed anal assault with a cola bottle, Dr Cornell  said
    that while the commonest cause of an anal fissure was constipation, the
    applicant gave no history of any such bowel or rectal problems prior to
    the torture and that the most likely cause relating to the  trauma  was
    by the repeated insertion and removal of the Coca Cola bottle with  its
    sharp metal cap.  He concluded that the fissure was  highly  consistent
    with this account.  However, Dr Cornell said that there was a much more
    common cause of such a scar, constipation, but its exclusion was  based
    on the applicant's own account and denial of previous symptoms.  It  is
    also relevant, as Ms Rowlands pointed out in her submissions,  that  Dr
    Cornell said that NHS surgeons had  not  noted  any  internal  scarring
    apart from the fissure and explained this by the fact  that  they  were
    not looking for scarring.  However, in the report from Dr Watson at  AB
    72 on 14 June 2011, he confirmed that he had examined the applicant and
    that there was no posterior scarring consistent with a chronic  fissure
    and that he saw  no  distal  rectal  pathology.   For  this  reason  Dr
    Cornell's statement that the treating doctors might not have looked for
    scarring is not sustainable.

28.  When the respondent's decision is  looked  at  as  a  whole  I  am  not
    satisfied that she  fell  into  the  error  of  compartmentalising  the
    evidence or that she reached concluded  views  on  credibility  and  on
    whether there was a realistic prospect of success before an immigration
    judge and only then went on to look at the medical evidence treating it
    as an add-on.

Ground 1

29.  As Mr Slatter made clear in his submissions, he does not seek  to  make
    a general argument about the respondent's approach to whether there was
    a realistic prospect of success in front of an immigration  judge  save
    in so far as it relates to the medical evidence.  I am  satisfied  that
    it is clear that the respondent asked herself the right  question.   It
    is not only referred to in the introduction to the  assessment  of  the
    protection-based submissions at AB 185 but also at points  during  that
    assessment: see by way of example AB 187 and AB  188.   The  respondent
    was entitled to take into account her own views  as  a  starting  point
    together with the previous  findings  by  the  immigration  judge.   Mr
    Slatter rightly emphasised that the task  for  the  respondent  was  to
    assess not only what view she took  of  the  further  evidence  but  to
    consider what an  immigration  judge  would  make  of  it.   I  am  not
    satisfied that the respondent failed to distinguish those  two  aspects
    of the test or that she failed to approach the issue of assessment with
    proper scrutiny of all the relevant issues.

Ground 5

30.  Mr Slatter did not  maintain  his  argument  that  the  respondent  had
    misdirected herself in her approach  to  the  documentary  evidence  in
    relation to the applicant's claimed identity as a resident of  the  UAE
    by failing to consider whether the evidence corroborative of the claims
    was taken together with the other evidence but he did  argue  that  the
    respondent should have taken into account the fact that Judge McClure's
    findings were based on a number of mistakes of fact, and  that  another
    judge would be bound not to follow them.  I  am  satisfied  that  Judge
    McClure did make an error when commenting that the evidence showed that
    the applicant had visited the USA in June 2009 instead  of  June  2010,
    but I am not satisfied that this would have  had  any  bearing  on  the
    outcome  of  the  appeal.   The  other  factors  telling  against   the
    applicant's credibility were so strong that this error would  not  have
    affected  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  and  does  not  undermine  the
    respondent's finding that there would not be a  realistic  prospect  of
    success before an immigration judge.

31.  For these reasons I am not satisfied that any of the grounds relied  on
    by the applicant are made out.

The overall position

32.  When granting permission to appeal UTJ Gleeson highlighted her  concern
    about whether the  respondent  had  properly  applied  herself  to  the
    approach which would be taken by an immigration judge when  considering
    the new material  rather  than  simply  considering  the  material  for
    herself and questioned whether the refusal decision read more  like  an
    asylum refusal letter than an assessment of the  previously  considered
    material. Having heard full argument,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    respondent has fallen into this error. As I have  already  indicated  I
    have been referred to the judgment in R (ST) v Secretary of State which
    rightly  emphasises that the decision taken  under  para  353  must  be
    taken separately from the initial decision accepting or  rejecting  the
    claim and involves an exercise in mental gymnastics in the sense  that,
    if the initial decision has been shaped by the decision  maker's  views
    on the applicant's credibility, the  decision  maker  must  immediately
    after rejecting the claim then decide whether the credibility  decision
    is one that has a reasonable prospect of being overturned on an  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  The decision maker must  stand  back  from
    the  decision  rejecting  the  new  claim  and   review   the   further
    representations and the previously considered material afresh  for  the
    purpose of deciding  whether,  notwithstanding  the  rejection  of  the
    further submissions, the claim is a fresh claim.  Reasons must be given
    which must be sufficient in content and  length  to  explain  why  that
    decision has been made.

33.  This very comprehensive analysis of the implications of the  provisions
    of para 353 and of the test concisely set out by Buxton LJ in WM  (DRC)
    must be balanced by the fact that the respondent's decision  must  not,
    in the words of Ms Rowlands, be subjected to a  pedantic  exegesis.   I
    should add that it was not being  suggested  nor  could  it  have  been
    suggested that Mr Slatter, who made his submissions in a clear, concise
    and helpful way, embarked on any such exercise.

34.  Applying the test set out by the Court of Appeal  in  WM  (DRC),  I  am
    satisfied in the present application that the respondent  assessed  the
    further representations and documents submitted in support with anxious
    scrutiny.  There has been no challenge to the way she  dealt  with  the
    school reports, the police letter, the HSBC  letter  and  the  hospital
    identity card, where she gave clear and compelling reasons why she  did
    not regard them as reliable,  nor  to  the  further  witness  statement
    submitted on behalf of the applicant which she was entitled  to  regard
    as not only merely a disagreement with the previous findings, but  also
    adding to  the  inconsistencies  in  the  accounts  given.   She  dealt
    carefully with  the  medical  evidence  and  in  my  judgement  reached
    findings and conclusions properly open to her.  There is no  reason  to
    believe when the letter is read as a whole that the respondent was  not
    fully aware that her obligation was  to  assess  whether  there  was  a
    realistic possibility of success before a First-tier Tribunal judge.  I
    am satisfied that in making that assessment the  respondent  reached  a
    decision well within the range of decisions reasonably open to her.

Decision

35.  Accordingly, this application for judicial review is dismissed.

36.  The applicant is to pay the respondent's costs of  the  application  to
    be assessed on the standard basis if not agreed subject  to  the  order
    not being enforced without an assessment of the applicant's ability  to
    pay in accordance with s.11(1) of  the  Access  to  Justice  Act  1999,
    directions in respect of which  to  stand  adjourned  generally  to  be
    restored on the written request of the respondent.

37.  The applicant's public funded costs are to be  subject  to  a  detailed
    assessment in accordance with the  Community  Legal  Service  (Funding)
    Order 2000.


H J E Latter

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

