
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Awuah and Others (Wasted Costs Orders -  HOPOs  -  Tribunal  Powers)  [2017]
UKFTT 00555 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House, London                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 June 2017                              |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

           MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL,
                SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL
                                     and
           THE PRESIDENT OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL, MR M CLEMENTS


                                   Between

                Darkwah awuah, SJ, TN and Khadija musu momoh

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants SJ and TN:   Ms Rebecca Chapman of counsel instructed by
Wesley            Gryk Solicitors
For the Appellant Awuah         Ms Helen Foot of counsel, instructted by
Sutovic &                  Hartigan Solicitors
For the Appellant Momoh         Ms Helen Foot and Ms Rebecca Chapman,
instructed by              Nathan Aaron Solicitors
For the Respondent:             Mr Rupert Cohen, of counsel, instructed by
the                    Government Legal Department, on behalf of the
         Respondent


 i) The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") is not empowered to make a Wasted Costs
    Order ("WCO") against a Home Office Presenting Officer ("HOPO").

ii) The relationship of Secretary of State and  HOPO  is  governed  by  the
    Carltona principle.

iii) The answerability of HOPOs to the tribunal is achieved through a  range
    of judicial functions and duties.

iv) In every case where a WCO  is  in  contemplation  common  law  fairness
    requires that  the  respondent  be  alerted  to  this  possibility,  be
    apprised of the case  against  him  and  be  given  adequate  time  and
    opportunity to respond.

 v) While expedition and summary  decision  making  are  desirable  in  WCO
    matters, the basic requirements of  fairness  to  the  respondent  must
    always be respected.

vi) A causal nexus between the impugned conduct of the respondent  and  the
    costs unnecessarily incurred by the aggrieved party is an essential pre-
    condition of a WCO.

vii) The tribunal's "own motion" power to make a  WCO  is  to  be  exercised
    with restraint.


                                  DECISION

McCloskey P

Preface

 1. This  is  the  judgment  of  the  panel  to  which  both  members  have
    contributed.  It is provided in the context  of  four  appeals  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") selected and conjoined for the  purpose
    of promulgating guidance on certain aspects of the power of the FtT  to
    make what is habitually described as a wasted costs order  (hereinafter
    "WCO").

 2. As a result of  careful  and  focussed  case  management  a  series  of
    questions, both general and  specific,  has  been  formulated  for  the
    decision of the panel.  The answers provided to the  general  questions
    transcend the boundaries of the four appeals.  In contrast, the  issues
    raised by the four appeals are case specific  and  their  determination
    will be guided by, inter alia, the Tribunal's resolution of the general
    questions.

 3. In  this judgment  [No  1]  we  address  and  determine  the  following
    questions:

      i) Against whom can the FtT make a WCO?  In particular,  can  such  an
         order be made against a Home Office Presenting Officer ("HOPO")?

     ii) If the FtT is empowered to make a  WCO  against  a  HOPO,  in  what
         circumstances is such an order appropriate?

    iii) What are the procedural and evidential requirements  for  making  a
         WCO?

     iv) In what circumstances is it appropriate for the FtT to make  a  WCO
         on its own initiative?

     General

 4. We begin by identifying the main provision of primary  legislation  and
    an important procedural rule.  Section 29 of the Tribunals, Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (the "2007 Act") provides:

          "(1)    The costs of and incidental to-

              (a) all proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal, and

              (b)      all proceedings in the Upper Tribunal,

          shall  be  in  the  discretion  of  the  Tribunal  in  which   the
          proceedings take place.

          (2) The relevant Tribunal shall have full power  to  determine  by
          whom and to what extent the costs are to be paid.

          (3) Subsections (1)  and  (2)  have  effect  subject  to  Tribunal
          Procedure Rules.

          (4) In any proceedings mentioned in subsection (1),  the  relevant
          Tribunal may-

              (a) disallow, or

              (b)  (as  the  case  may  be)  order  the  legal   or   other
              representative concerned to meet,

          the whole of any wasted costs or such  part  of  them  as  may  be
          determined in accordance with Tribunal Procedure Rules.

          (5) In subsection (4) "wasted costs" means any costs incurred by a
          party-

              (a) as a result of any improper,  unreasonable  or  negligent
              act  or  omission  on  the  part  of  any  legal   or   other
              representative or any employee of such a representative, or

              (b) which, in the light of any such act or omission occurring
              after they were incurred, the relevant Tribunal considers  it
              is unreasonable to expect that party to pay.

          (6) In this section "legal or other representative",  in  relation
          to a party to proceedings, means any person exercising a right  of
          audience or right to conduct the proceedings on his behalf.

          (7) In the application of this section in  relation  to  Scotland,
          any reference in this  section  to  costs  is  to  be  read  as  a
          reference to expenses."

     Rule 9 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 (the "2014 Rules"), in  operation  since
    20 October 2014, provides:

          "(1)     If  the  Tribunal  allows  an  appeal,  it  may  order  a
          respondent to pay by way of costs to the appellant  an  amount  no
          greater than-

              (a) any fee paid under the  Fees  Order  that  has  not  been
              refunded; and

              (b) any fee which the appellant is or may be  liable  to  pay
              under that Order.

          (2) The Tribunal may otherwise make an order in respect  of  costs
          only-

              (a) under section 29(4) of the 2007 Act  (wasted  costs)  and
              costs incurred in applying for such costs; or

              (b) if a person has acted unreasonably in bringing, defending
              or conducting proceedings."

    Pausing here, whereas section 29 of the 2007 Act  is  directed  to  the
    litigation conduct of a party's "legal or other  representative",  rule
    9(2) widens the  net  so  as  to  enmesh  the  conduct  of  parties  to
    litigation.

 5. In our decision in Cancino (costs - First-tier Tribunal -  new  powers)
    [2015] UKFTT 0059 (IAC) we described rule 9(2)  as  a  "new  power"  to
    award costs: see [2].  In [5] we emphasised that section 29 and rule 9,
    in tandem, are the two core elements of the FtT wasted costs regime.

 6. It is convenient at this juncture to rehearse what Cancino decided:

          [1] Rule 9 of the 2014 Rules operates in conjunction with  section
              29 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.


          [2] The only powers to award fees or costs available to the First-
              tier Tribunal (the "FtT") are those contained in  Rule  9  of
              the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and
              Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 (the "2014 Rules").


          [3] Transitionally, Rule 9 of  the  2014  Rules  applies  only  to
              appeals coming into existence subsequent to the  commencement
              date of 20 October 2014.  It has no  application  to  appeals
              predating this date.


          [4] It is essential to be alert to the  distinctions  between  the
              costs awarding powers contained  in  Rule  9(2)(a)  and  Rule
              9(2)(b) of the 2014 Rules.


          [5] Awards of costs are always discretionary, even in cases  where
              the qualifying conditions are satisfied.


          [6] In the ordinary course of events, where any of  the  offending
              types of conduct to which either Rule 9(2)(a) or Rule 9(2)(b)
              of the 2014 Rules applies, the FtT will normally exercise its
              discretion  to  make  an   order   against   the   defaulting
              representative or party.


          [7] The onus rests on the party applying for an order  under  Rule
              9.


          [8] There must be a causal nexus between the conduct  in  question
              and the wasted costs claimed.


          [9] One of the supreme governing principles  is  that  every  case
              will be unavoidably fact sensitive.  Accordingly, comparisons
              with other cases will normally be inappropriate.


          [10]    Orders for costs under  Rule  9  will  be  very  much  the
              exception, rather than the rule and will be reserved  to  the
              clearest cases.


          [11]    Rule 9 of the 2014 Rules applies to conduct, whether  acts
              or omissions, belonging to the period commencing on the  date
              when an appeal comes into existence and ending on the date of
              the final determination thereof.


        [12]  The procedure for determining applications under  Rule  9  of
             the 2014 Rules will be governed in the main by  the  principles
             of fairness, expedition and proportionality.

    The First Question

 7. This question, in substance, asks whether the FtT is empowered to  make
    a WCO against Home Office Presenting Officers ("HOPOs").  While this is
    a pure question of law it takes its colour from the context to which it
    belongs.  This, we consider, must include the general "whats, why's and
    wherefores" of the HOPO: what are HOPOs and what do they do?

 8. The latter question was one of those which arose in Home Office  v  the
    Information Commissioner and Yeo [2016] UKFTT 2015 0213  (GRC).   There
    the evidence included a witness statement of Daniel Hobbs, formerly the
    Director of Appeals, Litigation and Subject Access Requests Directorate
    of the Home Office.  This contains the following notable averments:

      a) The Secretary of State for the Home Department (the  "Secretary  of
         State") is represented in 98% of appeal hearings in the FtT and  in
         all cases, both statutory appeals and judicial reviews, before  the
         Upper Tribunal (the "UT").

      b) In the twelve month period ending in the second quarter of 2016 the
         FtT received 91,127 appeals.  In the next succeeding  twelve  month
         period this figure was not significantly different.  During each of
         these twelve month periods the total UT yearly intake of new  cases
         was close to 30,000, divided roughly equally between  new  judicial
         reviews and appeals  from  the  FtT  or  renewed  applications  for
         permission to appeal.

      c) There are 145 HOPOs nationally  distributed  throughout  nine  Home
         Office  centres.   Of  these  37  are  Senior  Presenting  Officers
         ("SPOs"), who present all cases in the UT.

      d) Many HOPOs have "qualifications and experience in law".

      e) SPOs have the rank of Senior Executive Officer.   All  other  HOPOs
         are  of  Higher  Executive  Officer  grade  which  is   the   first
         "significant" management grade in the Civil Service.  All HOPOs are
         employees of the Home Office, assigned to the  Appeals,  Litigation
         and Subject Access  Request  Directorate  which  is  part  of  UKVI
         ("United Kingdom Visas and Immigration").

      f) The role of HOPOs is "... to represent the Home Office  before  the
         Tribunal ... .  This involves advocacy and  also  making  decisions
         about case management based on fact, guidance and an interpretation
         of the law".

      g) The majority of HOPOs have completed  a  module  of  the  Chartered
         Institute of Legal Executives Level 3 course.

      h) All newly appointed HOPOs are  required  to  complete  an  internal
         eight day training course,  followed  by  a  two  month  period  of
         supervision and occasional further training thereafter.

      i)  HOPOs  "...  are  expected  to  demonstrate  a  high   degree   of
         professionalism and behave consistently in line with the values  of
         UKVI including being consistently competent,  high  performing  and
         customer focussed".

      j) The Home  Office  has  also  recruited  a  limited  number  of  law
         graduates at  the  grade  of  Executive  Officers,  on  fixed  term
         contracts.  This occurs typically as a response to  bulging  appeal
         numbers.  These persons are deployed in  the  more  straightforward
         cases.  The Home Office instructs counsel  in  the  "most  complex"
         cases.

 9. The evidence of Mr Hobbs further discloses that it is  the  established
    policy of the Home Office to develop particular  litigation  strategies
    and "lines to take" in immigration cases.  This promotes consistency of
    presentation and argument among HOPOs.   It  is  achieved  in  part  by
    ensuring that HOPOs are familiar with relevant  published  Home  Office
    guidance relating to specific subjects and issues.  Thus, for  example,
    HOPOs are, as a group, instructed to advance specified arguments on the
    meaning  and  scope  of  certain  statutory  provisions  and  important
    judicial decisions: see generally [19] - [22] of the reported decision.
     In this context we take cognizance also of the Home  Office  published
    guidance on the withdrawal of immigration decisions, conceding  appeals
    and applying for adjournments.  All of these functions are performed by
    HOPOs.

10. Other aspects of the wider context are  highlighted  in  the  following
    passages from VOM (Error of law - when appealable) Nigeria [2016]  UKUT
    410 (IAC) which have some purchase in the present context:

          "[17]   ... the delivery of swift, inexpensive  and  uncomplicated
          justice  has  long  been  the  overarching   ethos   of   tribunal
          adjudication.  See,  for  example,  the  discussion  in  Wade  and
          Forsyth, Administrative Law (10th Edition),  per  pp  773  -  774.
          This forms  part  of  the  context  in  which  the  2007  Act  was
          introduced.  The background to this enactment includes the  report
          of Sir Andrew Leggatt, followed by a  White  Paper  (CM.6243/2004)
          which accepted many of its recommendations.  Sir  Andrew's  report
          contains the following noteworthy passage, at paragraph 1.2:

               '...  Tribunal's procedures and approach to  overseeing  the
               preparation of cases and their hearing can  be  simpler  and
               more informal than the courts, even after the civil  justice
               reforms.'

          One of the main aims of the legislation  which  followed,  in  the
          form of the 2007 Act, was to introduce the "user-oriented service"
          strongly recommended by Sir  Andrew  (see  paragraph  1.4  of  his
          report).

          [18]    A second, inter-related aspect of the context in which the
          2007 Act  was  devised  is  the  overriding  objective,  with  its
          emphasis on expedition, finality and the suppression of  avoidable
          delay.  The overriding objective was, by 2007, firmly  established
          in  civil  proceedings,  was  gaining  a  foothold   in   criminal
          proceedings and was being introduced in tribunal  proceedings,  at
          both tiers.  As regards the Upper Tribunal,  it  is  contained  in
          Rule 2 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
          which came into operation on 3 November 2008.  Generally,  in  the
          United Kingdom legal system the overriding objective  and  related
          measures, including wholesale reform of rules of procedure in both
          courts and  tribunals,  progressively  gained  traction  during  a
          period in which the imperative of defeating the  so-called  unholy
          trinity  of  avoidable  delay,  excessive  costs  and  unwarranted
          complication became  increasingly  dominant.  By  2007  the  Civil
          Procedure Rules were firmly entrenched, having been introduced  on
          26 April 1999.

          [19]    While the developments in  civil  and  tribunal  procedure
          noted above have occurred during the last two  decades,  there  is
          nothing novel about them.  The principle  that  legal  proceedings
          should be concluded as expeditiously as possible is  expressed  in
          the longstanding Latin maxim interest rei publicae  ut  sit  finis
          litium.  Over a century has passed since this maxim was recognised
          as possessing "extreme value": by Lord Loreburn LC in Brown v Dean
          [1910] AC 373, at  374.   The  operation  of  this  maxim  in  the
          discrete context of statutory construction and  appeal  rights  is
          illustrated in R v Pinfold [1988]  QB  462,  where  Lord  Lane  CJ
          stated at 464:

               '...  One must read those provisions against the  background
               of the fact that it is in the interests  of  the  public  in
               general that there should be a limit or a finality of  legal
               proceedings, sometimes put in a Latin  maxim,  but  that  is
               what it means in English'.

          This maxim was also applied in a comparable legal context,  albeit
          in matrimonial proceedings, in Hewitson v Hewitson [1995] 1 ALL ER
          472  (see  particularly  per  Butler-Sloss  LJ  at  [63]  -  [65].
          Finally, in this context, we remind ourselves of  the  presumption
          of statutory construction that the law  should  serve  the  public
          interest: Bennion on  Statutory  Interpretation  (Sixth  Edition),
          page 722.

          [20]     We  further  take  into  account  that,  while  this  has
          manifested itself in contexts other than the present, one  of  the
          emerging features of the modern legal system  is  that  of  strong
          resistance to what has become  known  as  "satellite"  litigation.
          This species of litigation takes the  form  of  proceedings  in  a
          higher  court  or  tribunal,  frequently   via   judicial   review
          challenges, brought in circumstances  where  the  process  of  the
          lower court  or  tribunal  is  incomplete.   This  is  illustrated
          particularly, and perhaps most famously, in R v Director of Public
          Prosecutions, ex Parte Kebeline [2000] 2 AC 326, at 371  per  Lord
          Steyn.  This is further illustrated in the rejection  of  judicial
          review challenges to aspects of inquest proceedings pursued  at  a
          stage when  the  process  is  not  complete.   See  in  particular
          McLuckie v Coroner for Northern Ireland [2011] NICA 34, at [26]."

11. The correct answer to the first question is also informed by  an  array
    of statutory provisions.  While section 29 of the 2007 Act provides the
    foundation and starting point the enquiry ranges further, extending  to
    certain other  provisions  of  primary  legislation.   Section  29,  we
    recall, establishes that the FtT is empowered to  make  a  WCO  against
    "the legal or other representative concerned", defined as  "any  person
    exercising a right of audience or right to conduct the  proceedings  on
    [a party's] behalf."

12. Section 51(1) and (2) of  the  Senior  Courts  Act  1981  ("SCA  1981")
    provide:

          "(1) Subject to the provisions of this or any other enactment  and
          to rules of court, the costs of and incidental to all  proceedings
          in-

             (a) the civil division of the Court of Appeal;

             (b) the High Court;

             (ba) the family court; and

             (c) the county court,

          shall be in the discretion of the court.

          (2) Without prejudice to any general power to make rules of court,
          such rules may make provision for regulating matters  relating  to
          the  costs  of  those  proceedings   including,   in   particular,
          prescribing  scales  of  costs  to  be  paid  to  legal  or  other
          representatives or for securing that the amount awarded to a party
          in respect of the costs to be paid by him to such  representatives
          is not limited to what would have been payable by him to  them  if
          he had not been awarded costs."

    Section 51(6) - (7A) provide:

          "(6) In any proceedings mentioned in subsection (1), the court may
          disallow, or (as the  case  may  be)  order  the  legal  or  other
          representative concerned to meet, the whole of any wasted costs or
          such part of them as may be determined in accordance with rules of
          court.

          (7) In subsection (6), "wasted costs" means any costs incurred  by
          a party-

             (a) as a result of any improper, unreasonable or negligent  act
             or omission on the part of any legal or other representative or
             any employee of such a representative; or

             (b) which, in the light of any such act or  omission  occurring
             after  they  were  incurred,  the   court   considers   it   is
             unreasonable to expect that party to pay.

           (7A) Where the court exercises a power under  subsection  (6)  in
          relation to costs incurred by a party, it must inform such of  the
          following as it considers appropriate-

             (a) an approved regulator;

             (b) the Director of Legal Aid Casework."

    As noted by this Tribunal  in  Cancino,  at  [10],  the  definition  of
    "wasted costs" in section 29(5) of the  2007  Act  replicates  verbatim
    that contained in section 51(7) of the SCA 1981.  The latter  provision
    is clearly  the  derivation  of  the  former.  We  consider  the  nexus
    inextricable.

13.  The  Office  of  Immigration  Services   Commissioner   ("OISC")   was
    established by section 83 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  (the
    "1999 Act"), one of a series of provisions arranged in Part  5  of  the
    statute under the heading "Immigration Advisors and Immigration Service
    Providers".  Section 83(1) - (3) provide:

          "(1) There is to be an Immigration Services Commissioner (referred
          to in this Part as "the Commissioner").

          (2) The Commissioner is to be appointed by the Secretary of  State
          after consulting the Lord Chancellor, the Department of Justice in
          Northern Ireland and the Scottish Ministers.

          (3) It is to be the general duty of the  Commissioner  to  promote
          good  practice  by  those  who  provide  immigration   advice   or
          immigration services."

    By section 83(5):

          "(5) The Commissioner must exercise his functions so as to secure,
          so far as  is  reasonably  practicable,  that  those  who  provide
          immigration advice or immigration services-

             (a) are fit and competent to do so;

             (b) act in the best interests of their clients;

             (c) do not knowingly mislead any court, tribunal or adjudicator
             in the United Kingdom;

             (d) do not seek to abuse any procedure operating in the  United
             Kingdom in connection with immigration or asylum (including any
             appellate or other judicial procedure);

             (e) do not advise any person to do something which would amount
             to such an abuse."

    By section 84(1) and (2):

          "(1) No person  may  provide  immigration  advice  or  immigration
          services unless he is a qualified person.

          (2) A person is a qualified person if he is-

             (a) a registered person,

             (b) authorised by a designated professional body to practise as
             a member of the profession whose members the body regulates,

             (ba) a person  authorised  to  provide  immigration  advice  or
             immigration services by a designated qualifying regulator,

             (c) the equivalent in an EEA State of-

               (i) a registered person, or

               (ii) a person within paragraph (b) or (ba),

             (d)  a  person  permitted,  by  virtue  of  exemption  from   a
             prohibition, to provide in an  EEA  State  advice  or  services
             equivalent to immigration advice or services, or

             (e) acting on behalf of, and under the supervision of, a person
             within any of paragraphs (a) to (d) (whether  or  not  under  a
             contract of employment)."

    Section 82(1) contains some pertinent definitions.  First, "immigration
    advice" -

          "'immigration advice' means advice which-

             (a) relates to a particular individual;

             (b) is given in connection with one or more relevant matters;

             (c) is given by a person who knows that  he  is  giving  it  in
             relation to a particular individual and in connection with  one
             or more relevant matters; and

             (d) is not given in connection with representing an  individual
             before a court in criminal proceedings or matters ancillary  to
             criminal proceedings;"

    Next, "immigration services" -

          "'immigration services' means the  making  of  representations  on
          behalf of a particular individual-

             (a)  in  civil  proceedings  before  a   court,   tribunal   or
             adjudicator in the United Kingdom, or

             (b)  in  correspondence  with  a  Minister  of  the  Crown   or
             government department,

           in connection with one or more relevant matters;"

     "Qualified person" is defined as "a person who is  qualified  for  the
    purposes of section 84".

    "Registered person" is defined as "a person who is registered with  the
    Commissioner under section 85."

    Section 82(2) provides:

          "In this Part, references to the provision of  immigration  advice
          or immigration services are to the provision  of  such  advice  or
          services by a person-

             (a) in the United Kingdom (regardless of whether the persons to
             whom they are provided are in the United Kingdom or elsewhere);
             and

             (b) in the course of a business carried on (whether or not  for
             profit) by him or by another person."

    It is appropriate to note also the definition of "Designated Qualifying
    Regulator", which is contained in section 86(A):

          "(1) 'Designated qualifying regulator' means a  body  which  is  a
          qualifying regulator and is listed in subsection (2).

          (2) The listed bodies are-

             (a) the Law Society;

             (b) the Institute of Legal Executives;

             (c) the General Council of the Bar."

14. The most recent statutory prescription of  note  is  found  in  certain
    provisions of the Legal Services Act 2007 ("LSA  2007").   The  subject
    matter of Part 3  of  this  statute  is  "Reserved  Legal  Activities".
    Section 12 provides, in material part:

          "(1) In this Act "reserved legal activity" means-

             (a) the exercise of a right of audience;

             (b) the conduct of litigation;

             (c) reserved instrument activities;

             (d) probate activities;

             (e) notarial activities;

             (f) the administration of oaths.

          (2) Schedule 2 makes provision  about  what  constitutes  each  of
          those activities."

    Section 13 governs the topic of entitlement  to  carry  on  a  reserved
    legal activity.  It provides:

          "(1) The question whether a person is  entitled  to  carry  on  an
          activity which is a reserved legal activity is  to  be  determined
          solely in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

          (2) A person is entitled to carry on an  activity  ("the  relevant
          activity") which is a reserved legal activity where-

             (a) the person is an  authorised  person  in  relation  to  the
             relevant activity, or

             (b) the  person  is  an  exempt  person  in  relation  to  that
             activity.

          (3)  Subsection  (2)  is  subject  to  section  23   (transitional
          protection for non-commercial bodies).

          (4) Nothing in this section or section 23 affects  section  84  of
          the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c. 33) (which  prohibits  the
          provision of immigration advice and immigration services except by
          certain persons)."

    The term "authorised person" is defined in section 18(1) thus:

          "(1) For the purposes of this Act "authorised person", in relation
          to an activity ("the relevant activity") which is a reserved legal
          activity, means-

             (a) a person  who  is  authorised  to  carry  on  the  relevant
             activity by a relevant approved regulator in  relation  to  the
             relevant activity (other than by virtue of a licence under Part
             5), or

             (b) a licensable body which, by virtue of such  a  licence,  is
             authorised to carry on the relevant  activity  by  a  licensing
             authority in relation to the reserved legal activity."

    This discrete statutory jigsaw is completed by Part 1 of Schedule 4  to
    the 2007 Act which provides inter alia:

          "(1) Each body listed in the first column of  the  Table  in  this
          paragraph is an approved regulator.

          (2) Each body so listed is an approved regulator  in  relation  to
          the reserved legal activities listed in  relation  to  it  in  the
          second column of the Table.



                                   TABLE

|Approved regulator               |Reserved legal activities           |
|The Law Society                  |The exercise of a right of audience.|
|                                 |                                    |
|                                 |The conduct of litigation.          |
|                                 |Reserved instrument activities.     |
|                                 |Probate activities.                 |
|                                 |The administration of oaths.        |
|The General Council of the Bar   |The exercise of a right of audience.|
|                                 |                                    |
|                                 |The conduct of litigation.          |
|                                 |Reserved instrument activities.     |
|                                 |Probate activities.                 |
|                                 |The administration of oaths.        |
|The Master of the Faculties      |Reserved instrument activities.     |
|                                 |Probate activities.                 |
|                                 |Notarial activities.                |
|                                 |The administration of oaths.        |
|The Institute of Legal Executives|The exercise of a right of audience.|
|                                 |                                    |
|                                 |The administration of oaths.        |
|The Council for Licensed         |Reserved instrument activities.     |
|Conveyancers                     |The administration of oaths.        |
|                                 |                                    |
|                                 |Probate activities.                 |
|The Chartered Institute of Patent|The exercise of a right of audience.|
|Attorneys                        |                                    |
|                                 |The conduct of litigation.          |
|                                 |Reserved instrument activities.     |
|                                 |The administration of oaths.        |
|The Institute of Trade Mark      |The exercise of a right of audience.|
|Attorneys                        |                                    |
|                                 |The conduct of litigation.          |
|                                 |Reserved instrument activities.     |
|                                 |The administration of oaths.        |
|The Association of Law Costs     |The exercise of a right of audience.|
|Draftsmen                        |                                    |
|                                 |The conduct of litigation.          |
|                                 |The administration of oaths.        |
|The Institute of Chartered       |Probate activities.                 |
|Accountants of Scotland          |                                    |
|The Association of Chartered     |Probate activities.                 |
|Certified Accountants            |                                    |


15. As we are engaged in an exercise of construing  certain  provisions  of
    primary and secondary legislation, we remind ourselves  of  some  basic
    dogma.  It is a truism that the interpretation of any  statute  is  far
    removed from an academic jaunt.  Exercises in statutory  interpretation
    are per Lord Bingham of Cornhill -

         "... directed to a particular  statute,  enacted  at  a  particular
         time, to  address  (almost  invariably)  a  particular  problem  or
         mischief."

    R v Z [2005] UKHL 35 at [17].  In R (Quintavalle) v Secretary of  State
    for Health [2003] 2 AC 687, Lord Bingham stated at [8]:

         "The court's task, within the permissible bounds of interpretation,
         is to give effect to Parliament's intention. So  the  controversial
         provisions should be read in the context of the statute as a  whole
         and the statute as a whole should be read in the historical context
         of the situation which led to its enactment."

16. The arguments of the parties' respective counsel  revolved  around  the
    assorted statutory provisions  noted  above;  the  distinction  between
    HOPOs and other kinds of representative; the distinctive  character  of
    tribunal proceedings; the overriding objective; equality of  arms;  the
    maintenance of high standards of representation; and the need to  deter
    unacceptable standards of representation.  The core  submission  of  Ms
    Chapman and Ms Foot on behalf of  the  Appellants  is  that  HOPOs  are
    "other representative(s)" within the meaning of section  29(5)  of  the
    2007 Act and a "representative" within the meaning of rule  10  of  the
    2014 Rules.  Mr Cohen, on behalf of the Secretary of State, argues  the
    contrary,  placing  particular  emphasis  on  the  correlation  between
    section 29(5) of the 2007 Act  and  section  51(7)  of  the  1981  Act,
    coupled with the jurisprudence associated with the latter provision.

17. While none of the reported decisions addressed in  argument  determines
    directly   the first question which we are  deciding  some  nonetheless
    contain a series of  identifiable  signposts.   In  Medcalf  v  Mardell
    [2003] 1 AC 120 the House of Lords held that  a  WCO  can  be  made  in
    respect of the conduct of counsel not only when  exercising  rights  of
    audience in court but also in relation  to  surrounding,  or  anterior,
    conduct such as settling pleadings,  notices  of  appeal  and  skeleton
    arguments. Thus   the applications by a party against opposing  counsel
    under section 51 of the 1981 Act for a  WCO  designed  to  recover  the
    costs of investigating and rebutting serious allegations of fraud in  a
    draft amended Notice of Appeal were, in principle, properly made.

18.  Lord Steyn noted the following, at [35]:

         "The barrister must promote  and  protect  fearlessly  and  by  all
         proper and lawful means his lay clients' interests:  paragraph  203
         of the Code of Conduct."

    Lord Hobhouse made some notable observations  about  the  function  and
    responsibilities of advocates  in  the  United  Kingdom  legal  system.
    Firstly at [51]:

        "The starting point must be  a  recognition  of  the  role  of  the
        advocate in our system of justice. It is fundamental to a just  and
        fair  judicial  system  that  there  be  available  to  a  litigant
        (criminal  or  civil),  in   substantial   cases,   competent   and
        independent legal representation. The duty of the advocate is  with
        proper competence to represent  his  lay  client  and  promote  and
        protect fearlessly and by all  proper  and  lawful  means  his  lay
        client's best interests. This is a duty which the advocate owes  to
        his client but it is also in the  public  interest  that  the  duty
        should be performed.  The  judicial  system  exists  to  administer
        justice and it is integral to such a system that it provide  within
        a society a means by which rights, obligations and liabilities  can
        be recognised and given effect to in accordance with  the  law  and
        disputes be justly (and efficiently)  resolved.  The  role  of  the
        independent professional advocate  is  central  to  achieving  this
        outcome, particularly where the judicial  system  uses  adversarial
        procedures."

    Lord Hobhouse continued, at [52]:

        "It follows that  the  willingness  of  professional  advocates  to
        represent litigants should not be  undermined  either  by  creating
        conflicts of interest or by exposing  the  advocates  to  pressures
        which will tend to deter them from representing certain clients  or
        from doing so effectively. In England the professional rule that  a
        barrister must be prepared to represent any client within his field
        of practice and  competence  and  the  principles  of  professional
        independence underwrite in a manner too  often  taken  for  granted
        this   constitutional   safeguard.    Unpopular    and    seemingly
        unmeritorious  litigants  must  be  capable  of  being  represented
        without the advocate being penalised or  harassed  whether  by  the
        Executive, the Judiciary or by anyone else.  Similarly,  situations
        must  be  avoided  where  the  advocate's  conduct  of  a  case  is
        influenced not by his duty to his client but by concerns about  his
        own self-interest."

    Having then noted that the  advocate  owes  no  duty  to  his  client's
    opponent and that what  the  advocate  says  in  the  course  of  legal
    proceedings cannot give rise to an action in defamation, Lord  Hobhouse
    continued at [54]:

        "The professional advocate is  in  a  privileged  position.  He  is
        granted rights of audience. He enjoys certain immunities. In return
        he owes certain duties  to  the  court  and  is  bound  by  certain
        standards of professional conduct in accordance with  the  code  of
        conduct of his profession. This again reflects the public  interest
        in the proper  administration  of  justice;  the  public  interest,
        covering the litigants themselves as well, is now also expressed in
        Part I of the Civil Procedure Rules. ... The advocate must  respect
        and uphold the authority of the court. He must  not  be  a  knowing
        party to an abuse of process or a deceit  of  the  court.  He  must
        conduct himself with reasonable competence. He must take reasonable
        and practicable steps to avoid unnecessary expense or waste of  the
        court's time. The codes of conduct  of  the  advocate's  profession
        spell out the detailed provisions to be derived  from  the  general
        principles. These include the  provisions  relevant  to  barristers
        which preclude them from making allegations, whether orally  or  in
        writing, of fraud or criminal guilt unless he has  a  proper  basis
        for so doing. Paragraph 606(c), which has already been quoted by my
        noble  and  learned  friend,  requires  express  instructions   and
        reasonably credible material which as it stands establishes a prima
        facie case of fraud. All this fits  in  well  with  an  appropriate
        constitutional  structure   for   a   judicial   system   for   the
        administration of justice."

19. Lord Hobhouse, in his reflections on the "constitutional" framework  to
    which advocacy belongs, also gave consideration to the impact  of  WCOs
    at [55]:

        "The introduction of a wasted costs jurisdiction  makes  an  inroad
        into this structure. It creates a risk of a  conflict  of  interest
        for the advocate. It is intended and designed to affect the conduct
        of the advocate and  to  do  so  by  penalising  him  economically.
        Ideally a conflict should not arise. The advocate's duty to his own
        client is subject to his duty to the court: the  advocate's  proper
        discharge of his duty to his client should  not  cause  him  to  be
        accused of being in breach of his duty to the court (Arthur Hall  v
        Simons [2000] 3 WLR 543.) But the situation in which  the  advocate
        finds himself may not be so clear cut. Difficult tactical decisions
        may have to be made, maybe in difficult circumstances. Opinions can
        differ,  particularly  in  the  heated  and   stressed   arena   of
        litigation. Once an opposing party is  entitled  to  apply  for  an
        order  against  the  other  party's  legal   representatives,   the
        situation becomes much more unpredictable  and  hazardous  for  the
        advocate. Adversarial perceptions are introduced. This is a feature
        of what happened  in  the  present  case.  The  factors  which  may
        motivate a hostile application by an opponent are liable to be very
        different from those which would properly motivate a court."

    Lord Hobhouse distinguished  between  WCOs  made  at  the  suit  of  an
    advocate's own client and those of his adversary.  Whereas  the  former
    have a compensatory character, the latter are "penal"  in  nature.   He
    continued, at [56]:

        "The risk of such an application  can,  at  best,  only  provide  a
        distraction in the proper representation of his own client and,  at
        worst, may cause him to put his own interests above  those  of  his
        client. The construction of the section and the application of  the
        jurisdiction  should  accordingly  be  no  wider  than  is  clearly
        required by the statute."

    The next succeeding passage is of particular note:

         "Secondly, the fault must, in the present context,  relate  clearly
         to a fault in relation to the advocate's duty to the court  not  in
         relation to the opposing party, to whom he owes no duty."

    In the same  passage,  having  noted  that  the  terms  "improper"  and
    "unreasonable" qualify for no special  meaning,  Lord  Hobhouse  opined
    that the term "negligent" -

         "... is directed primarily to the jurisdiction as between  a  legal
         representative and his own client."

          His Lordship further contrasted the advocate  (on  the  one  hand)
         with a  person  "exercising  a  right  to  conduct  litigation",  a
         "litigation agent" in shorthand (on the other).

20. The precondition of a WCO that the advocate has acted in breach of  his
    duty to the court emerges clearly from Medcalf.  It has been emphasised
    in, inter alia, Ridehalgh v Horsefield [1994] Ch 205 at  232H  -  233A.
    It was on this ground that the Court of Appeal  in  Ridehalgh  rejected
    the argument that a breach of the advocate's duty to  his  client  must
    also be demonstrated in order to justify a WCO.

21. The duties which the advocate, whether solicitor or barrister, owes  to
    the court arise out  of  the  distinctive  role  and  position  of  the
    advocate in our legal system and the special relationship  between  the
    advocate and the court.  We consider it far from coincidental or casual
    that Lord Hobhouse, in his exposition of  this  subject,  employed  the
    phrase "professional advocates": see Medcalf at [52].  These duties, in
    one sense, represent the price which the professional advocate must pay
    for  the  privileges  and  immunities  he  enjoys.   Furthermore,   the
    professional advocate  is  duty  bound  to  honour  the  standards  and
    obligations  enshrined  in  the  professional  conduct  code   of   his
    profession.  Such codes impose ethical and  professional  duties  of  a
    high order.

22. The framework which we have outlined and expounded above simply  cannot
    be applied to HOPOs.  They are not officers of the court. They   belong
    to none of the regulated professional cohorts. They do  not  enjoy  the
    privileges and immunities of the advocate.  They are not subject to any
    of the detailed codes regulating the professional and  ethical  conduct
    of advocates and others and,  in  consequence,  they  lie  outwith  the
    jurisdiction of the  various  regulatory  bodies.   Stated  succinctly,
    HOPOs are unregulated.

23.  That is not to say that HOPOs owe  no  duties  to  the  tribunal.   We
    consider that rule 2(4) of the 2014 Rules, a discrete  element  of  the
    overriding objective and its UT analogue, framed  in  identical  terms,
    clearly apply to  HOPOs.   Thus  HOPOs  are  subject  to  the  positive
    obligations of helping the Tribunal further  the  overriding  objective
    and cooperating with the Tribunal generally.  The generality  of  these
    duties encompasses a potentially broad series of specific  requirements
    and obligations many of which will be recurrent in most cases.   Others
    may be more case sensitive.

24. The proposition that HOPOs are answerable to  the  judge  or  panel  of
    judges before which they appear is in our view unassailable.  It arises
    from the basic judicial functions and duties, in tandem with rule  2(4)
    of the 2014 Rules. The efficacy of this answerability is  not,  in  our
    estimation,  dependent  upon  prescribed  regulatory,  disciplinary  or
    enforcement arrangements.  In practice it is achieved,  satisfactorily,
    by the mechanisms of judicial oversight, judicial  disapproval,  simple
    judicial warnings, the Tribunal's  insistence  upon  strict  compliance
    with  its  orders,  directions  and   rules   and   kindred   measures.
    Answerability  is  further  achieved  by  correspondence  between   the
    Tribunal and the appropriate agency when necessary and the contents  of
    the Tribunal's decisions.   See  in  this  context  Wagner  (advocates'
    conduct - fair hearing) [2015] UKUT 655 (IAC).

25. Giving effect to our analysis above, we conclude as follows:  Given the
    inextricable link between section 29(6) of the  2007  Act  and  section
    51(13) of SCA  1981,  which  in  turn  engages  the  jurisprudence  and
    principles considered above, HOPOs are not vulnerable to  a  WCO  since
    the precondition that they owe, and have breached, a duty or duties  to
    the tribunal, correctly understood, cannot be satisfied.  As  they  are
    not professional advocates it follows that they are  not  a  "legal  or
    other representative" within the embrace of section 29(5) of  the  2007
    Act.

26. This analysis may be developed.  Having regard to the totality  of  the
    statutory framework considered above, the  related  conclusion  that  a
    HOPO  exercises neither a "right of audience" nor a "right  to  conduct
    the proceedings on [the Secretary  of  State's]  behalf"  must  in  our
    judgement be correct.  Section 29 of the 2007 Act  does  not  exist  in
    isolation.  Rather, when it  was  introduced  it  became  part  of  the
    broader, pre-existing statutory landscape sketched above.   Furthermore
    section 29 was devised during an  era  when  regulation  of  the  legal
    professions had become a hot topic. Successive  legislatures  had  paid
    particular attention to the legal professions,  professional  advocates
    and regulators.  We consider that unequivocal statutory language  would
    have been required in order to bring HOPOs within the scope of  section
    29(5) and (6).  There is none. On the contrary there is discernible  in
    these provisions, considered in both their narrow and broader contexts,
    a clear underlying intention to subject professional advocates only  to
    the risk of a WCO.

27. Likewise, we  take  cognizance  of  the  terms  in  which  the  primary
    legislation enabling power relating to the FtT and UT procedural  rules
    is framed.  This is found in section 22 of Schedule 5 to the 2007  Act.
    Paragraph 9 of Schedule 5 provides:

         "Rules may make provision conferring additional rights of  audience
         before the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal."

    We consider, in this  context,  that  "additional"  denotes  rights  of
    audience over and above those conferred by existing  legislation.   The
    relevant provision of the 2014 Rules in this respect is  rule  10.   In
    our judgement the terms of rule  10  make  abundantly  clear  that  the
    Tribunal Procedural Committee, in devising  the  2014  Rules,  did  not
    invoke the power available in paragraph 9 of Schedule 5.

28. Still further reasons can be offered  in  support  of  the  conclusions
    expressed above.  It is well-established that there is  no  distinction
    in law between a government minister and his civil  servants.   In  the
    present context the minister is the Secretary of State  and  the  civil
    servants are the HOPOs employed by the Home  Office,  the  organisation
    which gives effect to the Secretary of State's decisions  and  policies
    and  is  directly  answerable  to  him.   The  principle  engaged   was
    formulated by the Court of Appeal in Carltona v Commissioners of  Works
    and Others [1943] 2 All ER 560, at 563A, in these terms:

        "In the administration of government in this country the  functions
        which are given to ministers (and constitutionally  properly  given
        to ministers because they  are  constitutionally  responsible)  are
        functions so multifarious that no minister  could  ever  personally
        attend to them. To take the example of the present  case  no  doubt
        there have been  thousands  of  requisitions  in  this  country  by
        individual ministers. It cannot be supposed  that  this  regulation
        meant that, in each case, the minister in person should direct  his
        mind to the matter. The  duties  imposed  upon  ministers  and  the
        powers  given  to  ministers  are  normally  exercised  under   the
        authority  of  the  ministers  by  responsible  officials  of   the
        department. Public business could not be carried on  if  that  were
        not the case. Constitutionally, the decision of  such  an  official
        is, of course, the  decision  of  the  minister.  The  minister  is
        responsible. It  is  he  who  must  answer  before  Parliament  for
        anything that his officials have done under his authority, and,  if
        for an important matter he selected  an  official  of  such  junior
        standing that he could not be expected competently to  perform  the
        work, the minister would have to answer for that in Parliament. The
        whole system of departmental  organisation  and  administration  is
        based on the view that ministers, being responsible to  Parliament,
        will  see  that  important  duties  are  committed  to  experienced
        officials. If they do not do that, Parliament is  the  place  where
        complaint must be made against them."

    This principle has been applied to the  immigration  context:  in  R  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ex-parte Oladehinde [1990] 2
    WLR 1195 at 1218B/D especially, per Lord Donaldson MR.

29. We are of the opinion  that  the  Carltona  principle  applies  to  the
    relationship of Secretary of State and HOPOs.  While this principle is,
    as Lord Donaldson MR recognised in Oladehinde at 125E, capable of being
    "negative or confined by express statutory provisions", or by  "clearly
    necessary implication", neither is identifiable in the present context.
     In this context we take cognisance of the analysis in Yeo (supra) that
    the Secretary of State and HOPO's  are  a  single  entity  and  may  be
    regarded as a litigant in person.   It follows that  the  Secretary  of
    State - and the Secretary of State alone - is fully responsible for the
    actions of HOPOs.  No separate individual liability  or  responsibility
    attaches to such persons.  As the Secretary of State and the  HOPO  are
    indistinguishable in law it follows that in  the  language  of  section
    29(6) of the 2007 Act a HOPO does not conduct proceedings on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State. Rather, the HOPO is, in this discrete  context,
    the alter ego of the Secretary of State, one and the same person.

30. The  conclusion  expressed  immediately  above  is  reinforced  by  the
    decision in Brown v Bennett [2002] 1 WLR 713 which  held,  inter  alia,
    that the phrase "a right to conduct litigation on [a party's] behalf in
    section 51(13) of the 1981 Act denotes a right "granted by  the  client
    to the lawyers to conduct litigation", per Neuberger J at 727 H.

31. Furthermore, we can find nothing in the range of legislative provisions
    outlined above supporting the view that HOPOs have the status of "legal
    or other representative", defined as "any person exercising a right  of
    audience or right to conduct the proceedings on  [a  party's]  behalf",
    within the meaning and scope of section 29(6)  of  the  2007  Act.   In
    particular, the Appellants' argument  to  the  contrary  is  unable  to
    overcome the combined effect of the material provisions of the 1999 Act
    considered in tandem with LSA 2007.

32.   Section  84  of  the  1999  Act  establishes  a  discrete  cohort  of
    immigration advisers and immigration service providers.  All members of
    this group must either possess one of the specified  authorisations  or
    have the status of "registered person" viz registered with  OISC.   LSA
    2007 is concerned with the six types  of  legal  service  specified  in
    section 12(1).  Of these, the only two of note in the  present  context
    are "the  exercise  of  a  right  of  audience"  and  "the  conduct  of
    litigation".   The interaction and coexistence between the 1999 Act and
    LSA 2007 is achieved by section 12(4) which expressly leaves section 84
    of the 1999 Act unaffected.  This explains why OISC is not one  of  the
    "approved regulators" listed in the Table found in Part 1 of Schedule 4
    to LSA 2007: see [14] above.  HOPOs are clearly not embraced by  either
    section 84 of the 1999 Act or the regime established by LSA 2007.

33. In passing, one of the consequences of the above  analysis  is  that  a
    registered OISC practitioner is vulnerable to a WCO.  We consider  that
    such persons clearly fall within the embrace of section  29(4)  of  the
    2007 Act.

34. On behalf of the Appellants the protest is made that to  exclude  HOPOs
    from section 29(6) of the 2007 Act would give rise to an  absurdity  in
    two  specific  respects.   First,  the  vulnerability  of   the   legal
    representatives of Appellants to a WCO would  be  considerably  greater
    than that of the Secretary of State, leading  to  inequality  of  arms.
    Second, this would encourage a culture  of  impunity  on  the  part  of
    HOPOs.  We recognise of  course  the  well-established  principle  that
    Parliament, in legislating, is presumed not  to  have  intended  absurd
    consequences.  However, absurdity entails an  elevated  threshold,  one
    which in our judgement is plainly not overcome in this context.

35. There several reasons for this.  The first is the availability  of  the
    power conferred on the FtT by rule 9(2)(b) to order costs  against  the
    Secretary  of  State   for   unreasonably   defending   or   conducting
    proceedings.  This, in our estimation, is a wide and  potent  provision
    which is complementary to the  "wasted  costs"  definition  in  section
    29(5).  Second, HOPOs owe to the tribunal, without  qualification,  the
    broad range of duties enshrined in rule 2(4). Third, HOPOs act  at  all
    times subject to the deterrence and  scrutiny  noted  in  [23]  -  [24]
    above. Furthermore, they are answerable to the Secretary of State  who,
    in turn, is answerable to Parliament and, ultimately,  the  electorate.
    Fourth, the conduct  of  HOPOs  must  at  all  times  accord  with  the
    expressed  and  implied  standards  of  their  contractual  engagement.
    Finally, the discretions  and  duties  of  judicial  office,  traceable
    ultimately to the statutory oath of  office,  are  both  extensive  and
    efficacious in practice, more than sufficient to ensure a level playing
    field between the parties in  every  case.   For  this  combination  of
    reasons our construction of the  relevant  statutory  provisions  gives
    rise to no absurdity.

36. The exercise  which  we  have  conducted  above  and  the  interim  and
    principal conclusions which  we  have  reached  have  unfolded  in  the
    imperfect world of Parliamentary legislation.  In the ideal  world  the
    legislation itself would  provide  a  clear  answer  to  all  questions
    relating to its meaning and scope.  In the  real  world  it  frequently
    fails to do so.  We recognise that there  is  some  attraction  in  the
    contention that a HOPO is an "other representative" within the  meaning
    of section 29(5)(A) of the 2007 Act, as the unreported decision of  the
    UT in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  PR  [AA/11637/15],
    which we gave permission to cite, confirms.  However, with the  benefit
    of extensive argument and reflection, we consider that this  attraction
    is superficial only, failing  to  withstand  the  penetrating  analysis
    which we have endeavoured to conduct.

37. Although none of the questions formulated for our decision is  directed
    specifically to rule 9(2)(b) of the 2014 Rules, we  are  alert  to  the
    possibility of an increasing emphasis on this discrete  provision  and,
    hence, add the following.  Judges, parties and practitioners should  be
    alert to the decision in Catana v HMRC  [2012]  UKUT  172  (TCC)  which
    considers, inter alia, the meaning and scope of the  phrase  "bringing,
    defending or conducting proceedings".  The Tax and Chancery Chamber  of
    the Upper Tribunal held that this is -

         "....   an inclusive phrase designed to capture cases in  which  an
         appellant has unreasonably brought an appeal which he  should  know
         could not  succeed,  a  respondent  has  unreasonably  resisted  an
         obviously meritorious appeal or either party has acted unreasonably
         in the course of proceedings, for example by  persistently  failing
         to comply with rules and directions to the prejudice of  the  other
         side."

    See [14].

    We confine ourselves to two general observations.  The  first  is  that
    the application of the Rule  9(2)(b)  test  will  be  unavoidably  fact
    sensitive.  The second is that the presiding Judge will  be  especially
    well equipped and positioned to make the evaluative judgment  necessary
    in  deciding  whether  the  exercise  of  the  discretionary  power  is
    appropriate.  Thirdly and finally, Judges should take care  to  express
    the reasons for their decisions clearly  and  adequately.   While  this
    will not require  a  disproportionately  detailed  essay,  the  general
    principles, tailored to each individual context, apply: see MK (Duty to
    give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641  (IAC).

    Our Answer to the First Question

38. On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated above, we conclude:

      a) HOPOs are not vulnerable to a WCO under section 29 of the 2007 Act.



      b) Nor do they have any such vulnerability under Rule 9(b) of the 2014
         Rules.

    The Second Question

39. The second of the agreed questions asks: if a WCO can be made against a
    HOPO, in what circumstances should such an order be made?   While  this
    question has been rendered moot  by  our  determination  of  the  first
    question,  we  nonetheless  answer  it  in  order  to  cater  for   the
    possibility of correction by an appellate court.

40. The FtT  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  1  of  2015,  in  particular
    paragraphs [7] - [19] and [37], featured in the parties' submissions in
    this context.  There was no  suggestion  from  any  quarter  that  this
    instrument is in any way defective or inadequate.  It  is  appended  to
    our decision in Cancino and reproduction of any of its contents in this
    context is unnecessary. The provisions of  the  Guidance  Note  have  a
    clear bearing on the answer to this hypothetical question.

41. Next, in every individual case it will be necessary to give  effect  to
    the helpful definitions of the terms "improperly",  "unreasonably"  and
    "negligently" supplied  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Ridehalgh  (see
    Cancino, at [16]).  It will also be necessary to  observe  the  "golden
    rules" devised in Cancino, at  [12].   Alertness  to  [13]  -  [27]  of
    Cancino in every case will also be essential.

42. A perusal of the passages  in  Cancino  highlighted  immediately  above
    (which, in passing, tend to confirm the correctness of  our  answer  to
    the first  of  the  four  questions)  points  out  that  if  HOPOs  are
    vulnerable to a WCO some particular considerations arise.   These  were
    summarised in the submissions of Mr Cohen as the absence of a  personal
    liability insurance, the contractual  obligation  of  performing  one's
    employment duties owed to the Secretary of State and the  related  duty
    of confidentiality.  We  reject  Mr  Cohen's  submission  that  in  the
    hypothetical scenario under consideration it would never be  "just"  to
    make a WCO against a HOPO.  This is too sweeping and  experience  amply
    demonstrates that absolute rules or principles generally have no  place
    in the United Kingdom legal system.  That said we accept the submission
    that the features just mentioned could arise and, where they do,  would
    fall to be considered.  The evaluation of the second and third  factors
    in particular would be highly case specific.  As regards the first,  it
    was confirmed, in response to our  enquiry,  that  the  policy  of  the
    Secretary of State for the time being is  to  indemnify  HOPOs  against
    WCOs.

43. It is also appropriate in this context to reflect  on  the  nature  and
    purpose of a WCO.  We consider that the  WCO  jurisdiction  encompasses
    compensatory, penal and  deterrent  elements.   We  reject  Mr  Cohen's
    submission that the second and third of these elements  do  not  apply.
    There are sufficient indications in the leading cases to  confirm  that
    they do.   The  decided  cases  also  make  abundantly  clear  that  in
    circumstances where the costs wasted by the aggrieved party  have  been
    paid, from whatever source, there is no loss  and,  hence,  nothing  to
    compensate.  This is illustrated by D v  SMH  [2008]  EWHC  559  (Fam).
    There it was held that a WCO had been inappropriately made because  the
    aggrieved party (the husband) had both financed the  other  party  (his
    spouse) for the purpose of meeting the order  and  had  agreed  not  to
    enforce it in any event.

    The Third Question

44. This question asks: what are the procedural and evidential requirements
    for making a WCO?  We observe at once that this question is  framed  in
    notably general terms and invites a correspondingly general response.

45. A convenient  starting  point  is  provided  by  the  FtT  Presidential
    Guidance Note (supra), [24] - [29] (appended to Cancino). Next we  draw
    attention to the general guidance provided in Cancino  at  [6]  -  [8],
    [18] - [19] and [27].   The  fundamental  procedural  requirements  are
    those which the common law has  espoused  since  time  immemorial:  the
    respondent must be alerted  to  the  possibility  of  a  WCO,  must  be
    apprised of the case against him and must be given  adequate  time  and
    opportunity to respond.  In a context where the  tribunal  must  strive
    also to give effect to expedition and summary decision  making,  astute
    to deter the development of a 'cottage industry',  the  balance  struck
    must  always  respect  these  overarching  requirements  of  procedural
    fairness: in short, they are inalienable.

46. We draw particular attention to  the  requirement  of  causation.   The
    impugned conduct of the respondent  must  be  causative  of  the  costs
    unnecessarily incurred by the aggrieved party: the second of the  three
    stage Ridehalgh test (see Cancino at [19]).  Where  this  causal  nexus
    does not exist a WCO can never be made.

47. Finally, we adopt in full the same reasoning of Eder J in Nwoko  v  Oyo
    State Government of  Nigeria  [2014]  EWHC  4538  (QB),  a  case  where
    proceedings were issued to secure the  appointment  of  an  arbitrator,
    successfully and a WCO application ensued, at [8]:

        "As far as the costs incurred up to 3 September 2014, there was  a
        schedule which had been put before the court. I am not going to go
        through that in detail, but it is a schedule  which  totals  almost
        28,000. The difficulty with that schedule is that it does not, and
        does not even begin, to identify what costs are supposedly said  to
        have been  wasted  by  the  relevant  conduct  on  behalf  of  CNA.
        Mr Newman originally suggested that  I should  somehow  summarily
        assess those costs by taking a broad brush. At  one  stage  it  was
        suggested that the relevant figure was 20 per cent, another time it
        was suggested it should  be  80  per  cent  of  that  figure.  That
        approach is quite unacceptable."

    Eder J continued:

        "In order for the court to deal with it,  even  on  a  broad  brush
        basis, it is incumbent upon a party to come before the court  with
        proper evidence to identify what costs have  been  caused  by  what
        deficient conduct. I accept that in many cases it may be that  some
        estimates have to be made, but it is  unacceptable  for  any  party
        simply  to  throw  at  the  court  a  large  schedule,  a  schedule
        containing a large  bunch  of  figures  which  the  court  is  then
        expected to plough through in order to arrive  at  some  principled
        decision. It is simply impossible for the court to do that."

    Amen to that we say.

    The Fourth Question

48. In what circumstances is it appropriate for the FtT to make  a  WCO  on
    its own initiative?  This is what the fourth question asks.

49. Once again, this is a broadly phrased question.  It  has  been  largely
    answered by what the Court of Appeal said in Ridehalgh at 238E:

        "Under the rules, the court itself may initiate the inquiry whether
        a wasted costs order should be made. In straightforward cases (such
        as failure to appear, lateness, negligence leading to an  otherwise
        avoidable adjournment, gross repetition or extreme slowness)  there
        is no reason why it should not do so. But save in the most  obvious
        case, courts should in our view be slow to initiate the inquiry. If
        they do so in cases where the inquiry  becomes  complex  and  time-
        consuming, difficult and embarrassing issues on costs can arise: if
        a wasted costs order is not made, the costs  of  the  inquiry  will
        have to be borne by someone and it will not be the court;  even  if
        an order is made, the  costs  ordered  to  be  paid  may  be  small
        compared with the costs of the inquiry. In such cases  courts  will
        usually be well advised to leave an aggrieved  party  to  make  the
        application if so advised; the costs will  then,  in  the  ordinary
        way, follow the event between the parties."

    Thus caution and restraint occupy centre stage in the exercise  of  the
    "own notion" power.   This  is  reflected  in  [24]  and  [29]  of  the
    Presidential Guidance Note (supra).  We emphasise again  that  all  FtT
    judges must be cognizant of these provisions.

50. While the "own notion" power undoubtedly  entails  the  exercise  of  a
    broad discretion such  discretion  will  be  exercised  paying  careful
    attention to  the  restraint  exhorted  in  Ridehalgh  (supra).   Where
    discretions of this kind are in play prescriptive guidance is generally
    inappropriate.   Subject  thereto,  we  identify  some  merit  in   the
    submission of Ms  Chapman  and  Ms  Foot  that  by  analogy  with  PD46
    paragraph 5.7 of the CPR, the exercise of this discretion  will  rarely
    be appropriate unless (a) the tribunal is satisfied that  the  material
    available, if unanswered, would be likely to generate a WCO and (b)  it
    is just and  appropriate  to  make  the  order  having  considered  the
    representations of the parties/their representatives. This is a useful,
    though not prescriptively exhaustive, gateway.  Furthermore, and  self-
    evidently,  the  "own  notion"  discretion  will  not  be  engaged   in
    circumstances where a party to the appeal has made a  WCO  application,
    absent some special circumstance - for example, where the  party's  WCO
    application is considered excessively limited.






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  second  and
third Appellants are granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify them or any member of their  families.
 This direction applies both  to  the  Appellants  and  to  the  Respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.



                                                 [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                               SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

                                                          Date: 25 June 2017
