


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                      (IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)


R (on  the  application  of  Patel)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (duration of leave - policy) IJR [2015] UKUT 00561 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House

                                                         Friday, 3 July 2015



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                      THE QUEEN (on the application of)
                         AMITKUMAR PRAVINBHAI PATEL

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr R Sharma of Counsel, instructed Direct Access on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr Z Malik of Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department, on
behalf of the Respondent















                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    (1)  The decision of the High Court in R (SM & Others) v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 1144 (Admin) relating  to
        the 2009 Discretionary Leave policy and instruction only applies to
        cases where the decision to grant leave to remain was made prior to
        24 June 2013.

    (2)  There is no obligation on the Secretary of State to grant  ILR  or
        to  consider  granting  ILR  in  circumstances  where   no   formal
        application for ILR has been made.

    (3)  It is legitimate for the Secretary of  State  to  grant  leave  to
        remain for 30 months on an application that is decided on or  after
        9 July 2012 irrespective of when the application was made unless it
        was made between 9 July 2012 and 6 September 2012: see para [56] of
        Singh and Khalid v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
        [2015] EWCA Civ 74.




JUDGE ESHUN:  This judicial review  concerns  a  challenge  brought  by  the
applicant,  a  citizen  of  India,  born  on  1  April  1977.   He  has  two
dependants, namely, his wife, Daxaben Amitkumar Patel, born on  1  September
1977 and their child, a son, V, born on 23 December  2007.   They  are  also
Indian nationals.  The applicant challenges the decision of the  respondent,
Secretary of State for the Home Department, on 10 July  2013  to  grant  him
and his dependants discretionary leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  for
a period of 30 months  after  his  appeal  was  allowed  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal outside the Immigration Rules.

2.   Permission to bring judicial review proceedings was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gleeson at an oral hearing on 22 September 2014.

3.   The applicant raised two grounds.  The first ground contended that  the
    Secretary of State acted inconsistently with her duty under Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("the  2009  Act")
    as elucidated in R (SM & Others) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWHC 1144 (Admin);  and  secondly  the  Secretary  of
    State acted unlawfully in applying the provisions introduced by HC  194
    and associated policies because the relevant  implementation  provision
    provides that they would not apply to applications made before  9  July
    2012.

Facts

4.   The applicant and his wife arrived in the  United  Kingdom  with  entry
    clearance as visitors on 30 June 2004.  Their visit visas expired on 10
    December 2004 but they continued  to  reside  here  unlawfully.   Their
    child, V, was born in the United Kingdom.

5.   On 20 June  2011  the  applicant  with  his  wife  and  child  made  an
    application for discretionary leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    relying on Article 8 of the ECHR.  On 22 July 2011,  their  application
    was refused by the Secretary of State without a right  of  appeal.   He
    did not leave the United Kingdom and on 9 December 2011, the  Secretary
    of State issued an appealable decision to remove him under  Section  10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

6.   On 22 December 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the  respondent's  decision  to  remove  him.   On  13
    February 2012 the appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Warner
    and allowed on the ground that the respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the  law.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    respondent had not given consideration to the  best  interests  of  the
    applicant's child,  therefore  failing  to  discharge  her  duty  under
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act when making the decision under appeal.   The
    matter was remitted to the respondent for a lawful decision to be made.



7.    According  to  Mr  Sharma,  following  Judge  Warner's  determination,
    further decisions were made by the respondent on  7  March  2012  which
    were flawed for the same reason as the decision allowed  on  appeal  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Warner.  On 30 October 2012 the respondent re-
    made her decision  rectifying  the  errors  and  issued  an  appealable
    decision in  respect  of  the  applicant,  his  wife  and  child.   The
    subsequent appeals were heard together by Judge Warner on 7 March 2013.
     In a decision promulgated on 13 March 2013, Judge Warner  allowed  the
    appeals on the ground that the removal of the applicant and his  family
    members  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be   unlawful   for   being
    incompatible with Article 8.

8.   The Secretary of State, having  regard  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination, granted the applicant, his wife and child limited  leave
    to remain for 30 months on 10  July  2013.   The  grant  of  leave  and
    conditions attached to them were communicated by the Secretary of State
    in her letter of 9 July 2013 and 10 July 2013.

9.   Mr Sharma relied on his skeleton argument.   He  said  the  applicant's
    case raises two grounds.  The first ground is the wholesale failure  by
    the respondent to consider Section  55  at  the  second  stage  of  the
    decision making, which was when  the  respondent  was  considering  the
    length of leave to be granted to the applicant.  The second  ground  is
    that the applicant ought to have been granted leave that was  in  place
    at the time he made his application on 20 December 2011 and not at  the
    date of the decision under challenge, namely 10 July 2013.

10.  In relation to the first ground Mr Sharma relied on SM, [57]  where  Mr
    Justice Holman held that the relevant 2009 Discretionary  Leave  policy
    and instruction document was unlawful because it effectively  precluded
    case specific consideration of the welfare of the  child  concerned  in
    making the discretionary decision whether to grant discretionary  leave
    or ILR.  Further, the policy and  instruction  failed  to  give  proper
    effect to the statutory duty under Section 55.

11.  Mr Sharma submitted that the issue is not whether ILR should have  been
    granted but  whether  the  respondent  considered  Section  55  in  her
    decision to grant discretionary  leave  and  whether  she  applied  her
    discretion when considering how long the leave should be granted for.

12.  Mr Sharma submitted that Mr Justice Holman noted that  the  overarching
    submission for the Claimants was that

         "when making decisions concerning children officials must grasp the
         nettle at the outset and make a realistic appraisal whether 'it  is
         clear from the outset that a child's future is going to be  in  the
         UK' and make decisions accordingly". [23].

         Mr Sharma submitted that in the present  case,  the  respondent  is
    unable to establish that this question  had  been  properly  addressed.
    Given the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, it was undoubtedly clear
    that the applicant's child's future was in the United Kingdom.

13.  Mr Sharma noted that the respondent made reference to  R  (Alladin  and
    Wadhwa) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1334.  He submitted that although the Court of Appeal found that  there
    was a policy in place, it was unlawful for the same reason  as  in  SM;
    neither applicant had demonstrated that the grant of  indefinite  leave
    to remain was more appropriate than following the policy itself.

14.  Mr Sharma also made reference to Wadhwa  in  which  the  applicant  was
    subject to a removal direction for a number of years.   Eventually  the
    Secretary of State decided to grant the applicant leave to remain.  The
    Court of Appeal held that the applicant did not at any  stage  ask  for
    ILR.  Mr Sharma asked me nevertheless to find that the facts in  Wadhwa
    are similar to the facts in this case.  The  distinct  feature  in  the
    instant appeal is that Judge Warner found  that  "it  is  in  the  best
    interests of VP that he remain in the United Kingdom  and  continue  to
    develop his established private life".   He  submitted  that  the  best
    interest of the  third  applicant  to  remain  in  the  UK  has  to  be
    considered in line with the respondent's  Section  55  duties  at  both
    stages, namely the grant of leave, and the length of leave.   There  is
    no evidence at all that the respondent applied her mind to her  Section
    55 duty in respect of her consideration of the length of leave.

15.  Mr Sharma relied on R (NS and others) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2014] EWHC 1971 (Admin) which held that there  can  be
    countervailing considerations which might outweigh the  best  interests
    of the child.  Mr Sharma submitted that if this is what  the  Secretary
    of State was relying on, she has not told us.  He submitted  that  this
    case can be distinguished from NS  because  the  children  in  NS  were
    British nationals.  The application for leave was made by their mother.
     Her argument  was  that  the  interests  of  her  children  should  be
    reflected in the grant of leave to her.  He argued that  the  applicant
    child in the instant case will be left in  limbo  because  he  will  be
    subject to a precarious status when it had  been  held  that  his  best
    interest is to remain in the UK.  His status affects the family unit as
    a whole.  Additionally it would be difficult for the child coming up to
    the end of his secondary education and  how  he  will  be  treated  for
    university fees.

16.  Mr  Sharma  submitted  in  respect  of  the  first  argument  that  the
    respondent's  failure  to  give  consideration  to  Section   55   when
    considering the grant of leave and the length of leave was a flaw.

17.  In  respect  of  the  second  ground,  Mr  Sharma  submitted  that  the
    respondent applied the wrong policy and in so doing applied  the  wrong
    Immigration Rules in respect of  applications  under  Article  8.    He
    further argued that there was a failure to  consider  the  Respondent's
    delay in deciding the applications.

18.  He relied on the chronology in  the  background  to  this  claim.   The
    application which gave rise to the current grant of leave was that made
    on 20 June 2011 well before the new Rules came into  force  on  9  July
    2012.  He submitted that prior to 9 July 2012, an applicant on  success
    at an appeal was to be granted three years' leave to  remain,  extended
    for a further three years and after six years, was entitled to ILR.  It
    was the six year route to settlement.  The new  Article  8  Rules  were
    announced by way of a Statement of  Changes  (HC  194)  which  provided
    that:

         "...If an application for  entry  clearance,  leave  to  remain  or
         indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9 July 2012 and the
         application has not been decided, it will be decided in  accordance
         with the Rules in force on 8 July 2012."

 19. Mr Sharma submitted that from 9 July 2012 discretionary leave  was  put
    in line with paragraph 276, which was a ten year route to settlement of
    two and a  half  years'  leave  at  a  time.   He  submitted  that  the
    additional four years for a minor  is  significant  and  amounts  to  a
    potential prejudice to the applicant.

20.  Mr Sharma submitted that the transitional  provisions  gave  reason  to
    believe that the new Rules would not apply to an application for  leave
    to remain made before 9 July 2012.  He  submitted  that  the  Court  of
    Appeal considered this particular  point  in  Edgehill  and  Bhoyroo  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402,
    Haleemudeen v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 558 and Singh  and  Khalid  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

21.  Mr Sharma submitted that Singh assists the applicant's case because  at
    [79] Lady Justice Arden said that she would not  go  as  far  as  their
    Lordships  in  [40]  of  the  decision  and  would  not  say  that  the
    distinction made by Mr Blundell is necessarily  without  foundation  or
    that the reasoning of Jackson LJ necessarily goes so far as  to  decide
    that the Secretary of  State  can  never  rely  on  the  new  Rules  in
    determining  an  application  of  the  kind  referred  to  or  in   the
    implementation provisions.  She would urge circumspection  about  those
    parts of the old Rules which they have not  expressly  considered,  and
    leave them open to argument in an appropriate case when they arise.

22.   Mr  Sharma  relied  on  Chapter  8  Transitional  Provisions  of   the
    Immigration Directorate Instruction on Family Migration issued in April
    2015.   He  said  this  has  to  be  read  in  conjunction   with   the
    discretionary leave provisions.   He  also  relied  on  the  Chapter  8
    Transitional Provisions which  were  in  force  in  January  2012.   At
    paragraph 5.1 it states that an application  submitted  before  9  July
    2012 and which was  considered  and  refused  against  part  8  of  the
    Immigration Rules and his subsequent appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse is successful, leave should be granted under the Rules of part 8
    in force at the date of application.  Mr  Sharma  submitted  that  this
    provision gives weight to the applicant's argument.   Further  support,
    he said, can  be  found  in  the  April  2015  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions at paragraph 3.1.1, which states "a person who  meets  the
    following criteria will remain subject  to  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    force as at 8 July 2012 until settlement (the grant of indefinite leave
    to remain) even where the application is granted on  or  after  9  July
    2012."

23.  The next point made by Mr Sharma was in relation to the  delay  by  the
    respondent in considering the applicant's  application.   He  submitted
    that the respondent's further decision made  on  7  December  2012  was
    flawed because it failed to take into account what First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Warner said in his earlier decision.   There  was  correspondence
    between the applicant's solicitors and the respondent.  The  respondent
    withdrew her decision and it took the respondent two years  to  make  a
    lawful decision.  Mr Sharma submitted  that  but  for  the  delay,  the
    application would have been considered by the  respondent  long  before
    2012.   The  lack  of  explanation  for  the  delay   strengthens   the
    applicant's application.

24.  Mr Malik reminded the court that the respondent granted  the  applicant
    and members of his family leave to remain for 30 months.

25.  He said the two issues identified in the grounds  are  firstly  whether
    the Secretary of State is obliged to grant indefinite leave to  remain,
    and secondly whether the Secretary of State is in any event obliged  to
    grant leave to remain for three years.  He submitted that there  is  no
    obligation on the Secretary of State and that the thirty months'  leave
    granted was lawful and sustainable.

26.  In respect of the law Mr Malik submitted the following:

    (1)  The guidance given by the High Court in SM only applies  to  cases
         where a decision to grant indefinite leave to remain was made prior
         to 24 June 2013.

    (2)  There is no obligation on the Secretary of State to grant  ILR  or
         to  consider  granting  ILR  in  circumstances  where   no   formal
         application for ILR has been made.

    (3)  It is legitimate for the Secretary of  State  to  grant  leave  to
         remain for 30 months on an application that is decided on or  after
         9 July 2012 irrespective of when the application is made.

    (4)  The general principle in Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2009] UKHL 25 that Immigration Rules  apply  when  they
         say they take effect is good law and binding on  Lower  Courts  and
         Tribunals.

27.  Mr Malik asked me to endorse these four points.

28.  With regard to the first issue, whether the respondent  is  obliged  to
    grant ILR, Mr Malik said that Mr Sharma relies heavily on  SM  and  the
    duty of  the  respondent  in  respect  of  Section  55.   He  said  the
    respondent's duty was considered in Alladin  and  provides  a  complete
    answer to the applicant's case.

29.  Mr Malik said the principal issue in Alladin  and  Wadhwa  was  whether
    the decisions of the Secretary of State to give limited (discretionary)
    leave to remain as opposed to indefinite leave  to  remain  (ILR)  were
    unlawful because they were made in breach of the Secretary  of  State's
    duty under Section 55 of the 2009 Act.  Mr  Malik  submitted  that  the
    principal issue in Alladin is not  different  from  the  issue  in  the
    instant application.

30.  Mr Malik said that Miss Alladin, along with  her  family  members,  had
    applied for ILR outside the Immigration Rules relying on Article  8  of
    the European Convention.  ILR was refused but the  Secretary  of  State
    granted the family three years' DL.  Miss Alladin said that  the  grant
    of DL for three years was unlawful.

31.   Mr  Malik  submitted  that  Mr  Wadhwa   made   an   application   for
    discretionary leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  exceptional
    circumstances outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  application  was
    refused because the Secretary of State was not satisfied that Mr Wadhwa
    had provided material evidence of satisfactory reasons  in  support  of
    his application, and drew attention to the fact that such  private  and
    family life as he had developed in  this  country  had  been  developed
    whilst he was here unlawfully.  At [57] the Court of  Appeal  discussed
    the ambit of Section 55.  At [70] it held that a striking feature of Mr
    Wadhwa's case is that at no stage did he make a clear  request  to  the
    Secretary of State for the grant of ILR.   In  those  circumstances  it
    would be wrong to criticise the Secretary of State for granting  DL  in
    the belief  that  she  was  acceding  to  the  only  application  made.
    Consistently with the absence of any  request  for  ILR,  none  of  the
    material sent to the UKBA in support of the application pointed to  any
    disadvantage associated with the grant of DL as opposed to ILR.

32.  Relying on the decision in Mr Wadhwa's case, Mr  Malik  submitted  that
    in the instant application the applicant did not apply  for  ILR,  only
    discretionary leave and therefore he cannot criticise the Secretary  of
    State for granting him DL.

33.  Relying on paragraphs 29 and 30 of Alladin,  Mr  Malik  submitted  that
    the Secretary of State has to act fairly.  At [29] of  Alladin's  case,
    Mr Gallagher, a civil servant with the  Operational  Policy  and  Rules
    Unit in the Home Office, made a witness statement in which he explained
    the approach to granting leave outside the Rules, namely  discretionary
    leave, leave to remain and indefinite leave to remain.  DL  was  mostly
    frequently granted where there were grounds for a claim based on  human
    rights.  In developing a system of DL the Secretary of State sought  to
    manage progression to permanent settlement in a way  that  acknowledges
    the interests of the country  as  a  whole.   In  particular,  she  was
    concerned to ensure that those who had ignored or could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules did not proceed immediately  into
    the permanent residence category ahead of those who have to demonstrate
    their compliance, and without being able to review their  circumstances
    later to determine  whether  the  further  grant  of  leave  was  still
    appropriate.

34.  At [30] Mr Gallagher  continued  that  DL  on  Article  8  grounds  was
    normally granted for a period of 30 months, followed by a review to see
    whether a further period of DL was justified.   It  was  only  after  a
    second period of DL that an application for ILR  was  considered.   The
    Secretary of State considered that this struck a fair  balance  between
    the rights of those who could not be removed for human  rights  reasons
    and the wider interests of society as  a  whole.   To  grant  immediate
    settlement on the basis of  overstaying  would  be  to  trivialise  the
    requirement to use the lawful routes into  the  UK  and  undermine  the
    Secretary of State's ability to manage migration in a manner which  the
    government considers to be in the interests of society as a whole.   Mr
    Malik submitted that Mr Gallagher's evidence was accepted  as  rational
    and endorsed by the Court of Appeal who said at [59] that there can  be
    no doubt that the Secretary of State is entitled in principle to  adopt
    a  staged  approach  to  settlement.   Even  where  children  are   the
    applicants, it does not follow that the Secretary of State is bound, on
    a first application, to grant ILR.  The considerations outlined in  the
    evidence of  Mr  Gallagher  amount  to  factors  which  are  worthy  of
    consideration, and deserve to be placed in the balance after  the  best
    interests and welfare of the children have been considered.  It follows
    that an applicant who wishes to persuade  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    grant her leave to remain for a longer period than that provided for by
    the state's settlement policy has to do more than  point  to  the  fact
    that she is a child.

35.  Mr Malik also relied on [53] where the Court held  that  it  is  firmly
    established by decisions in the Court of Appeal that it is a matter for
    the Secretary of State to decide whether to exercise her discretion  to
    grant leave to remain, and if so, for how long, relying on  IT  (Sierra
    Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 787
    at [15] per Pill LJ.

36.  Mr Malik submitted that this is the second reason why the Secretary  of
    State is entitled to grant DL instead of ILR.

37.  His third reason in support of the first argument  relies  on  [11]  of
    Alladin which stated that version  3  of  the  Home  Office  Policy  on
    Discretionary Leave was amended on 24 June  2013.   Version  3  is  the
    current version.  Mr Malik submitted that this version was  amended  to
    plug the lacuna identified in SM.  This  new  policy  applies  in  this
    particular case because the Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  made
    after 24 June 2013.  SM applies to decisions made before 24 June 2013.

38.  Mr Malik submitted that the  policy  in  force  on  24  June  2013  was
    considered in NS at [38-41]  At [42] the Admin Court concluded that the
    policy guidance was compliant with  the  duty  under  Section  55.   He
    submitted there was therefore no reason for me to depart from  NS.   He
    submitted  that  SM  was  decided  under  the  old  policy  which   was
    subsequently amended on 24 June 2013.

39.  Mr Malik  further  submitted  that  the  claimants  in  SM  were  minor
    children who argued that it was wrong to grant them  DL  and  not  ILR.
    The minor children had made applications for ILR and the  Secretary  of
    State had instead granted them DL for three years.  In the instant case
    the application was made by the parents and the application was for  DL
    and not ILR.

40.  In respect of the two  documents  submitted  by  Mr  Sharma,  Mr  Malik
    submitted that they support the respondent's case.  Page 8 of the April
    2015 document at 3.1.1 refers to an application made under  part  8  of
    the Immigration Rules.  It permits applications for entry clearance  to
    join parents who are already in the UK.  Mr Malik  submitted  that  the
    applicant's application was for leave to remain outside the Immigration
    Rules, therefore paragraph 3.1.1 does not assist him.

41.  He further submitted that the January  2012  document  referred  to  at
    [22] at page 11, paragraph 5.1, also refers to an application  that  is
    considered and refused under part 8 of the Immigration Rules.  Again he
    submitted that 5.1 does not apply because the application made  by  the
    applicant was not allowed under the Immigration Rules.

42.  Mr Malik submitted that paragraph 5.2 is applicable.  It refers  to  an
    application submitted before 9  July  2012  and  following  refusal  at
    appeal it was considered and allowed on Article 8 family  life  grounds
    on or after 9 July 2012, and the Secretary of State is  not  contesting
    the determination, leave of 30 months' duration should  be  granted  in
    accordance with Appendix FM and in accordance with paragraph 276BE.  Mr
    Malik submitted that the grant of 30  months'  discretionary  leave  to
    remain to the applicant was consistent with this policy.   Consequently
    the first issue should be resolved in favour of the Secretary of State.

43.  Mr Malik then made submissions in relation to  the  second  issue  i.e.
    whether the Secretary of State was obliged to grant discretionary leave
    for three years.  Mr Malik submitted that the  starting  point  is  the
    policy in force in January 2012.  He  submitted  that  the  applicant's
    appeal was allowed under Article 8, paragraph 5.2 of  the  policy.   Mr
    Malik referred to Mr Sharma's reliance  on  HC194  to  argue  that  the
    applications were dealt with under the wrong  policy.   Mr  Sharma  had
    argued that HC194 provided:

         "If  an  application  for  entry  clearance,  leave  to  remain  or
         indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9 July 2012 and the
         application has not been decided, it will be decided in  accordance
         with the Rules in force on 8 July 2012."

     Mr Sharma relied on HC194 because he  said  the  application  was  made
    before 8 July 2012.

44.  Mr Malik submitted  that  this  provision  triggered  the  decision  in
    Edgehill where  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  the  ambit  of  the
    implementation provision.  At [21] the Court of Appeal identified  that
    the sole issue in Edgehill was whether  it  was  lawful  to  reject  an
    Article 8 application made before 9 July  2012  in  reliance  upon  the
    applicant's failure to achieve twenty years' residence, as specified in
    the new Rules.  The Court of Appeal at [33] answered that  question  in
    the negative.  Mr Malik submitted  that  Edgehill  provided  artificial
    support to the applicant's argument.  This was because of the Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Haleemudeen, the facts of which he said  were  not
    different from Edgehill, as Haleemudeen had also made  his  application
    before 9 July 2012.  The Court of Appeal rejected the argument that the
    new Rules should not be applied and held that the new Rules applied  in
    that case.

45.  Mr Malik submitted that the conflict  was  resolved  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Singh.  The Court of Appeal held that  Haleemudeen
    was decided per incuriam because Edgehill was not cited to it  nor  was
    the policy.  The Court of Appeal in Singh decided  that  Edgehill  only
    obtained as regards decisions taken in the two month window  between  9
    July and 6 September 2012 but  if  a  decision  is  made  outside  this
    window, the new Rules apply.

46.  Mr Malik submitted that the decision under challenge in this  case  was
    made on 5 July 2013, after 6 September 2012,  therefore  Singh  applied
    and the Secretary of State was entitled to apply  the  new  Immigration
    Rules and policy.  Mr Malik submitted  that  Singh  resolved  an  acute
    conflict which is binding and should be followed.

47.  Mr Malik then noted Mr Sharma's argument that Odelola states  that  the
    Immigration Rules take effect when they say they apply.   He  submitted
    that Odelola made her application which was  pending  and  during  that
    period the Secretary of State changed the Immigration Rules and refused
    her application under the new Rules.  The argument in Odelola was  that
    the Secretary of State was wrong to apply the new Rules.  The House  of
    Lords ruled that the Rules take effect when they say they take effect.

48.  Mr Malik submitted that R (Munir) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] UKSC 32 considered Odelola.  Lord Dyson endorsed  the
    ratio in  Odelola  which  is  still  good  law  and  binding  on  lower
    Tribunals.  Relying on Odelola he submitted that the Secretary of State
    relied on the Rules in force at the time of her decision.

49.  Mr Malik relied on the Court of  Appeal's  decision  in  R  (Rahman)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA  Civ  814.   He
    said this  was  about  the  seven  year  concession  policy  which  was
    withdrawn by the Secretary of State and therefore the applicant was not
    granted ILR.  The applicant argued that it was unfair not to be granted
    ILR.  The applicant argued  that  the  withdrawal  of  the  policy  was
    unlawful because it was made without any prior notice, consultation  or
    invitation to make representations.  The Court of Appeal at  [42]  held
    that the concept of legitimate expectation is normally otiose in  cases
    where there has been no representation, by  words  or  conduct  by  the
    public authority in question to the claimant seeking to rely on it.  It
    was said in the judgment that the Secretary of State  was  entitled  to
    take the view that the policy was inimical to her  immigration  policy.
    A Minister is entitled to review, to change and to  revoke  his  policy
    whenever he considers it to be in the public interest to do  so.   Thus
    he would reject any suggestion that the Secretary of  State's  decision
    to withdraw the policy was irrational.  Nor did she fail to  take  into
    account the interests of the children of those seeking to remain  here:
    their interests, as well as those  of  their  parents,  are  adequately
    addressed by the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights,
    and in particular  Article  8.   Relying  on  this  judgment  Mr  Malik
    submitted that the Secretary of State was entitled to grant 30  months'
    discretionary leave to the applicants after the policy came into force.

50.  Mr Malik submitted that Mr Rahman had resided  in  the  UK  unlawfully.
    The Court of Appeal held at [45] that there was no  unfairness  in  the
    refusal to apply the policy to those, such as Mr Rahman, who  had  been
    here for more than seven years, and who had not  sought  to  regularise
    their immigration status before the withdrawal of the policy, and  that
    any reliance on the expectation would not have been legitimate  in  the
    sense of giving rise to any right in public law.  Mr Rahman entered the
    UK under leave  he  obtained  by  deception.   He  failed  to  seek  to
    regularise his family's immigration status after the expiration of  his
    leave.  They  were  here  unlawfully.   His  evasion  or  avoidance  of
    Immigration Rules disqualified him  from  establishing  any  legitimate
    expectation.

51.  Mr Malik also relied on TN (Afghanistan)  and  others  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2015]  UKSC  40  which  he  said  was  a
    classic case of historic injustice.   He  submitted  that  the  Supreme
    Court criticised the decision in Rashid [2005] EWCA 744.  In R (Rashid)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 40  the  Court
    of Appeal held that to hold the Secretary of State to an earlier policy
    which had been withdrawn by the final  stage  of  the  decision  making
    process would infringe the principle established by R (Ravichandran)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [1995] EWCA CIV 16, but this
    consideration was outweighed by the conspicuous unfairness which  there
    had  been.   In  criticising  the  reasoning  in  Rashid,  Carnwath  LJ
    described the reasoning as "not altogether  convincing",  and  that  it
    appeared to turn "abuse  of  power"  into  a  factor  able  to  achieve
    remedial  results  not  open  to  the  courts  in  other  instances  of
    illegality.  He also had doubts about the weight placed by the court on
    the department's  conduct.   He  said  the  court's  proper  sphere  is
    illegality, not maladministration.

52.  Mr Malik submitted that the Supreme Court  had  difficulties  with  the
    application of the Rashid principle in DS (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 305, KA  (Afghanistan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 and  EU
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 32.  The Supreme Court at [71] overruled Rashid.  The Supreme Court
    held that in Rashid the sloppiness of procedures  in  the  Home  Office
    resulted in the appellant being unfairly denied refugee status when  he
    applied for it; but refugee status is not bound to endure forever.   By
    the time that his case reached  the  Court  of  Appeal  the  source  of
    persecution in Iraq had been overthrown, and the effect of the  court's
    decision was to give him a right which he did not need for his personal
    protection.  Because the  Rashid  exception  to  Ravichandran  lacks  a
    satisfactory principle, it is also impossible to state its  scope  with
    any degree of clarity.  The Supreme Court held  that  the  Ravichandran
    principle applies on the hearing of asylum appeals  without  exception,
    and Rashid should no longer be followed.  The question of  whether  the
    appellant qualifies for asylum status is not a question of  discretion.
    It is one which must be decided on the evidence before the Tribunal  or
    court, and there is no legal justification for abridging that  question
    with the presumption that the appellant  is  credible  arising  from  a
    failure of the respondent  properly  to  discharge  her  obligation  in
    relation to family tracing.  Discretionary leave by definition involves
    a discretion, but it is a discretion which belongs  to  the  respondent
    and not to the court.

53.  Mr Malik submitted that the principle derived in Ravichandran  is  that
    a court should look at the facts as  at  the  date  of  decision.   The
    decision under challenge in this case is 10 July 2013.   It  cannot  be
    said that the Secretary of State had no regard to Section 55  when  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision had already considered Section 55.   The
    First-tier Tribunal said it would be in the best interests of the child
    to remain in the UK and continue to establish his  private  life.   The
    applicant was entitled to make an application for indefinite  leave  to
    remain and had he done so the Secretary of State would have  determined
    it in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules.   He  did  not  make  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain.  He made an application for
    discretionary leave to remain.  Therefore the second issue should  also
    be resolved in favour of the Secretary of State.

54.  Mr Malik asked me to endorse the four propositions of law  which  began
    his submissions.

Decision

55.  I was greatly assisted in this case by the  helpful  analysis  by  both
    parties, in particular, Mr Malik, of the case law they relied on.

56.  I was not persuaded that the respondent erred in the manner  argued  by
    Mr. Sharma.  On the first issue, I find that the applicant got what  he
    applied for, which was discretionary leave to remain.

57.  I accept Mr  Malik's  submission  that  the  Section  55  duty  of  the
    respondent was considered in  Alladin  and  that  provides  a  complete
    answer  to  the  applicant's  case.   The  issue  in  Alladin  was  not
    dissimilar to this case.  Miss  Alladin  and  her  family  members  had
    applied for ILR outside the Immigration Rules relying on Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.  ILR was refused  on  15  June
    2011 but the Secretary of State granted the  family  three  years'  DLR
    until 14 June 2014.  Miss Alladin argued that  the  grant  of  DLR  was
    unlawful.   There  was  also  the  Claimant  Wadhwa  who  had  made  an
    application for discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on
    exceptional circumstances outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   This  was
    refused.   Mr  Wadhwa  then  made  further  submissions   through   his
    solicitors, drawing particular attention to Section 55 of the 2009 Act.
     He was on 11 April 2013 granted DLR for a period of thirty months.

58.  There was a discussion by the Court of Appeal judges  on  the  exercise
    of the duty under Section 55.  Floyd LJ said there could be no doubt in
    his judgment that the Secretary of State is entitled  in  principle  to
    adopt a staged approach to settlement.  Even  where  children  are  the
    applicants, it does not follow that the Secretary of State is bound, on
    a first application, to grant ILR.  He went on to say that an applicant
    who wishes to persuade the Secretary of State to grant her leave for  a
    period longer than that provided for by the  staged  settlement  policy
    has to do more than point to the fact that she is a child.  He went  on
    to say that a striking feature of Mr Wadhwa's case is that at no  stage
    did he make a clear request to the Secretary of State for the grant  of
    ILR.  In those  circumstances  it  would  be  wrong  to  criticise  the
    Secretary of State for granting DLR in the belief that she was acceding
    to the only application made.  Consistently with  the  absence  of  any
    request for ILR, none of the material sent to the UKBA  in  support  of
    the application pointed to any disadvantage associated with a grant  of
    DLR as opposed to ILR.

59.  I adopt those findings.  The applicant  made  an  application  for  DLR
    relying on Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  Other than relying
    on the conclusion made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, Mr Sharma  did
    not point to any specific disadvantage to the applicant with a grant  a
    grant of DLR as opposed to ILR.  Consequently the  Secretary  of  State
    cannot be criticised for granting the applicant DLR.

60.  I also find that the respondent did not err in law in failing to  grant
    ILR to the family.  Given that they had lived in the UK  in  breach  of
    the Immigration Rules, the grant of ILR would have put them in  a  more
    favourable situation than those who have lived here lawfully.  The High
    Court in SM approved the staged approach to settlement.   I  also  hold
    that it is a matter for the respondent to decide  whether  to  exercise
    her discretion to grant leave to remain, and if so, how long.  This  is
    a principle that has been established firmly in law.

61.  In SM the High Court held that the relevant  2009  discretionary  leave
    policy and instruction document was  unlawful.   This  was  because  it
    precluded case-specific consideration  of  the  welfare  of  the  child
    concerned in making the discretionary decision whether to grant  DL  or
    ILR and further the policy and instruction failed to give proper effect
    to the statutory duty under Section 55.  For those reasons  the  claims
    for judicial review of the claimants were allowed and the Secretary  of
    State was ordered to reconsider  each  claim  with  a  fresh  mind  and
    properly applying Section 55.

62.  Following the criticism in SM, the respondent issued a  new  policy  on
    24 June 2013.  This policy was considered by the Court of Appeal in  NS
    and held to be lawful.

63.  At [18] of NS, it was held that the respondent is entitled to  adopt  a
    policy whereby those who do not have leave to remain in the UK  may  be
    granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  because  of  the  particular
    circumstances of the individual  or  his  family.   The  following  was
    quoted[1]:

         "8.  I agree with those observations, it follows from the reasoning
             in that case that where the Secretary of State is adhering  to
             published policy, in  exercising  a  discretion  to  confer  a
             benefit on someone  to  which  they  would  not  otherwise  be
             entitled, there is no  obligation  to  give  reasons  for  not
             making an exception to  that  policy.   One  cannot  draw  any
             inference from the absence of such  reasons  in  the  decision
             letter, let alone the inference that the  decision  maker  has
             failed to  give  consideration  to  whether  the  case  is  so
             exceptional as to warrant  departure  from  policy  and  grant
             ILR."

64.  I find that this decision destroys Mr Sharma's argument that it  cannot
    be discerned from the Secretary of State's decision that she  exercised
    her discretion at the second stage when deciding the period of leave to
    grant to the applicant.

65.  In any event, SM was decided under the old policy and that  policy  was
    amended on 24 June 2013.  The decision in this case was made  after  SM
    and therefore the amended policy applied to the applicant.

66.  The two documents relied on by Mr Sharma, that  is  chapter  8  of  the
    2015 policy guidance and the one dated January 2012 do not assist  him.
    Both documents refer to part 8 which deals with permitted  applications
    to join parents under the Immigration Rules.  The application that  was
    made in this case was for leave to remain outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The applicant's appeal was  allowed  by  FtTJ  Warner  applying
    Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules.   FtTJ  Warner  allowed  the
    applicant's appeal on 13  March  2013.   By  the  time  the  respondent
    granted them leave on 9 July 2013, the policy dated 24 June 2013 was in
    force and I find that it was correctly applied to the applicant and his
    family.

67.  In light of the above I find in favour of the respondent in respect  of
    the first issue.   I  find  that  the  grant  of  30  months'  DLR  was
    consistent with the policy in force at the  date  of  the  respondent's
    decision.

68.  I rely on [38-41] of NS, where  Mr  Justice  Parker   referred  to  the
    relevant policy in this case which is contained in the children's  best
    interests guidance which was prepared following, and  in  response  to,
    the judgment of Holman J in SM.  He said that the guidance  was  issued
    in order to ensure that decisions taken under the  family  and  private
    life provisions of the Immigration Rules, and decisions as  to  whether
    to grant leave outside the Immigration Rules are  taken  in  accordance
    with the duty under Section 55.  He went on to state at [39]  that  the
    guidance does recognise that even if a longer period of  leave  was  in
    the   best   interests   of   the   child   involved,   "countervailing
    considerations" might outweigh those best interests.  The weighting  of
    competing factors in that manner is not inconsistent with  Section  55.
    The best interests of any child involved must be treated as  a  primary
    consideration; they are not required to be treated as  the  primary  or
    the conclusive consideration.  The duty under  Section  55  furthermore
    does not mandate in every case that the decision  should  conform  with
    the best interests of a child involved: the child's best interests  may
    be outweighed  by  the  importance  of  other  policies  affecting  the
    decision  (see  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] 2AC 166, at paragraphs 24-26).

69.  Mr Justice Parker said  at  [40]  that  the  guidance  does  place  the
    initial onus on the applicant to raise the issue of the best  interests
    of the child involved, given the context  in  which  the  applicant  is
    seeking a period of  leave  that  is  substantially  longer  than  that
    ordinarily provided by the applicant.  The applicant  should  be  in  a
    position to explain what children are involved in the decision, and how
    in broad terms  the  interests  of  the  children  would  be  adversely
    affected if, for example, LTR rather than ILR were granted.

70.   He  went  on  to  say  at  [41]  that  Holman  J  concluded  that  the
    discretionary leave Asylum Policy 1nstruction in that case was unlawful
    because it effectively precluded the case-specific consideration of the
    welfare of the children from  the  discretionary  decision  whether  to
    grant immediate ILR or limited DL.  By contrast,  the  children's  best
    interests'  guidance  requires  caseworkers   to   give   case-specific
    consideration to the welfare  of  any  child  concerned  when  deciding
    whether to grant a longer period of LTR, or ILR to the child's  parent.
    The flaw in the previous policy has been recognised and addressed in an
    appropriate manner.  Parker J concluded that  the  policy  guidance  at
    issue in this case was compliant with the duty under Section 55.

71.  In the light  of  NS,  I  find  that  Mr  Sharma's  argument  that  the
    respondent  failed  to  exercise  a  discretion  by  not  granting  the
    applicant and his family ILR as opposed to DL is without merit.

72.  The second ground argued by Mr Sharma was that the  respondent  applied
    the wrong policy; had she applied HC194, which was the policy in  force
    prior to 9 June 2012, she would have granted the applicant three years'
    DLR which would have led to ILR after six years, as opposed to  relying
    on the current policy which is a ten year route to indefinite leave  to
    remain.  Mr Sharma argued that the additional four years for a minor is
    significant and that a potential  prejudice  has  been  caused  to  the
    applicant. The potential prejudice was in respect of the confusion that
    might be caused to the applicant child in respect of  university  fees.
    I find that to be a very weak point.  The applicant is  10  years  old.
    There was no evidence of any immediate prejudice to him in the grant of
    30 months' DLR.  He continues to live in the UK  and  he  continues  to
    establish his family life in the UK.

73.  In any event, the conflict caused by the transitional provisions  which
    led to two different decisions in Edgehill and Haleemudeen was resolved
    by the Court of Appeal in Singh.   At [56] of Singh the Court of Appeal
    held as follows:

         "56. ...I can summarise my conclusion and the  reasons  for  it  as
             follows:

              (1) When HC 194 first came into force on  9  July  2012,  the
                  Secretary of State was not entitled to take  into  account
                  the provisions of the new Rules  (either  directly  or  by
                  treating them as a statement of her current  policy)  when
                  making decisions on private or  family  life  applications
                  made prior to that date  but  not  yet  decided.  That  is
                  because,  as  decided  in  Edgehill,  'the  implementation
                  provision' set out at  paragraph  7  above  displaces  the
                  usual Odelola principle.
             (2)  But that position was altered by HC 565 - specifically by
                  the introduction of the new paragraph A277C - with  effect
                  from 6 September 2012. As from that date the Secretary  of
                  State was entitled to take into account the provisions  of
                  Appendix  FM  and  paragraphs  276ADE-276DH  in   deciding
                  private or family life applications even if they were made
                  prior to 9 July 2012. The result is that the law as it was
                  held to be in Edgehill only obtained as regards  decisions
                  taken in  the  two-month  window  between  9  July  and  6
                  September 2012.
             (3)  Neither of the decisions with which we are  concerned  in
                  this  case  fell  within  that  window.  Accordingly   the
                  Secretary of State was entitled to apply the new Rules  in
                  reaching those decisions."
74.  The decision under challenge in this case was made  on  10  July  2013,
    after 6 September 2012.  I find in light of Singh that the Secretary of
    State was entitled to apply the new Rules and the policy  in  force  at
    the date she made her decision.

75.  Mr Sharma relied on Odelola where it was held  that  Immigration  Rules
    take effect when they say they apply.  Lord Dyson endorsed the ratio in
    Odelola.

76.  I find that in this case the Secretary of State was doing no more  than
    that when she granted the applicant 30 months'  DL  in  line  with  the
    policy prevailing at the time she made  her  decision.   The  applicant
    made his application in December 2011, before the new Rules  came  into
    force on 9 July 2012.  However, in light of Singh, the law  as  it  was
    held to be in Edgehill only obtained as regards decisions taken in  the
    two month window between 9 July and 6 September 2012.  The Secretary of
    State decided to grant the applicant DL on 10 July  2013.   It  is  the
    date of decision that is applicable and is in  line  with  the  Odelola
    principle. As in all Article 8 cases, it is the evidence at the date of
    decision that matters.  When the applicant made his application in 2011
    it was refused by the Secretary of  State.   His  appeal  against  that
    decision was allowed only to the limited extent that it was returned to
    the Secretary of State to re-make  the  decision  taking  into  account
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act.

77.  A further decision was taken  by  the  respondent  again  refusing  the
    application which resulted in the  appellant's  appeal  being  granted.
    The judge's decision was promulgated on 11 March 2013 and the Secretary
    of State's implementation of the judge's decision was on 10 July  2013.
    In the light of this evidence the Secretary of State  was  entitled  to
    apply the new Immigration Rules and the policy of granting  30  months'
    DL.

78.  I reject Mr Sharma's argument that there has been a historic  injustice
    in this case.  There was no legitimate expectation that  when  he  made
    his application for DL it would be granted by the  Secretary  of  State
    and therefore the policy in force in 2011 would have been applicable.

79.  In Munir the Supreme Court considered the Court  of  Appeal's  judgment
    that the Secretary of State had acted lawfully  in  withdrawing  DP5/96
    and in determining the transitional arrangements that would apply.  The
    Secretary of State was entitled to review  her  policy  (such  as  that
    contained in DP5/96) and to change or revoke it whenever she considered
    it to be in the public interest to do so.  They rejected  the  argument
    that the decision to withdraw the policy was irrational or  unfair  and
    held that the interests of the children were  adequately  addressed  by
    Article 8 of the Convention.  The Supreme Court noted that there was no
    challenge to this part of the Court of Appeal's reasoning and  that  it
    was plainly correct.

80.  The Supreme Court at [34] and [35] held that  the  Secretary  of  State
    was entitled to determine Munir's application by reference to  the  new
    Rule.

81.  In the January 2012 IDIs paragraph 5.2 applies  to  the  applicant.   I
    have already recited that particular paragraph earlier.   This  applies
    to the applicant who submitted his application before 9 July  2012  and
    following a refusal at appeal it was considered and allowed on  Article
    8 family life grounds after  9  July  2012.   The  respondent  did  not
    contest their determination and in line with paragraph 5.2 was  granted
    DL for 30 months in accordance with Appendix FM and Article  8  private
    life grounds.

82.  However it is looked at, the argument that the applicant's  application
    was considered under the wrong policy has  no  merit  whatsoever.   The
    applicant had no vested right that he would be granted  leave  in  line
    with a policy that had been revoked.

83.  Following my  consideration  of  the  arguments  and  the  evidence,  I
    endorse the four points that were made by Mr Malik at the start of  his
    submissions.  They are:

    (1)  The guidance given by the High Court in SM only applies  to  cases
         where the decision to grant leave to remain was made  prior  to  24
         June 2013.

    (2)  There is no obligation on the Secretary of State to grant  ILR  or
         to  consider  granting  ILR  in  circumstances  where   no   formal
         application for ILR has been made.

    (3)  It is legitimate for the Secretary of  State  to  grant  leave  to
         remain for 30 months on an application that is decided on or  after
         9 July 2012 irrespective of when the application was made.

    (4)  The general principle in Odelola that Immigration Rules apply when
         they say the take effect is good law and binding  on  Lower  Courts
         and Tribunals.

84.   The  applicant's  application  for  judicial  review   is   dismissed.
    ~~~~0~~~~


-----------------------
[1] R (Omokayode) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC
594 (Admin)

