
                     [pic][pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT
00567 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th July 2013                               |On 22nd August 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before
                       upper tribunal judge peter lane
                     UPPER tribunal JUDGE DEBORAH TAYLOR
                                   Between
                               roshan ghising
                                 kishor rai
                              chandra kala rai
                                yosa devi rai
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                         (IN RESPECT OF mr ghising)
                     Entry Clearance Officer - New Delhi
                       (IN RESPECT OF THE rai Family)

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Jacobs, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
      (for Mr Ghising)
                    Mr R Jesurum, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors (for
                    the Rai family)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ouseley, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) In finding that the weight to be  accorded  to  the  historic  wrong  in
Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to be regarded as less than that  to  be
accorded the historic wrong  suffered  by  British  Overseas  citizens,  the
Court of Appeal in Gurung and others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 did  not  hold  that,
in either Gurkha or BOC cases, the  effect  of  the  historic  wrong  is  to
reverse or otherwise alter the burden of proof that  applies  in  Article  8
proportionality assessments.

(2) When an Appellant has shown that there is family/private  life  and  the
decision made by the Respondent amounts to  an  interference  with  it,  the
burden lies with the Respondent  to  show  that  a  decision  to  remove  is
proportionate   (although   Appellants   will,   in   practice,   bear   the
responsibility of adducing evidence that lies within their remit  and  about
which the Respondent may be unaware).

(3) What concerned the Court in Gurung and others  was  not  the  burden  of
proof but, rather, the issue of weight in a proportionality assessment.  The
Court held that, as in the case of BOCs,  the  historic  wrong  suffered  by
Gurkha ex-servicemen should be given substantial weight.

(4) Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,  but  for
the historic wrong, the Appellant would have been settled  in  the  UK  long
ago,  this  will  ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the   Article   8
proportionality assessment in  an  Appellant's  favour,  where  the  matters
relied on by the Secretary of State/ entry clearance officer consist  solely
of the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.

(5)  It can therefore be seen that Appellants  in  Gurkha  (and  BOC)  cases
will not necessarily succeed, even though  (i)  their  family  life  engages
Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence  shows  they  would  have  come  to  the
United Kingdom with their father, but for the injustice that  prevented  the
latter from settling here earlier.  If the Respondent can point  to  matters
over and above  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm  immigration
policy, which argue in favour of removal or the refusal of leave  to  enter,
these matters must be  given  appropriate  weight  in  the  balance  in  the
Respondent's  favour.  Thus,  a  bad  immigration  history  and/or  criminal
behaviour may still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors  bearing
on the Appellant's side of the balance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These appeals come to us by an Order from the  Court  of  Appeal  dated
    14th February 2013, following the handing down on  21  January  of  the
    judgment of that Court in Gurung and others [2013] EWCA Civ 8. In  that
    Order, the Court set aside the previous  determinations  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal insofar as they relate  to  the  question  of  proportionality
    under Article 8(2) and remitted the appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    make  fresh  decisions  on  that  question.   The  cases   were   heard
    consecutively on the same day and remitted in the same terms and it  is
    therefore appropriate to deal with both  matters  together  since  they
    involve the same legal arguments and are based on similar facts, albeit
    that Mr Ghising's application was made in country and those of  Kishor,
    Chandra and Yosa Rai ("the  Rai  family")  from  out  of  country.   Mr
    Ghising made an application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK as
    the dependent relative of a person present  and  settled  here,  having
    come to the UK as a student on  14th  January  2007.   The  Rai  family
    applied for entry clearance under paragraph 317 for indefinite leave to
    enter as dependent  relatives.   Both  cases  concern  dependent  adult
    children of veterans of the Gurkha  Brigade  (the  Sponsors)  who  have
    settled in the UK.

 2. Mr Ouseley did not seek to argue that the findings of fact made by  the
    Upper Tribunal had been challenged by the Respondent in  the  Court  of
    Appeal and it is therefore on the basis of those facts that we make our
    decision today.

Mr Ghising's appeal

The facts

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 16th July 1986.  His father
    enlisted in the Brigade of  Gurkhas  on  23rd  November  1968  and  was
    discharged  on  6th  February  1992.   He  first  became  eligible  for
    settlement in the UK as a consequence of his  service  in  the  British
    army in 2009, and on 4th August 2009 was granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain here.  His mother was granted indefinite leave one  month  later
    and on 25th September 2009 they  arrived  in  the  UK.   The  Appellant
    himself had come here as a student on  14th  January  2007  with  leave
    until 31st December 2010.

 4. The Appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain as a dependent  of
    his father but was refused on 29th  July  2011.  He  appealed  and  his
    appeal was  dismissed  on  14th  September  2011.   That  decision  was
    subsequently set aside and re-made and dismissed again by  a  panel  of
    the Upper Tribunal (Mrs Justice  Lang  DBE  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jordan) in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy)  [2012]  UKUT
    00160 (IAC).

 5. The Appellant's father wished to  settle  in  the  UK  soon  after  his
    discharge ie in 1992 but was not permitted to do  so  because  at  that
    time Gurkhas who had served in the British army were not given the same
    rights to apply  for  settlement  as  other  foreign  and  commonwealth
    nationals serving in the British Armed Forces.  The Appellant's  father
    said in his unchallenged statement dated 31st August 2011:

         "It would have been my firm intention to apply  for  settlement  in
         the UK shortly after my discharge if I had been allowed to apply at
         that time.  Sadly despite my long and vigorous military career this
         right was not available to my family or me for many years to  come.
         If we had been allowed to come at this time then Roshan would  only
         have been 6 years old."

 6. It is accepted by the Respondent that if the Appellant had  accompanied
    his father to the UK whilst he was still a minor  he  would  have  been
    given indefinite leave to remain.

 7. In Ghising, the Tribunal recorded that the Respondent's  representative
    at the hearing  before  the  panel  conceded  that  the  Appellant  had
    established that he enjoyed family  life  with  his  parents  and  that
    Article 8 was engaged.  The panel stated:

         "In our judgment the  evidence  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing
         establishes that the appellant and his parents  genuinely  enjoy  a
         close-knit family life in which they value  and  depend  upon  each
         other for mutual support  and  affection.   On  the  basis  of  the
         authorities we have  cited  above  this  is  sufficient  to  engage
         Article 8.  Although their family life  was  interrupted  when  the
         appellant  came  to  the  UK  to  study  the   appellant   remained
         financially and emotionally dependent upon his parents during  that
         period and their normal family life resumed as soon as his  parents
         were above to settle in the UK" [72]

 8. Finally, the panel, having found that the Appellant  enjoyed  a  close-
    knit family relationship with his parents and that they value and enjoy
    each other's company on a daily basis and his parents  depend  on  him,
    concluded that the removal of the Appellant  to  Nepal  would  severely
    interfere with his family life and the family life of his parents, Mr &
    Mrs Ghising.  The panel also accepted that it  was  not  reasonable  to
    expect Mr & Mrs Ghising to return to Nepal and the distance between the
    UK and Nepal means that the scope for family visits will be limited.

Mr Jacobs' Submissions

 9. Mr Jacobs submitted that on the basis of the findings of fact the panel
    ought to have allowed the appeal.  Both of the  reasons  given  by  the
    panel  for  finding  that  the  Appellant's  removal   would   not   be
    disproportionate were found to be wrong by the Court of Appeal.

10. First, the panel stated that the weight to be  given  to  the  historic
    injustice suffered by the Gurkhas should be given limited weight.  They
    accepted that they ought to apply the  principle  which  the  Court  of
    Appeal had developed in the cases concerning British Overseas Citizens,
    namely that the historic injustice and its consequences are to be taken
    into account when assessing proportionality under  Article  8(2).   The
    panel stated:

        "However it is important to bear in mind that there are significant
        differences between the position of Gurkhas  and  that  of  British
        Overseas Citizens.  Gurkhas were citizens of  Nepal,  not  the  UK.
        They were not entitled as a right to live in the UK.  Moreover  the
        exclusion of British overseas citizens has been formally recognised
        as racially and sexually discriminatory unlike the policy excluding
        Gurkhas.  We therefore agree with the conclusion of Judge McKee  in
        KG that the 'historical wrong' perpetuated upon Gurkhas was not  as
        severe as that perpetrated upon British overseas citizens.  In  our
        view it carries substantially less weight."

11. However at paragraph 41 of their  judgment  in  Gurung,  the  Court  of
    Appeal said:

         "We do not consider that a judgment about the egregiousness of  the
         injustice that was suffered by the Gurkhas as  compared  with  that
         suffered by the BOCs should be a relevant factor in  the  balancing
         exercise.  As submitted on  behalf  of  NR,  Ghising  and  KR,  the
         crucial point is that there  was  an  historic  injustice  in  both
         cases, the consequence of which was that  members  of  both  groups
         were prevented from settling in the UK.  That is why  the  historic
         injustice is such an important factor to be taken into  account  in
         the balancing exercise and why the applicant dependent child  of  a
         Gurkha who is settled in the UK has such a strong claim to have his
         Article 8(1) right vindicated notwithstanding the  potency  of  the
         countervailing  public  interest  in  the  maintaining  of  a  firm
         immigration policy.  There is no place in  the  balancing  exercise
         for making fine judgments as  to  whether  one  injustice  is  more
         immoral or worthy of condemnation  than  another.   Such  judgments
         (which would in any event be difficult to weigh) may be relevant in
         the political plain.  They  are  not  relevant  to  the  making  of
         decisions as to whether it is proportionate to  interfere  with  an
         individual's Article 8(1) rights.

         ...

         If a Gurkha can show that but for the historic injustice  he  would
         have settled in the UK at a time when  his  dependent  (now)  adult
         child would have been able to accompany him as  a  dependent  child
         under the age of 18 that is a strong reason for holding that it  is
         proportionate to permit the adult child to join his family now.  To
         that extent the Gurkha and BOC cases are similar.  That is  why  we
         cannot agree that, as a general rule, the weight  accorded  to  the
         injustice should be substantially different in the two cases".

12. In  summary,  the  Court  of  Appeal  recognised  the  existence  of  a
    difference between BOCs and Gurkhas, the position of Gurkhas being less
    secure, but in the absence of evidence of adverse information about  an
    adult dependent child the difference between the two groups  should  be
    given little weight.

13. Mr Jacobs argued that when assessing the weight to be attached  to  the
    interests of immigration control it was incumbent on  the  Tribunal  to
    consider the nature and extent of  the  consequences  of  the  historic
    injustice to the Appellant's father and  his  immediate  family  rather
    than examine the nature of the wrong itself. He recognised  that  there
    will be cases where it is not possible to compensate, for example where
    children had embarked  upon  independent  lives  and  Article  8  would
    therefore have no purpose.  However in this case where family life  has
    been accepted, the effect of the historic injustice was to reverse  the
    usual balance of Article 8 issues.

14. Mr Jacobs relied on the comment of Sedley LJ  as  at  paragraph  15  of
    Patel v ECO Mumbai [2010 EWCA Civ 17:

         "As the individual cases to which I now turn illustrate, the effect
         of this is to reverse the usual balance of Article  8  issues.   By
         the time they come to seek entry clearance adult children may  well
         no longer be part of the family life of British  overseas  citizens
         who have finally secured British citizenship.  If so the  threshold
         of Article 8(1) will not have been crossed and the  proportionality
         of excluding them will not be  an  issue.   If  however  they  come
         within the protection  of  Article  8(1)  the  balance  of  factors
         determining proportionality for the purposes of Article  8(2)  will
         be influenced, perhaps decisively by the fact (if  it  is  a  fact)
         that, but for the history recounted in NH (India) the family  would
         or might have settled here long ago."

15. The ratio of Patel was, Mr  Jacobs  said,  that  where  Article  8  was
    engaged, the fact that but for the historic wrong the  Appellant  would
    have settled in the UK long ago will ordinarily determine  the  outcome
    of the proportionality assessment.

16. Mr Jacobs referred us to the military covenant which reads:

         "Soldiers will  be  called  upon  to  make  personal  sacrifices  -
         including the ultimate sacrifice - in the service of the  national.
         In putting the needs of the nation and the army  before  their  own
         they forego some of the rights enjoyed by those outside  the  armed
         forces.  In return British soldiers must be able to  always  expect
         fair treatment to be valued and respected as individuals  and  that
         they (and  their  families)  will  be  sustained  and  rewarded  by
         commensurate terms and conditions of service."

17. He submitted that the debt of honour  owed  to  the  Gurkhas  has  been
    expressly recognised by the House of Commons Select Committee  on  Home
    Affairs and in the opposition day debate which took place on 29th April
    2009. In Limbu [2008] EWHC 221 (Admin) [2008] HRLR 48, Blake J stated:

         "Rewarding long and distinguished service by the grant of residence
         in the country for which the service  was  performed  would  in  my
         judgment be a vindication and an enhancement of this covenant."[72]

18. Mr Jacobs referred us to paragraph 64 of the same judgment where  Blake
    J  considered  the  paradox  whereby  Falkland  islanders  only  became
    entitled to become  full  British  citizens  following  the  successful
    military outcome and loss of British Armed Forces in the service of Her
    Majesty.

19. Blake J said:

         "It would be curious if the Home  Office  had  concluded  that  the
         islanders themselves who may have stayed put for  many  years  were
         regarded as having a close enough connection with the UK but  those
         who risk their lives and limbs to bring them their freedom did not.
          This would seem to irrationally subvert the historic debt that the
         Prime Minister and the Home Secretary spoke of."[64]

20.  The  second  reason  for   finding   that   removal   would   not   be
    disproportionate given  by  the  panel  was  that  the  Respondent  had
    developed a scheme, in the form of  a  policy,  which  was  capable  of
    addressing the historic wrong and contained  within  it  a  flexibility
    which would avoid conspicuous unfairness.

21. The background is as follows.  For  many  years  Gurkha  veterans  were
    treated less favourably than other comparable non-British  Commonwealth
    citizens serving in the British army.  The Secretary  of  State  had  a
    concessionary  policy  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  which  allowed
    Commonwealth citizens subject to immigration control who  were  serving
    and former members of the British Armed  Forces  to  obtain,  on  their
    discharge, indefinite leave to enter and remain in the UK, but  Gurkhas
    were not included in the policy. In October 2004 Immigration Rules  A76
    E-K were introduced to enable Gurkha veterans with at least four years'
    service who had been discharged from the armed services within the past
    two years to apply for settlement in the UK. However only  Gurkhas  who
    had been discharged on completion of engagement on or after 1 July 1997
    were eligible to apply.  At  the  same  time  the  Secretary  of  State
    introduced  a  policy  outside  the  Rules  under  which  Gurkhas  were
    permitted to settle in the UK even if they had been discharged before 1
    July 1997 and/or more than two years prior to the date  of  application
    if there were strong reasons why settlement in the UK  was  appropriate
    in the particular case by reason of the individual's existing ties with
    the UK.  Entry clearance  guidance  was  contained  in  the  Diplomatic
    Service Procedures Chapter 9, paragraph 14, replaced in January 2009 by
    the Settlement Entry Clearance Guidance Chapter 12, paragraph 16.

22. In June 2009 the Respondent stated that any Gurkha with more than  four
    years' service discharged before 1st July 1997 would  be  eligible  for
    settlement in the UK under the terms of a discretionary policy set  out
    in IDIs, Section 2(a)  of  Chapter  15,  which  was  entitled  "Persons
    seeking settlement: HM Forces" and contained a  provision  relating  to
    the dependants of Gurkhas.  The policy was superseded  in  March  2010;
    but it is this policy with which this appeal is  concerned.   In  fact,
    both the 2009  and  March  2010  policies  state  that  in  exceptional
    circumstances discretion may be exercised in individual cases where the
    dependant is over the age of 18.

23. The panel said:

       "118. In  considering  a  claim  of  exceptional  circumstances  the
           respondent can and should take into account  the  fact  that  an
           adult dependant such as the appellant would have  been  able  to
           enter the UK as a minor if his father had been  given  leave  to
           enter at the appropriate time, shortly after discharge.

       119. The scheme that  the  respondent  has  developed  is  therefore
           capable of addressing the historical wrong and  contains  within
           it a flexibility that  in  most  cases  will  avoid  conspicuous
           unfairness.  Furthermore, although not an Immigration  Rule  the
           respondent could not properly fail to adopt the  obligation  set
           out in paragraph 2 of the rules,  namely  that  decision  makers
           within the Home Office and UKBA should perform their  duties  so
           as to comply with the provisions of the Human Rights  Act  1998,
           in  particular  the   judicious   recognition   of   exceptional
           circumstances in the case of an adult dependant."

24. The Court of Appeal rejected that argument and said:

         "We confess to having some difficulty in following the reasoning at
         paras 117 to 119 and in seeing in particular why the fact  that  an
         adult  dependent  child  may  be  permitted  to  settle   here   in
         exceptional circumstances leads to the conclusion that  the  weight
         to be given to the historic injustice  in  conducting  the  Article
         8(2)  balancing  exercise  is  limited.   The  flexibility  of  the
         exceptional circumstances  criterion  is  such  that  it  does  not
         require the historic injustice to be taken into account at all.  It
         certainly does  not  prescribe  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
         injustice,  if  indeed  it  is  to  be  taken  into  account.   The
         requirement to take the injustice into account in striking  a  fair
         balance between the Article 8(1) right and the public  interest  in
         maintaining a firm immigration policy is inherent in  Article  8(2)
         itself and it is ultimately for the court to strike  that  balance.
         This requirement does not derive from  the  fact  that  the  policy
         permits an adult dependent child  to  settle  here  in  exceptional
         circumstances.  Accordingly we reject this additional reason  given
         by the UT for holding that the weight to be given to  the  historic
         injustice is limited" [43].

25. Mr Jacobs  submitted  that  Gurkhas  form  a  special  and  exceptional
    category of migrant and  are  a  finite  and  diminishing  group.   The
    Appellant has an impeccable immigration history having lived in the  UK
    lawfully as a  student  since  January  2007.   But  for  the  historic
    injustice he would have settled in the UK many years ago.   The  family
    are owed a debt of honour and have behaved  in  an  exemplary  fashion.
    The Appellant's father was on standby during the Falklands conflict and
    three of his uncles were engaged in active combat.   The  Secretary  of
    State on the other hand who is responsible for the very fact  that  the
    Appellant is required to make an application would struggle to  justify
    removal of a family member as proportionate.

26. Mr Jacobs submitted that the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
    determinative of the issue of proportionality in  the  instant  appeal.
    The only reasons why the Appellant did not  succeed  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal had been rejected by the Court of Appeal.

Mr Ouseley's submissions

27. Mr Ouseley accepted that the Respondent did not challenge the  findings
    of fact made by the Tribunal in Ghising and said that the  decision  on
    proportionality was not one which he could concede and was a matter for
    us.  He reminded us that in this case there was no  separation  of  the
    family because the Appellant was in fact living with his parents  here.
    He said that when he came  he  would  have  had  to  satisfy  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer that he was coming for a temporary purpose.

28. He said that he would have liked  to  cross-examine  the  Appellant  in
    relation to the evidence cited in the skeleton argument,  that  he  had
    only one close relative in Nepal, an 87 year old grandfather who  lived
    in  a  remote  area.   Mr  Ouseley  said  that  this  contradicted  the
    submission that it was the  custom  amongst  Nepalese  people  for  the
    youngest son to remain living with his parents even after marriage,  to
    care for them when they became elderly.  It appeared that  no  one  was
    caring for the grandfather.  On the other hand he accepted that he  was
    bound by the findings in the Court of Appeal and recognised that  there
    had been no challenge to the findings made by the Tribunal in  Ghising.



The Rai Family Appeals

The Facts

29. The Appellants are citizens of  Nepal  born  in  1987,  1988  and  1989
    respectively.  In October 1973 their father had enlisted in the Seventh
    Gurkha Rifles and was discharged  in  May  1989  with  the  rank  of  a
    sergeant, and with a South Atlantic medal with rosette and long service
    and a good conduct medal.  During his sixteen years of service  he  was
    only  allowed  three  years  accompanied  service  and  was  unable  to
    participate in his children's upbringing as much as he wished.  In  his
    witness statement he said that if he had had the opportunity  to  apply
    for settlement immediately after his discharge he  would  have  applied
    together with his family.  His children would have been very  young  at
    that time.

30. He was granted indefinite leave  to  remain  on  19th  March  2007  and
    activated his visa two years later, in March 2009.  The Appellants made
    their applications in January 2010 and  were  refused  on  16th  August
    2010.  The Appellants' case then  came  before  Designated  Immigration
    Judge  Woodcraft  who  dismissed  their  appeals  on  17th  May   2011.
    Permission to appeal was sought and subsequently granted and the matter
    came before Senior Immigration Judge Waumsley on  20th  February  2012.
    He set aside the Designated Immigration Judge's decision  and,  on  5th
    March 2012 re-made it and again dismissed the appeals.   Permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal was granted by that  Court  and  on  14th
    February 2013 the Court  of  Appeal  set  aside  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Waumsley's  decision,  insofar  as  it  related  to  the  question   of
    proportionality under Article 8(2) and remitted the appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.

Mr Jesurum's submissions

31. Mr Jesurum was present during Mr Jacobs' submissions and, whilst he was
    not in a position to adopt them said that he was in agreement with  all
    that had been said.

32. With respect to family life, he submitted that whatever the strength of
    family life the  Appellants  had  the  right  to  its  enjoyment.   The
    Gurkhas' inability to be accompanied by their family  inevitably  meant
    that family life was delayed and children were often born late into the
    relationship. The fact that  there  had  been  a  voluntary  separation
    between the Sponsor and his family did not bring family life to an end.
     This family in particular had foregone their  right  to  enjoyment  of
    family life through the father's service, and the sacrifices which  the
    family had made in the early years required greater weight to be  given
    to their right to enjoy family life together now.

33. In assessing the proportionality of the interference with the Sponsor's
    rights the existence of other family bonds  which  the  Sponsor  or  an
    Appellant may or may not have is not a relevant consideration.   It  is
    the balance between the interference and the legitimate aim which  must
    be assessed, not the balance between the  rights  interfered  with  and
    those not interfered with.

34. It was not correct to say as Judge Waumsley had that  the  Sponsor  had
    freely chosen to come to the UK  and  therefore  the  interference  was
    proportionate.  His only choice was either to remain  in  Nepal  or  to
    take up the long delayed offer of settlement in the UK.  His wife had a
    similar choice and had decided to stay which showed the strength of her
    bond with the children.

35. He submitted that the Appellants' case was in  line  with  the  British
    Overseas Citizens' cases in that they fell within a category of persons
    unjustly denied entry for many years and, by the time the situation was
    rectified, the dependent children were over age.  He accepted that  the
    challenge to the differential treatment to Gurkhas had failed  in  that
    the courts had not found it  to  be  contrary  to  Article  14  of  the
    Convention; but that did not mean that it was a relevant factor.

36. He  also  relied  on  the  case  of  Patel  which  he  said  adopted  a
    compensatory approach to  the  historic  wrong.   Indeed  the  judgment
    referred in terms to "righting the wrong" and "compensation".

37. Mr Jesurum accepted that the fact the Gurkhas had suffered an  historic
    wrong was not determinative but he said that the starting point  should
    be that those wronged should be put in the  position  that  they  would
    have been in but for that wrong. He accepted that  supervening  factors
    may tilt the balance the other way, for example an adverse  immigration
    history; but he also relied on paragraph 15 of the Patel  judgment  for
    the proposition that where there has been historic injustice  and,  but
    for that injustice the family would have settled long ago,  the  effect
    is to reverse what he said is  the  usual  position  in  an  Article  8
    proportionality case.  That, he said, was the ratio  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal judgment. He relied on paragraph 41 which said:

         "That is why the historic injustice is such an important factor  to
         be taken into  account  in  the  balancing  exercise  and  why  the
         applicant dependent child of a Gurkha who was settled in the UK has
         such a strong claim to  have  his  Article  8(1)  right  vindicated
         notwithstanding the potency of the countervailing  public  interest
         in the maintaining of a firm immigration policy. "

  38. He submitted that the  language  used  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
      indicative of an acceptance that the burden was reversed.   The  Court
      of Appeal referred to it being proportionate to permit the adult child
      to  join  the  family  rather  than  the  usual  approach   of   being
      disproportionate to refuse. Whilst in most cases  the  requirement  of
      firm and fair immigration control would outweigh the  respect  due  to
      family life, where there is  historic  injustice,  the  needs  of  the
      family will outweigh them.

39. Mr Jesurum submitted that when  the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  the
    historic injustice was such  an  important  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account  notwithstanding  the  potency  of  the  countervailing  public
    interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy, the Court was saying
    that there would have to be something equally strong to tip the balance
    back the other way, and the use of the term 'notwithstanding' indicated
    that the interests of immigration control were already accounted for.

40. He relied on the case of Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL  11.   The  House  of
    Lords said at paragraph 16:

         "The authority will wish to consider and weigh all  that  tells  in
         favour of the refusal of leave which is challenged with  particular
         reference to justification  under  Article  8(2).   There  will  in
         almost any case be certain general considerations to bear in  mind:
         the general administrative desirability of applying known rules  if
         a system of immigration control is  to  be  workable,  predictable,
         consistent and fair as  between  one  applicant  and  another;  the
         damage to good administration and effective control if a system  is
         perceived  by  applicants  internationally  to  be  unduly  porous,
         unpredictable or perfunctory; the need to discourage  non-nationals
         admitted to the country temporarily from believing  that  they  can
         commit serious crimes and yet be allowed to  remain;  the  need  to
         discourage fraud, deception and deliberate breaches of the law; and
         so on."

41.  He  submitted  that  the  requirements  of   fairness   included   the
    rectification of past injustice.  It could not be argued that  Gurkhas,
    being a tightly defined category of  diminishing  numbers  of  persons,
    could be said to be unduly porous.  Neither was it unpredictable  since
    there was a clear system of  law  setting  out  the  correct  approach.
    There was a stringent causation test.  No  fair-minded  observer  could
    consider it to be perfunctory.

42. In this particular  case  the  Sponsor  saw  combat  in  the  Falklands
    conflict on the front line of battle three close friends were  severely
    injured and one killed.  He was discharged after sixteen years' service
    with the rank  of  sergeant.   So  far  as  the  present  situation  is
    concerned he is employed as a security officer earning �1,500 per month
    and whilst applications by dependents of servicemen  and  ex-servicemen
    are not  subject  to  accommodation  or  maintenance  requirements  the
    evidence shows that the Appellants would not become a burden on  public
    funds.   There  are  no  countervailing  considerations  to  which  the
    Respondent can point other than the maintenance of immigration control.



Mr Ouseley's submissions

43. Mr Ouseley submitted that Upper Tribunal Judge Waumsley  had  not  made
    any findings of fact in relation to whether the Sponsor would have made
    an application for settlement on discharge but  he  accepted  that  the
    evidence on this issue was not challenged by the Presenting Officer  at
    the hearing, either in cross-examination or in  submissions.   He  said
    that a relevant factor to be considered was  the  Sponsor's  choice  to
    join the Gurkhas and  thereby  bear  the  consequential  separation  of
    himself from the family.  He rejected Mr Jesurum's submission  that  in
    historic injustice cases the burden was reversed  because  if  that  is
    what the Court of Appeal had meant to say  they  would  have  done  so.
    Indeed the Court of Appeal stated in terms that historic injustice  was
    not determinative.

Findings and Conclusions

44. We accept the arguments from both representatives that the Secretary of
    State agreed to the Court of Appeal's order of 14 February 2013 and  at
    no stage challenged the findings of fact made by the Upper Tribunal  in
    each case.  Accordingly, the basis for our considerations is:

    (a)    It is accepted in both cases that there is family  life  between
         the Appellants and Sponsors.

    (b)    In both cases it has been accepted by the  Respondent  that  the
         refusal amounts to an interference with the  Appellant's  right  to
         family life which has consequences of such gravity as to engage the
         operation of Article 8.

    (c)    The findings of the previous tribunals that  the  decisions  are
         lawful and in pursuit of a legitimate aim  were  preserved  by  the
         Court of Appeal, which set aside the determinations only insofar as
         they related to the question of proportionality under Article 8(2).

45. In both cases the unchallenged evidence is  that  the  Sponsors  served
    with the Brigade of Gurkhas for many years and, on discharge, wished to
    settle in the UK.  In Mr Ghising's case he was discharged in 1992 after
    23 years' service and, had he been permitted to settle at  that  point,
    he would have been accompanied by his wife, his daughter and  his  son,
    the present Appellant, who would have been 6 years old.  So far as  the
    Rai family were concerned, the evidence  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Waumsley, and not subsequently challenged by the Respondent,  is  that,
    on his discharge, in 1989 the Sponsor would have applied for settlement
    with his wife and children had there  been  provision  to  do  so.  The
    children would then have been respectively 2, 1 and less than 1.

46. All the Appellants therefore meet the test articulated by Sedley LJ  in
    Patel, that there be a causal nexus between the historic injustice  and
    the actions  of  the  Sponsors,  namely  that,  but  for  the  Gurkhas'
    inability to settle in the UK at  the  date  of  discharge  when  their
    children were young (and certainly well below  the  age  of  18),  they
    would have come here long ago.

47. We reject Mr Jesurum's submission that, whatever the nature and quality
    of family life, the Appellants had a right to enjoy it,  and  therefore
    Article 8(1) was inevitably  engaged.  That  this  proposition  is  not
    correct can be seen from paragraph 14 of Patel, where Sedley LJ said:

        "You can set out to compensate for  a  historical  wrong,  but  you
        cannot reverse the passage of time. Many of these children have now
        grown up and embarked  on  lives  of  their  own.  Where  this  has
        happened, the bonds which constitute family life will no longer  be
        there, and art. 8 will have no purchase".

48. But as Sedley LJ immediately went on to say  "what  may  constitute  an
    extant family life falls well short of what constitutes dependency". In
    this regard, we note the useful analysis by the Tribunal in Ghising (at
    paragraphs 50 to 62) of the case law on family life between parents and
    adult children, culminating in the finding that:

        "62. The different outcomes in  cases  with  superficially  similar
             features emphasises to us that the issue under Article 8(1)  is
             highly fact-sensitive. In our judgment, rather than applying  a
             blanket rule with regard to adult children, each case should be
             analysed on its own facts, to decide whether or not family life
             exists, within the meaning of Article 8(1)."

         In Gurung, the Tribunal's analysis  was  specifically  endorsed  by
    the Court of Appeal (see paragraph 46).

49.  It is relevant  to  observe  that,  even  where  the  facts  compel  a
    conclusion that protected family life within Article 8(1)  exists,  the
    strength  of  the  family  relationships  can  still  be   a   relevant
    consideration in any resulting proportionality exercise. In the present
    cases, however, there is no issue as to  the  strength  of  the  family
    life. The Tribunal in Ghising found that "the Appellant and his parents
    genuinely enjoy a close-knit family  life,  in  which  they  value  and
    depend upon each other, for mutual support and affection" [72]. In  the
    case of the Rai family, the respondent accepted before  Judge  Waumsley
    that a protected family life existed; the Appellants were  studying  in
    Nepal and were "entirely dependent on  their  father  for  support  and
    maintenance"  (paragraph  36  of   the   determination).   The   latest
    unchallenged witness statements continue to  make  it  clear  that  the
    Appellants are both  emotionally  and  materially  dependent  on  their
    parents.

50.  We turn to the nub of this appeal, namely the approach to be taken  to
    the fact of the historic injustice  suffered  by  the  Gurkhas  in  the
    proportionality exercise.

51. With respect to the British Overseas Citizens' cases, we note that  the
    Court of Appeal did not  agree  that  as  a  general  rule  the  weight
    accorded to the injustice should be substantially different from Gurkha
    cases.

52. We also note  that,  in  Gurung,  the  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  the
    argument, which had found favour with the Tribunal in Ghising, that the
    existence of a policy permitting an adult dependent child to settle  in
    exceptional circumstances meant that only  limited  weight  has  to  be
    given to the  historic  injustice  in  conducting  the  proportionality
    assessment (see paragraph 43).

53. It is the submission of both representatives, pursued  most  vigorously
    by Mr Jesurum, that Sedley LJ's comment in Patel that the effect of the
    historic wrong "is to reverse the usual balance of Article 8 issues" is
    authority for the proposition that there is some kind of  "reversal  of
    burden" in these cases distinctive from the normal Article  8  appeals.
    We consider that it is unhelpful to discuss burden in this context.

54. Firstly, when an Appellant has shown that there is family/private  life
    and the decision made by the Respondent amounts to an interference with
    it, the burden lies with her to show  that  a  decision  to  remove  is
    proportionate  (although  Appellants  will,  in  practice,   bear   the
    responsibility of adducing evidence that lies within  their  remit  and
    about which the respondent may be unaware).  It is  hard  to  see  what
    added burden Mr Jesurum is seeking to place on the Secretary of State.

55. Secondly, as Mr Ouseley submitted, if the Court of Appeal had wished to
    say anything about a reversal of burden in these cases they would  have
    done so.  The Court of Appeal cited paragraph 15 of the Patel  judgment
    and said that even in the case of the BOCs:

        "Sedley LJ went no further to say that the historic injustice might
        'perhaps' be decisive. It is in any event binding  on  this  court.
        The question is how it should be applied in the  present  appeals".
        [32]

    That seems to us to be a comment about weight, not burden.

56. The Court said that the question to be decided was whether the historic
    injustice suffered by Gurkhas should be accorded limited or substantial
    weight in the Article 8(2) balancing exercise.  It seems clear  from  a
    reading of the determination  as  a  whole  that  it  was  their  view,
    depending on all the facts, that it should be given substantial weight.



57. It seems clear to us  that  the  Court's  approach  was  a  classically
    holistic one in which the decision  maker  is  required  to  take  into
    account all relevant factors.  As the House  of  Lords  said  in  Huang
    [2007] UKHL 11:

         "The giving weight to facts such as these is  not  in  our  opinion
         aptly described as deference: it is the performance of the ordinary
         judicial task of weighing up the competing considerations  on  each
         side and according appropriate weight to the judgment of  a  person
         with responsibility for  a  given  subject  matter  and  access  to
         special sources of knowledge and advice.  That is how any  rational
         judicial decision maker is likely to proceed". [16]

58. And again, Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo) v Home Secretary [2008] UKHL  41
    [2009] 1 AC 1159 at paragraph 12 stated:

         "There is in  general  no  alternative  to  making  a  careful  and
         informed evaluation of the  facts  of  the  particular  case.   The
         search for a hard-edged or bright line rule to be  applied  to  the
         generality of cases is incompatible with the  difficult  evaluative
         exercise which Article 8 required."

59. That said, we accept Mr Jacobs' submission that where Article 8 is held
    to be engaged and  the  fact  that  but  for  the  historic  wrong  the
    Appellant would have been settled in the UK long  ago  is  established,
    this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the  proportionality
    assessment; and determine it in an Appellant's favour. The  explanation
    for this is to be found, not  in  any  concept  of  new  or  additional
    "burdens" but, rather, in the weight to be  afforded  to  the  historic
    wrong/settlement issue in a proportionality balancing  exercise.  That,
    we consider, is the proper interpretation of what the Court  of  Appeal
    were saying when they referred to the historic injustice as being  such
    an important factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise.
    What was crucial, the Court said, was the consequence of  the  historic
    injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOCs:

        "were prevented from settling in the U.K. That is why the  historic
        injustice is such an important factor to be taken into  account  in
        the balancing exercise and why the applicant dependent child  of  a
        Gurkha who is settled in the UK has such a strong claim to have his
        article 8(1) right vindicated, notwithstanding the potency  of  the
        countervailing public interest in maintaining of a firm immigration
        policy". [41]

     In other words, the historic injustice issue  will  carry  significant
    weight, on the Appellant's side  of  the  balance,  and  is  likely  to
    outweigh the matters relied on by the Respondent, where  these  consist
    solely of the public interest just described.

60. Once this point is grasped, it  can  immediately  be  appreciated  that
    there may be cases where Appellants in Gurkha cases will  not  succeed,
    even though their family life engages Article  8(1)  and  the  evidence
    shows they would have come to the United Kingdom with their father, but
    for the injustice that prevented  the  latter  from  settling  here  on
    completion of his military service.  If the  Respondent  can  point  to
    matters over and above the "public interest in maintaining  of  a  firm
    immigration policy", which argue in favour of removal or the refusal of
    leave to enter, these must be given appropriate weight in  the  balance
    in the Respondent's favour. Thus,  a  bad  immigration  history  and/or
    criminal behaviour may still be sufficient  to  outweigh  the  powerful
    factors bearing on the Appellant's side. Being an adult child of  a  UK
    settled Gurkha ex-serviceman is, therefore, not a "trump card", in  the
    sense that not every application  by  such  a  person  will  inevitably
    succeed.   But, if the Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public
    interest described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph  41  of  Gurung,
    then the weight to be given to the  historic  injustice  will  normally
    require a decision in the Appellant's favour.

Disposal

61. In the present cases, the Respondent does not rely  on  any  additional
    factors of the kind just described.  Mr Ouseley stated that Mr  Ghising
    would have come to the UK for a temporary purpose when he  applied  for
    entry clearance as a student, but fell short of submitting  that  there
    had been any deception  on  his  part.   He  was  right  to  take  that
    approach.  There is no basis for a submission that  Mr  Ghising  misled
    the Entry Clearance Officer in any way  and  no  evidence  to  found  a
    submission that  he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,
    including intention, on application.  Likewise, there is no evidence to
    show that the Rai family have done anything which requires us  to  give
    greater weight to the State's interests.

62. In these circumstances, the course  described  in  paragraph  60  above
    should be followed. We conclude that the  fact  the  Sponsors  and  the
    Appellants suffered an historic injustice but for which the  Appellants
    would have settled in the UK as children  outweighs  the  interests  of
    maintaining firm immigration control.

63. The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8).

64. We have both contributed to this determination.




Signed                                       Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deborah Taylor























