
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of YK) v Birmingham City Council  (AAJR)  [2013]  UKUT
00565(IAC)


|Heard at Field House                                                        |
|On 20 and 21 March 2013                                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE Allen
                        UPPER TRIBUnAL JUDGE MCgeachy

                                   Between

                       Queen on the application of YK
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                           BIRMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr B Bedford, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Cowen, instructed by Birmingham City Council


                                  JUDGMENT

A.   Introduction

1.   The applicant claims to be a child from Afghanistan  who  was  aged  14
    when he came to  the  United  Kingdom  in  or  around  May  2010.   The
    respondent alleges that he initially said he was 16 years old and later
    said he was 14 years old.  The applicant says that he has  always  said
    that he was aged 14 when he arrived in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  was
    accepted into the care of the respondent on the basis  that  he  was  a
    child.  There was a screening interview on 3 June 2010 at  which  point
    the UKBA disputed the claimed age.  However, on 19 July 2010  the  UKBA
    treated the applicant as a child for the purposes  of  his  substantive
    asylum interview.  His asylum claim was refused on 27 August 2010.

2.   On 3 September 2010 the  respondent  carried  out  an  age  assessment,
    concluding that the applicant was over 18 years old.  The applicant was
    given the outcome of the age assessment on  8  September  2010.   On  9
    September 2010 the council sent a "Merton compliance pro forma" to  the
    UKBA informing them that the applicant had been assessed as being  over
    18 years old with a date of birth of 1 January 1992.  On the  same  day
    the applicant was referred to the Refugee Council for NASS  support  as
    an adult.

3.   The applicant was assessed by Dr Diana Birch on 1 October 2010 and  she
    concluded that his stated age of 14 years and ten months was likely  to
    be correct.  The applicant lodged an appeal against the refusal of  his
    asylum claim and the case was heard by First-tier Judge  Chohan  on  14
    October 2010.  He dismissed the appeal but deemed the applicant to be a
    minor, finding no reason to depart from Dr Birch's report.  In a letter
    dated 23 November 2010 the UKBA  granted  the  applicant  discretionary
    leave to remain based upon the  First-tier  Judge's  determination.   A
    review of the age assessment was undertaken, taking into  consideration
    Dr Birch's report and the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Judge.   This
    review was concluded on 25 January 2011.  The respondent maintained its
    view that the applicant had been born on 1 January 1992.

4.   Following the decision of First-tier Judge Chohan,  the  applicant  was
    granted permission to appeal that decision, and  in  a  Rule  24  reply
    dated 15 December 2010 the  respondent  accepted  that  the  First-tier
    Judge had erred and requested an oral hearing in order for  the  appeal
    to be remade.  The appeal was reheard by a Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    who allowed the appeal as not being in accordance with the law  on  the
    basis that he found that the  respondent  had  not  complied  with  the
    obligations set out in Regulation 6(1) of the Asylum Seekers (Reception
    Conditions) Regulations 2005.  Permission to appeal was granted against
    that decision and by consent the appeal was allowed to the extent  that
    it was remitted to the Upper Tribunal for a fresh hearing of the asylum
    claim.  The appeal was heard before a panel of the Upper Tribunal on 14
    February 2013, and the asylum appeal was dismissed.

5.   On 5 October 2011 a preliminary issue was heard  in  the  case  of  the
    applicant and another person (JS) on the  question  of  the  impact  of
    decisions remade under the Immigration Acts, on the course  or  outcome
    of proceedings for judicial review against the  local  authority.   The
    Tribunal concluded that the respondent had not followed its policy, had
    not given any good reason for departing from it but had simply  adopted
    and maintained an age assessment which was different from that  adopted
    by the Secretary of  State.   The  Tribunal  quashed  the  respondent's
    decisions, leaving it to apply its policy and differ from the Secretary
    of State's assessment only by following the procedure in the  protocol.



6.   Subsequently, the  Court  of  Appeal  allowed  the  Council's  decision
    against the decision of the Tribunal in the applicant and  JS's  cases.
    The Court ordered expedition of the final hearing  in  the  applicant's
    case as well as in the case of JS and that of a third applicant  Kadri.



7.   The applicant had sought an adjournment of the hearing in light  of  an
    application he had made to the Supreme Court for permission  to  appeal
    the Court of Appeal's decision.  This was refused in directions  issued
    by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 13 March  2013.   Insofar  as  that
    application was renewed before us, it was refused.  The Court of Appeal
    had ordered expedition and we saw no reason to await the outcome of  an
    application to the Supreme Court, which itself  quite  apart  from  any
    hearing, if permission were granted, could be a matter of many  months.



The Age Assessments

8.   Following an initial assessment, which was completed on 3 June 2010  by
    Charles Brewster, a former employee of the respondent, Mr Brewster  and
    Mr Swaran Singh carried out an age assessment on 3 September 2010.   We
    shall say more about the detail of that assessment in due course.   For
    now it suffices to say that Mr Singh and Mr Brewster concluded that the
    applicant's  physical  appearance,  features  and  demeanour   strongly
    suggested he was older than his stated age of  14  years,  though  they
    noted many discrepancies in the accounts he  had  given  and  seriously
    questioned the accuracy of the information stated by the applicant  and
    as a consequence questioned his stated age, whether that was 14 or  16.
    It was concluded that he was significantly older than 14 years  of  age
    and well over 18 years of age, making him an adult.  His date of  birth
    was estimated to be 1 January 1992.

9.   After the assessment carried out by Dr Birch, and  after  the  decision
    of the First-tier  Judge  who  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  but
    accepted  his  claimed  age,  a  review  of  the  age  assessment   was
    undertaken, taking into consideration Dr Birch's report and the judge's
    findings.  This was carried out by Mr Singh and Ms Kanta Chauhan.   The
    conclusions in a report  written  by  Sally  McDonagh,  the  operations
    manager at Urgency housing organisation, the parent company of Greenway
    where the applicant was accommodated, concerning his physical features,
    behaviour and interactions were taken into account.  It  was  concluded
    that it was on the balance of probabilities more likely that he was  an
    adult than a child.

The Law

10.  Following the judgment of the Supreme Court in  R  (A)  v  Croydon  LBC
    [2009] 1 WLR 2257, our task in this case is to resolve the issue of the
    applicant's age, as a matter of fact.  In carrying out this exercise we
    must in effect act in an inquisitorial role, and decide on the  balance
    of probabilities whether the applicant was or was not a  child  at  the
    time of the age assessment (R (AE) v London Borough of  Croydon  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 547 and R (CJ) v Cardiff VC [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1590).   It  is
    clear that there is no burden of proof in proceedings  such  as  these.
    We have to  decide  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  what  age  the
    applicant is.

The Evidence

11.  In addition to the age  assessments,  we  have  a  statement  from  the
    appellant, and also  a  statement  from  Mr  Singh  with  a  number  of
    exhibits.   We  also  have  the  initial  report  of  Dr  Birch  and  a
    supplementary report that she has provided.  In addition  there  is  an
    independent social workers' report provided on behalf of the applicant,
    as a consequence of assessment of the applicant's age by John Cooke and
    Muhumuza Arthur.  Mr Cowen opposed allowing in both Dr  Birch's  second
    report and the independent social workers' report, but we could see  no
    good reason not to do so,  and  consequently  they  form  part  of  our
    consideration of the issues in this case.  We also heard oral  evidence
    from the applicant, from Mr Singh and Mr Cooke.

(a)  The applicant

12.  We will set out first the evidence of the applicant.  We did  not  hear
    from him until after we had heard from Mr Singh, since there had been a
    mix-up as to who was to pay for his rail ticket, and he was not able to
    arrive until after lunch on the first day  of  the  hearing.   In  oral
    evidence he adopted his written statement,  which  is  dated  12  March
    2013.  He referred in the statement to the difficulties he  experienced
    while travelling to the United Kingdom.  He said that  he  had  entered
    the country by lorry and tried to wave to cars to stop and eventually a
    car stopped and the driver said he would help him.  The driver spoke to
    him in Pashtu.  The car was stopped by the  police  and  the  applicant
    said that he got out of the car and moved away a little and the  police
    called to him and as he could not give them an address he was taken  to
    the police station.  He was then given an interpreter and said that  he
    told him his name and his age, 14 years.  He did not remember in detail
    the questions he was asked but he gave his name and age as  his  father
    had told him and said that his mother had died about a year and a  half
    ago.  At the end of the questioning he was  taken  to  a  hostel  where
    there were other young people and children.  He stayed there for a  few
    days and then was taken to  the  Home  Office  for  an  interview.   He
    thought that this was the screening interview.  After that he was taken
    to a different hostel and the next day Swaran Singh came  to  see  him,
    told him he was a social worker, through an interpreter, and asked  him
    questions.

13.  He referred to the age assessment on 3 September 2010.  He said he  was
    seen by the social worker at the hostel and did not  have  anyone  with
    him in the assessment.  He said he was feeling  upset  because  he  was
    missing his family and was scared during the assessment because he  did
    not really understand what was going on but tried his  best  to  answer
    the questions.

14.  He commented on the age assessment report and Swaran Singh's  notes  as
    follows.  He denied telling the police that he was 16 and changing this
    to 14.  He denied saying that his mother had ever told him his age.  He
    said that his mother had been dead for a long time and he had said this
    when  he  was  interviewed  and  this  was  noted  in  Swaran   Singh's
    handwritten notes.  He said that the height recorded by Swaran Singh in
    the notes of 4 June, 5'11", was not right as he was not that tall  when
    he first arrived in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  confirmed  by  a  later
    measurement of 176cm.  He denied having had facial hair at  that  time,
    contrary to what was noted by Swaran Singh.

15.  He denied saying that the driver of the car that  he  had  stopped  had
    taken him to the police  station.   He  denied  not  showing  signs  of
    anxiety or distress as recorded in the age assessment report.  He  said
    he was anxious and scared during the questioning.  He said that he  did
    not believe that he was inconsistent and constantly changing his  story
    during the interviews.  He said that he gave the same information  when
    he was questioned by the police,  the  social  services  and  the  Home
    Office.  He confirmed that in Afghanistan age and dates  of  birth  are
    not commonly known by children and even some adults because it  is  not
    important.  It had never been necessary for him to know his age.   With
    regard to the Taliban commander contacting his father he said this  was
    done via a radio and that his father did not possess a mobile phone  so
    there was no way he could have kept in contact with him.

16.  As regards the details of his family  members,  he  said  that  in  the
    screening interview he had said that his sister was about  a  year  and
    four or five months old when he left Afghanistan rather than  the  four
    years that had been written down, and he said that this was  a  mistake
    on the part of the Home Office.  He had only given approximate ages for
    his brothers, when pushed, as he had thought them to be.  He had  never
    said that his sister was four to five years  old.   He  said  that  his
    mother died in childbirth one and a half to two years ago and that  his
    sister was therefore between one and a half and two years old.  He  had
    not been able to give his  siblings'  ages  without  hesitation.   With
    regard to the assessment referring to him being able to cook  and  look
    after himself, he said that before his mother died his father  used  to
    be away for long periods and he used to be at home with his mother  and
    helped her a lot around the house with the cooking  and  shopping.   He
    said that this was confirmed in Swaran Singh's notes.  After his mother
    died and as his  elder  brother  was  still  missing  he  had  to  take
    responsibility for himself and his younger siblings as his  father  was
    still away from the house and therefore he had some basic skills around
    the house and kitchen but was not confident with those  skills  as  was
    presented in the age  assessment  report.   He  had  been  assisted  by
    another Afghan boy at the hostel on how  to  use  the  cooker  and  the
    washing machine.  He did not accept the conclusions reached by Mr Singh
    and believed that Mr Singh had taken information from his asylum  claim
    and tried to use it against him in relation to his age.

17.  He said that after it was concluded in the age assessment that  he  was
    18 years old he was taken to a hostel where adult asylum seekers lived.
     He was very upset and scared and felt alone and vulnerable.   He  said
    that because he had been granted discretionary leave to remain in light
    of the First-tier Judge's decision, he was told by NASS that they would
    not support or accommodate him any longer, and after an application was
    made to the High Court he was allowed to go and live  at  the  Greenway
    hostel for children.  This was on or around 10 January 2011.

18.   With  regard  to  the  age  assessment  review  carried  out  by   the
    respondent, the applicant said that he was seen at the  hostel  by  the
    social workers on two occasions he thought, but he could  not  remember
    exactly how many times they spoke to him  because  they  used  to  come
    regularly to the hostel and speak to him even if they had come  to  see
    someone else.  He said he did not  have  anyone  with  him  during  the
    assessments.  He considered that the  report  again  appeared  to  rely
    largely on information taken from the asylum claim,  which  the  First-
    tier Judge had said was the wrong thing to  do.   With  regard  to  the
    report noting that he used to go out to the city centre and walk around
    most of the day, he agreed that he used to do that because if he stayed
    at the hostel he got bored.  He denied that he had not developed  close
    bonds with other young people in the hostel, commenting with regard  to
    what was said by Sally McDonagh that he had only been at the hostel for
    about ten days when she wrote her letter.  He said that  later  he  did
    make friends at the hostel and sometimes they used to go  out  together
    to the city centre and at other times he would go out  by  himself  and
    meet other people.  He denied being secretive or defensive  about  this
    and said he could not give his friends' telephone numbers and addresses
    out without their permission and they had not wanted him to  give  this
    information to anyone as was their right.  He also  disagreed  that  he
    had ever become irritated by spending time with people aged  16  to  18
    years.  He said that he had developed good friendships with some of the
    other boys over time and made several friends with whom he  still  kept
    in touch even though he did not live  at  that  hostel  any  more.   He
    denied having asked for an additional bank account.  He also  disagreed
    that he had not attended the life skills program at the hostel and said
    that in fact his attendance on the course was noted as "yes" in  Swaran
    Singh's notes.  He said that he attended  and  learned  how  to  manage
    money/budget, how to deal with emergencies, how  to  cook  and  prepare
    food and how to use appliances etc., but he had  also  learned  similar
    skills at the previous hostel and did not feel that he needed to attend
    all the classes.

19.  He confirmed that he had been shaving for about a year at the  time  of
    signing the statement but was not shaving before that and disputed that
    he had been shaving at the time that  the  second  age  assessment  was
    conducted or at any time prior to  that  and  said  that  even  now  he
    usually only shaved once a week.

20.  He also referred to the holiday to Pakistan he went on  with  a  friend
    in November 2012.  His friend had said he was going to Pakistan for his
    friend's wedding  and  he  suggested  he  go  with  him.   His  friend,
    Bakhtiar, had said that friends would help him with the  money  and  he
    could pay them back when he had money in the future.  He was helped  by
    two of his friends, Sameer and Askar with the money from the trip.   He
    had applied for his passport early in the year when one of his  friends
    from college had said he might be going to the embassy in  London  with
    his uncle to get a passport and thought it would be a good idea for the
    applicant to do so also.  He had gone to the  Afghan  embassy  in  June
    2012 with his friend and uncle  and  applied  for  his  passport.   His
    friend's uncle had filled out the application form for  him  by  asking
    him questions about his family, where he was born and how old  he  was,
    and he also had to show his discretionary  leave  to  remain  residence
    permit.  He and Bakhtiar had gone together to get a visa to  travel  to
    Pakistan.  Bakhtiar had filled out the forms at the consulate  and  the
    visa was issued.  He did not know what Bakhtiar gave as the applicant's
    reason for visiting Pakistan but he might have said  it  was  to  visit
    family as the listed reasons on the form were not very extensive.  They
    had stayed in Pakistan for  a  few  weeks  and  Bakhtiar's  friend  was
    married and he attended the wedding with Bakhtiar and the rest  of  the
    time they met other people Bakhtiar knew and went out  to  see  sights.
    He had made enquiries in the community about his own family but no  one
    had heard that they were in Pakistan.  He had returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 13 December 2012.

21.  When the applicant gave oral evidence and  adopted  his  statement,  he
    was cross-examined by Mr Cowen who put it to him that he was  at  least
    21.  He said that he was about 17 and it was up to  Mr  Cowen  what  he
    wanted to say and his father had told him how old he was.  He told  him
    that when he was coming to the United Kingdom and not previously.

22.  He was asked why, with reference to what was recorded at  page  212  of
    the bundle, he was recorded as having said to the police that he was 16
    and said he did not know.  It was made clear to him that this was  what
    Mr Singh said Mr Brewster had told him.  It was not correct that he had
    changed his claimed age to 14.  He also denied saying  his  mother  had
    told him to say he was 14.  His father had told him  and  he  had  told
    them that.  He also denied having given the reasons that were  set  out
    there for coming to the United Kingdom, to  receive  an  education  and
    going to school.  He had not been to college  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    having attended very rarely.

23.  He was asked whether he had started shaving  when  interviewed  in  May
    2010 and said not it was about  a  year  after  that  that  he  started
    shaving.  He was referred to what Ms McDonagh had said as  recorded  at
    page 190 of the bundle, that  he  had  an  evident  and  well-developed
    shaving shadow suggesting that he had been  shaving  full  face  for  a
    significant period of time.  This had been in January  2011.   He  said
    that he did not have any beard at that time.  It was put to him that Mr
    Singh said he recalled when he had first interviewed him that there was
    evidence that he was shaving and he said "no Mr Singh was lying" and he
    could not accept that.  He was asked whether Ms McDonagh was  lying  as
    well and said "no that was not true".

24.  He was referred to paragraph 4 on  the  first  page  of  Ms  McDonagh's
    report where she said that he regularly went out early in  the  morning
    and came back late at night, occasionally staying  out  overnight,  and
    was asked where he went and he said he was going out with his  friends.
    He was asked why he went out early in the morning and said it was as he
    was getting bored there.  It was put to him that the truth was that  he
    was going out to work and he said that that was not the case.   He  was
    asked who the friends were and he said they lived in  the  same  hostel
    with him, and when asked  to  give  names  mentioned  Izad,  Nazar  and
    others.  He said he had other  friends  who  were  not  living  in  the
    hostel.  When he went out they went wherever they wanted, to  the  city
    centre and other places.  As to why he went out early a.m. he  said  it
    was as they would call him so he would go out.  He was referred  to  Mr
    Singh's witness statement at paragraph 23 recording that  when  he  was
    accommodated at Greenway he did not  participate  in  the  life  skills
    training program, and he said he did participate.  It was  put  to  him
    that he had not and that he had left early, came back later,  made  his
    own meals and was self-contained.  He said they gave them  some  sheets
    and during the night he did training.   He  was  referred  to  the  age
    assessment report and what was said by Marcia Anderson  on  17  January
    2011, as recorded at page 160 of the bundle, that he had not engaged in
    the life skills program because he left the building very early in  the
    mornings and returned late in the evening and on return he prepared his
    own meals.  He was asked whether that was correct and he said  that  he
    did participate in the program, sometimes during the day and  sometimes
    during the night.  He said he did cook some meals.   It  was  right  as
    recorded in respect of 17 January 2011 at page 159 of the bundle,  that
    he went out practically every day to  meet  his  friends  in  the  city
    centre and just roam around.

25.  He was asked why he wanted two bank accounts and said he  had  not  had
    two bank accounts and only had one.  He said he had not wanted two bank
    accounts.  With regard to what was  recorded  at  paragraph  24  of  Mr
    Singh's statement, he moved to Broadway (semi-supported  accommodation)
    on  31  March  2011  as  he  did  not  require  any  assistance  living
    independently and he said this was not true and he had not wanted to go
    there but Mr Singh had said he had to go there.   He  was  referred  to
    paragraph 30 of Mr Singh's statement where on 12 October  2011  he  was
    recorded as requesting his own flat and on 22 November 2011  requesting
    his own flat or a foster placement.  It was put  to  him  that  he  had
    wanted to  live  independently.   He  said  yes  he  did  ask  for  the
    accommodation.

26.  He was referred to paragraph 42 of Mr Singh's statement and  was  asked
    how he had supported himself financially  since  November  and  whether
    what was said at  paragraph  40  was  correct  about  him  leaving  his
    accommodation and not collecting financial  support  or  responding  to
    telephone calls.  He said that he had gone to Pakistan  then  with  his
    friend.  He was asked how he had supported himself financially when  he
    went to Pakistan and said it was the  Pashtun  tradition  wherever  you
    went they provided you with food.  He was asked how he had paid for the
    travel and said he had taken the money from two of his friends.  It was
    put to him that he had been working in the United Kingdom and that  was
    why he had the money and he said it was not true and if he had had that
    money why he would borrow from friends.

27.  That concluded the appellant's evidence.

(b)  Mr Singh

28.  Swaran Singh  has  provided  a  witness  statement  with  a  number  of
    documents exhibited to it.  He is employed as a  senior  social  worker
    with the respondent.  He currently works with the unaccompanied asylum-
    seeking children's team - no recourse to public  funds  team,  and  has
    been doing so since November 2004.  He is the most senior social worker
    in age assessments for the respondent.   He  is  aware  of  the  Merton
    guidelines and applied them when doing age assessments.  They had a pro
    forma.  It was usually carried out with another person.

29.  He had no reason to believe that the applicant might  be  younger  than
    the estimated date of birth.  He and Mr Brewster had deemed him  to  be
    over 18.  He was asked whether he could  be  older  and  said  yes,  18
    upwards.  Mr Singh had thought he was in his 20s at  the  time  of  the
    interview.

30.  The further review had been carried on 25 January 2011.  This  kind  of
    review would be carried out when new evidence was presented to them and
    they needed to look at the age in the light of that.  The new  evidence
    comprised Dr Birch's report and the First-tier Judge's  findings  about
    the applicant's age.  Their conclusion, set out  at  page  261  of  the
    bundle was that he was over 19 and they saw no reason  to  depart  from
    the earlier decision.

31.  Exhibit 9 was the report by Sally McDonagh.   Mr  Singh  accepted  from
    the fax date that it would have been sent on 21 January 2011  and  that
    was the date they had accommodated the applicant.  It accorded with his
    observations  and  conclusions  about  the  applicant's  behaviour  and
    demeanour as relied on in the assessment.  The measurement recorded  at
    page 200 was carried out by the nurse, Julie Ellis, on 19 May 2011.

32.  Reliance was placed on the entirety of the initial assessment.  It  had
    been carried out in accordance with the Merton guidelines, i.e. by  two
    social workers and  the  applicant  was  allowed  to  rest  before  the
    assessment.  It had been carried out over a couple of visits and he had
    been given a chance to comment on the adverse findings.  Mr Singh stood
    by the contents and the conclusion.  He accepted that it was  the  case
    that some of the information had come from other  people,  for  example
    with regard to the circumstances where the applicant was stopped by the
    police and the screening interview.  It was standard practice to  refer
    to other documents.

33.  His initial involvement had been on 4  June  2010.   The  approximation
    5'10" in height he ascribed to the applicant was an  approximation  and
    he did not know the metric equivalent.  He had most recently  seen  the
    applicant about five weeks ago in the  applicant's  accommodation.   He
    had seen him a  number  of  times  over  the  years.   There  had  been
    statutory  visits  and  statutory  reviews.   He  had  not   seen   any
    significant change in his height  and  it  was  the  same  as  when  he
    initially saw him.  He had not noticed any significant changes  in  his
    physical features to cause him to review his decision as to age.   With
    regard to the reference to the applicant having  said  he  was  16  the
    source was what the police had said to Charles Brewster.  There was  no
    further documentary evidence about that of which Mr Singh was aware.

34.  He had told Mr Singh he was from Holbesat.  He had checked this on  the
    internet.  It had not shown up that this village was in Khost province.
     It was the case that therefore the information the applicant had given
    was inaccurate.  With regard to the  comment  at  page  214  about  the
    applicant frequently backtracking to change his version of events, what
    he had checked about the village and so on was relevant to  this.   The
    point at the top of page 215 referred to Mr Singh not having been  able
    to locate the district his village was in and no  mention  of  Holbesat
    district in the Khost province, something that could not  therefore  be
    substantiated from his research.

35.  He was asked what he had relied on to conclude  as  he  had  about  the
    applicant's age and  he  said  it  was  his  physical  appearance,  his
    demeanour and his credibility.  He was asked whether he  recalled  what
    he had observed about facial hair on the applicant and said that he had
    facial hair.  He seemed to have been shaving.  He was asked whether  he
    had referred to that in the report.  He could not see it there  but  it
    was his recollection now.  The applicant had had  facial  hair  and  Mr
    Singh recollected evidence of shaving.

36.  With regard to the reference at paragraph 5  on  page  217  as  to  the
    applicant's sister's age Mr Singh said that the applicant  was  getting
    his information mixed up and perhaps not being consistent with his life
    story.

37.  He was asked whether when  he  came  to  his  conclusion  he  gave  the
    applicant any opportunity to comment and said yes, he  had.   He  would
    read the analysis and get feedback.  The team manager saw this.   There
    was an interpreter.  He had discussed it with Mr Brewster.

38.  The applicant had moved on a number of occasions.  Over the last  three
    years Mr Singh had seen him on the basis of a  minimum  of  six  weekly
    statutory visits and also on informal occasions.  With regard to  Sally
    McDonagh's report and the question of where he would go if he went  out
    fairly early and returned late it could be that he  was  working.   The
    applicant had been to Pakistan and back with the assistance of  friends
    who were on benefits but managed to  lend  him,  Mr  Singh  understood,
    �300.  It could be that that person was also working as benefits  would
    not allow for that.  The applicant had never given Mr Singh  any  other
    information about his finances.  With regard to  paragraph  44  of  his
    statement Mr Singh said that in respect of the age on the passport, the
    source would be with the DLR document and he had set out  what  he  was
    told as contained at paragraph 44.

39.  He was asked where the applicant was now living  and  said  it  was  in
    emergency accommodation in a hostel.  He had been living  there  for  a
    week or so since he returned from Pakistan  in  late  December/January.
    This was bed and breakfast accommodation, emergency accommodation,  and
    he had access to a microwave, a fridge and  an  electric  kettle.   The
    previous accommodation had been let to someone else in his  absence  as
    there was a priority for women with young children.

40.  Mr Singh was asked whether the applicant had been working as far as  he
    was aware.  He said not to his knowledge.  The hostel took a log of his
    comings and goings.  He had not absented  himself.   He  did  not  know
    whether he went out early in the  morning.   They  would  consider  re-
    accommodating when a property came available.  The applicant asked  for
    alternative accommodation, his own flat or a room in a house.  He  came
    into the office since January  every  Thursday  to  get  his  financial
    support and there were six weekly statutory visits because he was under
    Section 20 of the Children's Act.  Mr Singh had last seen him six weeks
    ago.  The applicant got �35 or so per week.

41.  When cross-examined by Mr Bedford, Mr Singh was asked  whether  he  had
    seen the applicant yesterday in his office and said  he  had  not.   Mr
    Singh had been off ill but he believed  he  had  come  to  collect  his
    weekly allowance yesterday.  He was not aware of any arrangement  being
    made for the applicant to be accompanied to the hearing today by social
    services.  Mr  Singh  said  the  applicant  had  been  brought  by  his
    representatives to previous proceedings.

42.  With regard to the six weekly visits, Mr Singh had seen  the  applicant
    a couple of times this year, initially around late  December  and  then
    about six weeks later in late January or early February.  He said  that
    the applicant had been to a number of colleges, he would enrol,  get  a
    bus pass and then stop attending.  He had referred the applicant to the
    Connexions team but he had not attended the meeting.  He attended South
    Brighton College in 2011 and he thought he had been there  for  several
    weeks and at another college TBG in the  autumn  of  2011  he  thought.
    Since then they had referred him to  the  Connexions  team  in  October
    2012.  He was now living in a bed and breakfast in Bearwood.  This  was
    adult accommodation.  Mr Singh had visited the applicant  there  twice,
    between 2.00 and 3.00 in the afternoon.

43.  52 Church Street, where the applicant had been accommodated  before  he
    went to Pakistan, was a two bedroom house and the applicant  had  lived
    there with another Afghan asylum seeker.  It was accommodation  for  16
    to 18 year olds.  The other person was slightly older, 17 and  a  half.
    The applicant had been there  from  February  2012.   He  had  been  at
    Greenway from January 20 2011 until he went to Church Street.   He  had
    visited the applicant there every six weeks.  The  time  of  day  would
    vary.  It could be 9.30am or in the afternoon.  It was put to Mr  Singh
    that Mr Cooke, the independent social worker, said that  currently  the
    applicant was essentially sleeping all day and in a low state of mental
    health.  Mr Singh had said that when he had visited him he had said  to
    him that he needed to get into education and he would help him and  the
    applicant had said that he only wanted to do  evening  classes  and  he
    would try and get a job.  He said what efforts he had made to help  the
    applicant find a job and said he had referred to him to  Connexions  in
    October 2012 and the applicant had missed  two  appointments.   He  had
    said he would find a job through his friends.  He said  this  after  he
    returned from Pakistan.

44.  It was put to Mr Singh that he  had  said  earlier  in  examination-in-
    chief that the applicant's comings and goings were consistent with  him
    having a job.  Mr Singh  said  this  was  when  the  applicant  was  at
    Greenways accommodation.  He was asked what period of time that was and
    said most of the time he was there, a year or so.  This was speculation
    however, he accepted.  It was connected with him going to Pakistan  and
    having the funds to finance the journey himself.  It  was  put  to  him
    that apart from Ms McDonagh's report there was  no  evidence  that  the
    applicant was going out early and returning late  at  night  which  was
    consistent with the pattern of working.  Mr Singh said that Ms McDonagh
    was the operations manager and they would have recorded it.  As regards
    any other basis  for  his  speculation  there  was  the  issue  of  the
    applicant not attending college for more than a few weeks.

45.  It was put to him that in effect the  speculation  about  the  job  was
    limited to a period of some fourteen days, i.e. between 7  January  and
    21 January 2011, Mr Singh agreed.  It was  put  to  him  that  when  he
    conducted the assessment it was his view that the applicant was working
    and he said it was one aspect.  He was  asked  whether  it  would  have
    informed his assessment that the applicant was working and he  said  it
    was part of the discrepancy that he presented himself as being  14  and
    he had not been availing himself of care arrangements.

46.  He was asked whether it was the case that although he  considered  that
    the applicant had been working it had not played a  part  in  assessing
    his age and he said  it  was  in  respect  of  him  leaving  early  and
    returning late.  It was put to him  that  his  regular  visits  to  the
    applicant in the morning and afternoon were  not  consistent  with  him
    working and Mr Singh said that they were arranged visits.  He was asked
    whether he suspected that the applicant had not gone to work  on  those
    days deliberately and said that he would remain  in  the  unit  for  Mr
    Singh's visit.

47.  He was asked whether he recalled when he  decided  that  the  applicant
    should leave local authority care in September 2010 and said yes,  when
    he was assessed as being over 18.  Mr Singh agreed that he had assessed
    the applicant.  The effect was that he would have to find accommodation
    with the Refugee Council, via NASS.

48.  He was asked whether he would not have expected the applicant  to  have
    been  upset  to  have  spent  four  months  without  a  key  worker  in
    accommodation for people of all ages, and said that apart from the  key
    worker  the  arrangement  would  be  the  same.   He  had  been   found
    alternative accommodation, he had shared a house.  He was asked whether
    he had not considered it  would  not  have  disturbed  the  applicant's
    normal patterns of behaviour and he said that  was  the  same  routine,
    just an absence of a key worker.  He was asked  whether  it  would  not
    have been that bad  and  said  not  significantly  different  from  the
    accommodation he had moved out of.

49.   He  was  asked  whether  when  the  applicant  was  at  Theo  Langston
    accommodation was he getting up early and leaving late.  Mr Singh  said
    there was no report of that kind of activity.  He was asked whether  he
    had not thought the four months could  account  for  a  change  in  the
    applicant's life pattern and said he could see the  reasons  behind  it
    and also the applicant was in independent  accommodation  with  another
    person in a shared house, and it could be that comings and goings  were
    a consequence of that independence.  He was asked whether he was  alive
    to that particular concern and said he would have  been.   He  had  not
    taken it into consideration.  He was asked whether it was fair  to  say
    that he was frustrated by the fact that the judge had contradicted  his
    assessment.   Mr  Singh  replied  no.   Part  of  the  assessment   was
    credibility and the judge had found the applicant not to  be  credible.
    That did not tie with the story the applicant had told Mr  Singh.   The
    question  was  repeated  and  he  said  that  it  was  part  of   their
    professionalism  and  new  information  needed   to   be   taken   into
    consideration.  He was asked whether he had not been upset and  replied
    no.  It was his job to take new evidence into consideration and he  had
    not been frustrated on a personal or professional level.

50.  Mr Singh was referred to his review, at page 195 of the  bundle,  which
    made reference to Dr Birch as being "a  fantastic  paediatrician".   He
    agreed that the judge had not said that.  He was asked why therefore he
    had put it as the basis of the judge's conclusions and he said that  he
    himself had been present at the  review  and  the  judge  had  attached
    significant weight to Dr Birch's report.  It was put  to  him  that  it
    betrayed frustration and he said it was a paraphrase only.   He  agreed
    that it was the case that her report and the judge's  decision  led  to
    the review.  He was asked whether it was not because  of  the  judicial
    review application that the review had been carried out.  The  judicial
    review claim was dated 6 January 2011 and it was put to him  that  this
    had prompted the review.  Mr Singh said that they  would  have  had  to
    take the report into consideration.  It was put  to  him  that  it  was
    because of the judicial review and he said  they  conducted  a  further
    review based on Dr Birch's report and the  judge's  decision.   He  was
    referred to the letter at page 52 of the bundle from the  UKBA  to  the
    applicant's representatives, and it was put to him that it asked him to
    review the age decision given the judge's finding.   Mr  Singh  said  a
    number of things were happening then, and that that  was  part  of  it.
    They had been sent the letter.  The UKBA were treating the applicant as
    14.  Mr Singh had received the letter which  was  at  page  53  of  the
    bundle from the UKBA to him.  He was asked why he had not done so  then
    and said that there was still  legal  discussion  taking  place  as  to
    whether they were bound by the judge's findings.  It  was  put  to  him
    that he had not responded to the letter and he said he was awaiting the
    outcome of the legal discussions.  He had telephoned Mr  Campbell,  the
    author of the letter at page 53, to say that as  the  assessment  stood
    they were not bound to review until legal discussions had taken  place.
    He had no clear instruction at that  stage.   He  had  not  replied  by
    letter.  There had not been an  age  assessment  of  the  applicant  in
    November 2010.

51.  Mr Singh agreed that it was part of a Merton  compliant  assessment  to
    put the reasons for believing an applicant was  older  than  they  said
    they were to them.  He had done that, as recorded at page  151  of  the
    bundle.  He said that the full report reflected the other aspects  such
    as appearance and the information collated.  It was the matter  of  his
    physical features as well.  It  was  put  to  him  that  that  was  not
    mentioned at page 150 and he said it was reflected in the final report.

52.  It was put to Mr Singh that the  judge  had  separated  credibility  in
    respect of the asylum claim from the age  assessment.   Mr  Singh  said
    that it was not the credibility issue and  it  was  an  aspect  of  his
    report.  He agreed that in the judge's assessment  the  two  were  kept
    separate.  It was a question of overall matters  in  their  assessment.
    He was asked whether he agreed that it was not only credibility and  he
    said it was a composite.

53.  With regard to page 212 he was asked what he meant by  "demeanour"  and
    he said that it was the way an individual interacted with  people.   As
    regards the meaning of "physical appearance" it was the outward sign of
    a person.  It was put to him that this was the place  on  the  form  to
    deal with credibility and he said that  the  boxes  were  designed  for
    there to be a flow of information and credibility came in.  There could
    be credibility issues here or elsewhere.  It was put  to  him  that  at
    page 213 there were references to height, build and features but  there
    were only three lines about the applicant's physical  appearance  in  a
    much broader box.  Mr Singh said that that was the  initial  impression
    that they had formed.  It was put to him that  otherwise  that  section
    dealt with the applicant's credibility and he  said  that  it  was  the
    initial impression you developed.  It was put to him  that  under  this
    heading he was preoccupied with credibility and he said that it was  an
    aspect of demeanour.  He  was  asked  whether  the  assessment  of  the
    applicant's credibility was UKBA's or his on which  he  relied  and  he
    said that he had to have information from  other  sources  to  make  it
    robust.   He  was  asked  where  his  assessment  of  the   applicant's
    credibility was and said it was the change of claimed age from 16 to 14
    and the address not matching up.  The reference to "I" at page 203  was
    Mr Singh.  He was asked whether he had felt it was important for him to
    decide whether the applicant was consistent as to  his  asylum  history
    and said yes, it was tied in with his life being in danger.  He  agreed
    that it was the crux of the asylum claim.  If the information  did  not
    tally there had to be a reason and if he was not fully honest about one
    aspect it could be there was misinformation about other aspects.

54.  He was asked what was meant by the  "one  down"  position  referred  at
    page 214 of the bundle in  the  first  report  and  said  that  it  was
    presumably the seating arrangement for  making  the  person  feel  more
    careful, and that was his understanding of it.  He would want to become
    the authority figure while conducting the assessment.  It  was  put  to
    him that it concerned the person being assessed and he said he did  not
    know.

55.  He said that it was a coincidence that the date of the  refusal  letter
    of 27 August 2010 was the same as his 27 August 2010 meeting  with  the
    applicant as recorded at page 141.  Mr Singh said it was issued by UKBA
    and they were still considering the assessment.  He was  asked  whether
    he had told them his conclusion and he said they were still  finalising
    it.  It was put to him, with reference to paragraph 13 at page  394  in
    the refusal letter that they were aware of the  assessment.   Mr  Singh
    said that the dates  matched  up  but  his  final  assessment  was  not
    completed until September.  He had seen the applicant on 27  August  at
    the applicant's home.  Before conducting the age assessment he  thought
    he had visited him four times, it seemed that there were meetings on  4
    June, 18 June, 27 August and 8 September and therefore there  were  two
    meetings before 27 August.  He was asked whether 27 August was  a  desk
    analysis and he said no, it was a home visit to get feedback  from  the
    applicant.  He was asked whether it was a coincidence that he was still
    carrying out home visits on the same day as the refusal letter and they
    said that the respondent had assessed the applicant as being  over  18.
    Mr Singh said he saw the applicant on 27 August and the report had  not
    been finalised.  He could not explain the UKBA letter.  The report  had
    not been finalised then.  He had put his concerns to the applicant on 8
    September.

56.  Mr Singh was asked whether  he  thought  it  was  material  to  an  age
    assessment to know whether someone was still growing physically and  he
    said yes it was an indication.  It could take place after  the  age  of
    18.  He was asked whether in January 2011 he had thought to ask himself
    whether the applicant had grown since September 2010 and he  said  that
    the health assessment was part of  the  care  package.   He  was  asked
    whether after the claim had been issued  and  he  had  been  forced  to
    reassess age had he taken into account the fact that the applicant  had
    grown and he said that they had not had the opportunity to measure him.
     He was asked whether he thought it would help and he said they had had
    a lot of information from various sources about the age assessment.  He
    was asked  whether  he  thought  he  needed  to  consider  whether  the
    applicant had grown and said no, he had only been in  care  for  a  few
    days.

57.  He was asked whether he had seen the applicant in January  2011  before
    a review was conducted and he said no, not until he  was  accommodated.
    He had seen the applicant.  He had not thought to measure  him  because
    their assessments took several meetings to arrange.  Health assessments
    took place but there was only one paediatrician.  He agreed that he had
    noted the approximate height of the applicant as recorded at page  213.
    He was asked why he had not done  so  later  and  said  he  would  have
    thought the applicant would not have grown and he had not measured  him
    on either occasion.  He was asked whether Ms McDonagh had measured  the
    applicant and said that they did not do  this  and  this  was  left  to
    health assessments.  He had approximated the applicant's  height  on  4
    June.  The assessment by Ms McDonagh as recorded at page  190  was  not
    said to be approximate.  He was asked whether he knew whether  she  had
    measured the applicant or not and said he did not know, it was left  to
    the statutory health assessment.  As regards  the  discrepancy  between
    him and Ms McDonagh  he  said  it  was  an  observation  based  on  the
    applicant's height.  He was referred to the measurement carried out  by
    Dr Birch and he said it could be observational and the applicant  could
    have been wearing shoes.  It was put to him that they had measured  him
    and he had not done so and he  said  it  was  not  his  role.   He  was
    referred to paragraph 35 at page 308 of the bundle in  the  independent
    social worker's report that the applicant had grown 3cm  since  he  was
    measured by Dr Birch.  He was asked whether this was  relevant  to  the
    age assessment and said it might be a growth spurt  and  they  did  not
    know exactly how  they  had  measured  him.   He  was  still  at  175cm
    according to Dr Birch's second report.  He was asked whether it  was  a
    relevant factor and said that a whole lot of information needed  to  be
    brought together and concluded on.  He agreed  that  it  was  relevant.
    The applicant had been measured in May 2011 after  the  assessment  but
    they were not qualified to measure him and it was not their position to
    measure him.  He had been measured at the statutory  medical.   He  was
    asked whether if the applicant was no  longer  growing  would  he  have
    reached maturity and said yes, unless there were developmental reasons.

58.  On re-examination Mr Singh was referred to page 141 of  the  bundle  in
    his notes on 27 August.   He  was  asked  whether  there  had  been  an
    interpreter present and said yes, he recalled him being there and there
    would not have been an interpreter if it was a desk exercise.   He  was
    asked about the applicant's height and his saying that it  could  be  a
    matter of observation and he could have been wearing shoes and he  said
    that with regard to their assessments they had rigid  apparatus,  there
    was a ruler  and  he  could  not  say  what  others,  for  example  the
    independent social worker, had done, but Birmingham had a proper  piece
    of equipment.  He was asked whether there could be a 2-3  cm  different
    within observation and he said he would say so, approximately 5'8"  and
    Sally McDonagh had agreed.  He was asked  whether  even  if  an  actual
    measurement was done there could be variation in accuracy and  he  said
    yes, it was subjective, for example whether when measured to the top of
    the head or took into account the hair.

(c)  Mr Cooke

59.  We then heard evidence from the independent  social  worker  Mr  Cooke.
    Mr Arthur, the co-author of the report, had attended the home visit and
    the interview with the applicant and saw the report  and  was  able  to
    amend/add  to  it.   He  had  provided  his  professional  opinion   in
    consultation with  Mr  Cooke.   Mr  Cooke  clarified,  with  regard  to
    paragraph 17 of the report at page 305, that he had attended  as  well.
    He had seen the applicant at a bed and breakfast.  He had forgotten its
    name but it was in  Birmingham  where  the  applicant  lived.   He  had
    assumed that the applicant was not being looked after as a  child.   He
    was in an adult bed and breakfast.  He was  not  getting  the  kind  of
    support Mr Cooke would expect for a looked after child to be receiving.
     He would expect at least for him to be in a shared  housing  situation
    with other young people aged 16 or 17 with  regular  planning  meetings
    and review meetings to look at their health  and  education,  emotional
    and psychological needs.  Given the date of birth the legal  duty  with
    regard to accommodation  would  be  as  a  Section  20  child  with  an
    allocated social worker and to be  placed  in  children's,  not  adult,
    accommodation with regular planning meetings addressing all his  needs.



60.  It was put to him that Mr Singh had  said  he  was  the  social  worker
    responsible for the applicant and they had regular six  weekly  reviews
    and he was asked whether this was appropriate for a  Section  20  child
    and said yes.  He did not know the nature of the reviews undertaken but
    you would expect them to be carried out  by  an  independent  reviewing
    officer.  He was asked whether this would be  someone  other  than  the
    social worker and said that there should be  an  independent  reviewing
    officer to chair the meetings and review the care plan.  He  was  asked
    of whom the officer should be independent and he said  they  should  be
    independent of children's services.  Local authorities had  independent
    safeguarding boards and provided for children  who  were  being  looked
    after.

61.  He was asked how he regarded the fact that the  officer  who  conducted
    the age assessment was the case officer who carried out the six  weekly
    reviews and said that to him that would not constitute  a  looked-after
    child review.  The situation had not been addressed as  a  looked-after
    child should be.  In the circumstances of the case where the  applicant
    had been looked after as a child for the initial  four  months  in  the
    United Kingdom and there were no concerns about him going out early and
    coming back late and then going into a hostel as an  adult  he  thought
    that the applicant would have found it very difficult  and  would  have
    needed to develop survival strategies very quickly and come  to  depend
    on other adults and substitute parents.  He would have been  forced  to
    socialise with other adults as that was the life he  was  forced  into.
    It would be quite damaging to be rejected and abandoned in that way and
    there had been many adjustments in his  life  and  quite  naturally  he
    would then still gravitate towards that when he was brought back to the
    children's setting.  He was asked who he would expect to pick up on the
    disruption that the applicant's enforced socialising with adults  would
    have caused him and he said that the social worker: children's services
    should formulate a care plan to address concerning behaviour if he  was
    staying out etc. and staying out was  quite  a  concern  for  a  social
    worker.  It depended on how old they were.  He was  asked  whether  the
    independent reviewing officer would pick up on it and he said it should
    be an issue brought to the review meetings and a decision to  be  taken
    at the end of the meeting about the plan for  their  care  and  how  to
    address the concerns raised.  He was asked  whether  if  an  adult  was
    pretending to be a child leaving accommodation with friends it would be
    consistent with him being an adult and said more so than a child,  yes.
    It could be a child acting beyond their years  or  an  adult.   He  was
    asked whether he would be  expected  to  consider  only  one  of  those
    possibilities as a social worker and he said that the applicant  was  a
    looked-after child and needed to be treated as such.  You could not say
    you did not believe he was a child  so  you  would  not  address  those
    concerns as it would undermine the whole procedure.

62.  He was referred to the fact that the review in January  considered  the
    possibility that the applicant was  an  adult  and  his  behaviour  was
    inconsistent with him being a child and was asked whether  they  should
    have considered the other side of the coin as well.  Mr Cooke said  the
    issue was not resolved as to whether he was an adult  or  a  child  and
    legally he was a section 20 child and that imposed duties on children's
    services to treat him as such.

63.  He was referred to the fact that in the report he  said  he  found  the
    applicant to be depressed and he said he  had  shown  signs  indicating
    depression.  He was sleeping during the day  and  not  going  out.   He
    agreed that that was consistent with what you would expect to occur  if
    a looked-after child had been treated as an adult.   He  had  not  been
    asked to do a height assessment.  He was asked if he had  measured  the
    applicant and said they had taken a  tape  measure  and  he  had  stood
    against the wall and put a book over his  head.   He  was  dressed  and
    wearing trainers.  He had prepared such reports  before.   He  had  not
    usually measured height but he did so in  this  case  as  they  had  Dr
    Birch's measurement.  A one-off measurement  did  not  tell  you  much.
    Successive measurements were more indicative of development.

64.  Mr Cooke was asked whether it would have caused him  to  ask  questions
    as a social worker given the discrepancy between Mr Singh's estimate of
    the applicant's height and what Ms McDonagh had said.  He said that  he
    thought certainly that in such a situation as this there  should  be  a
    medical at least once a year when height would  normally  be  measured,
    and if Birmingham had done that for 2010 there could have been  two  or
    three assessments between then and now and that would be quite  useful.
    He would asked whether he would have been prompt to do anything at  all
    and he said he was not sure that he would, the original height estimate
    was just that and he would have accepted that  he  had  got  it  a  bit
    wrong, in contrast to the situation if the applicant had been  measured
    properly.  He was asked whether the fact that  Mr  Singh  also  had  Dr
    Birch's measurement would have been relevant to the  age  consideration
    and Mr Cooke said it was only helpful and it could have been helpful to
    undertake another measurement.  He would not be critical of this.  They
    did not routinely measure height as part  of  an  age  assessment.   It
    would happen in the course  of  a  looked-after  child's  medical.   He
    agreed that there was such a medical report at page 200.  He was  asked
    whether he had ever had explained to  him  how  the  nurse  measured  a
    person and he said he understand that usually they would have a  wooden
    kind of frame with a sliding level to be placed on the head.

65.  In cross-examination Mr Cooke confirmed that  both  he  and  Mr  Arthur
    were present during the interview on 9 March at all material times.  He
    had taken handwritten notes but he did not think he  had  brought  them
    with him today as he had not considered they would  be  necessary.   He
    had spent two and a quarter hours with the applicant and there had  not
    been a second follow-up meeting so he had not been able to observe  him
    over a period of time.  His assessment was that the applicant  was  17.
    He could be 17.  He was asked whether he accepted that he could  be  21
    and said that he could be.  It was in terms of what he had read  before
    the meeting having read a number of documents, for example  Mr  Singh's
    assessment and the judge's determination.  He was asked  whether  since
    meeting with the applicant and before writing the report  he  had  read
    any more documents and he said he had written the report following  the
    meeting.  He had not read the decision of 5 March  2013  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and was not aware of it.  Before today  he  had  not  seen  Ms
    McDonagh's report.  He had not read Mr Singh's statement.  He was aware
    to some extent of the number of criticisms  of  Dr  Birch  in  reported
    cases.  He was aware that in a number of cases a number  of  applicants
    no longer relied on her evidence.  He was asked why  therefore  he  had
    given her credence in his report and he said he did  not  rely  on  her
    assessment but mentioned some of her observations  which  to  him  were
    valid from a qualified paediatrician.  He did not rely on her  methods.
    He had strong difficulties with her methods.  He only referred  to  her
    observations  of  the  applicant's  behaviour  which  were  not  to  be
    dismissed  merely  because  her  methods  were   not   accepted.    Her
    observations remained valid.  He was asked whether he believed the case
    law allowed him to rely on her observations as valid and he  said  yes,
    as he believed it was her methods not she as a person  which  had  been
    criticised and she had not been accused of making false representations
    or untruths.  It was put to him that that was not true and the case law
    criticisms went beyond her methods.  We suggested to Mr Cowen  that  he
    needed to be more specific and he referred to the  authorities  bundle,
    first to the decision of Kenneth Parker J in  R  v  London  Borough  of
    Croydon [2011] EWHC 1473 (Admin) paragraphs 51 and 52.  It was  put  to
    him that this was a criticism going beyond her statistical methods  and
    Mr Cooke said he was aware of what Dr Stern had said.  It  was  put  to
    him that this affected the whole validity  of  the  credibility  of  Dr
    Birch's evidence and Mr Cooke said it was largely about the statistical
    methods.  It was put to him that it was more,  and  Mr  Cowen  referred
    also to the decision of the Court of Appeal in M v Mayor and  Burgesses
    of London Borough of Croydon [2012] EWCA  Civ  595,  in  particular  at
    paragraph 70.  He said he was aware of what was said there but  it  did
    not totally negate Dr  Birch's  own  observations.   He  had  not  read
    paragraph 71 onwards before today.  He was asked whether he  was  aware
    of deeply unsatisfactory evidence concerning a number  of  cases  where
    applicants now did not rely on Dr Birch's evidence and he said  he  had
    not been, but it did not surprise him, given the criticisms.  He agreed
    that it was important here as the judge had relied on her.  It was  put
    to him that it tended to  undermine  the  reliability  of  the  judge's
    decision and Mr Cooke said no, as he thought it was probably before all
    this case law and Dr Birch's credibility  had  not  been  significantly
    undermined then.  He was asked whether he was troubled about  his  lack
    of knowledge when he had carried out the assessment in  light  of  this
    and said not especially.  He had  been  aware  of  questions  about  Dr
    Birch's  methodology.   He  maintained  that  he  did  not  think   her
    observations of the applicant's behaviour were so much  invalidated  or
    undermined by what had been raised today.  It was mainly to do with her
    statistical methodology and he did not think that she was a liar as  he
    thought Mr Cowen was suggesting.  It  was  put  to  him  that  passages
    showed that Dr Birch's general credibility had been doubted in a number
    of cases and yet he still  maintained  it  was  about  her  statistical
    methods only.  Mr Cooke said that was the case.  It was put to him that
    it was not the case.

66.  Mr Cowen referred to the height  issue  and  he  asked  Mr  Cooke  what
    purpose that had served.  He said that it was to be able  to  ascertain
    whether the applicant had grown in the period between when Dr Birch had
    measured him.  He did not know what Dr Birch's method had been.  It was
    put to him that that made his measurement of no validity and he said it
    could give an indication though it might not be perfectly accurate  and
    hence he had done it.  He still thought that there was some  evidential
    significance.  It was put to him that although it was accepted it could
    help, there was nothing to show that there had been two assessments  of
    height using the same clinical method over a period of time and he said
    no, but Dr Birch had measured the applicant  at  175cm,  the  nurse  at
    176cm and his measurement was 178cm.  It was put to him that if we  did
    not know the methods and did  not  know  what  was  done  or  what  the
    applicant was wearing then it was unreliable and he said that it  could
    give a general indication.

67.  He was asked whether he was aware that Birmingham  had  carried  out  a
    check and did so as recorded at page 200 but the applicant  had  failed
    to attend further medical assessments and Mr Cooke said he had not been
    aware of that.  It was put to him that the assessment at page  190  was
    just a rough guess and there was no  suggestion  of  a  measurement  of
    height as opposed to an observation, and  Mr  Cooke  said  it  was  not
    clear.  He had no evidence as to the method of  measurement  of  height
    done by Ms McDonagh or anyone else at Greenway.

68.  As regards what she said about a shaving shadow he was referred to  his
    assessment and was asked whether he had not read what she said  and  he
    said that the sentence was in one of Mr Singh's reports.  He could  not
    say whether the applicant was shaving two or three years ago.   He  was
    asked whether he had discussed the question of the applicant going  out
    early and coming back late and staying out and he said he had discussed
    his current pattern of behaviour which was quite different  as  he  had
    described it to Mr Cooke.  He had said that he stayed in  most  of  the
    day.  Mr Cooke could not verify that independently  but  the  applicant
    had still been in bed at 11am when they had visited.

69.  He had not read Mr Singh's witness statement.  He had  not  been  aware
    of the evidence set out at paragraphs 22 through  to  paragraph  30  on
    p.113 when he had prepared his report.  He was aware from his knowledge
    of such cases of the issue  of  reaching  a  determination  on  age  of
    balancing treating the person as a child and safeguarding children as a
    general point, though that was not an issue here.  He had no reason not
    to think that statutory visits had taken place every six weeks.  He had
    not seen the statutory review at page 193.  He and Mr Arthur had  taken
    notes of their meeting so there should be two sets of  notes.   He  was
    asked what were the inconsistencies referred to  at  page  306  in  his
    report and he said that he thought one was that the applicant had  said
    that his father had tried to evade the Taliban and previously had  said
    his father had had a role in the Taliban.

70.  He was asked whether the interpreter's role was just to  interpret  and
    he said not necessarily.  He was referred to paragraph 28 of his report
    where he had relied on the interpreter as a witness of fact and it  was
    suggested that he should not really do that and he said  that  the  pro
    forma for age assessments did say that interpreters could  be  used  as
    other sources of evidence.  It was put to him that even so it  was  not
    really appropriate.  He  was  asked  whether  he  had  any  independent
    knowledge of the interpreter's expertise and he said  he  had  made  no
    enquiries.  He had met the interpreter for the first time that day.  He
    was asked whether he had discussed with him the basis on which he  gave
    evidence on which he could rely and he said that  the  interpreter  was
    from Afghanistan, from a similar area and was familiar with that aspect
    of  life  for  many  young  people  and   he   had   spoke   the   same
    language/dialect.

71.  On re-examination Mr Cooke was referred to page 217 of  the  bundle  in
    Mr Singh's report which bore out what he had said about  the  use  that
    could be made of interpreters in age assessments.  He was  referred  to
    the various references he made in his report to  Dr  Birch's  evidence.
    He was referred to the decision in A v London Borough of Croydon [2009]
    EWHC 939 (Admin), in particular to paragraph 75 for the fact that there
    was a different age test then.  He said that matters  such  as  shaving
    and whether the voice was broken or not were not matters of  expertise.
    He was asked whether he had been part of Manchester's response critical
    of Dr Birch's methods and said that they had had a  number  of  reports
    from Dr Birch which contradicted their own age  assessments  and  their
    legal  department  with  others  made  criticisms  of  the  statistical
    measurements and use of them to determine age.  He  was  asked  whether
    therefore she could not state the age on the basis  of  statistics  and
    said yes, measuring height, weight and BMI, shoe size etc.  It was  the
    case that the courts had concluded her judgement  could  be  no  better
    than anyone else, especially that of social workers.  Equally, as could
    be seen from the judgment elsewhere, her reports could not be  ignored.
    Reference was made in this regard to paragraphs 79 to 81.  It  was  put
    to him that it was because  she  had  clung  to  the  accuracy  of  her
    statistical method that she had been criticised, and as  a  consequence
    her observations might be unreliable.  Mr Cooke said that that  was  as
    he understood the questions.

72.  That concluded the evidence.

73.  We had detailed and helpful submissions from both counsel, which we  do
    not set out separately, but of which we have taken full account in  our
    conclusions.

Discussion

74.  The credibility of the applicant is  relevant  in  assessing  his  age.
    Untruths about other matters may be relevant to the age a  person  says
    he or she is.  It is therefore important that we assess the credibility
    of the applicant as part of our overall assessment of his age.

75.  The first matter is the age he said he was.  In the initial  assessment
    record at page 119 of the bundle, which we take to have been  completed
    by Mr Brewster since he is named there as the  worker  undertaking  the
    assessment, it is said that the police advised that the applicant was a
    16 year old minor without parents or family in the United Kingdom.   At
    page 120 it is recorded that the police arrested him and then  he  said
    he was 16, but when  the  police  presented  him  to  social  services,
    through an interpreter he is said to have  changed  his  statement  and
    said he was 14 years old and that his mother had told  him  two  months
    ago that he was 14.  As the interview proceeded he said his mother  was
    dead but his father had told him.  It is said  at  page  121  that  his
    physical appearance suggested he was an 18+ young person  and  that  he
    had facial hair and a mature face with lines on his  forehead  and  his
    demeanour was that of an  adult.   He  was  very  calm  and  showed  no
    emotions.

76.  Mr Singh in the age assessment noted the discrepancy about the  claimed
    age and the applicant's denial that he had said he was 16 and that  the
    interpreter had got it wrong.  Mr  Singh  noted  that  the  applicant's
    physical features suggested he was a lot older than his stated  age  of
    14, commenting on his deep, mature voice and his facial  skin  texture.
    In the notes of Mr Singh's meeting with the applicant of 4 June 2010 he
    records deep voice and facial hair.   He  also  notes  the  discrepancy
    which Mr Cooke referred to, at page  125  of  the  bundle  in  the  age
    assessment carried out by Mr Singh, as to why if the applicant's father
    was with the Taliban they should be threatening his family  and  if  he
    was with them why they were coming to the village looking for him.

77.  Mr Singh also noted that two districts, Ali Sher and  Qubai  which  the
    applicant said were in the Khost province, did not appear on  the  list
    of 13 districts quoted in the details downloaded from the internet.  Mr
    Singh was unable to locate the district which the  applicant's  village
    was  in,  when  he  downloaded  geographical  information  about  Khost
    province, in that Holbesat, which was the district the  applicant  said
    he was from, was not among them.  The applicant had said  he  was  born
    and raised in Sabrari which was a district  as  well  as  the  district
    centre and Holbesat was the village his family used  to  live  in.   He
    had, however, said that Holbesat was a district and Mr Singh was unable
    to find it among the list of districts in Khost province he  downloaded
    from the internet.

78.  There was also  the  discrepancy  about  the  age  of  the  applicant's
    sister.  On 3 June and 4 June he said that she was 4 or 5 but on  those
    dates he also said his mother died one and  a  half  years  ago  giving
    birth to the sister and that he only had the one sister.  Thereafter he
    said his mother died giving birth to a second daughter, and  his  claim
    was also that he had been misunderstood or misrepresented as to the age
    of his sister.  In fact, he said, she was between a year and a half and
    two years old.

79.  We consider  that  these  matters  give  rise  to  concern  as  to  the
    applicant's credibility.  We find on the evidence that he did initially
    claim he was 16 and then said he was 14.  We find the evidence is clear
    that he initially said his sister was four or five  which  was  clearly
    discrepant with the claimed date of death of his mother  and  the  fact
    that he had only one sister, and we are also concerned that it was  not
    possible to locate Holbesat district on an internet search.   There  is
    also the discrepancy as to why he would be at risk from the Taliban  if
    his father was a member of the  Taliban.   We  note  and  record  these
    matters as part of the evidence which requires to be taken into account
    when considering the issue of the applicant's age.   We  also  bear  in
    mind,  though  of  course  we  are  not  bound  by  them,  the  adverse
    credibility findings of the judge, who  disbelieved  the  core  of  the
    applicant's claim, though he accepted  the  claimed  age,  noting  with
    apparent approval the medical and  scientific  procedures  used  by  Dr
    Birch to assess the applicant's age, and expressing concerns about  the
    adverse view of credibility taken by Mr Singh and Mr Brewster.

80.  A further relevant issue is the question of whether or not and at  what
    stage he was shaving.  Again, this can not be determinative, but it  is
    a relevant factor.  We have noted above the comments of Mr Brewster and
    Mr Singh in this regard.  It is also relevant to note the comment of Ms
    McDonagh, at page 190 of the bundle, that the applicant had an  evident
    and well-developed shaving shadow which  suggested  that  he  had  been
    shaving full face for a significant period of time.   That  remark  was
    made on or about 21 January 2011.  By contrast, Dr Birch, who  saw  the
    applicant on 1 October 2010, commented that he had soft facial hair  in
    the moustache area and had a few soft, immature hairs on his chin.  She
    said that he had never shaved and this was borne out by examination  as
    he had no stubble and she said this was consistent with a 13 to 14 year
    old.  Mr Cooke and Mr Arthur saw the applicant on 9 March  2013.   They
    noted, at paragraph 49 of their report,  that  the  applicant  now  had
    facial hair growth and shaved regularly.  This was not  thought  to  be
    inconsistent with a young male aged 17.

81.  We find surprising the contrast between the evidence  of,  on  the  one
    hand, Mr Singh, Mr Brewster and Ms McDonagh, and that of  Dr  Birch  on
    the other hand.   In  particular  there  is  the  contrast  between  Ms
    McDonagh's evidence and Dr Birch's.  It is also relevant  to  note  the
    photograph taken by the applicant at the screening interview, on 3 June
    2010.  We have an A4 sized colour reproduction of that.  It  very  much
    bears out the assessment of Mr  Singh,  Mr  Brewster  and  Ms  McDonagh
    rather than that of Dr Birch.  The applicant  is  shown  with  a  clear
    moustache and hair on and around his  chin.   The  assessment  of  this
    evidence as a whole is that we prefer the  evidence  of  Mr  Singh,  Mr
    Brewster and Ms McDonagh to that of Dr Birch on the point.

82.  Of further relevance is  the  question  of  the  extent  to  which  the
    applicant has been perceived as having an independent lifestyle.  There
    is the report from Sally McDonagh referred to  above,  provided  on  21
    January 2011, stating that the applicant had not really developed close
    bonds or relationships with other young people on the unit and actively
    pursued independent activities and, whilst courteous  with  others,  it
    was clear that he was often irritated with any extended length of  time
    he needed to spend in the company of a group  of  sixteen  to  eighteen
    year olds.  (The applicant denied this).  She said  that  he  regularly
    went out early in the morning and came back late at night, occasionally
    staying out overnight, and considered this to  be  indicative  of  more
    mature young adults of 19+.  She also noted the absence of any need  to
    prompt  and  negotiate  to  ensure  independent  living   skills   were
    developed.  She commented that he was arrogantly resistant initially to
    a placement at South  Birmingham  College  but  on  further  discussion
    decided to attend.  She noted that he made his own appointments such as
    with solicitors and health  appointments  and  actively  attended  them
    alone and when offered assistance was clear that he wished to go alone.



83.  It is relevant to bear in mind that this report was based on ten  days'
    worth of observation by Ms McDonagh and has to be seen in  that  light.
    It is relevant also to note that in his  evidence  the  applicant  took
    issue with Ms McDonagh's conclusions.  We note though from paragraph 26
    of Mr Singh's report that when at Greenway where the appellant moved on
    7 April 2011 he absented himself from accommodation for periods of time
    without informing staff where he was going and whom  he  was  visiting.
    On 12 September 2011 he requested his own independent accommodation but
    Mr Singh explained he could not be moved at that time in light  of  his
    stated age.  Eventually he moved into independent accommodation  on  17
    February 2012.  It was noted at paragraph 37 of Mr Singh's report on  6
    July 2012 that the applicant was not attending college and not working.
     He was referred to the Connexions team for assistance  with  accessing
    education, training or work but he missed  his  two  appointments  with
    them on 17 October and 8 November 2012.   We  find  to  be  lacking  in
    credibility the applicant's claim to  have  participated  in  the  life
    skills course sometimes during the day and sometimes during the  night.
    We prefer Mr Singh's evidence on the point.   The  applicant  left  his
    accommodation in November 2012 and this was on  the  occasion  when  he
    went with a friend to attend a wedding in Pakistan.  He does not appear
    to have informed Mr Singh or anyone else  in  social  services  of  his
    plans and they only discovered this when  the  applicant  returned  and
    found he could not get access to the accommodation at 52 Church  Street
    as his accommodation there had  been  cancelled  because  he  had  gone
    missing.

84.  In this regard we bear in mind the point made by Mr Bedford which  was,
    to a limited extent, acknowledged by Mr Singh, that  one  might  expect
    that the effect of having four months in adult accommodation before  he
    was returned to young people's accommodation might have caused  him  to
    react in the way in which he did.  Mr Singh, however,  noted  that  the
    only real difference was  that  he  did  not  have  a  key  worker  and
    otherwise the same levels of support would have existed.  The applicant
    in his evidence referred to the household skills he had had to  develop
    after the death of his mother and in his father's absence, but said  he
    lacked  confidence  in  such  matters.   Dr  Birch  recorded  what  the
    applicant said with regard to him struggling to look after himself but,
    as Mr Singh pointed out at paragraph 20  of  his  statement,  that  was
    contradicted by the evidence of  professionals  who  had  observed  the
    applicant taking care of himself over a period of time.

85.  Mr Singh surmised that the applicant might  have  been  working,  given
    what was noted  by  Ms  McDonagh  about  his  early  leaving  and  late
    returning to the accommodation.  However, that does not appear to  have
    formed a part of his behaviour in other accommodations and as  we  have
    noted above her observations were based  on  only  a  relatively  short
    period of time.

86.  However, we do  see  force  in  Mr  Singh's  view  that  the  applicant
    exhibited clear signs of an independent lifestyle.  The comments on his
    behaviour that we have set out above are clearly  relevant.   The  fact
    that he felt able to go to Pakistan with a friend is a further sign  of
    independent behaviour.  We understand Mr Singh's querying  how  he  was
    able to do this when he had very limited funds of his own and went with
    a friend who it seems was also on benefits.  It is entirely unclear how
    it was possible for this trip to be funded, but we consider  it  to  be
    consistent with the number of signs of independent lifestyle  which  Mr
    Singh noted.

87.  We do not see anything adverse in the fact  that  it  appears  a  draft
    copy of the age assessment had been seen by the author  of  the  asylum
    refusal letter.  We accept that Mr Singh had no knowledge of  how  that
    took place, although it is possible to surmise that  his  colleague  or
    someone else passed the draft on, but we do not have enough evidence to
    make a finding on the point and it does not, in any event, seem  to  us
    to be essentially germane to the issues before us.  We also accept what
    Mr Singh said about the timing of the review.   It  is  credible  that,
    whatever was being said at the time by UKBA, there would be a  need  to
    have discussions with the legal department  about  the  impact  of  the
    judge's decision, and he had no clear instructions at that stage.

88.  Nor do we consider that Mr Singh was motivated by anything  other  than
    professionalism in carrying out the review.  We found Mr Singh to be an
    honest and consistent witness.  He did not overstate his  case  and  we
    are satisfied that the  review  was  carried  out,  as  indeed  it  was
    required to be, as a consequence of Dr Birch's report and the  findings
    of the Immigration Judge.  We also accept that he put his  concerns  to
    the applicant and that the age assessment  was  Merton  compliant.   Mr
    Singh is the person who has had  the  most  ongoing  contact  with  the
    applicant since he came to the United Kingdom.   He  has  seen  him  at
    regular intervals and has carried out the two assessments.  He does not
    seem to us in any sense to have an axe to grind, but we consider him to
    be an honest and competent professional doing a difficult  job  to  the
    best of his abilities.  He was right to note aspects of the applicant's
    evidence that gave  rise  to  doubts  about  his  credibility.   As  we
    remarked earlier, credibility as to a person's claimed  age  cannot  be
    divorced from their general credibility.  We see nothing adverse in  Mr
    Singh placing into account matters on which he only has  reports,  such
    as police reports and reports of other people who have been involved in
    assessing the applicant.  It has been clear from  the  outset  that  he
    considered the applicant to be at least 18, in contrast to Mr Cooke who
    accepted that he could be 21.  We do not see this as an illustration of
    inflexibility on the part of Mr Singh but rather a realistic evaluation
    of the age of the applicant based on  the  information,  knowledge  and
    observation he had of him.

89.  We found Mr Cooke to be an honest witness also.  Clearly  he  has  seen
    the applicant only on the one occasion rather than  over  a  period  of
    time, unlike Mr Singh, and his evidence has to be seen in that context.
     However, we have some concerns  regarding  his  views  on  Dr  Birch's
    evidence.  For example, in R (on  the  application  of  "R")  v  London
    Borough of Croydon [2011]  EWHC  1473  (Admin),  Kenneth  Parker  J  at
    paragraph 52 said as follows:

         "However, my concern is  that  Dr  Birch,  on  the  basis  of  the
         evidence that she  gave  to  the  court,  has  in  my  judgment  an
         erroneous  confidence  in  the  accuracy  and  reliability  of  the
         statistical  methods  that  she  has  employed.    That   misplaced
         confidence undermines the other evidence that she  has  given.   It
         appears to me that that confidence leads her to rely primarily upon
         her statistical methods.  Therefore,  she  is  very  likely  to  be
         biased in her  assessment  of  age  by  reason  of  that  misplaced
         confidence.  Therefore, it seems to me that I  must  approach  with
         very great caution the conclusions that she has reached.  In short,
         I do not believe that Dr Birch's  assessment  of  the  age  of  the
         applicant is any more reliable than that of a social worker."

90.  In R (on the application of MWA) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and Another [2011] EWHC 3488 (Admin), Beatson  J  stated  at
    paragraph 70 that he did not find  Dr  Birch's  evidence  satisfactory,
    noting that she stated that she accepted in the light of R  that  until
    she had completed more statistical work she had to  rely  only  on  her
    clinical assessments  and  not  on  her  statistical  methodology,  but
    maintained that her method was sound and  claimed  that  she  had  been
    given  no  opportunity  in  R's  case  to  explain  the  basis  of  her
    statistical methodology as the result of the instructions of solicitors
    for the applicants in those cases and that this was unfair.

91.  In her addendum report for this case, Dr Birch says that  in  light  of
    the disapproval of the statistical aspects of her approach by the  High
    Court she does not currently use a statistical method in preparing  age
    assessment reports but says that her clinical judgment has  never  been
    questioned, and that when she saw the applicant  in  October  2010  she
    employed her clinical skills in that assessment and  then  went  on  to
    support her medical evaluation and clinical judgment  with  statistical
    data and population norms, the approach disapproved  in  R.   She  says
    that she therefore did not use a  statistical  method  in  this  report
    which was based on the clinical view she reached at the time  when  she
    saw the applicant in October 2010 without the statistical backup.  This
    may be an attempt to deal with the comment  at  paragraph  71  in  MWA,
    where Beatson J commented that though Dr Birch no longer relied on  her
    statistical method it was of some significance  that  her  most  recent
    report (a) did not clearly distinguish findings in the earlier  reports
    which did use the statistical method from findings as a result  of  the
    more recent examination and (b) did not consist of a fresh look at  her
    assessment of  the  applicant  in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  the
    statistical  material  she  used  in  the  earlier  reports  had   been
    criticised in this way.  In her conclusions in the addendum  report  Dr
    Birch says that the assessment has  taken  into  consideration  a  wide
    range of physical and mental parameters.  She did  not  re-examine  the
    applicant and therefore her assessment is based on those parts  of  the
    previous assessment which have not been found to be  unsatisfactory  by
    the higher courts.  We think it would have been much more  satisfactory
    if Dr Birch had carried out a fresh examination of the applicant rather
    than simply in effect retaining from the previous report those parts of
    it which involved the use of her statistical method.  We  have  already
    commented on the divergence of views as  to  the  facial  hair  of  the
    applicant and preferred the evidence in particular of Ms  McDonagh  and
    the photographic evidence.  We have as a  consequence  derived  limited
    assistance  only  from  Dr  Birch's  report.   As  regards  Mr  Cooke's
    evidence, we consider he was wrong not to accept  that  the  subsequent
    criticisms of Dr Birch's statistical approach tended to  undermine  the
    Immigration Judge's conclusion on the applicant's  age.   Even  if  the
    criticisms were not before the judge, his acceptance of her assessment,
    based on a now-discredited approach, has to be seen as  flawed.   As  a
    separate point concerning the judge's conclusions  on  the  applicant's
    age, we consider them to be  further  weakened  by  the  fact  that  he
    treated as separate the general credibility of the  applicant  and  the
    issue of his age rather than treating the former  as  relevant  to  the
    latter, as he should have done.

92.  Bringing these matters together, we see as of  relevance  in  assessing
    the applicant's age the fact that his credibility is damaged in several
    respects.  In our view the evidence does show significant  examples  of
    independent lifestyle which is indicative of him being  older  than  he
    claims to be, and the evidence which we prefer of facial hair also  has
    an element of consistency with that finding, although of course that in
    particular is very far from being a determinative  piece  of  evidence.
    We have derived a good deal  of  assistance  from  the  evidence,  both
    written and oral, of Mr Singh, who is the person who has  observed  the
    applicant most over a significant period of time and whom we find to be
    an honest and objective witness.  We have also found  Mr  Cooke  to  be
    honest and objective, though of course he has  observed  the  applicant
    over a much shorter period indeed and we are not sure that he  is  wise
    to support, to the limited extent to which he does,  the  views  of  Dr
    Birch.   Taking  these  matters  as  a  whole  we  conclude  that   the
    applicant's date of birth is 1 January 1992.

93.  The parties may make further written submissions on the  terms  of  any
    further orders sought and in particular on the issue of  costs,  to  be
    received by the Tribunal no later than fourteen days after the date  of
    promulgation of this judgment.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
