
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

BW (witness statements by advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00568 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 November 2014                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                     BW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

Appellant:   Mr E Nicholson (of Counsel), instructed by Lawrence and
             Company Solicitors


 Respondent:  Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



   i)     It is timely to recall the golden rule  of  judicial  adjudication
      that justice must not only be done but must manifestly be seen  to  be
      done.

  ii)     In certain cases, likely to be rare,  evidence  presented  to  the
      Upper  Tribunal  may  include  a  witness  statement  compiled  by   a
      representative involved in the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
      ("FtT").  In practice, this is most likely to  occur  in  cases  where
      such  evidence  is  considered  necessary  to  demonstrate  that   the
      appellant was deprived of  his  right  to  a  fair  hearing  at  first
      instance.

 iii)     Evidence of this kind will not be required if the determination of
      the FtT speaks for itself on the relevant issue.

  iv)     In applications for permission to appeal, the distinction  between
      legal submissions and arguments (on the one hand) and  evidence  about
      events at the hearing (on the other) must be carefully observed.

   v)     Where an advocate makes a witness statement in  the  circumstances
      outlined above, a change of advocate may be necessary, since the roles
      of advocate and witness are distinct, separated by a  bright  luminous
      line.  An advocate must never assume the role of witness.

  vi)     The respondent's rule 24 response must  engage  specifically  with
      additional evidence of this kind.


                      DECISION, REMITTAL AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (the
    "FtT") promulgated on 18 July  2014,  whereby  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to remove him from the United
    Kingdom to Afghanistan, following rejection of his asylum  application,
    was dismissed.

 2. It  was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    determination of the FtT cannot  be  sustained,  on  an  assortment  of
    grounds.  In the Notice of Appeal, five central grounds  are  advanced.
    In substance, the concession  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    related to  the  first  three  grounds.   I  consider  this  concession
    properly made.

 3. One of the grounds of appeal to which the concession related was  based
    on the Judge's statement at the conclusion of the  evidence,  when  the
    closing submissions of the Appellant's Counsel  were  about  to  begin,
    that he had effectively made up his mind on the issue  of  whether  the
    Appellant was the person depicted in a series of photographs adduced in
    evidence. This was not disputed. This issue was one of  not  less  than
    fundamental importance: if the  photographs  were  found  to  depict  a
    person other than the Appellant, his appeal was almost certainly doomed
    to fail.  This serves as a timely reminder of the fundamental  rule  of
    adjudication in all contexts that an open mind must be  conscientiously
    maintained until the conclusion of the  adjudicative  process.  In  the
    hallowed words of Lord Hewart CJ, justice must not  only  be  done  but
    must manifestly be seen to be done. Lord Bingham of Cornhill  described
    this duty as "so fundamental, so pervasive and ........ so basic  "(The
    Business of Judging, p 81). The judicial intervention which occurred in
    this case (and about which  there  was  no  dispute)  created  a  clear
    appearance of unfairness and,  in  my  judgement,  had  the  effect  of
    denying the Appellant a fair hearing.

 4. I turn to address an important  issue  of  professional  standards  and
    ethics which arose  in  this  appeal.   The  material  upon  which  the
    application for permission  to  appeal  was  made  and,  in  turn,  the
    substantive appeal was presented included a witness statement signed by
    Counsel who represented the Appellant at first instance. This statement
    described certain events at the hearing, in particular that outlined in
    [3] above.  In response to my enquiry, I was informed by Mr  Nicholson,
    representing  the  Appellant,  that  the  change  of  Counsel   was   a
    deliberate, planned development, motivated by  the  consideration  that
    Counsel at first instance now had the status of a witness.

 5. In these circumstances, the following guidance seems appropriate:

    (i)   In  certain  circumstances,  it  is  appropriate  for   a   legal
         representative  to  make  a  witness  statement   of   this   kind,
         particularly where the grounds of appeal are based, in whole or  in
         part, on how the first instance hearing was  conducted  and  events
         which unfolded therein.

    (ii) The cases in which a witness statement of this  type  materialises
         between first instance hearing and appeal are likely  to  be  rare.
         In practice, this course is  most  likely  to  occur  where  it  is
         contended that the litigant was deprived of his  right  to  a  fair
         hearing by reason of events which occurred at the  hearing  itself.
         One far from fanciful illustration which comes to mind  is  a  case
         where it  is  considered  necessary  to  present,  as  part  of  an
         application for permission to  appeal,  evidence  relating  to  the
         circumstances in  which  a  late  application  for  an  adjournment
         materialised and how such application was handled by  the  Tribunal
         if the Tribunal's determination does not speak for itself  on  this
         discrete issue.

    (iii)    Those compiling applications for permission to appeal must  be
         alert to the important distinction between  legal  submissions  and
         arguments (on the one hand)  and  evidence  (on  the  other).  This
         distinction must not be blurred.

    (iv) Where it is decided that a witness statement  of  the  kind  which
         materialised  in  the  present  case  must  be  made,   the   legal
         representative concerned should, as a general rule, not present the
         appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  roles  of  advocate  and
         witness are distinct, separated by  a  bright  luminous  line.   An
         advocate must never assume the role of witness. This  conflict  may
         be avoided if, for example,  the  facts  bearing  on  the  judicial
         aberration in question are  undisputed.  Otherwise,  the  appellate
         advocacy function must be relinquished to another representative.


    (v)  In every rule 24 response, care must  be  taken  to  set  out  the
         Respondent's position in relation to a witness  statement  of  this
         kind.  Thus, if the contents of the statement are undisputed,  this
         should be simply stated.  Alternatively, any controversy  regarding
         the contents must be highlighted.

 6. Reference to the relevant professional standards of barristers confirms
    the correctness of and rationale underpinning the  propositions  listed
    above.  Adherence  to  the  latter,  with  specific  reference  to  the
    relevant provisions of the Bar Standards Board Handbook (First Edition,
    January 2014), will:

        i)    discharge the core duties of acting in the best interests  of
           the client and avoiding conduct likely to diminish public  trust
           and confidence (see CD2 and CD5);


    (ii) enhance the willingness and ability of the court  or  tribunal  to
           rely on information provided to it by both the  former  advocate
           (now witness) and the new advocate (see OC1);


    (iii)    further the proper administration of justice (see OC2);


       iv)    protect and promote the interests of the  client  (see  OC3);
           and


        v)    discharge the former advocate's duty  to  the  Tribunal  (see
           RC3);



 7. Reference may also be made to RC17, RC26.  The  first  of  these  rules
    provides that the duty to act in the best  interests  of  one's  client
    includes "a duty to consider whether the client's  best  interests  are
    served by different legal representations" - and, if so, to advise  the
    client to this effect.  RC26 provides  that  counsel  instructed  in  a
    matter may cease to act where there is some  "substantial  reason"  for
    doing so.  Further, I refer to the guidance enshrined  in  GC73.   This
    relates to the rule contained in RC21.10 that Counsel must  not  accept
    instructions to act if there is "a real prospect that you are not going
    to be able to maintain your independence".   The operative  passage  is
    thus:


         "Examples of when you may not be able to maintain your independence
         include appearing as an advocate in  a  matter  in  which  you  are
         likely to be called as a witness ...."

     Finally, it is appropriate to observe that adherence to the  rules  and
    standards highlighted above will  serve  to  protect  and  enhance  the
    necessary standards of dignity and decorum in the courtroom  and  will,
    thereby, promote the rule of law.

 8. It is appropriate to observe that, in the  present  case,  Counsel  who
    represented  the  Appellant  at  first   instance   conducted   himself
    impeccably, observing all of these precepts  fully.  In  this  way  the
    highest  standards  of  professional  conduct  and  ethics  were   duly
    observed.





DECISION

 9. I decide and direct as follows:

    (i)  The decision of the FtT is hereby set aside.

         (ii) I remit the appeal to a differently constituted FtT.

         (iii)    No findings of fact are preserved.

    (iv) Any application on behalf  of  the  Appellant  to  adduce  further
         evidence will be made within six weeks of  the  date  hereof.   The
         relisting will follow on the first available date thereafter.





                                [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER




                                                    Date:   18 November 2014
