


                           [pic]

Shabir Ahmed and others (sanctions for non - compliance) [2016] UKUT 00562
(IAC)

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                                               |                             |
|Before                                                         |                             |
|                                                               |                             |
|                                                               |                             |
|THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT                       |                             |
|DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES                             |                             |
|                                                               |                             |



Between


                                   SHABIR AHMED
                                   ADIL KHAN
                                 QARI ABDUL RAUF
                                   ABDUL AZIZ
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

Appellants:   [DC/00022 /2015] Mr R Sharma, of counsel, instructed by Platt
             Halpern Solicitors.
     [Other three cases] Mr Z Jafferji, of counsel, instructed by Burton &
             Burton Solicitors
Respondent:   Ms C McGahey QC and Mr V Mandalia and Mr Patel, both of
             counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department, on
             behalf of the Respondent


Persistent  and  egregious  non-compliance  with  Upper   Tribunal   orders,
directions and rules will attract appropriate sanctions.
                            RULING AND DIRECTIONS

 1. In these  four  inter-related  and  combined  appeals,  cases  of  some
    notoriety arising out of certain  highly  publicised  prosecutions  and
    ensuing convictions, the procedural history is as follows:


      a) Following a hearing on 16 February 2016, the decision of the First-
         tier  Tribunal   dismissing   the   Appellants'   appeals   against
         deprivation of citizenship decisions was promulgated  on  27  April
         2016.

      b) By my decision dated 11 July 2016,  permission  to  appeal  to  the
         Upper  Tribunal  was  granted.   This  incorporated  the  following
         directions.  First,  a  hearing  date  of  21  September  2016  was
         allocated.  Second, any request for a case management  hearing  was
         to be made within the ensuing period of  21  days.   Certain  other
         directions were also made.

      c) By further  directions  dated  09  August  2016  the  parties  were
         required to file and serve skeleton arguments by 11  September  and
         15 September 2016 respectively.

      d) By letter dated 04 August 2016 the Upper Tribunal was  informed  by
         the Home Office that the GLD  had  been  instructed  and  would  be
         instructing Counsel.

      e) Next, the Appellants' representatives were given the indulgence  of
         an adjournment of the hearing scheduled for 21 September 2016.

      f) All  parties'  representatives  have  failed  to  comply  with  the
         September directions   issued by the Tribunal.

      g) In re-listing  the  appeals  the  Tribunal  noted  the  information
         provided about the availability of counsel  and  duly  convenienced
         all concerned.

      h) By Notices dated 13 October 2016 the rescheduled hearing date of 01
         December 2016 was notified to all representatives.

 2. During  the  most  recent  phase  scarce  judicial  and  administrative
    resources have been  wasted  in  dealing  with  repeated  unmeritorious
    requests by the Appellants' solicitors for an  adjournment  of  today's
    hearing.

 3. These proceedings, in the Upper Tribunal, have  been  extant  for  some
    five months.  During this period no representative has requested a case
    management  hearing  or  has  applied  for  any  variation,  or  sought
    clarification of, the Upper Tribunal's directions.

 4. No hearing bundle  or  skeleton  argument  has  been  provided  by  the
    Appellants' representatives.


 5. On the eve of today's hearing it became apparent that at least  one  of
    the counsel apparently "instructed" had received  no  papers  from  his
    instructing solicitors. Still further Tribunal  resources,  which  took
    the form of, in effect, constructing a brief for counsel,  were  wasted
    in consequence.


 6. The Respondent's skeleton argument was received, figuratively,  at  the
    59th minute of the eleventh hour - and this only following a flurry  of
    emails involving the Tribunal's  administration.  It  was  produced  in
    egregious breach of the Tribunal's Directions and is still not properly
    before  the  Tribunal.  A  feeble  and  unacceptable  excuse  for  this
    particular default has been proffered - and only when prompted  by  the
    Tribunal.


 7. To describe this state of affairs as grossly unsatisfactory is an acute
    understatement.  The Upper Tribunal has been treated with sustained and
    marked disrespect.  The conduct of these appeals has been cavalier  and
    unprofessional.   The rule of law has been weakened in consequence.


 8. Disturbingly, there have  been  multiple  recent  examples  of  similar
    conduct and misconduct.  Recent examples include, inexhaustively:

          a) The three "ETS" cases of MA v  SSHD  [2016]  UKUT  450  (IAC),
             Mohibullah v SSHD [2016]  UKUT  561  (IAC)  and  Saha  v  SSHD
             (JR/10845/2015);

          b)  PP v SSHD (AA/09745/2011); and

          c)  VT v SSHD (AA/00156/2015).

 9.  I  trust  and  expect  that  these  four  appeals  and  each  of   the
    aforementioned cases  will  be  reviewed  personally  by  the  Treasury
    Solicitor.


10. The Upper Tribunal will, henceforth, have recourse to the full  panoply
    of sanctions at its disposal.  These include in particular wasted costs
    orders.  There  will  also  be  reporting  of  rulings  of  this  kind.
    Furthermore, consideration will be given to the invocation of the Upper
    Tribunal's contempt powers, together  with  referrals  to  professional
    bodies.

11. The    parties'representatives have by their conduct, also demonstrated
    a  signal  lack  of  interest  in  these  proceedings.   These  appeals
    evidently belong to the level of lowest priority.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    will treat them accordingly henceforth.  Deserving cases in  which  the
    parties are seeking expeditious finality will be accorded priority.


12. In a recent lecture to the Law Society I spoke of the vital  importance
    of partnership between the legal profession and the  judiciary.   There
    is no evidence of this partnership in  these  cases  or  any  of  those
    identified above.


13.  Today's  hearing  is  hereby  adjourned  in  these  frankly   shameful
    circumstances.  The Upper Tribunal, at this stage, will take  no  steps
    to relist the cases.  If the Appellants and their  representatives  are
    serious about prosecuting these appeals, they will  provide  an  agreed
    draft order to the Tribunal by 16.00 hours tomorrow.  This  time  limit
    is immutable. If a draft order  materialises,  it  will  of  course  be
    without prejudice to the appeals being dismissed on account of want  of
    prosecution and/or a misuse of the process of the  Upper  Tribunal.  If
    relisting of these appeals eventuates, the only convenience which  will
    be taken into account is that of this Chamber and its judges.


14. The issues of possible contempt action  and  referral  to  professional
    bodies are hereby reserved.







                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER




                                                     Dated: 01 December 2016
