









R (on the application of Said Aitjilal) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department  ((EEA  Regulations  -  deportation  -  reassessment  -regulation
24(5)) [2016] UKUT 00563 (IAC)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                The Queen on the application of Said Aitjilal


                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                                   Before:

               The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                      The Honourable Mr Justice Garnham





            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms C Hulse, of Counsel,  instructed  by  A  &  A
Solicitors, on behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  R  Kellar,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 08 November 2016.

Neither a decision to make a deportation order nor a notice of intention  to
make  a  deportation  order  triggers  the  two  year  period  specified  in
regulation 24(5) of the EEA Regulations. The two  year  period  begins  upon
the making of the deportation order itself.


Garnham J

Introduction

 1. This is the judgment of the Tribunal. It contains the full reasons  for
    our brief pronouncement at the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  that  the
    appeal is dismissed.

 2. This case raises  the  question  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    required, at the date of  signing  a  deportation  order,  to  consider
    whether an EEA national, in respect  of  whom  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order was made more than two years ago, remains  a  threat.





The History

 3. The Applicant is a national of Morocco. He entered the  United  Kingdom
    in January 2001 on a tourist visa but then remained without  leave.  In
    March 2003 he married a French national and, in April 2004, was granted
    leave as the spouse of an EEA national. The Applicant and his wife were
    divorced in 2009. The Applicant has since married again, under  Islamic
    law, to another Moroccan national who has lived in the  United  Kingdom
    since 2002. They have four children.

 4. The Applicant has a number of previous criminal convictions,  including
    for theft and motoring matters.  More materially for present  purposes,
    he was convicted on 10 October 2010 of six counts  of  handling  stolen
    goods, ten counts of possessing or controlling false ID documents,  two
    counts of attempting  to  remove  criminal  property  from  the  United
    Kingdom and one count of acquiring  or  using  or  possessing  criminal
    property.   He  was  sentenced  to    three  years  and   six   months'
    imprisonment. He has since been assessed as being  at  medium  risk  of
    reoffending.

 5. On 24 January 2012 Secretary of State notified the Applicant  that  she
    was considering whether his deportation would be justified and  invited
    his observations.  He responded and the Secretary of  State  considered
    that response and the other material available to her.  By letter dated
    7 March 2013 she notified her initial decision.  She decided  that  the
    Applicant's deportation was justified under the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations") and  under  the
    Human Rights Convention.  On 8 March 2013 the Applicant was served with
    a "reasons for deportation" letter and a notice of intention to deport.
     The letter indicated that the Applicant had a right of appeal  against
    the decision under Regulation 26 of the EEA Regulations.

 6. On 29 March 2013, at the expiry of the custodial term of his  sentence,
    the Applicant was detained by the Secretary of State under  immigration
    powers as a  person  served  with  a  notice  of  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order whose detention had been authorised by the  Secretary
    of State. On 15 March 2013 he lodged an appeal against the decision  to
    deport. On 29 May 2013 he was granted bail by an immigration judge.  On
    16 August 2013 his appeal against  deportation  was  dismissed  by  the
    First-Tier Tribunal. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    refused.  On 17 October 2013 the Applicant made representations seeking
    the revocation of the deportation order, although, on the Secretary  of
    State's account, no such order had been  made  by  that  date.  Further
    representations were made on 12 May 2014.

 7.  On 25 August 2015  a  deportation  order  was  signed  on  behalf  the
    Secretary of State pursuant to section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971
    and the Applicant's detention was authorised. The  Secretary  of  State
    set out her reasons for detaining him thereafter in a  letter  dated  3
    September 2015.  By letter dated 16 September  2015  the  Secretary  of
    State provided her reasons for maintaining the decision to  deport  and
    served a copy of the deportation order.  It is that decision  which  is
    the subject of challenge in these proceedings.

 8. On 16 October 2015 the Applicant was detained pending  removal.   These
    judicial review proceedings were commenced on 27 October 2015.


The Legislative Scheme

 9. Section 3 (5) and (6) of the Immigration  Act  1971  ("the  1971  Act")
    identify the circumstances in which a person is liable  to  deportation
    from the United Kingdom:

         "(5)     A person who  is  not  a  British  citizen  is  liable  to
             deportation from the United Kingdom if-


             (a) the  Secretary  of  State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
                  conducive to the public good; or  (b)  another  person  to
                  whose family he belongs is  or  has  been  ordered  to  be
                  deported.


         (6)       Without prejudice to  the  operation  of  subsection  (5)
             above, a person who is not a British  citizen shall  also  be
             liable to deportation from the United Kingdom if, after he has
             attained the age of seventeen, he is convicted of  an  offence
             for which he  is  punishable  with  imprisonment  and  on  his
             conviction is recommended for deportation by a court empowered
             by this Act to do so."

    The Secretary of State is given power to  make  deportation  orders  by
    Section 5(1) of the 1971 Act:

         "Where a person is under section  3(5)  or  (6) above  liable  to
         deportation, then subject to the following provisions of  this  Act
         the Secretary of State may make a deportation  order  against  him,
         that is to say an order requiring him to leave and prohibiting  him
         from entering the United Kingdom; and a deportation order against a
         person shall invalidate any leave to enter or remain in the  United
         Kingdom given him before the order  is  made  or  while  it  is  in
         force."

10. Council Directive 38 of 2004 was adopted on 29 April 2004. It  provides
    for the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move
    and reside freely within the territory of the Member States.   Articles
    27, 28 and 33 are relied on in these proceedings.

      Article 27 provides as follows:

         "1.      Subject to the provisions of this Chapter,  Member  States
             may restrict the freedom of movement and  residence  of  Union
             citizens   and   their   family   members,   irrespective   of
             nationality, on grounds of public policy, public  security  or
             public health. These grounds shall not  be  invoked  to  serve
             economic ends.


         2. Measures taken on grounds of public policy  or  public  security
             shall comply with the principle of proportionality  and  shall
             be based exclusively on the personal conduct of the individual
             concerned.  Previous  criminal  convictions   shall   not   in
             themselves constitute grounds for taking  such  measures.  The
             personal conduct of the individual concerned must represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society.  Justifications  that
             are isolated from the particulars of the case or that rely  on
             considerations of general prevention shall not be accepted..."

11. Article 28 of the Directive provides:

         "1.      Before taking an expulsion decision on grounds  of  public
             policy or public security, the host Member  State  shall  take
             account of considerations such  as  how  long  the  individual
             concerned has resided on its territory, his/her age, state  of
             health, family and economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
             integration into the host  Member  State  and  the  extent  of
             his/her links with the country of origin.


         2. The host Member State may not take an expulsion decision against
             Union  citizens  or  their  family  members,  irrespective  of
             nationality, who have the right of permanent residence on  its
             territory, except on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
             public security.


         3. An expulsion decision may not be taken against  Union  citizens,
             except if the decision  is  based  on  imperative  grounds  of
             public security, as defined by Member  States,  if  they:  (a)
             have resided in the host Member State  for  the  previous  ten
             years; or  (b)  are  a  minor,  except  if  the  expulsion  is
             necessary for the best interests of the child, as provided for
             in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of
             20 November 1989."

    By Article 33:

         "1.      Expulsion orders may not be  issued  by  the  host  Member
             State as  a  penalty  or  legal  consequence  of  a  custodial
             penalty, unless they conform to the requirements  of  Articles
             27, 28 and 29.


         2. If an expulsion order,  as  provided  for  in  paragraph  1,  is
             enforced more than two years after it was issued,  the  Member
             State shall check that the individual concerned  is  currently
             and genuinely a threat to public policy or public security and
             shall assess whether there has been any material change in the
             circumstances since the expulsion order was issued."

12. The Directive was  implemented  by  the  EEA  Regulations,[1].  Part  4
    (Regulations (19 to 21) provides for the exclusion and removal of  EEA
    nationals and their family members.  As under the previous  Directives,
    EEA nationals and their family members can be excluded  on  grounds  of
    public policy, public security and public health.  Regulation 2 defines
    the expression "EEA decision".  It means, insofar as material for these
    proceedings, a  decision  under  the  2006  Regulations  that  concerns
    "...(c) a person's removal from the United Kingdom".

13. Regulation 19 deals  with  exclusions  and  removals  from  the  United
    Kingdom. It enables the  Secretary  of  State  to  remove  certain  EEA
    nationals from the United Kingdom:

         "(1)     A person is not entitled to  be  admitted  to  the  United
             Kingdom by virtue  of regulation   11 if  his  exclusion  is
             justified on grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health in accordance with regulation 21.

         (1A)      A person is not entitled to be  admitted  to  the  United
             Kingdom by virtue of regulation 11 if that person  is  subject
             to a deportation or exclusion order, except where  the  person
             is temporarily admitted pursuant to regulation 29AA ....


         (1B)     If the Secretary of State considers that the exclusion  of
             an EEA national or the family member of  an  EEA  national  is
             justified on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
             public health in accordance with regulation 21 the Secretary
             of  State  may  make  an  order  for  the  purpose  of   these
             Regulations prohibiting that person from entering  the  United
             Kingdom...

         (3)      Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an EEA national who has
             entered the United      Kingdom or the family member of such a
             national who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if-
             (a) that person does not have or ceases to  have  a  right  to
                  reside under these Regulations;


             (b) the Secretary of  State  has  decided  that  the  person's
                  removal is justified on grounds of public  policy,  public
                  security or public health in  accordance  with regulation
                  21; or


             (c) the Secretary of  State  has  decided  that  the  person's
                  removal is justified on grounds  of  abuse  of  rights  in
                  accordance with regulation 21B(2).

         (4)      A person must not be removed under paragraph  (3)  as  the
             automatic  consequence  of  having  recourse  to  the   social
             assistance system of the United Kingdom.


         (5)      A person must not be removed under paragraph (3) if he has
             a right to remain in the United Kingdom  by  virtue  of  leave
             granted under the 1971 Act unless his removal is justified  on
             the grounds of public policy, public security or public health
             in accordance with regulation 21."


    Regulation 21 deals with  decisions  taken  on  public  policy,  public
    security and public health grounds.  It provides in material part:

         "(1)     In this regulation a "relevant  decision" means  an  EEA
             decision taken  on  the  grounds  of   public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

          (2)    A relevant decision may not  be  taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.


          (3)    A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person
             with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.


          (4)    A relevant decision may not be taken except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or


             (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision  is
                  necessary in his best interests, as provided  for  in  the
                  Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the
                  General Assembly of the United Nations  on  20th  November
                  1989.

         (5)      Where a relevant decision is taken on  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security it shall, in addition  to  complying
             with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken  in
             accordance with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;


             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;


             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

         (6)      Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin..."

14. Regulation 24 deals with persons  subject  to  removal.   It  provides,
    insofar as material:

         "(3)      Where  a  decision  is   taken   to   remove   a   person
             under regulation 19(3)(b), the person is to be treated as  if
             he  were  a  person  to  whom section  3(5)(a) of  the  1971
             Act  (liability to deportation) applied, and section 5 of that
             Act  (procedure for  deportation)  and Schedule  3 to  that
             Act (supplementary provision as to deportation) are to  apply
             accordingly.
         ...
         (5)      Where such a deportation order is made  against  a  person
             but he is not removed under the  order  during  the  two  year
             period beginning on the date on which the order is  made,  the
             Secretary of State shall only take action to remove the person
             under the order after  the  end  of  that  period  if,  having
             assessed  whether  there  has  been  any  material  change  in
             circumstances  since  the  deportation  order  was  made,   he
             considers that the removal continues to be  justified  on  the
             grounds of public policy, public security or public health..."

15. Regulation 24A provides, in material part:

         "(1)     A deportation or exclusion order  shall  remain  in  force
             unless it is revoked by the  Secretary  of  State  under  this
             regulation.


         (2)      A person who is subject  to  a  deportation  or  exclusion
             order may apply to the Secretary of State to have  it  revoked
             if the person considers that there has been a material  change
             in the circumstances that justified the making of the order.


         (3)      An application under  paragraph  (2)  shall  set  out  the
             material change in circumstances relied upon by the  applicant
             and may only be made  whilst  the  applicant  is  outside  the
             United Kingdom.


         (4)      On receipt of an  application  under  paragraph  (2),  the
             Secretary of State shall revoke the order if the Secretary  of
             State considers that the criteria for making such an order are
             no longer satisfied."

    Regulation 25 deals with appeals against EEA decisions.  It provides by
    paragraph (1) that

         "Subject to the following paragraphs of this regulation,  a  person
         may appeal under these Regulations against an EEA decision."



The Competing Arguments

16. Permission to bring judicial review proceedings was  granted  by  order
    dated 26 February 2016 on the  single  ground  that  it  was  "arguable
    whether the respondent is required to consider on the date of signing a
    deportation order if the EEA national remains a present threat".

    The competing arguments in this case may be briefly stated.

    On behalf of the Applicant, Ms Hulse relies on Articles 27, 28  and  33
    of Directive CE/38/2004.  She argues  that  under  Article  33  of  the
    Directive, if an expulsion order is to be enforced more than two  years
    after it was issued a Member State is  required  to  check  whether  an
    individual remains a genuine threat to public policy or public security
    and to assess whether  there  has  been  any  material  change  in  the
    circumstances since the expulsion order was issued.

17. Ms Hulse submits that the issuing  and  service  of  the  "reasons  for
    deportation" letter and the notice of intention to  deport  constitutes
    the issuing of an expulsion order, that more  than  two  years  elapsed
    between the issuing of that decision and its  proposed  enforcement  by
    means of the deportation order and  that  therefore  the  Secretary  of
    State was required to, but has not, carried out the  requisite  checks.
    Accordingly, she argues, the proposed deportation is in breach  of  the
    Directive.

18. It is further argued on the Applicant's behalf that he is entitled to a
    decision in a form which would generate a statutory appeal.

    Finally, Ms Hulse points out that the Applicant had been present in the
    United Kingdom from January 2001, a period in excess  of  10  years  in
    March  2013  at  the  time  of  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport.
    Accordingly, she says that, pursuant to Article 28(3) of the  Directive
    (and Regulation 21(4)), he could only be removed on imperative  grounds
    of public security and no such grounds have been shown here.

19. Mr Kellar, on behalf of the Secretary of State, contends,  in  summary,
    that the governing provisions are the  Regulations,  that  English  law
    recognises a distinction between a notice of intention  to  deport  and
    the making of a deportation order  and  that  Art  33  applies  to  the
    deportation order itself,  not  the  reasons  for  deportation  letter.
    Accordingly, he submits that the two year period did not begin  to  run
    until 25 August 2015.

    Mr Kellar  disputes  that  there  is  any  appeal  still  open  to  the
    Applicant.  He submits that in calculating  the  period  of  ten  years
    under Regulation 21 (4) no regard should be had to any period spent  in
    prison.


Discussion

20. This case therefore raises three issues.

21. The first issue, and the one most vigorously argued  by  Ms  Hulse,  is
    that the Secretary of State was obliged to  assess  whether  there  had
    been any material change in the  Applicant's  circumstances  since  the
    notice of intention to deport was  issued  and  whether  the  expulsion
    continued to be justified.  Second, it was  argued,  somewhat  faintly,
    that the Applicant was entitled to an appealable decision at  the  time
    the deportation order was made.  And third it was  submitted  that  the
    Applicant's length of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  means  that
    removal can be justified only if imperative grounds of public  security
    are established.  Before we address these grounds it  is  necessary  to
    say something about the implementation of the Directive and the  nature
    of deportations in English domestic law.

The Implementation of the Directive

22. The 2004 Directive has been brought into force in domestic English  law
    by  the  2006  Regulations.  That  is  plain  from  the  terms  of  the
    Regulations themselves, and the Explanatory  Note  to  the  Regulations
    says so expressly.  Ms Hulse chose to concentrate her arguments  almost
    exclusively on the  terms  of  the  Directive  but  in  our  view,  the
    arguments  in  the  case  fall  to  be  tested  primarily  against  the
    Regulations.  We would add, however, that the position is would  be  no
    different if the Directive were to be regarded  as  directly  effective
    and requiring no implementing action by Member States.

Expulsion Orders and Deportation Orders

23. It is well established in English immigration law  that  the  following
    are to be distinguished, each having  separate  juridical  effects  and
    consequences:


   a)  a decision to make a deportation order; and


    (b)    a deportation order, with its accompanying statement of reasons.




    Decision (a) is preparatory, or preliminary, to the deportation  order.
    It constitutes  a  notice  of  the  executive's  intentions.  It  is  a
    notification of the "minded to act" variety familiar in several spheres
    of public law,  such  as  housing,  compulsory  and  town  and  country
    planning. And it is equally clear that the  deportation  order  is  the
    executory step which carries into effect the proposals  and  intentions
    intimated by the preceding notification, which takes  the  form  of  an
    initial, or preliminary, decision.

24. In our judgment, a deportation order in domestic law is  a  species  of
    expulsion order as that expression is used in the Directive. It is  the
    executory step which carries into effect the expulsion  of  the  person
    concerned from the territory of the member state. An expulsion order is
    not, however, the equivalent  of  a  notice  of  intention  to  make  a
    deportation order, or a notice of the reasons for making a  deportation
    order or even a decision to make a deportation order.   These  are  all
    steps preparatory to the making of the final order  pursuant  to  which
    the person  concerned  is  to  be  deported,  none  of  which  has  any
    equivalent in the Directive.

Restrictions on Expulsion Orders

25. Regulation 24 (5) faithfully reproduces article 33  in  relation  to  a
    deportation order.  It requires the Secretary of State, in the case  of
    a person against whom a deportation order has been made,  but  who  has
    not been not removed during the two year period beginning on  the  date
    of the order, to assess whether there has been any material  change  in
    circumstances  since  the  order  was  made  and  whether  the  removal
    continues to be justified.  But there is no equivalent  restriction  in
    respect of a  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  or  notice  of
    intention   to   make   a   deportation   order   in   the   Directive.
    Unsurprisingly, as a result, there is no such restriction either in the
    Regulations.

26. Accordingly in our judgment it cannot be said, on  the  facts  of  this
    case, that there   has been a breach of either  the  Directive  or  the
    Regulations by reason of a failure  to  conduct  a  reassessment  under
    Regulation 24(5).  We consider that the two year  period  specified  in
    Regulation 24(5) was not triggered until the deportation order was made
    on 15 August 2015.

Appeals and Revocations

27. Pursuant to regulation 19(3)(b),  a  decision  to  make  a  deportation
    order, and not the deportation order itself, is a relevant decision for
    the purposes of regulation 21. Such a  decision  attracts  a  right  of
    appeal. The Applicant exercised that right  of  appeal  in  this  case.
    That appeal was  dismissed  and  the  Applicant  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 8 October 2013.  There is no right of appeal  against  the
    deportation order itself.

28. Regulation 24A deals with revocation of deportation orders. It provides
    that a deportation or exclusion order remains in  force  unless  it  is
    revoked.  A person who is subject to deportation order may apply to the
    Secretary of State to have it revoked if  there  has  been  a  material
    change in circumstances, but such  an  application  may  only  be  made
    whilst the Applicant is outside the United Kingdom.   It  follows  that
    the Applicant has exhausted his appeal rights and he can  only  seek  a
    revocation of the deportation order from abroad.

The 10 year rule

29. Article 28(3) of  the  Directive  and  Regulation  21(4)  prohibit  the
    removal of EEA nationals who have been resident for more than ten years
    unless imperative grounds of public security are established.  However,
    the Applicant cannot show  ten  years'  continuous  residence  in  this
    country.  He was first granted leave to remain, as the spouse of an EEA
    national, in April 2004.   He  was  made  the  subject  of  deportation
    proceedings in March 2013, eight years and  eleven  months  later.   Of
    that period, as noted above, he spent fifteen months in prison.

30. In C v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 1406 the Court of  Appeal  held  that  time
    spent  in  prison  cannot  count  towards  the  qualifying  period  for
    permanent residence under Regulation 15(1)(a) of the  EEA  Regulations.
    At [47] Longmore LJ said:

         "Once one recognises that the purpose of according to  a  worker  a
         right permanently to reside in a EU state is  that  of  encouraging
         the integration of such workers into the  population  of  the  host
         state and that such  purpose  is  not  achieved  or  achievable  in
         prison, it must follow that the worker is not legally  resident  in
         the host state as an EEA worker during the period  of  imprisonment
         and that any period, which includes that  period  of  imprisonment,
         cannot be part of the necessary "continuous" period for the purpose
         of calculating the five years continuous legal residence  necessary
         to acquire the right permanently to reside here."


    More recent decisions of the CJEU confirm in essence the correctness of
    what the Court of Appeal decided: see Onuekwere v SSHD [2014] ECR  I  -
    0000, at [26] - [27] and [31] - [32] and  SSHD  v  MG  [2014]  EUECJ  -
    378/12. In short, every period of imprisonment breaks  continuity  and,
    ultimately, the requisite qualifying period  is  to  be  calculated  by
    counting back from the date of the expulsion decision.

31. We consider that the same approach must, by logical extension, apply to
    the  question  whether  ten  years'  continuous  residence   has   been
    established.   In  those  circumstances,  we  see  no  basis  for   any
    suggestion that the Secretary of State can only remove the Applicant if
    imperative grounds of public security are demonstrated.


Conclusions

32. As set out above,  we  conclude  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  EEA
    Regulations or the Directive to prevent the  making  of  a  deportation
    order more than two years following a preliminary  decision  intimating
    an intention to make such order without first conducting a reassessment
    under Regulation 24(5).  None of the Applicant's grounds  of  challenge
    is made out.  For these reasons this application is dismissed.


Decision and Order

(1)    The application for judicial review is dismissed.

(2)   The Applicant will pay the  Respondent's  costs,  to  be  assessed  in
    default of agreement.

(3)   Permission to appeal is refused as the case raises no issue worthy  of
    consideration by the Court of Appeal.




                                        Signed:    Neil  Garnham

                                                 THE HON. MR JUSTICE GARMHAM
                                    SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date: 02 December 2016



-----------------------
[1] It is to be noted that the 2006 Regulations will be repealed as of 1
February 2017 by the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
2016/1052

