
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

JS (Former unaccompanied child - durable solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT
00568 (IAC)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 14 March 2013 and 25 June 2013         |                            |
|                                          |............................|
|                                          |...........                 |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     JS
                           (anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr G Lee, instructed by Sutovic &  Hartigan  (14  March
                    2013)
                                  Ms  K  Cronin,  instructed  by  Sutovic  &
                    Hartigan (25 June 2013)

For the Respondent: Mr P Nath, Home Office  Presenting  Officer  (14  March
2013)
                                    Mr G Saunders, Home  Office  Presenting
                    Officer (25 June 2013)


(1)       A   local  authority's  obligations  to   an   appellant   as   an
    unaccompanied child and asylum  seeker  and  his  status  as  a  former
    relevant child after he becomes 18 do not of themselves  determine  the
    outcome of a decision  on  an appellant's immigration  status  but  may
    provide evidence relevant to those issues.

 (2)   The failure of the Home Office  to endeavour to trace family members
    of a child asylum seeker  is only relevant  to  an  immigration  appeal
    after the appellant ceases to be a child , where he is able to  show  a
    causal link between that failure and issues relevant to the outcome  of
    the appeal.

(3)    For an unaccompanied asylum seeking child, the best durable  solution
    is to be reunited with his own family unless there are good reasons  to
    the contrary.  Where reunification is not possible  and  there  are  no
    adequate reception facilities  in  the  home  country,  an  appropriate
    durable solution  may  be  to  grant  discretionary  leave  during  the
    remaining years of minority and then arrange a return to the country of
    origin. Where the child is  of  a  young  age  on  arrival,  cannot  be
    reunited with his family and will spend many years in  the  host  state
    during his minority a durable solution may need to be found in the host
    state.

(4)    Where the appellant is no longer a minor, the duty on  the  Secretary
    of State under s.55 of the Borders,  Immigration  and  Citizenship  Act
    1999 no longer  arises  but  when  making  the  assessment  of  whether
    removal  would lead to a breach of article 8 all relevant factors  must
    be taken into account including age, background, length of residence in
    the UK, family  and  general  circumstances  including  any  particular
    vulnerability and whether an appellant will have family or other  adult
    support on return  to his home country appropriate  to  his  particular
    needs.

(5)     In the context of Afghanistan it is also  necessary  to  take  into
    account the guidance in AA (Unattended children) Afghanistan CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00016 (IAC) about the risks to unattached children in the light of
    the reminder in KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 in the judgment of Maurice  Kay  LJ  at
    [18] that there is no bright line across which the  risks  to  and  the
    needs of a child suddenly disappear.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.       This is an appeal by the appellant against a determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal issued on 22 November 2012  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the respondent's  decision  of  25  August  2012  refusing  him
    further leave to remain following the refusal of his claim for  asylum.
    On 14 March 2013 the Upper Tribunal found that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred  in  law  for  the  reasons  set  out  at  Annex  1  to  this
    determination. At this stage the appellant was represented by Mr Lee of
    counsel.  There was a re-hearing of the appeal on 25  June  2013  by  a
    panel of the Upper Tribunal, the President presiding. At this stage  Ms
    Cronin represented the appellant. This determination has been  prepared
    by Judge Latter but both members of the panel have contributed  to  the
    reasons for re-making the decision and dismissing the appeal.


Background

2.       The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  whose  age  is  in
    dispute.  He claimed that his mother told him he was 13 in  2009  which
    would mean that he was born in 1996 but this was not  accepted  by  the
    respondent. There was an age assessment by Slough  Borough  Council  in
    April 2009 when he was assessed as being 15 years old and was allocated
    a date of birth of 1 January 1994.

3.       The appellant made a clandestine entry into  the  UK  on  24  March
    2009 and when apprehended  he  claimed  asylum.   His  application  was
    refused but he was granted discretionary leave until 30 June 2011.   He
    then applied for further  leave  to  remain  but  his  application  was
    refused and a decision was made to remove him.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

4.       The appellant appealed and on 25 July 2012 the decision  was  found
    not to be in accordance with the law and remitted to the respondent for
    a further decision.  A fresh decision was made for the reasons set  out
    in the decision letter of 29 August 2012.   The  appeal  against  that
    decision was listed on 22  October  2012  but  adjourned  so  that  the
    appellant's foster mother who had been summoned for jury service  could
    attend the hearing.  However, on 6 November 2012 she  did  not  attend
    because of unspecified family matters.  No application was made  for  a
    further adjournment and the hearing proceeded.

5.       The appellant's case was that he would be at risk of  serious  harm
    from the Taliban if he had to return to Afghanistan as his  father  had
    worked for American intelligence.  He had only  become  aware  of  this
    about three weeks before his father was killed.  The appellant  was  at
    home revising for his exams when the Taliban broke in and attacked  his
    family.  His parents and his brothers were together  in  another  room.
    When he heard shooting he checked what had happened to his  family  and
    saw his parents lying on the  floor  but  he  did  not  see  where  his
    brothers were.  He realised that his life was  in  danger  and  quickly
    left the house and went to hide in the forest.

6.       The next day he started walking on the main road to  Kabul  to  the
    house where his father's friend lived.  When he arrived at the friend's
    home he told him what had happened to his  parents  and  that  he  knew
    nothing about his brothers.  The friend  told  him  that  for  his  own
    safety he must leave Afghanistan and he made arrangements  accordingly.
    The appellant stayed with him for five days, then took a flight to Iran
    and travelled overland eventually arriving in France where he was  able
    to board a lorry and travel to the UK.

7.       The judge did not find the appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness.
    The judge described the whole scenario as unrealistic  [31]  and  found
    that the whole account had been made up to support  his  asylum  claim.
    It was argued on the appellant's behalf that the  respondent's  failure
    to endeavour to trace his relatives in Afghanistan showed that it could
    not be demonstrated that it was safe for the appellant to return there,
    but the judge noted that the appellant  had  told  two  social  workers
    during the age assessment interview that he  did  not  know  where  his
    siblings were and did not wish them to be traced.  The judge  commented
    that in the light of this, it was difficult to see how  the  respondent
    could be criticised for not conducting any sort of inquiry to trace the
    appellant's relatives.

8.       The judge went on to consider the issue of humanitarian  protection
    saying:

         "38.  In so far as humanitarian protection issues are  concerned  I
             find to make a  finding  is  premature  at  this  stage.   The
             respondent has only issued, to date, two  relevant  decisions,
             namely to refuse the appellant's application for asylum in the
             UK but granted him discretionary leave to  remain  in  the  UK
             until 30 June 2011.  The second decision  [15]  to  refuse  to
             vary the appellant's leave to remain in the UK.  There  is  no
             decision to remove the appellant back to Afghanistan.  If  and
             when  that  decision  is  made  then,  in  my   view,   issues
             surrounding humanitarian protection arise.  Consequently, I do
             not deal with humanitarian protection at this juncture."

9.       The judge then turned to the issue  of  the  appellant's  age.   He
    noted that he had asserted at the hearing that he was only 16 years  of
    age on the basis of what  his  mother  had  told  him  before  he  left
    Afghanistan but the judge did not accept that he had told the truth  in
    this regard.  He  said  there  was  no  cogent  evidence  to  rebut  or
    challenge the age assessment made by Slough Social Services despite  an
    application made in June 2012 to obtain an independent report.  At  the
    hearing it was made clear that the appellant was  not  relying  on  any
    other report and the judge said that, in  the  light  of  his  negative
    credibility findings and the total  lack  of  any  cogent  evidence  to
    challenge the age assessment by Slough Social Services, he gave  little
    if any weight to the appellant's assertions that he was only  16.   The
    appeal was dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.

The Grounds and Directions

10.     The grounds of appeal raised three issues. It was contended that:-
           (i)  The  judge  dealt  cursorily  and   incorrectly   with   the
    submissions that the age  assessment  by  Slough  Social  Services  was
    inadequate and not compliant with the Merton [2003] EWHC  1689  (Admin)
    guidelines.
          (ii) The judge failed to deal adequately with the  issues  arising
    under KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State [2012] EWCA Civ  1014,  had
    wrongly declined to consider humanitarian  protection  because  removal
    directions had not been set and had not engaged with the argument  that
    the failure to trace was relevant to the proportionality decision under
    article 8.
          (iii)  The decision did not display anxious scrutiny in the  light
    of the fact there were a large number of  grammatical  and  syntactical
    errors such as to leave the appellant in real doubt as to  whether  his
    case had been understood and his appeal analysed correctly.

11.    Judge Latter found that there  were  material  errors  of  law  with
    respect to the second of these grounds (see Annex 1 at [6] to [9]).  In
    summary, the question  of  humanitarian  protection  should  have  been
    considered as well as asylum and the consequences of  the  respondent's
    failure to conduct a tracing inquiry should have been  considered  both
    in respect of asylum/humanitarian protection and as an  aspect  of  the
    article 8 claim.

Further Directions

12. The appeal was relisted to hear further submissions  on  the  issue  of
    humanitarian protection and article  8.   The  appeal  was  listed  for
    hearing on 14 May 2013 but as the parties were not  ready  to  proceed,
    further directions were given and in the light of the issues  raised  a
    direction given for it to be relisted before a  panel.   A  substantial
    bundle of further documents, a supplemental subjective  bundle  indexed
    and paginated 1-85,  was served on 21 June 2012, ten  days  later  than
    the date specified in  the  directions  given  on  14  May  2013.   The
    appellant also produced further background evidence including a  report
    entitled Still Human Still Here 19 June 2013, a quarterly  data  report
    from Afghanistan NGO Safety Office for January to  March  2012  and  an
    extract from the Afghanistan COI Report 15 February 2013 re-issued on 8
    May 2013.

13.    Ms Cronin also produced extracts from  the  Children  Act  1989  and
    2004,  DS v Secretary of State [2011] EWCA Civ 305, KA  v Secretary  of
    State, EU v Secretary of State [2013] EWCA Civ 32, the  decision  in  R
    (M) v Hammersmith and Fulham London Borough Council [2008] UKHL  14,  R
    (TS) v Secretary of State and Northamptonshire  County  Council  [2010]
    EWHC 2614, the Upper  Tribunal  determination  in  AK  (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC)  and  AA  (Unattended  children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC).  She  also  produced  a  number
    reports  illustrating  attack  rates  and  the  security  position   in
    provinces in Afghanistan.  Following clarification of the issues  being
    argued, Mr Saunders was content for the hearing to proceed despite  the
    late service of the appellant's documents.

Further Submissions for the Appellant

14.     Ms Cronin submitted that  the  outstanding  issues  of  humanitarian
    protection and article 8 required  consideration  first,  of  the  UK's
    obligations to the appellant as an unaccompanied child who had been  in
    care as a looked after child and was now a former  relevant  child  and
    the continuing relevance of the local authority's  obligations  towards
    him  as  a  young  adult;  second,  the  continuing  relevance  of  the
    respondent's failure during the appellant's minority  to  endeavour  to
    trace  his family and  third,  the  significance  to  the  respondent's
    decision of the appellant's current status as a former relevant child.

15.     She submitted that the appellant had  been  a  vulnerable  child  on
    entry as he was unaccompanied by his family or a guardian  and  was  an
    asylum seeker.  The Reception Directive required such  children  to  be
    safeguarded and their welfare promoted.  The appellant had  become  the
    responsibility of his local authority and the Children  Acts  1989  and
    2004 set out the duties which local authorities must undertake for such
    children.  On entry he had been a child in need who the local authority
    was required to accommodate and to maintain in other respects.  He  was
    then a looked after child and at the age of 16 became an eligible child
    the local authority was looking after.

16.     The appellant was now a former relevant child within  s.23C  of  the
    Children Act 1989 which placed duties on local authorities to keep  and
    stay in touch with him and  to  continue  his  personal  mentoring  and
    guidance  so  facilitating  his  transition  to  independence.    These
    obligations are further set out in the  Every  Child  Matters  Guidance
    applying to former relevant children.  This  requires  under  s.23  and
    para 19B(2)b of Schedule 2 of the Children Act 1989 the preparation  of
    a pathway plan  which  must  be  kept  under  review  as  part  of  the
    obligation to safeguard and promote his welfare to enable him to  enter
    adulthood successfully.

17.     Ms Cronin submitted that the evidence from the  appellant's  pathway
    plan and the personal evidence in the supplementary bundle showed  that
    he had achieved functional levels in English, maths and IT and  was  in
    the first year of a four-year course which  included  work  experience.
    His qualifications at present did not equip him for employment in  this
    or any other skilled field.  He  had  been  moved  to  semi-independent
    accommodation when he finished school but he felt that he had lost  his
    foster family at that stage and later he returned to  live  with  them.
    The pathway plan noted the importance  of  his  relationship  with  his
    foster mother and the fact that she kept in  touch  with  his  personal
    advisor.   It  also  noted  that  the  appellant  was  confident,  well
    presented,  always  well  dressed  and  polite.   He  was  not   living
    completely independently but in a supportive family  setting  where  he
    was receiving exactly the support the Children Act anticipated he would
    need. She submitted that account had  to  be  taken  of  the  risks  to
    children on return to Kabul and that there was  no  bright  line  which
    could be drawn when an appellant reached the age of 18.

18.     She then dealt with the issue of tracing.   She  accepted  that  the
    appellant's credibility had some relevance when analysing the causative
    link between the respondent's failure to endeavour  to  trace  and  his
    application and appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had  disbelieved
    his evidence that his parents had been killed but had made  no  finding
    as to whether he had lost contact with his family.   The  pathway  plan
    made it clear that he had had no contact with his family in Afghanistan
    and that he had asked for his family to be traced.  It was a matter  of
    concern that the appellant came from Nangarhar province  which  was  in
    the top ten  provinces  producing  internally  displaced  people.   The
    professional assessments of the appellant's  character,  demeanour  and
    engagement were positive and he had at all times  been  accepted  as  a
    young man who had lost his parents.

19.     The purpose of the tracing obligation was  directed,  so  Ms  Cronin
    submitted, to finding a durable solution for separated  children.   She
    referred to the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child General Comment
    (No. 6) that tracing was an essential component of  any  search  for  a
    durable solution and should be  prioritised  except  when  the  act  of
    tracing or the way in which tracing was conducted would be contrary  to
    the best interests of the child or jeopardise the fundamental rights of
    those being traced.  She submitted that in the present  case  inquiries
    in the appellant's home village may have confirmed the  fact  that  his
    parents had been killed and shown the fate of his brothers and that the
    failure  to  trace  was  not  simply  about  lost  benefits   but   the
    compromising of the UK's continuing  obligations  to  an  unaccompanied
    child who was now a former relevant child.

20.      A  failure  to  endeavour  to  trace  impacted  on  an  immigration
    application by a young adult care leaver and was relevant to whether it
    was reasonable to refuse leave to remain  and  to  proceed  to  removal
    where such action deprived him both of the care he  was  receiving  and
    his attachments formed whilst in the  UK.   If  the  appellant  had  to
    relocate to Afghanistan, he would have to  find  after  four  years  in
    which there had been no contact, relatives or friends who could  assist
    and support him, travel to his home area, reintegrate into a  community
    which would now be strange and  unfamiliar  to  him,  find  employment,
    learn to be safe and avoid violent incidents.  The respondent's failure
    to endeavour to trace had denied the appellant the best evidence of his
    asylum claim and left him vulnerable to a refusal of further leave  and
    removal.  It had also denied  his  personal  advisor  of  the  material
    needed for his pathway plan.

21.     On the issue of humanitarian protection  Ms  Cronin  submitted  that
    the appellant was in an enhanced risk category and the availability  of
    family support was unknown.  It would be unreasonable to assume at  the
    present time that circumstances were such that as a single young man he
    could safely relocate in Kabul.

22. She summarised her submissions on the issue of humanitarian  protection
    under four heads: firstly, the appellant was someone who was vulnerable
    and in need of adult guidance and it was not shown that he  would  have
    it on return; secondly, there were strong echoes of the position in  AA
    (Afghanistan) because he had been  an unattended  child;  thirdly,  the
    area  where  the  appellant's  family  and  neighbours  lived  was   in
    Nangarhar, a very dangerous province where the level of danger remained
    high and fourthly, Kabul would not be an easy place for  the  appellant
    to relocate to. Whilst the Upper Tribunal had found in AK (Afghanistan)
    that the conditions in Kabul would not in  general  make  return  there
    unsafe or unreasonable, in the appellant's circumstances  it  would  be
    unreasonable for him as a young, unattended adult.

23.     She submitted that similar  considerations  applied  to  article  8.
    The appellant had  a  private  and  family  life  in  the  UK  and,  in
    particular, a strong and dependent attachment to his foster carer.   He
    was in a loving, committed relationship with his girlfriend, a  British
    citizen and they planned  to  marry.   Ms  Cronin  explained  that  his
    girlfriend had not been able to attend because  her  father  would  not
    allow her out of the  house  as  a  sister  had  recently  eloped.   In
    addition to his family life the appellant  had  established  a  private
    life which had particular value as it was mandated in the provisions of
    the Children  Act,  the  pathway  plan  allowing  for  his  educational
    progress, oversight, contact and guidance.




Submissions for the Respondent

24.     Mr Saunders relied on AK (Afghanistan) and in  particular  [243]  on
    the situation in Kabul.  He submitted that no particular  vulnerability
    had been shown so  far  as  the  appellant  was  concerned.   When  the
    evidence was looked at as a whole, a picture emerged of quite a capable
    young man and there was no sufficient evidence to show  that  he  would
    fall  into  the  category  of  someone  entitled  to  protection.   The
    background evidence submitted in support of the humanitarian protection
    appeal was very generalised. He accepted that  there  continued  to  be
    problems in Afghanistan but there was no  proper  basis  for  departing
    from the conclusions reached in AK (Afghanistan).  So far as article  8
    was concerned, he accepted that the appellant had  established  private
    life and  arguably  also  family  life.  Even  so,  there  was  nothing
    compelling   in   his   circumstances   which   would   make    removal
    disproportionate. He submitted that the appeal should be dismissed.

Discussion

25. The issues before us are whether the appellant is entitled to  a  grant
    of humanitarian protection and whether  returning  him  to  Afghanistan
    would lead to a breach of article 8.

26. The requirements for the grant of humanitarian protection are  set  out
    in para 339C of HC 395 and the only matters  in  issue  before  us  are
    whether the appellant is able to meet  the  requirements  of  sub-paras
    (iii) and (iv) of para 339C  by  showing  that  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that if returned to Afghanistan he would  face  a
    real risk of serious harm consisting of torture or inhuman or degrading
    treatment or punishment (sub-para (iii)),  or  serious  and  individual
    threat to his life or person by reason of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    situations of international or internal armed conflict and is unable to
    or owing to such risk unable to avail himself of the protection of  the
    Afghan authorities (sub-para (iv)).  When considering article 8 we must
    take into account firstly, the provisions of the immigration  rules  as
    amended in July 2012 and then, the wider application of  article  8  in
    addition to the provisions of  the  rules  unless  the  rules  and  the
    general article 8 jurisprudence is in harmony: Green (Article 8  -  new
    rules) [2013] UKUT 00254 (IAC).[1]

27.     In Ms Cronin's submissions considerable weight  was  placed  on  the
    fact that the appellant had arrived  in  the  UK  as  an  unaccompanied
    child, had been  in the care of the local authority as a  looked  after
    child and was now a former relevant child to whom obligations were owed
    under the Children Acts  1989  and  2004.   These  provisions,  further
    detailed in  the  Care  Leavers  (England)  Regulations  2010,  include
    requirements to appoint a personal advisor, to carry out an  assessment
    of his needs, to prepare a pathway plan to deal with his transition  to
    life after being looked after and  to  keep  that  plan  under  regular
    review: para 19B of Schedule 2 to the Children Act 1989.  It is  common
    ground that the local authority owes these duties  to  a  young  person
    until he reaches the age of 21 or where their pathway plan  includes  a
    programme of full-time education/training until 25.

28.     We were also referred to  the  Department  of  Health  Children  Act
    Guidelines, "Transition  to  Adulthood  for  Care  Leavers"  concerning
    looked  after  children  and  care  leavers  "who  require   additional
    specialist  report".   The  following  paragraphs  are  of   particular
    importance:

         "6.20 Unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  children  (UASC)  making  the
             transition from care to adulthood have  both  a  leaving  care
             status  and  an  immigration  status  in  addition  to   their
             placement and  accommodation,  education,  health,  financial,
             religious  and  cultural  needs.    Planning   transition   to
             adulthood for UASC is  a  particularly  complex  process  that
             needs to address the young people's care needs in the  context
             of wider asylum and  immigration  legislation  and  how  these
             needs change over time.


         6.21 Pathway planning to support a UASC's transition  to  adulthood
             should cover all areas that  would  be  addressed  within  all
             young people's plans as well as any additional  needs  arising
             from  their  specific  immigration   issues.    Planning   may
             initially have to be based around short term achievable  goals
             whilst entitlement to remain in the UK is being determined.


         6.22 Pathway planning for the majority of  UASC  who  do  not  have
             permanent immigration status should initially take a  dual  or
             triple  planning  perspective,  which,  over  time  should  be
             refined as the young person's immigration status is resolved.

         Planning may be based on:

             .       A transitional plan during the period  of  uncertainty
                  when the young person is in  the  United  Kingdom  without
                  immigration status;
             .       Longer term perspective plan  in  the  United  Kingdom
                  should the young person be granted long term permission to
                  stay (for example through the grant of refugee status); or
             .       Return to their country of origin at  any  appropriate
                  point or at  the  end  of  the  immigration  consideration
                  progress, should  that  be  necessary  because  the  young
                  person decides to leave the UK or is required to do so."


29.     It was not argued on behalf of the appellant that the fact  that  he
    is  a  former  relevant  child  receiving  assistance  from  the  local
    authority meant for that reason alone that he could not be removed.  In
    our judgment  any  such  a  contention  would  be  unsustainable.   The
    resolution of the appellant's immigration status depends not on whether
    he is in receipt of care under the provision of the Children  Acts  but
    on whether he is able to show an entitlement to  remain  in  accordance
    with the law or the immigration rules.

30.   We are satisfied that the guidelines at 6.20 -  22  set  out  at  [28]
    above accurately reflect the  statutory  duties  on  local  authorities
    where a child is subject to immigration control. The purpose of pathway
    planning is to assist with the transition from the status of  child  to
    independent adulthood. However, the fact that an appellant is receiving
    support from a local authority does  not  without  more  determine  his
    immigration status whether he is a child or a young adult.

31.   We accept that the fact of local authority support or the adoption  of
    a pathway plan may  give  rise  to  evidence  that  in  his  particular
    circumstances he is  either  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules or establish a significant private life in the United
    Kingdom  interference  with  which  would  be  unjustified,  and   thus
    establish a lawful basis for remaining.

32.     Ms Cronin emphasised and  relied  on  the  respondent's  failure  to
    carry out her duties under the Asylum  Seekers  (Reception  Conditions)
    Regulations 2005 reg. 6 to  endeavour  to  trace  the  members  of  the
    appellant's family as soon as possible after  he  made  his  claim  for
    asylum. The issues arising  from  this  failure  have  been  considered
    comprehensively by the Court of Appeal in DS v Secretary of  State,  KA
    v Secretary of State and EU  v Secretary of State , all of  which  have
    been  recently  reviewed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in   SHL   (Tracing
    obligations/trafficking) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00317 (IAC).  We  have
    also noted the decision of Hickinbottom J in R (ota  Hashemi)  v  Upper
    Tribunal  [2013]  EWHC  Admin  2316.  These  decisions  focus  on   the
    consequences and possible detriment to an appellant in  the  assessment
    of his immigration status by a failure  to  trace  but,  as  Ms  Cronin
    rightly points out, the importance of family tracing is  also  directed
    to finding a durable solution for separated children.

33.     The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child General Comment (No.  6)
    entitled "Treatment of Unaccompanied  and  Separated  Children  outside
    Their Country of Origin" provides as follows:


         "79. The ultimate aim in addressing the fate  of  unaccompanied  or
             separated children is to  identify  a  durable  solution  that
             addresses all their protection needs, takes into  account  the
             child's view and wherever possible  leads  to  overcoming  the
             situation  of  a  child  being  unaccompanied  or   separated.
              Efforts to  find  durable  solutions  for  unaccompanied  or
             separated children should be initiated and implemented without
             undue delay  and,  wherever  possible,  immediately  upon  the
             assessment  of  a  child  being  unaccompanied  or  separated.
             Following a rights-based approach, the search  for  a  durable
             solution commences with analysing the  possibility  of  family
             reunification.


         80.    Tracing is  an  essential  component  of  any  search  for a
             durable solution and should be prioritised except   where  the
             act of tracing, or the way  in  which  tracing  is  conducted,
             would be contrary to  the  best  interests  of  the  child  or
             jeopardise fundamental rights of those being traced.   In  any
             case, in conducting tracing activities, no reference should be
             made to the status  of  the  child  as  an  asylum  seeker  or
             refugee.  Subject to all  of  these  conditions  such  tracing
             efforts  should  also   be   continued   during   the   asylum
             proceedings. For all children who remain in the  territory  of
             the host state, whether on the basis of asylum,  complementary
             forms of protection or due to other legal or factual obstacles
             to removal, a durable solution must be sought."

34.     Again we readily accept that for a child, the best durable  solution
    is to be reunited with his own family unless there are good reasons  to
    the contrary.  In other cases particularly where there are no  adequate
    reception facilities  in  the  home  country,  an  appropriate  durable
    solution will be to grant  discretionary  leave  during  the  remaining
    years of minority and then arrange a return to the country  of  origin.
    There may be cases where the child's needs, his age on arrival and  his
    future development will all suggest that a durable solution may need to
    be found in the host state.

35.    However, the appellant is no longer a minor, and a distinct  duty  on
    the respondent under s.55 of Borders Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    1999 no longer applies. This Tribunal  is  not  concerned  with  future
    planning for the welfare of children. As already indicated our  concern
    is whether the appellant is  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  or
    whether returning him will be in breach of article  8,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal having resolved the issue of whether he would be at real  risk
    of persecution or serious harm.  In making that assessment we must take
    into account all relevant factors including his  age,  his  background,
    his  family  and  general  circumstances   including   any   particular
    vulnerability.  We must consider whether an appellant will have  family
    or other adult support on return to his home country appropriate to his
    particular needs, and in  the  context  of  Afghanistan  to  take  into
    account the guidance in AA (Afghanistan) about the risks to  unattached
    children in the light of  the  reminder  in  KA  (Afghanistan)  in  the
    judgment of Maurice Kay LJ at [18] that there is no bright line  across
    which the risks to and the needs of a child suddenly disappear.

36.     To summarise, a local authority's obligations to an appellant as  an
    unaccompanied child and asylum  seeker  and  his  status  as  a  former
    relevant child after he becomes 18 do not of themselves  determine  the
    outcome of a decision on an  appellant's  immigration  status  but  may
    provide evidence relevant to those issues.  Similarly, the  failure  to
    endeavour  to  trace  is  only  relevant  if,  as  made  clear  in  the
    authorities from the Court of Appeal, the appellant is able to  show  a
    causative link between that failure and issues relevant to the  outcome
    of the appeal.

Conclusions

37.     The first difficulty  for  the  appellant  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not believe his evidence.  He did not accept to  the
    lower standard that his parents had been killed by the  Taliban.   This
    was both the core basis for his asylum claim and the primary  piece  of
    information as to his family ties in Afghanistan for the purpose of any
    tracing obligation.

38.     The second difficulty is that  if,  as  the  judge  has  found,  the
    appellant was giving false information about his  family  circumstances
    in Afghanistan, he would have every incentive not to co-operate with  a
    tracing inquiry into family links. His evidence was  that  he  did  not
    know where his brothers were and the judge noted that the appellant had
    told two social workers during the age assessment interview that he did
    not wish them to be traced.

39.      Accepting  that  the  tracing  duty  on  the  respondent   is   not
    extinguished by the appellant's unwillingness to assist in the inquiry,
    it nevertheless results in very real  difficulties  in  the  respondent
    being able to make any  useful  inquiries  at  all.  The  duty  in  the
    Reception Directive art.19 (3) is not an absolute one but "to endeavour
    to trace" and taking care that  "the  processing,  and  circulation  of
    information concerning those persons is undertaken  on  a  confidential
    basis" where the family life abroad is in regions of potential  danger.
    International agencies such as the International Committee of  the  Red
    Cross or the International Organisation of  Migration  do  not  act  as
    agents of the state but only at the request if the individual.  In  our
    judgment this means in practice, where  the  appellant  has  positively
    stated he does not want his family to be traced, has every incentive to
    mislead about his family  history  if  advancing  a  false  picture  of
    events, and where in the absence of reliable data  from  the  appellant
    the respondent would have no information with  which  to  make  tracing
    inquiries in Afghanistan, that it is improbable that a failure  of  the
    tracing duty is likely to be material.

40. As far as we are aware, to this day, despite the assistance of  counsel
    highly experienced in this field of law, the appellant has not provided
    any information to the  respondent  as  to  which  relatives  could  be
    contacted and how. In the circumstances  we  do  not  accept  that  the
    failure of the tracing duty has led to loss of relevant information  on
    the asylum claim (where  indeed  it  is  for  the  appellant  with  the
    assistance of his advisers to advance his case in good  faith)  or  has
    had any material impact on the development of his family life since his
    arrival in the United Kingdom in January 2009.

41. In the light of his rejection  of  his  asylum  claim,  his  claim  for
    humanitarian protection would depend on him establishing that there was
    to a reasonable degree of likelihood "a serious threat to a  civilian's
    life  by  reason  of  indiscriminate   violence    in   situations   of
    international armed conflict "   (Council  Directive  2004/83/EC   art.
    15(c)) and that there is no alternative to international protection  by
    way of  relocation to "a part of the country of origin where  there  is
    no real risk of suffering serious harm and (where)  the  applicant  can
    reasonably be expected to stay"  (ibid art. 8 (1).

42. Ms Cronin submits that the appellant's home province of  Nangarhar  was
    particularly volatile and the subject of  above  average  violence  and
    that it would unsafe and unreasonable to  return  him  to  Kabul  as  a
    dependent, unattended adult. The very limited further evidence produced
    about the security situation in Nangarhar  does  not  satisfy  us  that
    there is any proper basis  in  the  evidence  for  departing  from  the
    country guidance in AK (Afghanistan) where it  was  held  at  [215-226]
    that there was no province where the  level  of  violence  reached  the
    article 15(c) threshold.

43. But, in any event, if and when removed from  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    appellant would be returned to Kabul.  We are not satisfied that he  is
    able to show that he would be at risk of serious harm on return  there.
     The evidence tends to show that he is a relatively capable young  man
    with no particular physical or psychological vulnerability. We  do  not
    accept that because he was classified as vulnerable in social  services
    terms on arrival in the United Kingdom as an unaccompanied 15 year old,
    he does not have the ability to live in the capital of his own  country
    without serious risk to his life or  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment;
    nor, on the hypothesis, that it would be unsafe  for  him  to  live  in
    Nangarhar that it would be unreasonable for him in Kabul. He is not  of
    an age where he  is  vulnerable  to  sexual  exploitation,  he  has  no
    physical or mental impairment or any other  characteristic  that  would
    take him out of the general guidance given in AK (Afghanistan).

  44. In AK  the UT found at paragraph 243

        'As regards Kabul city, we have already discussed the situation  in
        that city and we cannot see  that  for  the  purposes  of  deciding
        either refugee eligibility  or  subsidiary  protection  eligibility
        (and we are only formally tasked with  deciding  the  latter)  that
        conditions  in  that  city  make  relocation   there   in   general
        unreasonable, whether considered under Article 15(c) or under 15(b)
        or 15(a). We emphasise the words "in general" because it  is  plain
        from Article 8 (2) and our domestic case law on internal relocation
        (see AH (Sudan) in particular) that in every case there needs to be
        an inquiry into the applicant's individual circumstances; and  what
        those circumstances are will very often depend  on  the  nature  of
        specific findings made about the credibility  of  an  appellant  in
        respect of such matters as whether they have family ties in  Kabul.
        But here our premise concerns an appellant with  no  specific  risk
        characteristics and someone found to have an uncle  in  Kabul:  see
        above paras 3, 5, 154, 186 and below, paras 250-254).  To summarise
        our  conclusion,  whilst  when  assessing  a  claim  in  which  the
        respondent asserts that Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable  internal
        relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account  (both
        in assessing "safety" and reasonableness") not only  the  level  of
        violence in that city but also the difficulties experienced by that
        city's  poor  and  also  the  many   IDPs   living   there,   these
        considerations will not in general make return to Kabul  unsafe  or
        unreasonable, although it will still always be necessary to examine
        an applicant's individual circumstances'.



      The further background  evidence  adduced  in  this  appeal  does  not
      provide an adequate  evidential  foundation  for  not  following  that
      guidance.

  45. Further, the appellant cannot show that he would have no relatives  or
      family friends to turn to for support in Afghanistan.  The  judge  did
      not accept his account that his parents were killed  and  he  has  not
      been forthcoming  about  the  location  of  other  relatives.  He  has
      referred in his most recent statement  dated  19  June  2013   to  his
      father's friend who on his account made the arrangements  for  him  to
      leave Afghanistan and says that he cannot stay with him as word  would
      get back to his own village as he lives nearby and this would put  him
      at risk but in the light of the judge's findings of fact he would  not
      be at such personal risk from the Taliban or anyone else in  his  home
      area and there is therefore no reason why he could not  look  to  this
      friend for support.  In these circumstances, he fails to show that  he
      falls within the category of a young unattended adult.

  46. It was also submitted that returning the appellant would be in  breach
      of his human rights as reflected in article 8.  He has  been  resident
      in the United Kingdom for four years from the age of  15  to  19.   He
      cannot rely  on  any  immigration  rule  or  policy  to  suggest  that
      residence of such length would require the grant of leave  to  remain,
      nor  can  he  bring  himself  within  the  category   of   exceptional
      circumstances justifying the grant of leave under the rules.

  47. We do not limit our inquiry to the  immigration  rules,  would  accept
      that the period of  residence  means  that  he  has  established  some
      private life here, and that his status as a former child  with  duties
      of care owed to him as such may be relevant  to  immigration  decision
      making in respect of someone who has reached the age of 18. But  there
      was simply no evidence before us or the judge below to suggest that he
      has developed such strong ties in so short a period as to make removal
      unjustifiable. He has never had any expectation of  being  allowed  to
      remain permanently; was only given leave to remain for  27  months  on
      arrival and his status has  been  under  review  since  then.   It  is
      significant that despite adjournment requests  specifically  for  this
      purpose, his foster carer did not attend to give any oral evidence  to
      substantiate or develop what she had written by way  of  support.   No
      doubt  such a relationship is  capable of producing strong  ties,  but
      the foster care was  always  intended  as  temporary  and  this  would
      doubtless have been well known to both carer and the  cared  for.   We
      are not persuaded that the appellant is in  a  committed  relationship
      with his girlfriend and do not accept that her lack of obvious support
      by not attending the hearing was due to action taken by her father. In
      the light of the previous assessment of credibility, we would be  slow
      to accept the appellant's unsupported account on issues favourable  to
      his claim to remain on which he relies.

  48. In the absence of particular features and strong  ties  formed  during
      his residence here as a child, Ms Cronin really has to rely on a  very
      bold submission that it is disproportionate to return any 19 year  old
      male to Afghanistan after four years residence here as a child, unless
      there is satisfactory evidence of  a  family  awaiting  him  there  or
      similar satisfactory reception arrangements.  Understandably  she  was
      reluctant to go that far, but stripped  of  the  generalities  arising
      from the social services background, that is in substance all  she  is
      left with.  We not accept such a bold submission. As we noted  at  the
      hearing it  would have very significant  impact  on  the  respondent's
      practice  and  successive  policies  in  dealing  with   unaccompanied
      children by way of limited leave and assessing the circumstances after
      age 18.

  49. We accordingly conclude that removing  the  appellant  to  Afghanistan
      would engage article 8(1).  It would be lawful and  for  a  legitimate
      aim. The issue is whether removal would be proportionate to  that  aim
      within article 8(2).  The appellant has been unable to show that he is
      entitled  to  asylum  or   humanitarian   protection.   In   all   the
      circumstances we are satisfied that the  requirements  of  immigration
      control outweigh the interference with his right to  respect  for  his
      private and family life built up whilst in the UK.

Decision

  50. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and its decision was set aside in
      respect of the  appeals  on  humanitarian  protection  and  article  8
      grounds.  We re-make  the  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  on  both
      grounds.

  51. There has been no application to vary or discharge the anonymity order
      made by the First-tier Tribunal and that order  therefore  remains  in
      force.



Hi His
Signed
                      Date: 23 August 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


ANNEX 1

Ruling on Error of Law


1.    Mr Lee adopted the grounds of appeal. He referred by  way  of  example
    to what he described as a confused direction on the burden and standard
    of proof in [12] and to the sentence in [13]: "He did  not  heard  them
    screams which gunshots were heard."  He conceded that there was  not  a
    wealth of evidence on the issue of the appellant's age but  nonetheless
    he submitted that the judge's decision was not  sufficiently  reasoned.
    He argued that the judge had clearly erred on the issue of humanitarian
    protection.  The appellant had been accepted as a minor, even if  older
    than he had claimed to be when he arrived  in  this  country,  and  the
    respondent's duty to endeavour to trace was not outweighed by the  fact
    that the appellant had said that he did not want his siblings traced.

2.       Mr Nath argued  that  the  judge  had  not  erred  in  law  in  his
    assessment of the appellant's age.  There had been no further  evidence
    from the appellant save his own oral evidence and the judge's  findings
    were properly open to him.  The failure to endeavour to trace would not
    have any material bearing on the outcome of the appeal as the appellant
    was unable to point to any link between the failure to carry  out  that
    duty and any detriment to him.  He accepted that the  judge's  decision
    might have benefited from  more  careful  proof  reading  before  being
    issued but such faults as there were did not go to  the  heart  of  the
    claim.  When the determination was read as a whole it  was  clear  what
    view the judge  had  formed  on  credibility  and  in  consequence  his
    decision dismissing the appeal was properly open to him.  On the  basis
    of the judge's findings of fact an appeal had no prospects  of  success
    on humanitarian protection grounds.

Assessment of the Issues

3.       The issue for me at this stage of the appeal is whether  the  judge
    erred in law such that his decision should be set aside.  I accept that
    the judge's decision might  have  benefited  from  more  careful  proof
    reading before it was issued.  Mr Lee  points  in  particular  to  [12]
    dealing with the burden and standard of proof.  The judge  referred  to
    the standard of proof as a low one with regard to  asylum  and  related
    matters but otherwise that  generally  the  standard  of  proof  was  a
    balance of probabilities.  I am satisfied that this does indicate  that
    the judge was fully aware of  the  appropriate  standard  of  proof  in
    relation to the asylum appeal.  It is also correct  that  the  sentence
    referred to in [13] does not on its face make sense but in the  context
    of the summary of the appellant's case it is clear what is meant.

4.       When assessing whether the  judge  has  given  sufficiently anxious
    scrutiny to the appeal the decision must be read  as  a  whole  and  in
    particular the judge's analysis of the evidence  at  [19]-[39]  on  the
    asylum, humanitarian and age issues and at [40]-[46] on article 8.   On
    this basis this is not a case where I am left with any real doubt about
    whether the  appellant's  case  was  properly  understood.   The  judge
    summarised the basis of the claim and analysed the  evidence.   He  has
    explained why he did not believe the appellant's evidence.  He  pointed
    out contradictions in his evidence at [21]-[27]  and  was  entitled  to
    comment on the fact that the appellant had said in evidence  that  when
    he heard the gunshots none  of  his  brothers  screamed  or  were  seen
    although he knew they were in the house.   He  had  asserted  that  the
    Taliban wanted to kill him as he was his parents' oldest boy yet on his
    account he was in front of Taliban gunmen who had allegedly  just  shot
    his parents and he came into their view but none of them raised  a  gun
    to take aim at him, gave chase or took  a  shot  at  him  when  he  was
    running away.  In summary, I am satisfied that the judge's findings  on
    the issue of credibility were properly open to him.

5.       So far as the judge's finding on the appellant's age  is  concerned
    it is argued that the judge was wrong  to  attach  weight  to  the  age
    assessment by Slough Social Services as it was in breach of the  Merton
    guidelines  in  that  it  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  its
    decision.  However, the position the judge  faced  was  that  the  only
    evidence about the appellant's age was the appellant's own evidence and
    the evidence set out in the age assessment.  I agree that very  limited
    reasons were given in the age assessment report but the judge had to do
    his best on the available evidence.  He was entitled to  note  that  an
    application had been made on the appellant's behalf for an  independent
    age assessment but no such report was relied on.  In the light  of  his
    findings on the appellant's credibility, I am satisfied that the  judge
    was entitled to find that the appellant was born in 1994 as opposed  as
    to 1996.

6.       However, I find that the judge erred in  law  by  failing  to  deal
    with the humanitarian protection appeal having found that the appellant
    was not entitled to asylum.   The  fact  that  there  were  no  removal
    directions did  not  mean  that  a  decision  should  not  be  made  on
    humanitarian protection  grounds.   Just  as  in  an  asylum  case  the
    appellant was entitled  to  have  the  humanitarian  protection  appeal
    assessed as at the date of hearing and not to have it deferred until  a
    decision to remove.  In any event the respondent's decision  to  refuse
    further leave to remain is prefaced  on  an  intention  to  remove  the
    appellant: see [71] and [72] of the decision letter.

7.       I am also not satisfied that the judge dealt  adequately  with  the
    issues arising from the failure to endeavour to trace  the  appellant's
    relatives set out in KA (Afghanistan).  The fact that the appellant may
    have told the social workers that he did not know  where  his  siblings
    were and did not wish  them  to  be  traced  does  not,  without  more,
    discharge the respondent from her duty under the relevant  regulations.



8.        The  grounds  argue  that  the  judge  did  not  engage  with  the
    appellant's arguments that the failure to trace  was  relevant  to  the
    proportionality decision under article 8.  The skeleton argument before
    the First-tier Tribunal argued that the appellant's only viable private
    life was in the UK and was the closest thing he had to a  family  life.
    When analysing article 8 the judge said at [46] that in the absence  of
    any cogent evidence to demonstrate the appellant had established rights
    under article 8, he did not find that the respondent's refusal to  vary
    leave engaged article 8 and that  mere  assertions  were  insufficient.
    However, despite the rejection of the appellant's  credibility  on  the
    issue on relating to his asylum claim, the fact  remains  that  he  has
    been in the UK since March 2009, has been living with a  foster  family
    and attending college.  A number of letters were written in support  of
    his article  8  claim  and  these  should  have  been  considered  when
    assessing whether article 8 was engaged.

9.       In summary, I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law  in  his
    findings of fact in relation to the appellant's credibility  about  his
    age and events in Afghanistan  or  in  his  assessment  of  the  asylum
    claim.  However,  he  did  err  in  law  by  failing  to  consider  the
    humanitarian protection appeal and more generally in his assessment  of
    article 8 and the implications of the respondent's failure to carry out
    his duty to endeavour to trace.

         Signed:  Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


-----------------------
[1] See now MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

