








R (on the application of Mohibullah) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department
(TOEIC - ETS - judicial review principles) [2016] UKUT 00561 (IAC)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review




             The Queen on the application of Mohammad Mohibullah

                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




          Before The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President and
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


Having considered all  documents  lodged  and  having  also  considered  the
submissions  of  Mr  N  Armstrong,  of  Counsel,  instructed   by   Bindmans
solicitors on behalf of the Applicant Mr S Kovats QC and Mr  C  Thomann,  of
Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal  Department  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent at a hearing conducted on 01, 02,  04  and  15  August  2016  and
having considered the further written submissions on behalf of both  parties
completed on 01 November 2016.


   i) Where there is a multiplicity  of  decision  making  mechanisms,  some
      generating a right of appeal and others not, there  is  a  public  law
      duty on the decision maker to be aware of the options and to take same
      into account when opting for a particular mechanism.


  ii)  Where  a  Tier  4  Student  is  considered   to   have   made   false
      representations, thereby being liable to discretionary curtailment  of
      leave and has been withdrawn from a course, thereby  being  liable  to
      mandatory curtailment action there is a duty on the Secretary of State
      to consider both of the corresponding sections in the "Curtailment  of
      Leave" policy guidance.


 iii) A failure to give effect to policy guidance without  justification  is
      in breach of the Lumba principle  and  renders  the  ensuing  decision
      vulnerable to being quashed.


  iv) Where a curtailment of leave decision is underpinned by the  Secretary
      of State's  decision  that  leave  to  remain  had  been  procured  by
      deception, the  appropriate  standard  of  review  is  the  Wednesbury
      principle rather than proof of the precedent fact of deception.


   v) A decision which has a conspicuously unfair impact on the subject  may
      qualify  for  condemnation  as   unreasonable,   or   irrational,   in
      contravention of the Wednesbury principle.


  vi) The student's knowledge of an allegation by ETS that he  has  procured
      his TOEIC certificate by deception will normally suffice to convey the
      gist of the case against  him,  thereby  rendering  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision making process (in this respect) procedurally fair.


                             DECISION AND ORDER

McCLOSKEY J


                                    INDEX

Chapter Number         Subject                           Para Number

I                Introduction                                 (1) - (2)
II               The Broader Canvas                           (3) - (4)
III              This Applicant's Challenge                   (5) - (8)
IV               The Impugned Decision                   (9) - (10)
V                The Blakehall College Issue             (11) - (31)
VI               First Ground of Challenge                    (32) - (75)
VII              Second Ground of Challenge              (76) - (84)

VIII             Delay                                        (85) - (88)

IX               A Footnote                              (89) - (92)

X                Omnibus Conclusion and Relief                      (93)



                             APPENDICES

Appendix 1:      Ruling on reception of evidence, dated 04 August 2016

Appendix 2:      Further reception of evidence ruling, dated 05 August  2016


Appendix 3:      Post - hearing Directions to the parties




                                  GLOSSARY

"CAS":         Confirmation of acceptance for studies.

"ETS":      Educational Testing Services - the US corporation contracted  to
           the Home Office to provide various services relating to  English
           language testing and certificates.

"HTS":       Highly trusted sponsor status  (from  6  April  2015,  "Tier  4
           sponsor status"), an accreditation given by the Home  Office  to
           certain approved institutions providing  full  time  educational
           courses.

"IELTS":    International English Language Testing System.

"SELT":     Secure English Language Test.

"TOEIC":    Test of English for International Communication.

"UKVI":     United Kingdom Visas and Immigration,  an  agency  of  the  Home
           Office.



I     INTRODUCTION

 1) The hearing of this application for judicial review was conjoined  with
    the related case of Saha (JR/10845/2015) and the  statutory  appeal  in
    the case of MA v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKUT
    450 (IAC) [39899/2014] as all three  cases  were  considered  to  raise
    certain common issues. Judgment has been given in MA. On the date  when
    judgment was to be promulgated in Saha,  an  unwelcome  and  unexpected
    evidential development on behalf of the Secretary of  State  intervened
    and, regrettably, those proceedings are not  yet  completed,  and  this
    judgment was delayed, in consequence: see further [92] infra.


 2) In the course of the hearing it became necessary for  the  Tribunal  to
    make certain  rulings  ex  tempore  and,  post-hearing,  to  promulgate
    certain directions. All are contained in the Appendices hereto.


II    THE BROADER CANVAS

 3) The background to the growing number of judicial review challenges  and
    statutory appeals in the field to  which  these  two  cases  belong  in
    relation to action taken on behalf of the Respondent, the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of State"), frequently in
    the form of refusing to extend leave or cancellation of leave, relating
    to the scores purportedly obtained by some 30,000 foreign  students  in
    "TOEIC" English language proficiency tests.  It is set out  in  extenso
    in SM and Qadir (ETS Evidence Burden of Proof) [2016]  UKUT  229  (IAC)
    and in general terms in R (Gazi) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (ETS-Judicial Review) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 327 (IAC) at  [2]  -
    [4], which need not be reproduced here.

 4) As explained  in  R  (Mahmood)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] UKUT 439  (IAC),  at  [1]  cases  belonging  to  this
    sphere:


         "... have gained much currency during recent months, stimulated  by
         action taken on behalf of the ......   Secretary of State ....   in
         the wake of the BBC "Panorama" programme broadcast on  10  February
         2014."


    As further explained in  Mahmood,  "ETS"  denotes  Educational  Testing
    Services, which is -


         "... a global agency  contracted  to  provide  certain  educational
         testing and assessment services to the Secretary of State".


    In all of these cases the impugned decision of the Secretary  of  State
    is based upon an assessment that the TOEIC Certificate  of  the  person
    concerned was procured by deception.


III   THIS APPLICANT'S CHALLENGE


 5) Mr Mohibullah is challenging the Secretary of State's  decision,  dated
    18 December 2014, to curtail his leave to remain in the United Kingdom.
     This  decision  was  made  under  paragraph  323A  (a)(ii)(2)  of  the
    Immigration Rules (the "Rules").  His case is that  this  decision  was
    impelled and dictated  by  the  anterior  decision,  some  four  months
    previously, of the third level  educational  establishment  where  this
    Applicant was studying, Blakehall College, to  withdraw  him  from  his
    course consequential upon a communication from the Secretary of State's
    agents that he had procured his TOEIC Certificate by fraud.

 6) The first limb of this Applicant's ensuing legal challenge is that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was unlawful as it evaded  the  statutory
    scheme under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  (the
    "1999 Act") and/or paragraphs 321A and 323 of the  Rules.  In  outline,
    the Applicant  complains  that  the  procedural  protections  enshrined
    within these provisions, including rights of  appeal,  were  unlawfully
    circumvented by the course taken by the Secretary  of  State  and  were
    also in breach of the prevailing  policy.   The  second  limb  of  this
    Applicant's challenge is that the Secretary of State erred  in  law  in
    concluding that he had engaged in deception  on  the  ground  that  the
    precedent fact of deception had not been  established.  It  is  further
    contended that the decision was vitiated by procedural unfairness.

 7) At the outset we draw attention to one important agreed  fact.   It  is
    accepted by the Applicant that  the  voice  which  is  audible  on  the
    computerised voice files generated  at  the  time  when  he  supposedly
    underwent the speaking element of his TOEIC test is not his.

 8) The central elements of the Secretary of State's case are,  first,  the
    contention that the Wednesbury principle, rather than  precedent  fact,
    is the appropriate standard of review and that  the  impugned  decision
    withstands this  species  of  challenge;   second,  that  the  impugned
    decision is not vitiated by procedural unfairness;  third,  that  there
    was no improper purpose in the communication with  MM's  college;  and,
    finally, there was no illegality  in  pursuing  the  selected  decision
    making course rather than making a curtailment of leave decision  under
    the Immigration Acts  and/or  the  Rules  (both  of  which  would  have
    attracted a right of appeal).  The  final  limb  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case is that this Applicant's challenge is defeated by delay.


IV    THE IMPUGNED DECISION

 9) The impugned decision of the Secretary  of  State  is  contained  in  a
    letter dated 18 December 2014.  The operative passage  therein  is  the
    following:


         "This decision has been made in line with the Immigration Rules and
         the Tier 4 policy guidance.  You were granted leave to remain as  a
         Tier 4 (General) student until 30 May 2015 in order to  complete  a
         course of study at Blakehall College.  However, the Home Office was
         informed by Blakehall College on 13 August  2014  that  you  ceased
         studying with them.  Home Office  records  have  been  checked  and
         there is no evidence that you have made an  application  to  change
         your sponsor or made a fresh application for entry clearance, leave
         to enter or leave to remain in the United Kingdom in any  capacity.
         Therefore, as you have been excluded, or withdrawn from your course
         of studies, as notified by your  Tier  4  sponsor,  your  leave  is
         curtailed under paragraph 323A(a)(ii)(2) of the  Immigration  Rules
         until 21 February 2014."

    This letter was the impetus for  these  proceedings,  which  were  duly
    initiated on 20 February 2015.




10) The Applicant is a national of Bangladesh, aged 28 years. He  has  been
    lawfully present in the United Kingdom since 25 October 2009, following
    which he undertook  various  courses  of  study.   In  2012  it  became
    necessary for him  to  secure  a  TOEIC  English  Language  Proficiency
    Certificate.  This was directly related to his application for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom, dated 13 April  2012.   He  duly
    arranged to undertake the  test  at  one  of  the  accredited  centres,
    Synergy Business College of London.  Two TOEIC certificates, which  lie
    at  the  heart  of   these   proceedings,   were   generated.    These,
    respectively, certify the following:


      i) On 13 April 2012 the Applicant underwent the listening and  reading
         elements of the test, obtaining scores of 495/495 and 415/495.


     ii) On 17 April 2012 the Applicant undertook the speaking  and  writing
         limbs  of  the  test,  obtaining  scores  of  170/200  and  190/200
         respectively.


    It is common case that  the  two  certificates  specify  correctly  the
    Applicant's name and date of birth.


V     THE BLAKEHALL COLLEGE ISSUE


11) The Secretary of State's decision is  expressly  based  upon  a  letter
    dated 13 August 2014 from Blakehall College to the Applicant.  This  is
    the third level educational institution  at  which  the  Applicant  was
    enrolled at the material time.  The letter is in these terms:


         "It has been identified by  UKV  and  I  that  you  have  submitted
         fraudulent [sic] ETS Certificate prior to  admission  at  Blakehall
         College, therefore you have failed to meet UKV and I  requirements.
         Your registration at this college is now terminated ...


         Your sponsorship will be withdrawn and UKV and I will  be  informed
         accordingly.  You have no right to appeal against this decision."


    [Hereinafter  described  as  "the  withdrawal  letter".   "UKV  and  I"
    (hereinafter "UKVI") denotes United Kingdom Visas and  Immigration,  an
    agency of the Home Office.]

12) The withdrawal letter was preceded by a letter dated 24 June 2014  from
    the Sponsor Compliance Unit of UKVI addressed to Mr Gardner, proprietor
    of Blakehall College.  This states, in material part:


         "(1)     As you will be aware, Educational Testing  Services  (ETS)
             have recently  withdrawn  a  high  volume  of  Secure  English
             Language Test (SELT) results from students who have taken  its
             Test of English for International Communication (TOEIC)  tests
             at some of their approved centres.  They have informed us that
             some of these certificates have been obtained fraudulently and
             this may have involved either someone taking the test for  the
             student or the student being provided with the answers.   Such
             widescale organised abuse of the system is  unprecedented  and
             will not be tolerated by the Home Office. .....


         (ii)     According to the information we have  received,  you  have
             assigned 67 CAS to students who have  had  TOEIC  certificates
             withdrawn by  ETS  (annexe  A).   Since  these  students  have
             directly  and  deliberately  posed  a  threat  to  immigration
             control, we are extremely concerned that  you  have  sponsored
             these students ......


         We consider this to be a breach of your sponsor duties ....


         (iii)    Since this activity has resulted in widespread immigration
             abuse, we have suspended your sponsor license  with  immediate
             effect."


         [Emphasis supplied - hereinafter "the suspension letter"]


    Continuing, the suspension letter states that "in addition" UKVI has  a
    concern:

         "...  that for some students you have failed to  adequately  assess
         whether there is genuine academic progression prior to sponsoring a
         student already in the UK."

    Finally, the letter informed Mr Gardner that  the  UKVI  investigations
    were  continuing  and  alerted  him  to  his  right  to  make   written
    representations and to provide evidence.


13) Some two weeks later, Mr Gardner received a further letter  from  UKVI,
    dated 11   July 2014.  This enclosed two lists.   The  first  of  these
    contained the names of 147 students at Blakehall  College  whose  TOEIC
    test scores had been assessed by ETS as  "invalid".   The  second  list
    contained the names of 71 Blakehall College students whose  TOEIC  test
    scores had been assessed by ETS  as  "questionable".   Each  list  also
    contained the date of birth and registration number  of  each  student.
    The Applicant's name was one of those on the "invalid" list.

14) The UKVI letter of 11 July 2014 to Mr Gardner  contains  the  following
    material passages:


         "At some point each of the students listed have [sic] directly  and
         deliberately circumvented immigration control.  Whether as part  of
         an application to study with you,  or  with  an  earlier  or  later
         sponsor.  We  are  extremely  concerned  that  you  have  sponsored
         students who would be prepared  to  take  part  in  such  dishonest
         activity ....  We believe that each of the students  listed,  along
         with your institution since you were prepared to sponsor them,  has
         contributed to this unprecedented  threat  to  immigration  control
         ....


         Before assigning a CAS to a student, you should be making a  robust
         assessment of their ability and intention to follow the  course  of
         study; this would include fully assessing  their  English  language
         ability.  You are not obliged to accept any  student,  particularly
         if you have  identified  concerns  about  their  language  ability,
         regardless of what their SELT score may show ....


         Since the majority of the students you recruit are already  in  the
         UK and therefore could have been interviewed in person, we  believe
         such disparities would have been apparent."


    This letter also expressed the concern  of  UKVI  in  relation  to  one
    further issue,  namely  "Attendance  monitoring  and  management",  the
    suggestion being that the college had, from 2012, become  lax  in  this
    respect, citing four individual cases of students with unacceptably low
    attendance.


15) On 14 July 2014 Blakehall College submitted its comprehensive  response
    to  the  UKVI  suspension  letter.   This  contained,  inter  alia,  Mr
    Gardner's assurance of full co-operation  in  the  UKVI  investigation,
    together with his assertion that:


         "Blakehall College is a bona fide educational institution  and  was
         unaware of any fraudulent activity under ETS, TOEIC or elsewhere."


    An individual response was made in respect of each of the 218  students
    listed in the UKVI  schedules.   This  described  the  Applicant  as  a
    student of BA (Hons) Business Studies who had completed two of the four
    modules and whose English language proficiency had been demonstrated in
    an IELTS (denoting "International  English  Language  Testing  System")
    Certificate.




16) The Blakehall College response to the UKVI suspension letter  coincided
    with a meeting of both parties held on the same  date,  14  July  2014.
    The brief minutes of  this  meeting  attributed  to  one  of  the  UKVI
    officials include the following passages:
         "[Mr Gardner] stated that Blakehall College want to work with  UKVI
         to help resolve this issue and restore the  college's  licence  and
         that he hopes this meeting today proves  they  want  to  take  this
         matter seriously also as he believes that Blakehall  College  is  a
         good college who have always tried to abide by the Rules ....


         [A UKVI official] said he understood this and can see that this was
         not a deliberate attempt to abuse the immigration system  which  is
         why he has agreed to this meeting today.  But the fact still stands
         that you do have ETS cheats studying at your college."


    Certain action points were noted.  No other  issue  of  concern,  other
    than the "ETS issue" is documented in the minutes.


17) This meeting was followed by a further UKVI letter to Mr Gardner, dated
    08 August  2014.   This  notified  the  continuing  suspension  of  the
    college's licence.  The first reason  given  was  explained  under  the
    rubric of "ETS issues".  The second concern expressed  related  to  the
    assignation of a CAS to four  named  students  and,  specifically,  the
    evidence upon which these students were assessed as having the  ability
    to follow their chosen course of study.  The third matter raised in the
    letter was that of "academic  progression"  in  respect  of  one  named
    student. Fourth, the issue of "attendance monitoring  and  management",
    raised in a previous letter, was reiterated, in relation to three named
    students.   The  letter,  finally,  indicated  that  Mr  Gardner  could
    continue to make representations and provide evidence  in  response  to
    the concerns expressed.

18) This letter was followed by a second meeting between the parties,  held
    on 13 August 2014.  One of the UKVI  officials  in  attendance  was  Mr
    Turner, described as "Senior Sponsor Compliance Manager".   The  record
    of this meeting indicates that, from the  outset,  the  ETS  issue  was
    prominent.  After Mr Gardner had provided an overview, Mr  Turner,  per
    the record:

         "....  reiterated our continuing areas of concern, as per our
         letter of 08/08/14, highlighted that the ETS issue is of major
         concern."


         [Emphasis added.]


    Those in attendance were informed that 33 students had been "withdrawn"
    by the college.   Our  construction  of  the  record  of  the  meeting,
    unaffected and unchallenged by the evidence of Mr  Turner  (infra),  is
    that the ETS issue was the only matter of concern addressed.   This  is
    reinforced by the four action points noted at the end  of  the  record,
    all of which relate exclusively to this issue.




19) Paragraph [10] of the UKVI letter of 08 August 2014 stated:


         "We do not believe that  you  have  effectively  responded  to  our
         concerns regarding 60 of your  students'  cohort  who  continue  to
         study with you.  You have failed to explain what  action,  if  any,
         you intend to take with these  students  who  obtained  a  SELT  by
         deception."


    As the record indicates, this issue was specifically ventilated  during
    the meeting held five days later.  Mr Gardner's concern to address this
    issue is evident from the exchange of emails on the eve of the meeting,
    in the course of which one of the UKVI officials stated:


         "The 60 students quoted in our letter of 08 August  refers  to  the
         student list provided  with  your  representations,  which  was  in
         response to the students listed as  a  concern  in  our  Annexe  A.
         There are 60 students on your list that you state are continuing to
         study with you."


    In short, as of 13 August 2014, the Home Office position was  that  the
    college's response to the suspension of its licence  had  consisted  of
    the "withdrawal" of 158 (only) of the 218 students  in  the  UKVI  list
    (supra).




20) As the exchanges between the college and  UKVI  continued,  Mr  Gardner
    asserted (inter alia) that, with regard  to  a  discrete  group  of  41
    students whose TOEIC  scores  had  been  declared  "invalid",  28  were
    withdrawn within 24 hours of  the  relevant  notification.   Withdrawal
    action was not taken against the remaining 13  students  on  the  basis
    that their admission to  the  college  had  not  been  based  on  TOEIC
    certificates.  Mr Gardner expressed his belief  that,  in  consequence,
    this gave rise to a group of 13 students arranged under the umbrella of
    "unable to take further action".  A  similar  assessment  was  made  in
    respect of 9 students belonging to the "questionable" category.


21) Notably, in the immediate aftermath of the inter partes meeting held on
    13 August 2014, one of the UKVI officials directly  involved,  and  who
    had attended the meeting,  sent the following email to Mr Gardner later
    on the same date:


         "Thank you for your time today.  As discussed, the  number  of  ETS
         students of concern detailed in our  letter  of  08/08/14  was  60.
         However, this was incorrect as 33 of the students had already  been
         withdrawn from  their  studies  by  you  and  reported  by  SMS  on
         15/07/14.  The students who continue to study  with  [sic]  and  of
         concern are ....   13 students with  invalid  ETS  scores  ....   9
         students with questionable ETS score [sic] ...


         I have attached a list of the 22 students.   We  will  provide  you
         with further advice on the 9 students with questionable scores once
         James [Mr Turner] has sought advice on this point."


         [Emphasis added.]


    The college's withdrawal decision was communicated to the Applicant the
    following day, 14 August 2014.

22) We deal  briefly  with  the  succeeding  events.  By  letter  dated  11
    September  2014  UKVI  confirmed  the  continuing  suspension  of   the
    college's licence, based on "new information" which had emerged.   None
    of this relates  directly  to  the  "ETS  issue".  Mr  Gardner  replied
    accordingly.  This was followed by a further (third) meeting,  held  on
    18 September 2014.  Within the minutes of  this  meeting  one  finds  a
    clear acknowledgement  by  the  senior  UKVI  official  (with  emphasis
    added):


         "GS  acknowledged  the  commitments  made  by  [the  college],  the
         implementation of additional process and the withdrawal of the  ETS
         students."


         [Our emphasis.]


    The particulars of the "remaining concerns" in the  record  of  meeting
    confirm that the ETS issue was no longer a live one.


23)  Soon afterwards, the UKVI decision to revoke the licence of  Blakehall
    College was communicated to Mr Gardner, by a letter  dated  03  October
    2014.  Of the six issues identified  in  this  letter,  the  ETS  issue
    received the least treatment, being addressed in the past  tense.   The
    following passages are of particular note:


         "We explained in our earlier letter that you had assigned  147  CAS
         linked to TOEIC certificates identified as invalid and a further 71
         CAS to students with questionable scores.  Of  these,  41  students
         with invalid  scores  and  14  students  with  questionable  scores
         continued to study at your institution at the  time  of  suspension
         ....


         Following our meetings with you  on  14  July  and  13  August  and
         subsequent correspondence we have received, we  are  now  satisfied
         that these students have been expelled from  your  institution  and
         reported appropriately to the Home Office."


         [Our emphasis.]


    The specific misdemeanour attributed to the  college,  again  belonging
    exclusively to the past, was an asserted failure to "thoroughly  assess
    their ability, intentions and previous academic progress" at  the  time
    of deciding to assign a CAS to each of the students concerned.


24) As contemplated  by  the  order  of  Green  J  at  an  interim  hearing
    postdating the grant of permission, we  received,  unconventionally  in
    this sphere of litigation, a quantity of  oral  evidence  addressed  to
    certain discrete issues.  This included evidence from Mr  Gardner.   In
    this context we begin with the official record of Mr Gardner's evidence
    to the House of Commons Home Affairs Committee (the "HOC Committee") on
    20 July 2016.   Mr  Gardner  was  questioned  about,  inter  alia,  the
    withdrawal of all of the students on the UKVI list.  The thrust of  the
    questioning was whether it had been implied to him that  a  failure  to
    take this action would result in the loss of the college's  sponsorship
    licence.  Mr Gardner replied:


         "It was never said, but it was implied all  the  time.   After  the
         first visit, we got a list of students who were  so-called  frauds.
         In fact, on the train down, I did what we believed they required of
         us, which is we got in touch with  the  college  and  we  suspended
         those students or curtailed their classes with immediate effect. We
         were commended by the Home Office at that time for making  progress
         in the right sort of direction, but they were at pains to say to us
         that we needed to understand that they never instructed  us  to  do
         this. They still commended the fact that we actually did it."


    The ensuing questioning reveals the statistic  that  approximately  one
    third of the Blakehall College student population  had  obtained  TOEIC
    certificates.


25) The evidence included two witness statements of  Mr  Gardner.   In  the
    first of these, he describes a meeting  with  UKVI  representatives  in
    July 2014 - see [ 16] above - during which he and his colleague were:


         "....  repeatedly asked by George Shirley (Director UKVI) 'what  we
         were going to do' about these students ....


         It was our understanding that if we withdrew sponsorship from these
         students that would certainly count towards an early  reinstatement
         of our HTS status.  We then withdrew sponsorship from this group of
         students, based on what we were told by the UKVI."


    ("HTS" denotes "Highly Trusted Sponsor".)




    In a second witness statement, Mr Gardner avers, with reference to  the
    exchange of communications with UKVI in mid-August 2014:


         "As can be seen, the Home Office witness statements  were  appended
         to  the  email  and  we  were  informed   by   [the   Home   Office
         correspondent] that we could  'use  them',  the  intention  clearly
         being  that  they  could  be  used  as  justification  to  withdraw
         sponsorship from the further 22 students.   In  other  words,  when
         this list was provided, it was clearly  understood  that  the  Home
         Office wanted us to do with those students what we  had  done  with
         the other  students  (ie  withdraw  them).   The  Applicant's  name
         appears on this list."


    This evidence may be juxtaposed with what  we  have  digested  in  [16]
    -[20] above.


26) As noted above, Mr Gardner gave evidence to this Tribunal.   He  was  a
    demonstrably thoughtful, balanced and credible witness.   His  evidence
    was understated, containing no hint of invention or  exaggeration.   It
    was in all material respects consistent with his written statements. He
    was entirely unshaken in cross examination.

27) The final evidence bearing on this subject was that of Mr  Turner,  one
    of the senior Home Office  employees  directly  involved  in  the  UKVI
    interaction  with  Blakehall  College,  beginning  with   the   licence
    suspension decision and culminating  in  the  decision  to  revoke  the
    college's licence.  As with Mr Gardner, we had the benefit of assessing
    Mr Turner in the witness box. For  the  reasons  elaborated  below,  we
    found him a wholly unimpressive witness.


28) Mr Turner affirmed that he had no knowledge of  the  decision  of  this
    Tribunal in Gazi.  When asked about the decision in SM and  Qadir,  his
    response was that he had heard of it but  had  never  read  it.   These
    aspects of his evidence were symptomatic  of  the  consistent  lack  of
    depth and conviction which characterised his testimony throughout.   At
    the outset of his cross examination, Mr  Turner  was  asked  about  the
    identical format and near identical content of  his  witness  statement
    and that of another Home Office employee,  Mr  Evans.    It  was  quite
    obvious that  Mr  Turner's  statement  was  modelled  on  that  of  his
    colleague.  However, Mr Turner refused to acknowledge this  inescapable
    reality.  His protestation that he had prepared his  statement  without
    any reference whatsoever to the other was utterly implausible.


29) Mr Turner's claims as to  how  the  letters  and  minutes  of  meetings
    examined above should be properly construed and understood were  simply
    unsustainable.  Digging an  increasingly  deep  hole  for  himself,  he
    sought unconvincingly to blame colleagues for their actions in agreeing
    to meetings (one of which he himself  attended)  and  the  contents  of
    letters and minutes of meetings.  Finding himself, thus, at a point  of
    virtually no return  he  sought  refuge  in  the  manifestly  untenable
    suggestion  that  the  relevant  UKVI  guidance  erects   an   absolute
    prohibition to  meetings  with  representatives  of  licensed  colleges
    during  the  twilight  period  between   suspension   and   revocation.
    Throughout his evidence  Mr  Turner  failed  to  engage  directly  with
    certain pertinent questions and made a series of sweeping,  generalised
    and unsupported assertions.


30) We have no hesitation in preferring the evidence of Mr Gardner to  that
    of Mr Turner. Our evaluation of Mr Gardner's testimony is  as  follows.
    During the period in question, June to October 2014, Mr  Gardner  found
    himself in increasingly  desperate  straits.   The  reputations  of  Mr
    Gardner, his college and those involved in it  were  at  stake.   Their
    livelihood was under serious threat.  Mr Gardner  found  himself  in  a
    progressively weak and desperate position.  Having  considered  all  of
    the evidence in the round we find, without doubt, that Mr  Gardner  was
    pressurised by UKVI  officials  into  expelling  the  218  students  in
    question.  This cohort included the Applicant.  We consider that he was
    given  no  choice.   Based  on  his  evidence,  which  we  accept,  the
    requirement that he expel all of these students from Blakehall  College
    was conveyed to him explicitly by a senior Home Office official.   This
    duress is also readily to be inferred from the contemporaneous  letters
    and records of meetings.  The threat is not, of course,  documented  in
    any of the latter.  However, we attach no weight to this consideration,
    given that, having regard to Mr Turner's evidence, UKVI has  evinced  a
    clear  policy  of  disassociation  and  innocence  as  regards  student
    withdrawals and, therefore, selected its written words with caution.


31) In summary, the Secretary of State's evidence on the issues relating to
    Blakehall College shrinks and withers  to  the  extent  that,  for  the
    reasons given, we reject it in all material  respects.   We  shall  now
    relate this omnibus finding to the Applicant's grounds of challenge.


VI    FIRST GROUND OF CHALLENGE

32) The gist of this ground is that the Secretary of State acted unlawfully
    in electing to take action against the Applicant under  paragraph  323A
    of the Rules, thereby circumventing the statutory scheme under  Section
    10 of the 1999 Act and paragraphs 321A  and  323  of  the  Rules.   The
    Applicant's fundamental complaint is  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    choice of decision making route deprived him of a  statutory  right  of
    appeal.  The question for  the  Tribunal  is  whether  any  public  law
    misdemeanour of the various types canvassed is demonstrated.  The nexus
    between this ground of challenge and the issue which we have  addressed
    in extenso in [10] - [30] above is formed by  the  Applicant's  omnibus
    contention that having regard to the events relating to the  revocation
    of the licence of Blakehall College the impugned decision is tainted in
    several inter-related ways.


    Immigration Rules and Statutory Framework


33) At this juncture, reference to the statutory  framework  is  essential.
    There are three provisions of the Immigration  Rules  of  significance.
    Each is contained in  Part  9,  a  discrete  regime  entitled  "General
    grounds for the refusal of entry clearance, leave to enter or variation
    of leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom".  From  30  December
    2013 (at latest) paragraph 321A of the Rules has provided:

         "321A.   The following grounds for the cancellation of  a  person's
                leave to enter or remain which is in force  on  his  arrival
                in, or whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply;


                (1)     there has been such a change in the circumstances of
                    that person's case since the leave was  given,  that  it
                    should be cancelled; or


                (2)     false representations were made or  false  documents
                    were  submitted  (whether  or  not   material   to   the
                    application,  and  whether  or  not  to   the   holder's
                    knowledge), or material facts  were  not  disclosed,  in
                    relation to the application for leave; or  in  order  to
                    obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a  third
                    party required in support of the application or,


                (3)     save in relation to a person settled in  the  United
                    Kingdom  or  where  the  Immigration  Officer   or   the
                    Secretary of State is satisfied that  there  are  strong
                    compassionate reasons justifying admission, where it  is
                    apparent that, for medical reasons, it is undesirable to
                    admit that person to the United Kingdom;  or  (4)  where
                    the Secretary of State has personally directed that  the
                    exclusion of that person  from  the  United  Kingdom  is
                    conducive to the public good; or


                (4A)    Grounds which would have  led  to  a  refusal  under
                    paragraphs 320(2), 320(6), 320(18A), 320(18B) or 320(19)
                    if the person concerned were making  a  new  application
                    for leave to enter or remain  (except  where  this  sub-
                    paragraph applies in respect of leave to enter or remain
                    granted under Appendix Armed Forces it is to be read  as
                    if for paragraphs 320(2), 320(6), 320(18A), 320(18B)  or
                    320(19)" it said "paragraph 8(a), (b), (c)  or  (g)  and
                    paragraph 9(d)"); or


                (5)    The Immigration Officer or  the  Secretary  of  State
                    deems the  exclusion  of  the  person  from  the  United
                    Kingdom to be conducive to the public good. For example,
                    because  the  person's  conduct  (including  convictions
                    which do not fall within paragraph  320(2)),  character,
                    associations, or other reasons, make it  undesirable  to
                    grant them leave to enter the United Kingdom; or


                (6)     where that person is  outside  the  United  Kingdom,
                    failure  by  that  person  to  supply  any  information,
                    documents, copy documents or medical report requested by
                    an Immigration Officer or the Secretary of State."



    The Appellant's case in principle fell within paragraph 321A(2).


   34)  Paragraph 323 of the Rules prescribes various circumstances in which
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom may be curtailed (discretionary
       curtailment).  Throughout the period under  scrutiny  and   until  06
       April 2015 it provided:

         "323     A person's leave to enter or remain may be curtailed:


                (i)     on any of the grounds set out in  paragraph  322(2)-
                    (5A) above  (except  where  this  paragraph  applies  in
                    respect of a person granted leave under  Appendix  Armed
                    Forces "paragraph 322(2)-(5A) above" is to read as if it
                    said "paragraph 322(2) and (3) above and paragraph  8(e)
                    and (g) of Appendix Armed Forces"); or


                (ia)     if  he   uses   deception   in   seeking   (whether
                    successfully or not) leave to remain or a  variation  of
                    leave to remain; or


                (ii)    if he ceases to meet the requirements of  the  Rules
                    under which his leave to enter or remain was granted; or




                (iii)   if he is the  dependant,  or  is  seeking  leave  to
                    remain as the dependant, of an  asylum  applicant  whose
                    claim  has  been  refused  and  whose  leave  has   been
                    curtailed under section 7 of the 1993 Act, and  he  does
                    not qualify for leave to remain in his own right, or


                (iv)    on any of the grounds set out in paragraph 339A (i)-
                    (vi) and paragraph 339G (i)-(vi), or


                (v)     where a person has, within the  first  6  months  of
                    being granted leave to enter, committed an  offence  for
                    which they are subsequently sentenced  to  a  period  of
                    imprisonment, or


                (vi)    if he was granted his current period of leave as the
                    dependent of a person ("P") and P's leave  to  enter  or
                    remain is being, or has been, curtailed."

    The Appellant's case in principle fell within paragraph 323 (ia).




   35) Next, Rule 323A(a), in force from 06 April 2012 to  date,  introduced
       certain grounds for mandatory curtailment  of  leave  in  respect  of
       Tiers 2, 4 and 5 migrants.  It provided:


         "In addition to the grounds specified in paragraph 323,  the  leave
         to enter or remain of a Tier 2 Migrant, a Tier 4 Migrant or a  Tier
         5 Migrant:


               a) is to be curtailed if:


        i) in the case of a Tier 2 Migrant or a Tier 5 Migrant:


                     1)     the migrant fails to commence, or


                     2)     the migrant ceases, or will cease,  before  the
                        end date recorded on the Certificate of Sponsorship
                        Checking  Service,  the  employment,  volunteering,
                        training or job shadowing (as the case may be) that
                        the migrant has been sponsored to do.


                ii) in the case of a Tier 4 Migrant:


                     1)     the migrant fails to commence studying with the
                        Sponsor, or


                     2)     the  Sponsor  has  excluded  or  withdrawn  the
                        migrant, or the migrant  has  withdrawn,  from  the
                        course of studies, or


                    (2A)      the migrant's course of study has  ceased,  or
                        will cease, before the end  date  recorded  on  the
                        Certificate of Sponsorship Checking Service, or


                     3)     the Sponsor withdraws their  sponsorship  of  a
                        migrant on the doctorate extension scheme, or


                     4)     the Sponsor withdraws their  sponsorship  of  a
                        migrant  who,  having  completed  a   pre-sessional
                        course as  provided  in  paragraph  120(b)  (i)  of
                        Appendix A, does not have a  knowledge  of  English
                        equivalent to level B2 of the Council  of  Europe's
                        Common European Framework for Language Learning  in
                        all four components (reading, writing, speaking and
                        listening) or above."


    The impugned  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  was  made  under
    paragraph 323A
    (a)(ii)(2).


36) We turn to consider the  relevant  primary  legislation.  Prior  to  20
    October 2014, section 10(1) of the 1999 Act provided:

         "A person who is not a British citizen  may  be  removed  from  the
         United  Kingdom,  in  accordance  with  directions  given   by   an
         immigration officer, if - (a) having only a limited leave to  enter
         or remain, he does not observe a condition attached to the leave or
         remains beyond the time limited by the leave; (b) he  has  obtained
         leave  to  remain  by  deception  or  (c)  directions  ("the  first
         directions") have been given for the removal, under  this  section,
         of a person ("the other person") to whose family he belongs."


    By virtue of Section  82(2)(g)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 previously in force, there was  a  statutory  right  of
    appeal against decisions made under Section 10 of  the  1999  Act.   An
    appeal of this genre had to be pursued  out  of  country,  per  Section
    92(2).  This appeal right would have availed the Appellant, per section
    10(1)(b), had he been the subject of a decision there under at any time
    from the beginning of the saga in mid -  June  2014  until  20  October
    2014, when significant changes, including the abolition of this  appeal
    right, were effected by SI 2014/2771, commencing certain provisions  of
    the Immigration Act 2014.




    Policy Guidance


37) The provisions of statute and the Rules outlined above do not exist  in
    a vacuum.  Rather, they are to be considered in conjunction with one of
    the Secretary of State's  published  policies  which  featured  in  the
    evidence, namely the publication "Curtailment of Leave", effective from
    31 July 2014. This states, firstly [at page 11]:


         "This  page  tells  caseworkers  about  considering  curtailing   a
         migrant's leave when they have made false representations or failed
         to disclose material facts in a previous application for leave.


         You  must  consider  curtailment  under  paragraph  323(i)  of  the
         Immigration Rules with reference to paragraph 322(2), if  you  find
         that in a previous application for leave to enter or  remain  under
         the Immigration Rules, a migrant:


               . has made a false representation, such as providing a  false
                 document, or
               .  did  not  disclose  information  that  they  should   have
                 provided.


         In this context a 'previous application' means one that has already
         been considered and decided, rather  than  one  that  is  currently
         being considered and has not yet been decided.


         You  must  consider  curtailment  under  paragraph  323(i)  of  the
         Immigration Rules with reference to paragraph 322(2A), if you  find
         that, in a current or previous  application  for  a  document  that
         indicates the person has a right to reside in the UK, a migrant:


               . has made a false representation, such as falsely stating on
                 the  application  form   that   they   have   no   criminal
                 convictions, or
               . did not disclose  information  that  was  material  to  the
                 application."
    It continues [at page 12]:

         "Check whether the case should be treated as a removal rather than
         curtailment


         You must consider whether to curtail a migrant's leave if they have
         made false representations or failed to  disclose  material  facts.
         Before you curtail, you must first consult the  local  immigration,
         compliance and engagement (ICE) team to see  if  the  case  can  be
         treated as a removal under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum
         Act 1999 (on grounds of deception).
           The ICE team will assess most of these cases to see if they can
           be considered for:


               . administrative removal, or
               . removal for illegal entry in the case of leave to enter."

    Within the same section the following statement appears [at page 13]:

         "False representations or failure to disclose material facts in a
         current application


         You may find that a  migrant  has  made  false  representations  or
         failed to disclose material facts in the current  application  that
         you are considering and the migrant will still have leave remaining
         after you have refused the  application.  You  cannot  curtail  the
         remaining leave in these circumstances. This is  because  paragraph
         322(2) relates to false  representations  or  failure  to  disclose
         material facts for the purpose of obtaining leave  to  enter  or  a
         previous  application  to  vary  leave,  rather  than  the  current
         application.


         Therefore, when refusing a current application on these grounds you
         must refuse under paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules. If you refuse the
         application on this basis, you must then  refer  the  case  to  the
         appropriate ICE team  to  consider  making  a  Section  10  removal
         decision (on the grounds of deception), instead of  curtailing  any
         remaining  leave.  If  a  removal  decision  is  made,  this   will
         invalidate any existing leave."


    At page 49 one finds  under  the  rubric  "Mandatory  Curtailment"  the
    following passage:


           "Exclusion or withdrawal from studies


           If the sponsor has excluded or withdrawn  the  migrant,  or  the
           migrant has withdrawn, from the  course  of  studies,  you  must
           curtail  their  leave  under  paragraph  323A(a)(ii)(2)  of  the
           rules."


    The Secretary of State's policy guidance in vogue at the material  time
    included the "Enforcement Instructions and  Guidance"  ("EIG").   This,
    under the rubric "Curtailment of current leave", states,  at  paragraph
    50.8:


         "Although a  person's  leave  can  be  curtailed  where  they  have
         breached their conditions of stay by, for example,  working  whilst
         here as a student in excess of the hours permitted under the Rules,
         it is normally more appropriate to consider Section  10  action  in
         such  cases  where  a  person  has  come  to  attention  during  an
         enforcement visit."


The Competing Arguments In Outline

38) Mr Armstrong submitted that the scheme of the 1999 Act and the Rules is
    as follows:
      a) In cases where Section 10 of the 1999 Act was available, it  should
         be utilised.  The main procedural protection thereby triggered  was
         an out of country appeal.


      b) In cases where Section 10 could not be  utilised,  the  appropriate
         course was to invoke  the  curtailment  provisions  of  the  Rules,
         namely Rule 323, rather than Rule 323A,  with  the  consequence  of
         either an in country right of appeal  or  the  ability  to  make  a
         further immigration application.


      c) The exercise of the mandatory curtailment power enshrined  in  Rule
         323A was designed to be confined  to  cases  where  a  student  had
         withdrawn from the relevant course for educational reasons.



39)  Developing  his  argument,  Mr  Armstrong  submitted  that,  from  the
    Secretary of State's perspective this  was  at  all  times  a  case  of
    alleged deception on the  part  of  the  Applicant,  thereby  rendering
    resort to a decision under Rule  323A  unsustainable  in  law.  It  was
    argued that the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  frustrated  the
    legislative purpose;  alternatively,  deprived  the  Applicant  of  the
    procedural protections which both of the  alternative  decision  making
    mechanisms would have provided; and further,  or  in  the  alternative,
    fails to withstand review by reference to the  established  public  law
    standard of anxious scrutiny, fairness and discharge  of  the  Tameside
    duty of enquiry (see Secretary of State for  Science  and  Education  v
    Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council [1977] AC  1014).   Mr  Armstrong
    further submitted that the impugned decision was made in  disregard  of
    or, alternatively,  in  breach  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
    guidance (supra).  Finally, Mr Armstrong submitted that  having  regard
    to the factor of deception, the appropriate standard  of  review  in  a
    challenge of this kind is that of precedent fact.

40) We distil the core of the riposte of Mr Kovats QC to be the  following.
    The Applicant's challenge to the impugned decision of the Secretary  of
    State can be advanced only on the ground that it was unfair not to make
    an appealable immigration decision.   Furthermore,  properly  analysed,
    this is not a challenge to the  Secretary  of  State's  curtailment  of
    leave  decision,  the  real  target  being  the  college's   withdrawal
    decision.   Nor  does  any  question  of  precedent  fact  arise.   The
    Applicant had the opportunity to make representations to the  Secretary
    of State's agents following the termination of his registration at  the
    college on 13 August 2014.  While ETS assessed  the  Applicant's  TOEIC
    test scores to be invalid, this did not form the basis of the  decision
    under challenge.  As a result, the evidence of the Applicant, including
    the expert evidence of Professor Sommer on which he relies, as  to  the
    reliability of the test results is irrelevant and, though  admitted  de
    bene  esse  by  the  Tribunal,  should,  at  this  stage,  strictly  be
    considered inadmissible.




41) The submissions of Mr Kovats also laid emphasis on the  fact  that  the
    only decision under challenge is that of the Secretary  of  State  and,
    further, that it is not the function of this Tribunal to make  findings
    of fact relating to the events surrounding the TOEIC  tests  which  the
    Applicant claims to have undertaken.  It was further submitted that the
    Secretary of State's decision is vulnerable to challenge  only  on  the
    basis  of  Wednesbury  principles.   Mr  Kovats'  submissions   further
    highlighted that the revocation of the Blakehall College licence is not
    under challenge in these proceedings and was, in any  event,  based  on
    several grounds  extending  beyond  the  "ETS/TOEIC"  issue.   Finally,
    submitting that the Applicant's challenge  is  defeated  by  delay,  Mr
    Kovats highlighted the absence of any challenge to the actions  of  the
    Secretary of State's agents  relating  to  the  college's  decision  to
    withdraw the Applicant from  his  course,  with  the  result  that  the
    present challenge, which attacks the Secretary of  State's  curtailment
    of leave decision of 18 December 2014, is "a device to obscure the fact
    that [the Applicant] has not only fired his shot too late, he has aimed
    at the wrong target".


42) Post-hearing the Tribunal invited further submissions from the  parties
    on the following issues relating to the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
    guidance (supra):


      a) The Secretary of State's stance on whether  either  of  the  policy
         guidance instruments invoked by the Applicant was applicable.


      b) The factual question of whether the Secretary of  State's  decision
         maker took into account either or both of these instruments.


      c) The factual question of whether the Secretary of  State's  decision
         maker took into account the multiplicity of decision making  routes
         available in the Applicant's case.


    [See Appendix 3 hereto]


    In a further submission, it was accepted on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State that the "Curtailment of Leave"  guidance  was  applicable.   The
    submission did not address the second ("EIG") instrument  of  guidance.
    Next, the submission acknowledged, in substance, that the Secretary  of
    State could adduce  no  evidence  bearing  on  either  of  the  factual
    questions  ventilated.   The  Tribunal's  post-hearing  Notice  to  the
    parties'  representatives  also   invited   argument   on   the   legal
    consequences which would flow from (a) a finding that the Secretary  of
    State had failed to take into account, or give  effect  to,  either  or
    both of the policy guidance instrument  and  (b)  a  finding  that  the
    Secretary of State had failed to take into account the multiplicity  of
    decision making routes available.  The further submission on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State did not address either of these issues.


    The Choice of Decision Making Mechanism


43) In our judgement there are two main competing approaches to this issue.
    The first involves focussing on what the Secretary of  State,  formally
    and expressly, stated in the decision under challenge.  It is necessary
    to identify the following separate stages in the sequence of events:



      i) At the first stage, ETS communicated to the Secretary of State  its
         assessment that the Applicant had  procured  his  English  language
         proficiency certificates by deception, via the use of a proxy  test
         taker.


     ii)  At  the  second  stage,  the  Secretary  of  State  relayed   this
         information to Blakehall College.


    iii)  The Secretary of State's agents  then  pressurised  the  college's
         proprietor into withdrawing the Applicant  and  all  other  student
         members of the same cohort from  the  course  of  study  they  were
         pursuing. This conduct was based exclusively upon their  conviction
         that the Applicant (and others) had committed fraud.


     iv) At the next stage, the college made withdrawal decisions in respect
         of the Applicant and other students


      v) At the final stage, the Secretary of State decided to  curtail  the
         Applicant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom  under  paragraph
         323A(a)(ii)(2) of the Rules.




    The Decision in Giri

44) At this juncture we consider the decision in R (Giri)  v  Secretary  of
    State for  the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  784.   There,  the
    Secretary of State refused the timeous application of a Tier 4  student
    migrant for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules on the ground of  false  representations
    or information. As the Applicant's extant leave remained intact,  there
    was no appealable  immigration  decision,  with  the  result  that  the
    ensuing challenge proceeded via judicial review.


45) The Court of Appeal, having noted that the  crucial  question  for  the
    Secretary of State was whether the student had  engaged  in  deception,
    categorised this as a question of  fact  requiring  a  finding  by  the
    decision maker in deciding whether to grant or refuse  entry  clearance
    or leave to enter or remain. It was held that the role of the court  is
    to review the ensuing decision on Wednesbury principles.  Richards  LJ,
    delivering the unanimous judgment of the Court, stated at [32]:


         "I accept that a finding that deception has  been  used  should  be
         scrutinised very carefully but I do not accept  that  the  relevant
         question is anything other than whether it was reasonably  open  to
         the decision maker, on  the  material  before  him,  to  find  that
         deception had been used.  The finding in question is one of fact."


    In the remaining passages of its judgment,  the  Court  reiterated  the
    well  established    principles that  the  onus  of  proving  deception
    rests on the Secretary of State  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  the
    balance of probabilities.

    General

46) Our evaluation of the submissions of the  parties'  respective  counsel
    gives rise to the following analysis and conclusions.  We take  as  our
    starting point some elementary dogma.  This is not a challenge  to  the
    merits of the Secretary of State's decision to curtail the  Applicant's
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Furthermore,  this  is  not  an
    immigration appeal.  Rather, by this challenge, the  Applicant  invokes
    the supervisory jurisdiction of this Tribunal



47) The only prerequisite to a decision under this Rule (in  this  context)
    is that the sponsor college has withdrawn the migrant from  his  course
    of studies.  Analysed in this way, the Secretary  of  State's  decision
    did not involve a finding that the Applicant had engaged  in  deception
    in the manner suggested by ETS.  The decision did not involve, and  was
    not dependent upon, a finding of deception.  Rather, for  the  purposes
    of the Rule invoked, the critical fact involved  in  the  decision  was
    that the Applicant had been withdrawn from his course of study  by  the
    sponsor college.




48) The alternative, competing  approach  is  somewhat  wider.  It  entails
    focussing on the reality and substance of the impugned decision.   This
    involves scrutinising the conduct of the Secretary  of  State's  agents
    throughout  the  period  under  scrutiny   and   sustained   underlying
    motivation. It is clear  beyond  peradventure  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's agents did not merely suspect, or believe, that  the  Applicant
    had engaged in deception in the relevant  manner.   Rather,  they  were
    plainly convinced of this fact.  As recorded in the  judgment  of  this
    Tribunal in Gazi, at [15]:


         "The  Home  Office  invariably  accepts  the  deception  assessment
         provided by ETS, without more".


    See also SM and Qadir at [20].  The thrust of Mr Turner's  evidence  to
    this Tribunal was unambiguously  in  these  terms.   Furthermore,  from
    start to finish of the material period the Secretary of State's  agents
    adhered relentlessly to the position that the Applicant  had  practised
    deception and had to be penalised accordingly.   Notwithstanding,  they
    ultimately  had  recourse  to  a  decision-making  mechanism  in  which
    deception does not feature.


49) What is the effect of this analysis?  It is tempting to conclude simply
    that the Secretary of State had a choice of decision making  routes  at
    her disposal.  However unsatisfactory this multiplicity of choice might
    appear in the abstract, this was the legal effect of  the  co-existence
    of the several legal mechanisms all duly made and  adopted  and  having
    the requisite parliamentary scrutiny.  So it was  simply  a  matter  of
    picking from the menu. But is  this  apparently  simplistic  assessment
    correct in law?

50) We take as our point of departure that, in  principle,  where  multiple
    decision-making mechanisms are available to any  public  authority  the
    decision to invoke one of these rather than any of the  others  entails
    the  exercise  of  discretion  and  is  susceptible  to  challenge   on
    conventional public law grounds.

51) Given the crucial importance of context, it is appropriate to highlight
    certain features of  the  situation  prevailing  at  the  time  of  the
    Secretary of State's impugned decision.  At this stage,  the  Applicant
    had been in limbo during a period of some four months, consequent  upon
    the termination of his registration at Blakehall College:  [10]  supra.
    During this period his situation remained static, with no  amelioration
    or,  indeed,  any  type  of  material  development.   We   accept   the
    Applicant's evidence that following receipt of the  withdrawal  letter,
    he went to the college seeking further  information  and  clarification
    and was informed that he could expect a letter from  the  Home  Office.
    We accept his further evidence that  this  triggered  a  period  during
    which his stance was one of  awaiting  the  expected  letter  prior  to
    taking any kind of action.  There was no  suggestion  from  any  source
    that he should proactively contact the Home Office and, of  course,  he
    had not experienced previously a  comparable  plight.  He  received  no
    warning of what was in the pipeline, he was not informed in any  detail
    of the case being built against him and he  was  not  invited  to  make
    representations on any issue.


52) In the circumstances just noted,  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    maker had a choice of the three  separate  decision  making  mechanisms
    outlined above.  In simple public law terms, there was a discretion  to
    be exercised in the matter of identifying the selected route.  Properly
    analysed, the Applicant is challenging the exercise of this discretion.
     We consider  that  that  whereas  the  formal  driver  propelling  the
    impugned decision was the withdrawal by the sponsor  of  the  Applicant
    from the college, the real rationale was the ETS  assessment  that  the
    Applicant had procured his qualification by deception and the Secretary
    of State's acceptance thereof. Having regard to certain undisputed  (or
    indisputable) facts  and  our  findings  (see  Chapter  V  above)  this
    diagnosis is inescapable. We consider that this  alleged  deception  on
    the part of the  Applicant  was  the  omnipresent  and  dominant  force
    throughout  the  sequence  of  events  in   question.    Formally   and
    technically, the withdrawal of the Applicant by the  college  from  the
    course was the underpinning of the Secretary of State's curtailment  of
    leave decision.  However, in substance and reality, the assessment that
    the  Applicant  had  practiced  deception  in   procuring   his   TOEIC
    qualification was the essential underpinning  of  the  conduct  of  the
    Secretary of State's officials from the beginning to  the  end  of  the
    period under  scrutiny,  culminating  in    the  impugned  decision  in
    December 2014.


53) Turning to scrutinise the actions of the Secretary of State's  decision
    maker, we note firstly the absence of any evidence of alertness that  a
    discretion fell to be exercised.  The evidence adduced on behalf of the
    Sectary  of  State  contains  no  indication,  either  express  or   by
    reasonable implication, that the decision maker was aware of, and  duly
    gave consideration to, the three decision making routes available.  The
    finding that there was no real exercise of discretion, is readily made.
     Applying orthodox public law doctrine, this invites the analysis  that
    material considerations were disregarded by the decision maker and that
    the discretion in play was fettered.  The  other  two  decision  making
    routes were material factors for the reasons that they provided options
    lawfully available in the circumstances and they entailed significantly
    different consequences for the Applicant, namely the  triggering  of  a
    statutory right of appeal. Had they been considered a  quite  different
    species of decision could have materialised. Thus  the  requirement  of
    materiality is clearly satisfied.


54) We consider that the duty imposed on the  Secretary  of  State  was  to
    identify the multiplicity of  decision  making  routes  available  and,
    having  done  so,  to  conscientiously  consider  the  alternatives  in
    accordance with normal public law standards.  The question  of  whether
    this duty was  discharged  is  one  of  fact.   The  evidence,  in  our
    judgement, points clearly to the finding that it was not.   The  public
    law misdemeanour  thereby  committed  was  the  disregard  of  material
    considerations.  We conclude that the impugned decision of the  Sectary
    of State is vitiated on this ground alone.


    The Policy Guidance Issue


55) At this juncture we turn  to  examine  the  impugned  decision  from  a
    different perspective.  The two decision making routes contained in the
    Rules, together with the single statutory decision  making  alternative
    did not exist in a vacuum.  Rather, they co-existed with the  Secretary
    of State's policy guidance.  We have outlined the salient  features  of
    this in [35] above.  Mr Kovats was correct in his submission  regarding
    the status of this  instrument,  namely  it  ranks  as  mere  guidance.
    However, it is policy guidance bearing  directly  on  the  question  of
    selection of the decision making route. Furthermore, we are mindful  in
    the principle enunciated by Lord Dyson JSC  in  Lumba  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC  12 at [26]:


         "...a decision maker must follow  his  published  policy  .........
         unless there are good reasons for not doing so
           . "

56) As noted in [42] above, the applicability of the "Curtailment of Leave"
    guidance is not disputed.  Within this publication there  are  separate
    sections entitled "Curtailment of Leave - False Representations  (etc)"
    and "Curtailment of Leave - Tier 4 Mandatory  Curtailment".  Mr  Kovats
    submitted, in effect,  that  these  belong  to  separate,  hermetically
    sealed compartments. We reject this  submission.   The  guidance  is  a
    single, indivisible instrument.  It must  be  considered  as  a  whole.
    Furthermore, it is not to be construed with the rigours appropriate  to
    an exercise in statutory interpretation or the construction of  a  deed
    or contract.  Rather,  given  its  nature  and  status,  it  is  to  be
    approached more broadly and flexibly. We consider all  of  this  to  be
    orthodox dogma. The final ingredient  in  this  analysis  is  that  the
    Applicant's case belonged to overlapping, or multiple, categories.


57) We consider that both sections of the guidance fell to be considered by
    the decision maker. This is unremarkable, given the overlapping  nature
    of certain of the material provisions in Part 9 of  the  Rules  coupled
    with the multiplicity  of  decision  making  routes  available  in  the
    circumstances. As regards the first of the two sections of the guidance
    under scrutiny, the simple fact is  that  the  Applicant  was,  at  the
    material  time,  a  person  who  was  considered  to  have  made  false
    representations and  who  was  liable  to  have  his  leave  to  remain
    curtailed in consequence.  As regards the second section, the Applicant
    was also a Tier 4 Student  who  was,  on  paper,  liable  to  mandatory
    curtailment  action.  We  add  that  while  the   "Tier   4   Mandatory
    Curtailment" section of  the  guidance  purports  by  its  language  to
    prescribe rigid instructions to case workers, we consider  that,  as  a
    matter of elementary principle,  these  are  not  to  be  construed  as
    extinguishing the discretion to have resort to other options. Moreover,
    "rules" of  this  species  must  be  construed  and  applied  with  the
    flexibility required by the British Oxygen principle (British Oxygen  v
    Board of Trade [1971] AC 610).

58) The materiality of the guidance was not - and could  not  have  been  -
    contested.  Accordingly, there was a duty on the decision maker to take
    it into account.  If the decision maker had done so,  this  would  have
    entailed, as a matter of obligation (given the terms of the  guidance),
    weighing the options available and, specifically, considering whether a
    removal decision under Section 10 of the 1999 Act  should  be  made  in
    preference  to  a  curtailment  of  leave  decision  under  the  Rules.
    Furthermore, again as a matter of obligation, the  decision  maker  was
    bound by unambiguous instruction ("You must  ......")  to  consult  the
    "local immigration, compliance and engagement  (ICE)  team"  in  making
    this choice. The evident  purpose  of  this  step  is  to  provide  the
    caseworker concerned with advice, information and guidance.


59) The first - and elementary -  question  is  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision maker had regard to the aforementioned guidance.  This
    is a question of fact.  Having considered all the  evidence,  including
    the response on behalf of the Secretary of State to the Tribunal's post-
    hearing Notice,  we  conclude  without  hesitation  that  the  impugned
    decision was made without any reference to the  guidance.   It  follows
    inexorably that there was a  failure  to  have  regard  to  a  material
    consideration.


60) It further follows that none of the steps specified  in  the  guidance,
    outlined briefly in [58]  above,  was  taken.  Nor  were  the  optional
    courses of action considered. As a result the impugned decision of  the
    Secretary of State failed to give effect to the  policy  guidance.   No
    explanation of, or justification for, this failure was proffered in the
    evidence.  The  conclusion  that  there  was  a  breach  of  the  Lumba
    principle follows inexorably.  To summarise, our consideration  of  the
    issue relating to the first instrument of guidance in play  yields  the
    conclusion that the Secretary of State's decision is  vitiated  by  the
    aforementioned public law misdemeanours. We are satisfied that  neither
    this conclusion nor that in [55] above is precluded by Daley-Murdock  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 161,  [6]  -
    [9], on which Mr Kovats relied, which concerned a different species  of
    legal challenge.


61) The second instrument of policy guidance of the Secretary of State upon
    which the  Applicant  relies  is  Chapter  50  of  the  EIG.   We  have
    reproduced in [37] above the provision - paragraph 50.8  -  invoked  by
    the Applicant.  The gist of this is that in cases  where  a  person  is
    considered to have "breached their conditions  of  stay"  action  under
    Section 10 of the 1999 Act  is  usually  the  appropriate  course.   We
    consider that this does not avail  the  Applicant  for  the  elementary
    reason that this is not a case of breach of conditions of stay. Indeed,
    the conditions upon which the Applicant  was  permitted  to  enter  and
    remain in the United Kingdom did not form part of the evidence adduced.
     We find it unsurprising that neither  party  addressed  this  discrete
    issue in the further submissions invited.

    Wednesbury irrationality or proof of the precedent fact of deception?


62) Which of these is the appropriate standard  of  review?   This  is  the
    stark choice to  be  confronted,  bearing  in  mind  our  analysis  and
    conclusion above that in substance and reality the curtailment of leave
    action taken against the Applicant was underpinned by the Secretary  of
    State's unshakeable and unwavering conviction that he  had  engaged  in
    deception in procuring his TOEIC English language  qualification.   The
    Applicant argues  that  his  judicial  review  challenge  falls  to  be
    determined by reference to  the  standard  of  the  precedent  fact  of
    deception.  We consider that he Appellant's argument  founders  on  the
    rock of the Giri decision, which points firmly to the  conclusion  that
    the Wednesbury principle, rather than proof of the  precedent  fact  of
    deception, provides the appropriate standard of review in this context.




63) The next question, logically, is whether the impugned decision  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  is  vitiated  by  Wednesbury  irrationality?   As
    emphasised in recent Supreme Court decisions such as Keyu  v  Secretary
    of State for  the  Home  Department  [2015]  UKSC  69,  the  Wednesbury
    principle, in cases not involving the assertion of fundamental  rights,
    continues to entail an acutely elevated  threshold.   It  has  a  heavy
    emphasis on (merely) supervisory judicial review. Applying the  formula
    adopted by Richards LJ in Giri,  we  are  satisfied  following  careful
    scrutiny that while the information available to the Secretary of State
    was far from abundant, and bearing in mind when the  impugned  decision
    was made viz it preceded the significant developments  (evidential  and
    otherwise) in the "ETS saga" heralded by the decisions in Gazi  and  SM
    and Qadir, the assessment that the Applicant had engaged  in  deception
    based on the notification from ETS  lay within the spectrum of rational
    decisions open to the hypothetical reasonable decision maker.

    Conspicuous Unfairness


64) From Mr  Armstrong's  quiver  next  emerged  the  submission  that  the
    Tribunal should apply  the  prism  of  conspicuous  unfairness  to  the
    decision making route selected by the Secretary of State.  The  factual
    ingredients in this discrete argument are that this is the  only  known
    case to date in which this curtailment of leave provision in Rule  323A
    has been deployed by the Secretary of State (which is  not  contested);
    the conditions under which resort to this decision making power  became
    possible were orchestrated by the dubious  conduct of the Secretary  of
    State's agents in  exercising  improper  pressure  on  the  college  to
    withdraw the Applicant from his course;  and  the  Applicant  has  been
    treated differently than  other  suspected  TOEIC  fraudsters,  without
    adequate explanation or good reason. The other key ingredient  in  this
    equation is, of course, that each of the other  two  possible  decision
    making routes   generated a statutory right of appeal.


65) "Conspicuous unfairness" is a term  which  has  gained  currency  in  a
    number of reported cases during recent years.  It denotes  fairness  of
    the substantive,  rather  than  procedural,  variety.   It  focuses  on
    harshness of impact and outcome.  The concept features, for example, in
    Rashid v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 744
    where the issue concerned a failure by the  Home  Office  to  apply  an
    internal relocation policy when refusing the asylum application  of  an
    Iraqi Kurd.  Delivering the main judgment of the Court of Appeal,  Pill
    LJ stated, at [34]:


         "It is ...  a claim of unfairness amounting to an abuse  of  power,
         of which legitimate expectation is only one application.  The abuse
         is based on an expectation that a general policy for  dealing  with
         asylum applications will be applied and will be applied  uniformly.
         Serious errors  of  administration  have  resulted  in  conspicuous
         unfairness to the claimant."
      [Emphasis added.]


    Other elements in this analysis were the persistence of  the  offending
    conduct and the absence of any explanation: [36].


66) In a concurring judgment, Dyson LJ described the central issue  in  the
    case as one of "justice  and  fairness":  [44].   He  too  adopted  the
    "conspicuous unfairness" standard, at [52].  Both judgments contain  an
    acknowledgement  that  the  concept  of  "conspicuous  unfairness"   is
    traceable to the judgment of Simon Brown LJ in  R  v  Commissioners  of
    Inland Revenue, ex parte Unilever [1996] STC 681,  a  decision  of  the
    Court of  Appeal  which,  by  reason  of  more  recent  jurisprudential
    developments, has come to be recognised as  a  seminal  development  in
    modern public law.  We are  at  a  loss  to  understand  the  insistent
    argument on behalf of the Secretary of State that the  Supreme  Court's
    subsequent disagreement with the substantive outcome of Rashid,  in  TN
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2015] UKSC 40 somehow reversed also  the  Court's
    exposition of the principle which we are here addressing. Our reasoning
    is entirely independent of the result in Rashid.

67) While Mr Armstrong's argument also prayed in aid the decision  of  R  v
    Liverpool County Court, ex parte Baby Products Association  [2000]  LGR
    171, we are inclined to view this as a routine illustration of a  first
    instance decision in which a public authority was held  to  have  acted
    unlawfully as it had, in effect, acted ultra vires and, further,  in  a
    manner which  improperly  circumvented  and  frustrated  the  statutory
    scheme in question.


68) Our attention was also drawn to R (London Borough of  Lewisham)  v  AQA
    and Others [2013] EWHC 211 (Admin).   This  requires  some  reflection.
    There Elias LJ,  delivering  the  judgment  of  the  Divisional  Court,
    offered the following thesis, at [111]:


         "Logically, if there is a doctrine of conspicuous unfairness  as  a
         substantive head of judicial review which is to  be  treated  as  a
         distinct form of abuse of power, it must be for the court to decide
         whether in any particular case  the  decision-maker  has  infringed
         that principle since the court must decide whether power  has  been
         abused. It is no different from a court deciding  that  a  decision
         has been exercised for an improper purpose or  that  an  irrelevant
         consideration has been taken into account. But  I  do  not  believe
         that Unilever has formulated a fresh head of review  conferring  on
         the  court  a  wide  discretion  to  substitute  its  view  of  the
         substantive merits for the decision-maker. In order  to  constitute
         conspicuous unfairness, the decision must be immoral  or  illogical
         or attract similar opprobrium, and it necessarily follows  that  it
         will be irrational. I  would  treat  this  concept  of  conspicuous
         unfairness as a particular  and  distinct  form  of  irrationality,
         which in essence is how it was viewed  by  Sir  Thomas  Bingham  in
         Unilever. There are no doubt cases, of which Unilever is one, where
         the  concept  of  fairness,  and  an  allegation   of   conspicuous
         unfairness, better captures the particular nuance of the  complaint
         being advanced than the concept of irrationality. Indeed,  I  think
         that is typically so in any case  where  the  alleged  unreasonable
         behaviour involves  a  sudden  change  of  policy  or  inconsistent
         treatment. It is more natural  and  appropriate  to  describe  such
         conduct as unfair rather than unreasonable. But in my  view  it  is
         only if a reasonable body  could  not  fairly  have  acted  as  the
         defendants have that their conduct  trespasses  into  the  area  of
         conspicuous unfairness amounting to abuse  of  power.  The  court's
         role remains supervisory."

    The last sentence in this passage is of self-evident importance,  being
    preceded by an emphatic reiteration of the root principle that even  in
    cases where conspicuous unfairness is canvassed, it is not the function
    of the reviewing court  to  substitute  its  view  of  the  substantive
    merits.  Elias LJ, ultimately,  applied  the  prism  of  reasonableness
    which, of course, was, historically, the term habitually used  in  this
    field (see Council of Civil Service Unions v  Minister  for  the  Civil
    Service [1985] AC 374 at [407] - [413] ( per  Lord  Diplock)  until  it
    became more fashionable to speak of  rationality  and  its  antithesis,
    irrationality.  Notably, Elias LJ linked  this  to  what  is  generally
    recognised as the ultimate touchstone in judicial review, namely  abuse
    of state power.


69) While recognising that there may not be judicial or academic  unanimity
    on this interesting issue, we consider that, doctrinally, the  approach
    in AQA is the correct one. The emergence of the concept of  conspicuous
    unfairness may be viewed as a natural development, or  elaboration,  of
    the Wednesbury principles.  The concept was somewhat dormant  during  a
    period of approximately two  decades.   However,  its  re-emergence  is
    probably attributable to the development of the doctrine of substantive
    legitimate expectations, duly driven by the organic power of the common
    law.  A decision which results in a conspicuously unfair  outcome  for,
    or impact upon, the claimant has  the  potential  to  qualify  for  the
    condemnation of irrationality.  The ultimate question  is  whether  the
    decision under scrutiny is so unfair and/or unreasonable as  to  amount
    to an abuse of power. Stated succinctly, the exercise  of  governmental
    power with conspicuously unfair or unreasonable  results  violates  the
    Wednesbury principle.

70) Reverting to the  present  case,  the  most  important  effect  of  the
    Secretary of State's selection of decision making route  was  to  leave
    the Applicant bereft of an appeal to a tribunal.  As our analysis above
    makes clear, the only form of legal redress available to him, namely an
    application for judicial review, is quite different  from  a  statutory
    appeal.  This was recognised, with some emphasis, in  the  decision  of
    this Tribunal in R (Gazi) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2015] UKUT 327 (IAC), duly endorsed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  R
    (Mehmood and Ali) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 744.   In  Gazi,  this  Tribunal  emphasised,  at  [40],  that
    judicial review is an unsuitable litigation mechanism in cases of  this
    kind, continuing:

         "...Secondly,  the  present  case  illustrates  that   every   case
         belonging to this field will be unavoidably  fact  sensitive.  Each
         litigant  will  put  forward  his  or   her   individual   disputed
         assertions, agreed facts, considerations and  circumstances.  These
         will be evaluated by a fact finding tribunal, to be contrasted with
         a court or tribunal of supervisory jurisdiction. This analysis  is,
         in my view, amply confirmed by the growing number of FtT  decisions
         in this sphere. Within these one finds emphasis  on  self-evidently
         important issues such as the appellant's evident  English  language
         ability, demeanour and previous life  events.  Furthermore,  it  is
         trite  that  the  assessment  of  each  appellant's  demeanour  and
         credibility will be carried out on a case by case basis."

    In SM and Qadir, this Tribunal observed at [102]:


         "The hearing of these appeals has demonstrated beyond  peradventure
         that judicial  review  is  an  entirely  unsatisfactory  litigation
         vehicle for the determination of disputes of this kind".


71) It is, of course, correct, that, exceptionally, features of the hearing
    in the present case  included  oral  evidence  and  cross  examination.
    However, these were confined to specific issues  and  these  mechanisms
    did not, and were not designed to, convert these  proceedings  into  an
    appeal on the merits.  Rather,  what  emerged,  under  strict  judicial
    supervision, was a  hybrid  of  sorts.   To  this  must  be  added  the
    conclusion which we have reached above that  this  is  not  a  judicial
    review challenge in which deception on the part of the Applicant has to
    be established as a precedent fact.


72) To summarise, the Secretary of State's  selection  of  decision  making
    mechanism had the effect of depriving the Applicant of a judicial forum
    in which all of the evidence bearing upon the question  of  whether  he
    had procured his English language proficiency certificates by deception
    could be fully ventilated and explored, resulting in a judicial finding
    on the issue.  As we have already observed, the question of whether the
    Applicant practised deception is the key, dominant one in  the  overall
    matrix.   By confining the  Applicant  to  pursuing  the  inferior  and
    limited remedy of judicial review against the background  and  findings
    detailed above, the Secretary of State, in  our  judgment,  acted  with
    singular and manifest unfairness.  The evidence contains no explanation
    of why one of the other two available decision making  routes  was  not
    adopted.  Nor is there any  explanation  of  why  the  decision  making
    routes adopted in all of the other cases known to, and brought  to  the
    attention of, this Tribunal in this case  and  earlier  ones  were  not
    invoked in this case.  As decisions such as AQA make clear,  these  are
    relevant  considerations.   The  factors  of  both  an  unexpected  and
    unexplained change of policy and unreasoned inconsistent treatment  are
    discernible.


73) What is the effect of this  analysis?   In  our  judgment,  it  adds  a
    further, discrete dimension to the Applicant's  challenge.  It  invites
    the conclusion (to borrow the language of Elias LJ) that  a  reasonable
    public authority could not fairly have  deprived  the  Applicant  of  a
    statutory right of appeal in the context and circumstances in question.
     Drawing the various strands together, the conduct of the Secretary  of
    State's  agents  in  their  interaction   with   the   proprietor   and
    representatives of Blakehall College attracts  the  opprobrium  of  our
    analysis and findings in [25] - [29] above; the  Secretary  of  State's
    ability to invoke the mandatory and unappealable curtailment  of  leave
    decision making route was a direct  result  of  the  improper  conduct,
    consisting in essence of duress and manipulation, which we have  found;
    the Applicant was left in the dark  as  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    intentions at all material times; the college was the only  source  and
    conduit of information to him; no invitation  to  make  representations
    about decision  making  routes  was  afforded  to  him;  there  was  no
    communication with him during a critical period; and,  ultimately,  the
    Applicant was driven to pursuing a legal remedy which is markedly  less
    suitable than an appeal on the merits .  We conclude that these various
    factors combine to yield the conclusion that the Secretary  of  State's
    decision was so unfair and unreasonable as to amount  to  an  abuse  of
    power.


74) The Secretary of State had ample opportunity  to  address  evidentially
    the issue of the decision making  route  selected  in  this  particular
    student's case. No evidence bearing on this issue was presented. It  is
    trite to add that all cases are decided on the basis  of  agreed  facts
    and/or the judicial resolution of contested  factual  issues.  Notably,
    the  Secretary's  hopelessly  belated  and  truly  forlorn  attempt  to
    introduce still further evidence many weeks following the completion of
    the hearing and remote from the questions raised in the Tribunal's post
    - hearing Notice (see Appendix 3]  did  not  extend  to  this  discrete
    issue.

75) On the assorted grounds and reasons elaborated above we  conclude  that
    the Applicant's first ground  of  challenge,  with  its  multi-facetted
    ingredients, succeeds.

VII   SECOND GROUND OF CHALLENGE: PROCEDURAL UNFAIRNESS

76) This operates as a free  standing  ground  of  challenge.  Its  factual
    matrix is uncomplicated and uncontentious.  In summary,  the  Secretary
    of State's officials played a  leading  and  influential  role  in  the
    decision of Blakehall  College  to  withdraw  the  Applicant  from  his
    studies there; a hiatus of some  four  months  duration  followed;  the
    Applicant interacted with  the  college,  but  not  UKVI,  during  this
    period; UKVI engaged in no form of communication with the Applicant; in
    particular, he was not informed of the detailed case against  him;  and
    he was not invited to make representations  on  the  central  issue  of
    alleged TOEIC fraud. We have considered the other  procedural  features
    of the impugned decision making process under the rubric of conspicuous
    unfairness above.


77) In evaluating this ground of  challenge,  we  are  not  concerned  with
    unfairness of the conspicuous, or substantive, variety explored  above.
    Rather, the focus  here  is  on  the  hallowed  principles  of  natural
    justice, specifically the  audi  alteram  partem  rule  in  its  modern
    incarnation as expounded by Lord Mustill in his seminal speech in  R  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Doody  and  Others
    [1994] 1AC 531, at 560 especially.  While it is correct  that  the  six
    precepts of procedural fairness formulated by Lord Mustill  began  with
    the question of what fairness required in that  case,  which  concerned
    decisions  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  the  minimum   terms   of
    imprisonment to be served by mandatory life prisoners, what follows was
    clearly of general application. Furthermore,  Lord  Mustill  formulated
    the principle that there is a presumption that a statutory  power  will
    be exercised fairly (in the procedural sense).  We can conceive  of  no
    reason why a similar approach should not be applied to powers enshrined
    in the Immigration Rules: and  none  was  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  Indeed, the submissions on behalf of the Secretary
    of State were based on the premise that the Doody principles applied to
    the decision making process under scrutiny.


78) For completeness, we add the following. It is trite that  the  decision
    making context is all important: see, for example, R (L) v West  London
    Trust [2014] EWCA Civ 47 at [67], [76], [78] and [96]  especially,  per
    Beatson LJ.  In the fields of immigration and asylum, it has been  held
    that the basic principles  of  procedural  fairness  apply  to  certain
    decision making contexts: see  Miah  [2014]  UKUT  00515  (IAC)  and  R
    (Mushtaq) v Entry Clearance Officer of Islamabad, Pakistan [2015]  UKUT
    00224 (IAC). If necessary for our decision, we would  hold  that  these
    principles apply presumptively to all decision making contexts  in  the
    field of immigration  and  asylum  law.   In  R  (Mehmood  and  Ali)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 744 at [72],
    Beatson LJ, while noting that a person in the position of the Applicant
    is at liberty to  make  representations  or  provide  evidence  to  the
    Secretary of State, acknowledged  (in  the  context  of  a  Section  10
    decision) the duty to provide the migrant concerned with "at least  the
    gist of the evidence" upon which the removal decision is made.


79) We do not identify in the submissions of Mr Kovats any suggestion  that
    the repercussions of the Secretary of State's decision  were,  for  the
    Applicant, anything other than grave.  In brief compass, this  decision
    effectively branded the Applicant a fraudster, a person who had  abused
    immigration laws and control; required him to leave the United Kingdom,
    where he had been established for several years; blighted his  academic
    and  career  prospects;  rendered  null   the   substantial   financial
    investment which he had made in his studies in the United Kingdom;  and
    blacklisted him with regard to future immigration decisions.


80)  We  recognise  that  in  theory  the   Applicant   could   have   made
    representations to the Secretary of State after  communication  of  the
    impugned decision.  However, it is far from clear that the Secretary of
    State would have been either willing or,  more  fundamentally,  legally
    empowered  to  revoke  the  decision.    Furthermore,  there   is   the
    inescapable and prosaic reality highlighted by Simon Brown LJ  in  R  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department,  ex  parte  Hickey  (No  2)
    [1995] 1 WLR 734, at 744, echoed by Hooper LJ  in  SP  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1750, at [58],  that  the
    exercise of post-decision representations, in the real world, may  well
    be an arid one. This had already  been  expressly  recognised  by  Lord
    Mustill (supra). This has a clear resonance in the present case,  given
    that the Secretary of State's agents were implacably and, in our  view,
    irrevocably committed to the view  that  the  Applicant  had  practised
    deception.


81) The riposte of Mr Kovats to this ground highlighted the  large  numbers
    of students perceived to have  engaged  in  deception  and  the  UKVI's
    interaction with persons and agencies other than  the  Applicant  -  in
    particular ETS and Blakehall College.  Mr  Kovats'  written  submission
    contains the following passage:


         "To  have  approached  all  students  individually  to  seek  their
         comments and representations before approaching the colleges  would
         have caused inordinate delay and inordinate administrative  burden,
         further prejudicing effective immigration control."
    This submission addresses the wrong target. The Applicant's case is not
    that he should have been given the opportunity  to  make  informed  and
    considered representations in advance of the August  2014  decision  of
    the college to withdraw him from his course.  Rather, the sole focus of
    the  Applicant's  challenge  is  the   decision   impugned   in   these
    proceedings, which was made on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  some
    four months later. Furthermore, we consider  that  procedural  fairness
    cannot be sacrificed on the altar of Government volume. The main  focus
    of Mr Kovats' closing submission was the  Blakehall  College  decision.
    His only submission relating to the Secretary of  State's  decision  is
    that the Applicant  could  have  made  representations  on  that  front
    between August and December 2014.

82) It is common case that during a period of some  four  months  preceding
    the impugned decision of the Secretary  of  State,  the  Applicant  was
    aware of the allegation that  he  had  procured  his  English  Language
    qualification by deception.  Second, he was aware that the Secretary of
    State was the source of this allegation.   Third,  he  knew  that  this
    allegation was the reason for the withdrawal action taken  against  him
    by the college where he was studying.  Fourth,  he  knew  that  further
    action on behalf of the Secretary of State could follow.   True  it  is
    that he was not aware of the details of the case against him.  However,
    the contours and substance of the case which  he  had  to  answer  were
    known to him. The gist was apparent. He  was,  therefore,  equipped  to
    make representations in his defence.  He was in no  way  disabled  from
    making his case.  However, his position  throughout  the  period  under
    scrutiny was one of inertia.

83) As Lord Mustill stated, memorably, what fairness demands in  any  given
    case is dependent upon the particular context.  Based on  the  analysis
    in [79] above, we conclude that the impugned decision was  procedurally
    fair.  The Applicant had a very clear target at  which  he  could  aim,
    mustering all his ammunition and resources, during a reasonable  period
    of time.   He  did  not  do  so.   He  cannot  complain  of  procedural
    unfairness in consequence.


84) We have emphasised in (65) above the  fundamental  distinction  between
    substantive unfairness and procedural unfairness. We consider that  our
    conclusion that the impugned decision was procedurally  fair  does  not
    undermine our anterior conclusion  that  there  was  a  breach  of  the
    Wednesbury principle.


VIII  DELAY


85) Rule 28(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  as
    amended, provides:


         "Subject to paragraph (3), an application under paragraph (1)  must
         be made promptly  and,  unless  any  other  enactment  specifies  a
         shorter time limit, must be sent or delivered to the Upper Tribunal
         so that it is received no later than 3 months after the date of the
         decision  [,  action  or  omission]  1  to  which  the  application
         relates."
    As noted in the submissions of Mr Kovats, this  Rule  differs  slightly
    from its equivalent in the High Court regime, CPR 52.5.  Neither  party
    submitted, correctly in our estimation that anything of substance turns
    on this difference.  Common to both regimes is the power to extend this
    time limit: as regards the Upper  Tribunal,  see  Rule  5(3)(a).   This
    power must be exercised in accordance  with  the  overriding  objective
    enshrined in Rule 2, by virtue of  Rule  2  (3).   We  understand  this
    analysis to be uncontroversial.


86) The two key dates are 18 December 2014, when the impugned  decision  of
    the Secretary of State was  made  and  20  February  2015,  when  these
    proceedings were initiated (followed by an amended claim form dated  16
    March 2015).  In the order granting permission to  apply  for  judicial
    review, the issue of delay was not addressed, notwithstanding  that  it
    had been raised in the  Secretary  of  State's  pleading.   Substantial
    quantities of water have flowed under the notional bridge  since  these
    early litigation events.


87) We reject unreservedly Mr  Kovats'  central  submission  on  the  delay
    issue, namely that the real target of the Applicant's challenge is  the
    Blakehall College withdrawal decision of August 2014.  This  submission
    effectively  airbrushes  the  factual  and  juridical  reality  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision some four  months  later  and  the  legal
    effects and consequences thereof.  Secondly, the Secretary  of  State's
    submissions do not engage with the evidence bearing on and  surrounding
    the impugned decision  and  the  timing  of  the  registration  of  the
    challenge thereto.  Thirdly, Mr Kovats' submission ignores the  reality
    that the detailed involvement of the Secretary of State's officials  in
    the college's withdrawal decision of August 2014 did not  emerge  until
    an advanced stage of these proceedings, following the  industrious  and
    diligent endeavours of the Applicant's solicitors.

88) Given our rejection of the centrepiece  of  Mr  Kovats'  argument,  the
    issue of delay falls away.  There was no alternative submission that by
    reason of the elapse of  some  two  months  between  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision and the lodgement of the Applicant's  challenge  these
    proceedings were not initiated "promptly".  We make clear that we would
    have rejected such argument in any event.  There are no indications  of
    indolent inactivity during this period.  Nor is there any suggestion of
    a misuse of this Tribunal's process.  Had it been necessary to do so we
    would also have  taken  into  account  the  (apparently)  unprecedented
    nature of the Secretary of State's  recourse  to  the  decision  making
    route of paragraph 323A(a)(ii)(2) of the Rules; the resulting  features
    of this challenge which distinguish it from all others in this Tribunal
    to date;  the educative function and value  of  judicial  review;   the
    legal merits of the Applicant's challenge; the gravity of the stigma of
    cheating, which the Applicant cannot legally challenge by any mechanism
    other than these proceedings; and, finally, the illumination which this
    decision may provide in some  of  the  large  numbers  of  other  cases
    pending in the two tiers of this Chamber, the Administrative Court  and
    the Court of Appeal.

IX    A Footnote

89) We would observe that the forum of an in-country statutory appeal would
    be clearly superior to the hybrid model adopted  in  these  proceedings
    for the full exploration and consideration of all the evidence and,  in
    particular, the finding of whether the Applicant engaged  in  deception
    as alleged.  This  sounds  on  our  conclusion  concerning  conspicuous
    substantive unfairness. The suitability of an out-of-country appeal  in
    this sphere of litigation - and, indeed, in others - has  not  yet  (to
    our knowledge) been fully tested at either tier and,  thus,  remains  a
    moot question. In this context, we draw attention to what this Tribunal
    stated in SM and Qadir, at [104 ]:

         "We are conscious that some future appeals may be of  the  'out  of
         country' species.  It is our understanding that neither the FtT nor
         this Tribunal has experience of an out of country  appeal  of  this
         kind, whether  through  the  medium  of  video  link  or  Skype  or
         otherwise.  The question of whether mechanisms  of  this  kind  are
         satisfactory and, in particular, the legal question of whether they
         provide an appellant with a  fair  hearing  will  depend  upon  the
         particular context and circumstances of the individual case.  This,
         predictably,  is  an  issue  which  may  require  future   judicial
         determination".

    The Upper Tribunal now has experience of a broad range  of  "ETS/TOEIC"
    hearings:  error  of  law  hearings,  remaking  hearings,  conventional
    judicial review hearings and the hybrid judicial review  model  adopted
    in this case.  In SM and Qadir this Tribunal observed, at [102]:

         "Furthermore, the hearing of these appeals has demonstrated  beyond
         peradventure that judicial review  is  an  entirely  unsatisfactory
         litigation vehicle for the determination of disputes of  this  kind
         ...".

    The words "of this kind" refer to cases such as SM and Qadir and MA  in
    which the facts  relating  to  the  relevant  events  are  of  critical
    importance and,  in  consequence,  the  evidence  requires  penetrating
    examination.


90)  Experience has demonstrated that in such cases  detailed  scrutiny  of
    the demeanour and general presentation of parties and  witnesses  is  a
    highly important factor. So too is close quarters assessment of how the
    proceedings are being conducted - for example, unscheduled requests for
    the production of further documents, the response thereto, the  conduct
    of all present in the courtroom, the taking of further instructions  in
    the heat of  battle  and  related  matters.  These  examples  could  be
    multiplied. I have found the mechanism of evidence by video link to  be
    quite unsatisfactory in other contexts, both civil and criminal. It  is
    not clear whether the aforementioned essential judicial exercises could
    be conducted satisfactorily in an out of country appeal.   Furthermore,
    there would be a loss of judicial control and supervision of events  in
    the distant, remote location, with associated potential for  misuse  of
    the judicial process. The conventional  video  link  bail  hearing,  at
    which the subject is virtually present but making little or  no  active
    contribution, is to be contrasted.

91)  For the avoidance of any doubt, we add that with the exception of  the
    reception of limited oral evidence, the present challenge  was  of  the
    classic judicial review variety and proved to be ideally suited to this
    species of legal challenge - without prejudice to (a) our  comments  in
    Gazi concerning the overall adequacy of this remedy in  cases  of  this
    genre and (b) the further observation that the crucial issue of whether
    the Applicant engaged in deception in procuring his TOEIC  certificates
    remains unresolved judicially.

92) The promulgation of this judgment was initially scheduled  to  coincide
    with those in the related cases of MA  and  Saha.   However,  this  was
    frustrated by certain wholly unsatisfactory post-hearing  developments,
    attributable to the Secretary of State's conduct of the proceedings  in
    Saha.  Some further delay was caused by the Tribunal's decision to seek
    further written submissions from the parties on discrete  issues.   The
    Applicant's representatives duly responded, having sought,  and  having
    been granted, a brief extension of time.  On behalf of the Secretary of
    State, what emerged was a delayed response  to  the  Tribunal's  formal
    Notice which was neither preceded  nor  accompanied  by  a  request  to
    extend time.  By this response the Secretary of State  also  sought  to
    adduce new evidence, both within and outwith  the  submission,  without
    having applied for this facility: see Appendix 3.  We regret to observe
    that these developments  were  symptomatic  of  the  conduct  of  these
    conjoined cases on behalf of the Secretary of State.


X     OMNIBUS CONCLUSION AND RELIEF

93) On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated  above,  the  Applicant's
    challenge succeeds in the following terms:


      a) The Secretary of State's decision maker failed  to  appreciate  the
         multiplicity  of  decision  making   routes   available   and,   in
         consequence, failed to lawfully  exercise  the  discretion  thereby
         engaged by disregarding material considerations.


      b) The Secretary of State's decision maker failed to take into account
         the relevant policy guidance.


      c) The Secretary of State's  decision-maker  failed  unjustifiably  to
         give effect to the relevant policy guidance.


      d)  The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  infringes  the   Wednesbury
         principle on account of conspicuous unfairness.



FOR THE REASONS SET OUT ABOVE and UPON THE RESPONDENT HAVING AGREED:

 i) that if the Applicant makes a further application for leave  to  remain
    by 17 February 2017, the Respondent shall  treat  that  application  as
    having been made at a time when the Applicant had leave  to  remain  in
    the UK;

ii) should the Respondent refuse that  further  application,  on  the  sole
    ground that the Applicant obtained his 2012 TOEIC  by  deception,  then
    that will not be taken into  account  in  relation  to  the  sponsoring
    university's refusal rate for the purposes of the  Tier  4  sponsorship
    requirements; and


iii) the Respondent shall moreover not refuse any future application by  the
    Applicant for leave to remain in the UK  by  reason  only  of  his  not
    having had leave to remain between 21 February  2015  and  17  February
    2017



IT IS ORDERED THAT


 1. The Respondent's decision of 18 December 2014 is quashed.

 2. Permission to appeal is refused, as the  Respondent's  grounds  do  not
    raise an arguable case of material  error  of  law  in  the  Tribunal's
    judgment.

 3. The Respondent's application for  the  reception  of  further  evidence
    lodged some four months following the  completion  of  the  hearing  is
    refused [see Appendix 3].


 4. The Respondent shall pay the Applicant's  costs,  to  be  subjected  to
    detailed assessment if not agreed.

 5. Within 14 days of receipt of an estimate of the Applicant's costs,  and
    subject to having liberty to apply to the Upper Tribunal within that 14
    day period, the Defendant shall pay 60% of  the  sum  plus  VAT  on  an
    interim basis without prejudice to the outcome of  detailed  assessment
    proceedings or settlement.

 6. There shall be detailed assessment of the Applicant's  publicly  funded
    costs.

 7. Liberty to apply.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date:  21 December 2016

                                 APPENDICES


                          APPENDIX 1: Ruling 04/08/16


 1) We shall deal with these two interlocutory  matters  in  the  following
    way.  First, there is an application on behalf  of  the  Respondent  to
    adduce further evidence.  The further evidence  takes  the  form  of  a
    second witness statement of one of the Respondent's deponents, Mr James
    Turner.  It is represented to the Tribunal by Mr Kovats  QC  that  this
    further evidence is designed to establish as a fact that Mr  Mohibullah
    has previously attended a number of educational establishments    which
    have been the subject of, inter alia, licence  revocation.   We  refuse
    this application for the following reasons.

 2) First of all, if this evidence had been relevant it would have  had  to
    form part of the Secretary of State's response, ideally  initially  but
    at the latest during the several subsequent  phases  of  these  heavily
    case managed proceedings in the discharge of the Secretary  of  State's
    duty of candour. Why it did not do so is not explained,  adequately  or
    at all. Second there is absolutely no evidence before us that this  new
    evidence was taken into account by the decision maker.  Third this  new
    evidence has not been put to the Applicant Mr Mohibullah. We could,  of
    course,  devise  a  mechanism  for  dealing  with  this  problem.   The
    difficulty with that is that  the  disruption  and  delay  which  would
    inevitably result in these exhaustively orchestrated and  now  somewhat
    elderly  proceedings,  involving  three  conjoined  cases,   would   be
    disproportionate and inimical to the overriding  objective.   For  this
    combination of reasons we refuse the application.

 3) Second, we rule on the Respondent's objection to the witness  statement
    of Ms Patel.  This witness statement is dated  26  July  2016  and  was
    served in advance of the hearing.  She is a paralegal in  the  firm  of
    solicitors representing  the  Applicant  Mr  Mohibullah.   Her  witness
    statement contains certain averments relating to the layout of  a  room
    in premises which are of relevance to these proceedings. Objection  has
    been taken on the ground that this purports to be expert evidence  and,
    secondly, has not been adduced in accordance with the  requirements  of
    evidence of that category.

 4) We acknowledge firstly that the issue to which the witness statement is
    addressed is a relevant issue in  the  proceedings.   Furthermore,  the
    author of the witness statement does  not  have  the  expertise  of  an
    architect or engineer.  However,  evidence  of  this  species,  in  our
    judgment, does not necessarily require expertise of this kind  and  the
    main question from our perspective will be the weight to be attached to
    it.   We  take  into  account  further  that  these  are   public   law
    proceedings, there is no prejudice to the Respondent and no  suggestion
    of inappropriate timing, ambush or being taken by surprise.

 5) We shall admit this evidence and, in due course, shall form a  view  on
    the weight, if any, which it merits.

                         APPENDIX 2: Ruling 05/08/16



   1) There has been much pre-trial activity in these combined  proceedings.
      Today's application has as its main focus the issue of  disclosure  of
      documents  from  both  the  Secretary  of  State  and  also  ETS,  the
      interested party whose  activities  form  an  important  part  of  the
      factual framework. At this stage of the combined  hearing,  namely  at
      the beginning of the hearing of  the  two  conjoined  judicial  review
      applications, we are required to rule on a discrete issue relating  to
      the reception of oral evidence.

   2) The origins of this issue can be traced to the  order  of  Mr  Justice
      Green in the High Court dated 21 March 2016.   His  Lordship  ordered,
      inter alia, in paragraph 3 that the  parties  shall  prepare  for  the
      final hearing on the basis that there will be oral evidence and cross-
      examination of the Applicant, Mr Gardner,  Roxanna  Cram  and  Bernard
      Evans, while it should be a matter for the trial  Judge  whether  such
      oral evidence is required.

   3) This wise and pragmatic order has had the consequence that we are in a
      position to deal with the question of the reception of  oral  evidence
      without any unwelcome obstruction of or delay in  the  transaction  of
      this hearing.

   4) The reception of oral evidence in judicial  review  is  undoubtedly  a
      comparatively  unusual  occurrence,  just  as   an   application   for
      permission to cross-examine any party or witness.  These are, however,
      unusual proceedings.  Furthermore, as a matter of general principle it
      may be said that in the contemporary  world  of  judicial  review  the
      reception of oral evidence and the phenomenon of cross-examination are
      likely to be approached a little more broadly and flexibly  than  they
      would have been during a previous era.

   5)  Hence when it is stated by the Divisional Court in the case of Harris
      (at pages 596 to 597) that the principles for the  reception  of  oral
      evidence in judicial review are  "the  following"  (and  the  relevant
      passage then ensues) we incline to construe this passage as rehearsing
      applicable principles  which  were  not  necessarily  intended  to  be
      exhaustive and indeed do not have that effect.

   6) We have considered the written submission of Mr Armstrong on behalf of
      the applicant Mohammad Mohibullah  and  the  helpful  response  of  Mr
      Kovats on behalf  of  the  Respondent.   These  challenges  have  been
      organic.  The organic dimension of these proceedings may  not  yet  be
      exhausted and we are particularly conscious that this  is  the  second
      set of combined hearings in this jurisdiction which are likely to have
      an impact on a substantial quantity of other cases.

   7) Adopting this approach and bearing in mind that without the aid  of  a
      crystal ball we cannot hope to predict precisely the course which  the
      admission of oral evidence is likely to take, we propose to accede  to
      the application.  We shall not do so in rigid terms. Any oral evidence
      adduced will be received de bene esse.  We shall receive the  evidence
      and in the usual way shall then decide, following such argument as may
      be advanced, what weight should properly and rationally be attached to
      it.

   8) We must make abundantly clear that as in previous instances where oral
      evidence has been adduced in the forum of judicial review it will have
      a very narrow focus.  Witnesses will not be giving evidence  at  large
      and in an open-ended manner and we shall identify clearly  in  advance
      of each witness testifying the proposed scope of  any  examination-in-
      chief.







                                                           APPENDIX 3




                            Notice to the Parties




 1) In apparent and purported response to the Tribunal's Directions dated
    12/10/16 [appended below], the Secretary of State's representative has
    filed a written submission signed by counsel.

 2) The further submission has been served out of time. It is neither
    preceded by the Tribunal's permission to extend time nor accompanied by
    an application to extend time.

 3) At [5] - [9] and [11] - [12] (second sentence) counsel purport to give
    evidence about certain matters.

 4) In addition to [3], the further submission is accompanied by new
    documentary evidence which was not invited or directed by the Tribunal,
    is not the subject of an application for permission to adduce fresh
    evidence** and has not been addressed in inter - partes adversarial
    argument.

 5) The further submission does not address issues 1(b), 3 5 or 6 in the
    Tribunal's Directions.

 6) The Tribunal's embargoed judgment will be transmitted to the parties'
    representatives on 24/11/16, on the usual strict terms.

 7) The parties' representatives will communicate any spelling errors,
    misquotes (etc) to the Tribunal by 16.00 on 28/11/16 at latest.

 8) The case will be listed for handing down of judgment and determination
    of costs, permission to appeal and any other ancillary issue at 09.45
    on 01/12/16.


    ** This was re-emphasised by the Tribunal during the embargoed judgment
    phase of communications. This stimulated an application by the
    Respondent to have new evidence admitted, almost four months post-
    hearing. At the hand down stage, Mr Thomann confirmed that he was
    pursuing this application "formally. Refusing the application, the
    Tribunal observed that it was as a minimum highly ambitious and, given
    its timing, was bound to fail.









                        APPENDED: DIRECTIONS 12/10/16




The parties are invited to provide further submissions, in writing and by
28 October 2016, addressing the following issues:



 1) The applicability of:

      a)  the Home Office guidance "Curtailment of  Leave"  (valid  from  31
         July 2014); and

      b) Chapter 50 of the Home Office Enforcement Instructions and Guidance
         (Section 10 - "Non EEA" especially) to the impugned decision of the
         Secretary of State dated 18 December 2014.

 2) The factual question of whether the Secretary of State's decision maker
    took into account either (or both) of the above instruments,  including
    the evidence bearing on this discrete issue.

 3) The legal consequences which would flow from a finding by the  Tribunal
    that the Secretary of  State's  decision  maker  failed  to  take  into
    account either (or both) of the above instruments.

 4) The factual question of whether the Secretary of State's decision maker
    was aware of, and took into  account,  the  multiplicity  of  decision-
    making routes available in the case of the Applicant.

 5) The legal consequences which would flow from a finding by the  Tribunal
    that the Secretary of  State's  decision  maker  failed  to  take  into
    account the multiplicity of decision-making routes available.

 6) Whether it is contended on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  the
    basic principles of procedural fairness did not apply to  the  impugned
    decision and the preceding decision-making process of the Secretary  of
    State, together with any other issue, factual  or  legal,  said  to  be
    directly related thereto.



                                                   Dated: 12 October 2016









       Signed:
                    The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                    President of the Upper Tribunal
                    Immigration and Asylum Chamber


