
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers - Reg.15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 00560 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2015                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        (1) George Oluwasheun Ayinde
                            (2) Sonthaya Thinjom
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Secretary of State:     Ms J. Smyth, instructed by the Government
                        Legal Department
For the first Respondent:  Mr Stephen Knafler QC and Ms G. Mellon
                        instructed by Irving & Co.
For the second Respondent: Mr Stephen Knafler QC and Ms A. Benfield
                        instructed by Camden Community Law Centre


      i) The deprivation of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of  the
         rights  attaching  to  the  status  of  European   Union   citizens
         identified in the decision in  Zambrano  [2011]  EUECJ  C-34/09  is
         limited to safeguarding a British citizen's EU rights as defined in
         Article 20.

     ii) The provisions of reg. 15A of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 as amended apply when the effect of  removal
         of the carer of a British citizen renders the  British  citizen  no
         longer able to reside in the  United  Kingdom  or  in  another  EEA
         state.  This requires the carer to establish as  a  fact  that  the
         British citizen will be forced to leave the territory of the Union.



    iii) The requirement is not met by an assumption that the  citizen  will
         leave and does not involve a consideration of whether it  would  be
         reasonable for the carer to leave the United Kingdom.  A comparison
         of the  British  citizen's  standard  of  living  or  care  if  the
         appellant remains or departs is material only  in  the  context  of
         whether the British citizen will leave the United Kingdom.

     iv) The Tribunal is required to  examine  critically  a  claim  that  a
         British citizen will leave the Union if the benefits  he  currently
         receives by remaining in the United  Kingdom  are  unlikely  to  be
         matched in the country in which he claims  he  will  be  forced  to
         settle.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The Secretary of State appeals against two decisions of the First-tier
      Tribunal.  Each appeal raises a similar  issue.   In  each  case,  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal against the  decision  of
      the respondent to refuse to issue them  with  a  derivative  residence
      card.  In  doing  so  the  Judge  purported  to  apply  the  principle
      developed by the Court of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  in  Ruiz
      Zambrano (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-34/09  as  incorporated
      into domestic United Kingdom law by the insertion of regs. 15A and 18A
      into the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 1. For the sake of continuity Mr Ayinde and Ms Thinjom will be referred to
    as the appellants as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The EEA Regulations as they took effect from 8 November 2012 provided:

         "15A.    Derivative right of residence

                (1)    A person ('P') who is not an exempt  person  and  who
                    satisfies the criteria in paragraph ...(4A)...  of  this
                    regulation is entitled to a derivative right  to  reside
                    in the United Kingdom for as long  as  P  satisfies  the
                    relevant criteria.

                [Neither Mr Ayinde nor Ms Thinjom is an exempt person.]

                (4A)   P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

                    i. he is the primary carer of a  British  citizen  ('the
                        relevant British citizen')

                    ii.    the relevant British citizen is residing  in  the
                        United Kingdom; and

                    iii.   the relevant British citizen would be  unable  to
                        reside in the UK or in another EEA state if P  were
                        required to leave.  [My underlining]

                (7)    P is to be regarded as a 'primary carer'  of  another
                    person if -

                    (a)    P is a direct relative or  a  legal  guardian  of
                        that person; and

                    (b)    P -

                        (i)    is the person who has primary responsibility
                             for that person's care...

                (8)    P will not be regarded as having responsibility for a
                    person's care for the purpose of paragraph  (7)  on  the
                    sole basis of  a  financial  contribution  towards  that
                    person's care."

 3. Regulation 18A of the 2006 EEA Regulations requires  the  Secretary  of
    State to issue a person with a derivative residence card on application
    and production of a valid passport and proof that the applicant  has  a
    derivative right of residence under reg. 15A of the 2006 Regulations.

 4. The European Operational Policy Team provided  guidance  to  UK  Border
    Agency staff  on  considering  applications  from  persons  claiming  a
    derivative card in a document entitled 'Derivative Rights of  Residence
    - Ruiz Zambrano cases' of  12th December 2012 (Issue number:  21/2012).
    It included the following passage:

     Would the British citizen be forced to leave the  EEA  if  the  primary
         carer was forced to leave?
     24. Even where there is evidence of primary and shared  responsibility,
         evidence to show why the British citizen would be forced  to  leave
         the EEA (for example because they cannot access alternative care in
         the UK) is still required.
     25. If there is another person in the UK who can care for  the  British
         citizen, then a derivative residence card must be  refused  on  the
         basis that such a refusal would not result in the  British  citizen
         being forced to leave the EEA.
     26. Therefore caseworkers must assess whether there is  another  direct
         relative or legal guardian in the UK who can care for  the  British
         citizen  and,  in  the  case  of  a  child,  who  has  already  had
         established contact. In making this assessment, the burden of proof
         remains on the applicant and the standard of proof is  the  balance
         of probabilities. This means  the  onus  is  on  the  applicant  to
         demonstrate that their removal would force the British  citizen  to
         leave the EEA. If there is no information to demonstrate this, then
         caseworkers may wish to make further enquiries with  the  applicant
         as to the status or whereabouts of the other parent in the case  of
         a child, or alternative care provisions in the case  of  a  British
         citizen adult.
     27. Examples of when it  may  be  appropriate  to  issue  a  derivative
         residence card to a primary carer would be where:
         there are no other direct relatives or legal guardians to care  for
         the British   citizen; or
         there is another direct relative or legal guardian  in  the  UK  to
         care for the  British citizen but there are reasons why this  carer
         is not suitable; or
         in the case of an adult British citizen, there are  no  alternative
         care provisions   available in the UK.

 5. Originally, this appeal contained three linked cases.  The third appeal
    concerned a claimant, a citizen of Algeria, the  mother  of  a  British
    citizen born 4 January 2012, who sought leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom with her son and the child's father.   Significantly,  although
    this was also a claim by a foreign national seeking to  remain  as  the
    carer of a Union citizen, the application was made pursuant to  Article
    8 of the ECHR and in pursuit of a protected private and family life and
    not under the EEA Regulations.   It  was,  therefore,  of  a  radically
    different character from the two appeals now before me.  At the  outset
    of these appeals, the Secretary  of  State  offered  to  make  a  fresh
    decision and the parties in the third appeal settled the appeal  before
    me in the form of an order to which I gave my consent.

 6. Neither appellant has a right to remain under the Immigration Rules  as
    they fail to meet the requirements of the Rules for leave to remain  in
    any capacity.  Both are the primary carers of Union citizens.   In  the
    case of Mr Ayinde as the  son  of  Mrs  Animashaun  who  is  a  British
    citizen; in the case of Ms Thinjom, as the wife of Mr Stevens,  also  a
    British national. Having rejected  the  application  for  a  derivative
    residence card, the Secretary of State informed each claimant that  the
    decision did not require them to leave the United Kingdom  and  invited
    each claimant to make  a  claim  under  Article  8  with  reference  to
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE if they wished to do so.  In the  case
    of Ms Thinjom, the grounds of appeal to the Tribunal did not  raise  an
    Article 8 claim.    In the case of Mr Ayinde, the grounds of appeal  to
    the Tribunal raised a formulaic assertion  (amongst  others)  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was in breach of Article 8 but  there  is
    no suggestion this was pursued before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Judge made no mention of a viable Article 8 claim and there is no cross-
    challenge before the Upper Tribunal that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    should have determined such a claim.  Hence, neither has an  Article  8
    claim before the Upper Tribunal.

The compass of the appeals

 7. Mr Knafler asserts that their actions as carers  render  them  able  to
    benefit from the principle in Zambrano which, he submits, enables  non-
    nationals who are the primary carers of dependent British citizens  the
    right to reside and to work on the basis that,  without  their  support
    and their earnings it must be assumed that the  British  citizen  would
    ultimately have to leave the  EU  with  their  carers.   The  words  in
    italics  are  taken  from  the  skeleton  argument  advanced  by   both
    appellants.

 8. Likewise, he submits, the Courts have recognised that  the  concept  of
    European citizenship entails more then a bare right  of  residence  and
    have acknowledged that a  'serious  impairment'  of  the  EU  citizen's
    standard or quality of life, resulting from the carer having  to  leave
    the EU, could in  practice  compel  the  EU  citizen  to  follow.   The
    Zambrano threshold is therefore not whether it would be impossible  for
    the citizen to remain in the United Kingdom (because the Union  citizen
    enjoys a right of  residence)  but  rather  to  extract  an  underlying
    principle from Zambrano that, without the care of their  primary  carer
    on whom they are dependent, the  Union  citizen's  right  of  residence
    would be theoretical  and  ineffective  due  to  the  extent  of  their
    dependence on their primary carer.  Accordingly, he says, the 'genuine'
    enjoyment of the right of residence must entail a  real  and  practical
    right  of  enjoyment  and  not  one  which  is  merely  theoretical  or
    illusionary.  If the effect of this is to require the carer to  remain,
    then in light of Zambrano,  the  carer  is  entitled  to  a  derivative
    residence card.

 9. The Secretary of State disputes this.  In a nutshell, the Secretary  of
    State's position is that the fundamental flaw in the  appellants'  case
    is obvious from the case-law of  the  Court  of  Justice  and  domestic
    courts which make it clear beyond doubt  that  the  Zambrano  principle
    only applies when a Union citizen will, as a matter of fact, be  forced
    to leave the Union.  The principle does not apply where that is not the
    case, even if the quality  of  life  of  the  Union  citizen  would  be
    substantially  diminished  as  the  result  of  the   primary   carer's
    departure.  As there was, in neither case, sufficient  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal to justify a finding that the  British  citizen
    would be forced to leave the Union as the  result  of  the  refusal  to
    grant a residence card, both appeals were bound to fail.  It should  be
    noted that the expression used in reg. 15A (4A) is 'unable'  to  reside
    in the United Kingdom, that is, 'forced' to leave.

George Ayinde

10. Mr Ayinde was born on 11 June 1973. He is now aged 41.  He is a citizen
    of Nigeria.  He first entered the United Kingdom on  14  February  2001
    and claimed asylum.  His asylum  claim  was  refused  and  he  did  not
    exercise a right of appeal against that decision.  On 3  November  2004
    he applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  This was refused on 6 August  2007  and  the  appeal  which  he
    commenced, without having a right to do so, was eventually concluded on
    20 October 2010. In 2011 he made two applications for leave  to  remain
    as a carer of a British citizen.  In doing so, he sought to  apply  the
    Zambrano principle.  These applications were refused in  November  2011
    and March 2012 respectively.  Undeterred, on 19 July 2012, he sought  a
    derivative residence card under reg. 18A of the 2006  EEA  regulations.
    This provision was inserted into the rules with  effect  from  16  July
    2012.

11. The Secretary of State refused the application on the  basis  that  the
    evidence provided did not establish that the  appellant's  mother  (who
    was born on 18 August 1948 and was then aged 65  and  whose  carer  the
    appellant claimed to be) could not call upon the services of others for
    her daily needs, including those provided by the  NHS.   She  had  been
    admitted as a hospital in-patient on five occasions, the last being  in
    2008.  The Secretary of State contended that  adequate  assistance  was
    provided for her  care,  including  access  to  social  services.   She
    concluded, therefore, that the appellant had failed to demonstrate that
    his mother would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom if  he  were
    required to leave.

12. The evidence provided by Mr Ayinde  is  uncontroversial,  although  the
    conclusions that a Tribunal can properly draw  from  it  is  not.   The
    evidence itself is set out in paragraph 8 of the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Blandy:

         "The appellant confirmed that his mother wanted to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom.  She is naturalised as a British  citizen.   If  he
         had to leave he did not know what she would do.  She was scared  of
         returning to Nigeria.  The health facilities in Nigeria  could  not
         meet her requirements.  Her children in Nigeria could  not  support
         her there.  In this country she had her house that she  liked,  was
         able to go to church  every  week,  with  his  assistance  and  had
         friends.  He was able to provide a good level of care for her.   In
         Nigeria he would not be able to  afford  the  medication  that  she
         needs.  She had her tumour monitored in this country.  They  needed
         to check it for re-growth.  She also had a problem with her thyroid
         which was regularly monitored.  His mother needed daily care  which
         could not be given if he had to leave."

    In addition, the appellant gave evidence that his mother suffered  from
    paranoid schizophrenia, type II diabetes, was partially sighted and was
    suffering the residual effects from a brain tumour which was excised in
    February 2009.  She was on a  variety  of  medications.   He  had  been
    living with her since November 2008, performing the  routine  tasks  of
    assisting to bathe her, preparing food and doing the shopping.  He  was
    responsible for ensuring that the bills were paid.  She  was  not  then
    receiving  any  assistance  from   social   services.    It   was   his
    understanding that if he did not perform these tasks she was  going  to
    have to go into a care home as a permanent resident.  She did not  wish
    to do that.

13. Judge Blandy's reaction to this material was to  acknowledge  that  the
    Secretary of State had adopted the methodology of regs. 15A and 18A and
    had applied the very words of the policy document, cited in paragraph 3
    above, concerning derived rights  of  residence.   He  found  that  the
    appellant's mother did indeed suffer from a combination of physical and
    mental disabilities which prevented her from  having  the  capacity  to
    manage her own daily needs.  He accepted that  the  appellant's  mother
    relied on the appellant and that no care was provided by the NHS or the
    local authority.  He found [18] this situation was permanent and that:

         "...no other sources of care are available  save,  of  course,  the
         ordinary systems of  social  security  and  the  resources  of  the
         National Health Service in this country."

14. He referred to paragraph 27 of the policy note,  set  out  in  full  in
    paragraph 3 above, which gave examples  of  cases  where  it  might  be
    appropriate to issue a derivative residence card, one of which read:

         "in the case of an adult British  citizen,  [where]  there  are  no
         alternative care provisions available in the United Kingdom."

15. He then continued, in allowing the appeal:

         "I find that it is clear that this paragraph does  not  permit  the
         respondent to treat the agencies of the social services or the  NHS
         as potential alternative carers whose involvement would enable  the
         British citizen to remain in the UK.  Clearly every British citizen
         in this country is entitled to be cared for by  those  agencies  in
         the absence of any other available carer.  Paragraph 27  explicitly
         ignores those agencies as a potential alternative.  I find that  it
         therefore is not appropriate to argue, as the respondent did in the
         refusal letter, that if the  appellant  were  not  present  in  the
         United Kingdom to care for his mother she could procure  assistance
         from other sources with the help of Social Services.  I  find  that
         the appellant has been cared for by her son so competently  and  so
         well for so long that if he were forced to leave the United Kingdom
         then she would be left with no real alternative but to go with him.
          To rely on the intervention of the  social  services  or  the  NHS
         would not be a reasonable  alternative  for  her.   To  effectively
         force her to go with her son, I find, would indeed be  contrary  to
         the principles of the case of Zambrano."

Sonthaya Thinjom, now Mrs Stevens

16. Ms Thinjom is a national of Thailand.  She was born on 5 May  1967  and
    is now 48 years old.  On 18 July 2012, she  applied  for  a  derivative
    residence card as the primary carer of her husband Donald Stevens, born
    24 May 1930 and is now 85.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom in
    June 2012 in order to visit her sister, aunt and uncle.  Shortly after,
    Mr Stevens invited the appellant to join him on a cruise and the couple
    married on 13 August 2012.   Mrs  Stevens  stated  that,  in  the  year
    preceding her appeal (the determination of which was promulgated on  19
    August 2014), his health had deteriorated to the  extent  that  he  had
    become increasingly  reliant  upon  his  wife's  care.   They  live  in
    sheltered accommodation in Camden.  Mr Stevens is in receipt of pension
    and benefits.  Although he has two daughters, he does not see them.  He
    has an older sister who is seriously ill.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Samini described how Mr Stevens had had three 'mini strokes',  suffered
    from diabetes and hypertension and is in remission from cancer  of  the
    bladder.  Prior to his marriage, Mr Stevens had been paying for a carer
    who visited him twice a week for two hours  on  each  occasion.   Since
    then, he stated that his health had deteriorated to the extent that  he
    cannot now walk very far and his wife helps him with  bathing,  shaving
    cooking, shopping washing and cleaning.  His GP confirmed the level  of
    care provided by his wife.  Mr Stevens  explained  that  he  is  wholly
    dependent upon his wife for every aspect of his physical care and that,
    were she to leave, he would have to be taken into care in a residential
    home which he would not wish.

17. Judge Samini found the appellant and her husband to be credible and  to
    have provided an accurate description of  their  relationship  and  the
    nature and extent of the care provided to her husband by the appellant.
    She accepted the evidence of Mr Stevens'  deteriorating  condition  and
    the consequential increase in the care that is provided to him  by  his
    wife. She concluded:

         "[Mr Stevens] does need 24 hour support and having heard and having
         had the benefit of hearing the oral evidence of the  appellant  and
         [Mr Stevens] I accept that he does need  the  full  extent  of  the
         physical and emotional care that is now provided by  the  appellant
         towards [his] physical care.  I accept that if the  appellant  were
         forced to return to Thailand, [Mr Stevens] would have to be  looked
         after in a nursing  home,  which  is  an  option  that  he  clearly
         opposes."

18. Accordingly, the Judge found that the appellant was the  primary  carer
    of her husband.  Having referred to the decision in  Zambrano,  and  in
    particular, paragraph 42 with its reference to  Article  20  precluding
    national measures which have the effect of depriving  citizens  of  the
    Union of  the  'genuine  enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the  rights
    conferred by virtue of their status as  citizens  of  the  Union',  the
    judge concluded  that  the  direct  consequences  of  the  respondent's
    decision would be that the appellant's  husband  would  in  reality  be
    deprived of the ability to live in the United Kingdom.  She found  that
    this would not be a reasonable option, as Mr  Stevens  was  an  elderly
    gentleman who had spent the majority of his life in the United  Kingdom
    and had "explained that living in Thailand  at  his  age  would  be  an
    extremely difficult task and one which would not be possible for him at
    his age."  Approaching the case in  this  way,  the  Judge  allowed  Ms
    Thinjom's appeal under Article 15A of the EEA Regulations.

19. In reaching their decisions, both judges concluded that it would not be
    reasonable to require the respective appellants  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, see paragraphs 14 and 18 above.

20. The substance of the appellant's case is that it is illogical to draw a
    distinction between a Union citizen who would, as  a  matter  of  fact,
    leave ('forced to leave') the Union  but  is  permitted  to  remain  by
    operation of the Zambrano principle enabling his carer to remain in the
    United Kingdom and the Union citizen whose condition is  such  that  he
    cannot leave the Union but who cannot invoke his EU rights  to  prevent
    the departure of his carer.

21. At the heart of this  appeal  is  Article  20  of  the  Treaty  on  the
    Functioning of the European Union  ("TFEU").   Mr  Knafler  principally
    relies upon paragraph 1 which is in the following terms:

         "1.  Citizenship of the Union is hereby established.  Every  person
             holding the nationality of a Member State shall be  a  citizen
             of the Union. Citizenship of the Union shall be additional  to
             and not replace national citizenship."

The decision in Ruiz Zambrano (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-34/09  -
the Zambrano principle

22. It was this provision which acted as the catalyst for the  decision  of
    the Court of Justice in  Ruiz  Zambrano  in  which  the  Grand  Chamber
    confirmed that Article 20 TFEU confers the status  of  citizen  of  the
    Union on every person holding the nationality of a Member State.

23. Zambrano  concerned  the  denial  of  work  and  residence  permits  to
    Colombian national parents  of  whose  minor  children  became  Belgian
    nationals by reason of their birth in Belgium.  Mr  Zambrano  lost  his
    employment, which he had been undertaking  without  the  required  work
    permit. He was refused  unemployment  benefits.   He  sought  to  argue
    before the courts in Belgium that Articles  20  and  21  TFEU  required
    Belgium, as a Member State, to grant him, as an ascendant relative upon
    whom his minor EEA citizen children depended,  an  exemption  from  the
    obligation to hold a work permit.

24. The Grand Chamber, on a reference  from  the  Tribunal  du  travail  de
    Bruxelles, concluded as follows:

         "41. As the Court has stated  several  times,  citizenship  of  the
             European Union is intended to be  the  fundamental  status  of
             nationals of member states...

         42.  In those circumstances, Article  20  TFEU  precludes  national
             measures which have the effect of depriving  citizens  of  the
             Union of the genuine  enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  their
             rights conferred by virtue of their status as citizens of  the
             Union.

         43.  A refusal to grant a right of residence  to  a  third  country
             national with dependent minor children  in  the  member  state
             where those children are nationals  and  reside,  and  also  a
             refusal to grant such a person a  work  permit,  has  such  an
             effect.

         44.  It must be assumed  that  such  a  refusal  would  lead  to  a
             situation where those children, citizens of the  Union,  would
             have to leave the territory of the Union in order to accompany
             their parents.  Similarly, if a work permit were  not  granted
             to  such  a  person,  he  would  risk  not  having  sufficient
             resources to provide for himself and his family,  which  would
             result in the children, citizens of the Union, having to leave
             the territory of the Union.   In  those  circumstances,  those
             citizens of the  Union  would,  as  a  result,  be  unable  to
             exercise the substance of the  rights  conferred  on  them  by
             virtue of their status as citizens of the Union."

         45.  Accordingly, the answer to the question referred is  that  art
             20 TFEU is to be interpreted as meaning that  it  precludes  a
             member state from refusing a third country national upon which
             his minor children,  who  are  European  Union  citizens,  are
             dependent, a  right  of  residence  in  the  member  state  of
             residence and nationality of those children, and from refusing
             to grant a work permit to that third country national,  in  so
             far as such decisions deprive those children  of  the  genuine
             enjoyment of the substance of  the  rights  attaching  to  the
             status of European Union citizens."

The appellant's argument - the 'genuine enjoyment' test

25. Mr Knafler puts at the forefront of his argument  the  words  found  in
    paragraph 42 of Zambrano: 'the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance  of
    their rights conferred by virtue of their status  as  citizens  of  the
    Union'.  In Dereci & Ors (European citizenship) [2011]  EUECJ  C-256/11
    the Court of  Justice  re-stated  the  "genuine  enjoyment"  test.   In
    Dereci, it said:

         "66. It follows that the criterion relating to the  denial  of  the
             genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred  by
             virtue of European Union citizen status refers  to  situations
             in which the Union citizen has, in fact, to leave not only the
             territory of the Member State of which he is  a  national  but
             also the territory of the Union as a whole.

         67.  That criterion is specific in character inasmuch as it relates
             to situations in which, although  subordinate  legislation  on
             the right of residence  of  third  country  nationals  is  not
             applicable, a right of residence may  not,  exceptionally,  be
             refused to a third country national, who is a family member of
             a  Member  State  national,  as  the  effectiveness  of  Union
             citizenship  enjoyed  by  that  national  would  otherwise  be
             undermined."




    However, the Court went on to say:

         "68. Consequently, the mere fact that it might appear desirable  to
             a national of a Member State, for economic reasons or in order
             to keep his family together in the territory of the Union, for
             the members of his family who do not have the nationality of a
             Member State to be able to reside with him in the territory of
             the Union, is not sufficient in itself  to  support  the  view
             that the Union citizen will be forced to leave Union territory
             if such a right is not granted."

26. In Yoshikazu Iida v Stadt Ulm [2012] EUECJ C-40/11  (8  November  20120
    the Court of Justice stated:

         "71. Finally, there are also very  specific  situations  in  which,
             despite the fact that  the  secondary  law  on  the  right  of
             residence of third-country nationals does not  apply  and  the
             Union citizen concerned has not made use  of  his  freedom  of
             movement, a right of residence exceptionally  cannot,  without
             undermining the effectiveness of the  Union  citizenship  that
             citizen enjoys, be refused to a third-country national who  is
             a family member of his if, as a consequence of  refusal,  that
             citizen would be obliged in practice to leave the territory of
             the European Union altogether, thus denying  him  the  genuine
             enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred  by  virtue
             of his status (see Dereci and Others, paragraphs  67,  66  and
             64).

         72   The common element in the above situations is  that,  although
             they are governed by legislation which falls a  priori  within
             the competence of the Member States, namely legislation on the
             right of entry and stay of third-country nationals outside the
             scope of Directives 2003/109 and 2004/38, they none  the  less
             have an intrinsic connection with the freedom of movement of a
             Union citizen which prevents the right of entry and  residence
             from being refused to those nationals in the Member  State  of
             residence of that citizen, in order not to interfere with that
             freedom.

         76   In those circumstances, it cannot validly be argued  that  the
             decision at issue in the main proceedings is liable to deny Mr
             Iida's  spouse  or  daughter  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
             substance of the rights associated with their status of  Union
             citizen or to impede the exercise of their right to  move  and
             reside freely within the territory of the Member  States  (see
             McCarthy, paragraph 49)."

    However, the Court went on to say:

         77   It must be recalled that the purely hypothetical  prospect  of
             exercising the right of freedom of movement does not establish
             a sufficient connection with European Union law to justify the
             application  of  that  law's  provisions  (see  Case  C-299/95
             Kremzow [1997] ECR I-2629, paragraph 16).  The same applies to
             purely hypothetical prospects of that right being obstructed."

27. Less than a month later the Court of Justice re-visited these themes in
    O & S v Maahanmuuttovirasto v L [2012] EUECJ C-356/11 (6 December 2012)

         "47  The criterion of the denial of the genuine  enjoyment  of  the
             substance of the rights conferred by the status of citizen  of
             the Union referred, in the Ruiz Zambrano and Dereci and Others
             cases, to situations characterised by  the  circumstance  that
             the Union  citizen  had,  in  fact,  to  leave  not  only  the
             territory of the Member State of which he was a  national  but
             also that of the European Union as a whole.

         48   That criterion is therefore specific in character inasmuch  as
             it relates to  situations  in  which  a  right  of  residence,
             exceptionally, may not be refused to a third country  national
             who is a family member of a national of a Member State, as the
             effectiveness  of  the  Union  citizenship  enjoyed  by   that
             national would otherwise be  undermined  (Dereci  and  Others,
             paragraph 67).

         49   In the  present  case,  it  is  for  the  referring  court  to
             establish  whether  the  refusal  of  the   applications   for
             residence  permits  submitted   on   the   basis   of   family
             reunification in circumstances such as those at issue  in  the
             main proceedings entails, for the Union citizens concerned,  a
             denial of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights
             conferred by their status.

         56   ...As the  Advocate  General  observes  in  point  44  of  his
             Opinion, it is the  relationship  of  dependency  between  the
             Union citizen who is a minor and the  third  country  national
             who is  refused  a  right  of  residence  that  is  liable  to
             jeopardise the effectiveness of Union citizenship, since it is
             that dependency that would lead to  the  Union  citizen  being
             obliged, in fact, to leave  not  only  the  territory  of  the
             Member State of which he is a national but also  that  of  the
             European Union as a whole, as a consequence of such a  refusal
             (see Ruiz Zambrano, paragraphs  43  and  45,  and  Dereci  and
             Others, paragraphs 65 to 67)."

28. The cases cited above identify a  related  expression  of  the  genuine
    enjoyment test.  A common theme is the use of the words 'effective'  or
    'effectiveness'.  Thus, for example,  in  paragraph  48  of  O  &  S  v
    Maahanmuuttovirasto v L we  read:   'the  effectiveness  of  the  Union
    citizenship enjoyed by that national would otherwise be undermined.'

The Charter of the Fundamental Rights of the European Union

29. Mr Knafler  places  considerable  reliance  upon  the  Charter  of  the
    Fundamental Rights of the European Union which provides:

         "Article 1 - Human Dignity

         1.   Human  dignity  is  inviolable.   It  must  be  respected  and
             protected.

         Article 3 - Right to the integrity of the person

         1.   Everyone has the right to respect for his or her physical  and
             mental integrity.

         Article 7- Respect for family and private life

         1.   Everyone has the right to respect for his or her  private  and
             family life, home and communications.

         Article 21 - Non-discrimination

         1.   Any discrimination based on any  ground  such  as  sex,  race,
             colour, ethnic or social origin, genetic  features,  language,
             religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership
             of a national minority, property, birth,  disability,  age  or
             sexual orientation shall be prohibited.

         Article 25 - The rights of the elderly

         The Union recognises and respects the rights of the elderly to lead
         a life of dignity and independence and to participate in social and
         cultural life.

         Article 34 - Social security and social assistance.

         1.   The Union recognises and respects the  entitlement  to  social
             security benefits and social services providing protection  in
             cases  such  as  maternity,  illness,  industrial   accidents,
             dependency or old age, and in the case of loss of  employment,
             in accordance with the rules laid down by  Community  law  and
             national laws and practices.

         2.   Everyone residing and moving legally within the European Union
             is entitled to social security benefits and social  advantages
             in  accordance  with  Community  law  and  national  laws  and
             practices.

         3.   In order to combat social exclusion  and  poverty,  the  Union
             recognises and  respects  the  right  to  social  and  housing
             assistance so as to ensure a decent existence  for  all  those
             who lack sufficient resources, in accordance  with  the  rules
             laid down by Community law and national laws and practices."

30. Thus the appellants argue that the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance
    of their rights conferred by virtue of their status as citizens of  the
    Union includes the right to maintain their dignity which in  the  cases
    of persons like the appellants who suffer  the  effects  of  increasing
    age, infirmity or illness should be protected  by  permitting  them  to
    retain their home and the level of care  which  has  been  provided  by
    their carers.  Hence, Mr Knafler argues that  the  rights  of  a  Union
    citizen (and therefore the rights of a British citizen) as developed in
    Zambrano and the succeeding case law establish that  the  principle  of
    genuine enjoyment is independent of the requirement that an  individual
    is forced, as a matter of fact, to leave the territory of the Union.

Analysis

31. For the reasons that follow, I consider Mr Knafler's submissions as  it
    relates to the scope of the rights protected by Union  citizenship  are
    flawed.

32. The starting-point must be a more detailed consideration of Article  20
    of the TFEU.  Its full text is in these terms:

         "Article 20

         1.   Citizenship of the Union is hereby established.  Every  person
             holding the nationality of a Member State shall be  a  citizen
             of the Union. Citizenship of the Union shall be additional  to
             and not replace national citizenship.

         2.   Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights and be subject to
             the duties provided for in  the  Treaties.  They  shall  have,
             inter alia:

             (a)  the right to move and reside freely within the  territory
                  of the Member States;

             (b)  the right to vote and to stand as candidates in elections
                  to the European Parliament and in municipal  elections  in
                  their Member State of residence, under the same conditions
                  as nationals of that State;

             (c)  the right to enjoy, in the territory of a  third  country
                  in which the Member State of which they are  nationals  is
                  not represented, the  protection  of  the  diplomatic  and
                  consular authorities of  any  Member  State  on  the  same
                  conditions as the nationals of that State;

             (d)  the right to petition the European Parliament,  to  apply
                  to the European Ombudsman, and to address the institutions
                  and advisory bodies of the Union  in  any  of  the  Treaty
                  languages and to obtain a reply in the same language.

             These  rights  shall  be  exercised  in  accordance  with  the
             conditions and limits defined  by  the  Treaties  and  by  the
             measures adopted thereunder."

33. The rights associated with citizenship of the EU are the rights created
    by the European  Treaties  and  include,  amongst  others,  freedom  of
    movement, the  right  to  participate  in  elections  to  the  European
    Parliament as well as in elections in their  place  of  residence,  the
    right to enjoy diplomatic protection abroad where the  Union  citizen's
    own consular assistance is not present but that of another Member State
    is, as well as access to the European Parliament and its  institutions.
    It is noticeable that the  rights  do  not  trespass  upon  the  rights
    derived  from  being  a  citizen  of  the   individual's   country   of
    nationality.  The relationship between Article 20 rights and freedom of
    movement is made clear by Article 21:

         "Article 21

         1.   Every citizen of the Union shall have the right  to  move  and
             reside freely within  the  territory  of  the  Member  States,
             subject to the limitations and conditions  laid  down  in  the
             Treaties and by the measures adopted to give them effect."

34. There is a demarcation between the rights created and preserved by  the
    TFEU and those rights that are created or preserved under national law.
     As Articles 20 and 21 demonstrate, EU rights are distinct and  limited
    in character.

35. The attempt to expand the scope of an individual's Treaty rights to  go
    beyond forced removal was rejected by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Damion
    Harrison (Jamaica) & AB (Morocco) v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1736  (21
    December 2012).  Indeed, the argument advanced by Mr  Drabble  in  that
    case was in essence the same argument as Mr Knafler advanced before me.
     Damion Harrison (Jamaica) was a case in which the appellants were  the
    subject  of  deportation  proceedings  and  each  had  British  citizen
    children.  In each case it was found as a fact that  if  the  appellant
    were to be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom,  their  Union  citizen
    children would not be compelled to  leave.   The  appellants  submitted
    that if they were to be removed this would adversely affect the quality
    of life of their British citizen children and that Article 20 TFEU  and
    the Zambrano principle would be engaged. In rejecting  this  submission
    Elias LJ, giving the judgement of the Court said:

         "57  There are four strands in Mr  Drabble's  submission  that  the
             scope  of  the  doctrine  might  arguably  extend  beyond  the
             situation of forced removal.  First, he submits  that  certain
             passages in the judgments can be read that way, and he  relies
             in particular on the way  in  which  the  Court  answered  the
             question in Zambrano ...see paragraph 45, set out in paragraph
             [24] above.  It is at least arguable, he says, that  depriving
             an EU citizen of the 'genuine enjoyment of  the  substance  of
             the rights' attached to EU citizenship could embrace decisions
             which leave the right intact but  less  valuable  because  the
             enjoyment is diminished.  It may be enough that the  right  is
             impeded even though not lost.  Mr Drabble does not go  so  far
             as to say that this formulation of the principle by  the  CJEU
             carries the day; he merely claims that there  are  hints  that
             the court was recognising a  potentially  wider  jurisprudence
             and  that  the  language,  no  doubt  carefully   framed,   is
             consistent with the Court envisaging  a  possible  development
             along those lines.

         62   Finally, Mr Drabble  prays  in  aid  certain  observations  of
             Professor Gareth Davies  from  Amsterdam  University  who  has
             written a  paper  entitled  'The  family  rights  of  European
             children: expulsion of non-European parents'  which  discusses
             Zambrano in considerable detail.   It  includes  a  number  of
             passages supporting Mr Drabble's argument that the position in
             EU law is at least fluid, that the current state of the law is
             not entirely coherent, and  that  the  precise  scope  of  the
             Zambrano principle remains uncertain."

36. Having considered this passage, I can  see  no  significant  difference
    between the argument advanced to me and that made  by  the  appellant's
    counsel in Damion Harrison.  It was roundly rejected by  the  Court  of
    Appeal:

         "63. ... [T]here is really  no  basis  for  asserting  that  it  is
             arguable in the light of the  authorities  that  the  Zambrano
             principle extends to cover anything short of a situation where
             the EU citizen is forced to leave the territory of the EU.  If
             the EU citizen, be it the child or wife, would not in practice
             be compelled to leave the country if the non-EU family  member
             were to be refused the right of residence, there is in my view
             nothing in  these  authorities  to  suggest  that  EU  law  is
             engaged.  Article 8 rights may then come into the  picture  to
             protect family life as the court  recognised  in  Dereci,  but
             that is an entirely distinct area of protection...

         66.  Even if the non-EU national is  not  relied  upon  to  provide
             financial support, typically there will  be  strong  emotional
             and psychological ties within the family and  separation  will
             be  likely  significantly  to  rupture  those  ties,   thereby
             diminishing the enjoyment of life of the  family  members  who
             remain.  Yet it is plainly not the case, as Dereci makes clear
             and  Mr  Drabble  accepts,  that  this  consequence  would  be
             sufficient to engage EU  law.  Furthermore,  if  Mr  Drabble's
             submission were correct, it would jar with the description  of
             the  Zambrano  principle  as  applying  only  in   exceptional
             circumstances, as the Court in Dereci observed.  The principle
             would regularly be engaged.

         67.  As to the  submission  that  EU  law  might  develop  in  that
             direction, I accept that it is a general principle of  EU  law
             that conduct which materially impedes the exercise  of  an  EU
             law right is in general forbidden by EU law in  precisely  the
             same way as deprivation of the right.  But in my  judgment  it
             is necessary to focus on the nature of the right in issue  and
             to decide  what  constitutes  an  impediment.   The  right  of
             residence is a right to reside in the territory of the EU.  It
             is not a right to any particular quality of  life  or  to  any
             particular standard  of  living.   Accordingly,  there  is  no
             impediment to exercising the  right  to  reside  if  residence
             remains possible as a matter of  substance,  albeit  that  the
             quality of life is diminished.  Of course, to the extent  that
             the quality or standard of life will be seriously impaired  by
             excluding the non-EU national, that is likely in  practice  to
             infringe  the  right  of  residence  itself  because  it  will
             effectively compel the EU citizen to  give  up  residence  and
             travel with the non-EU national.   But  in  such  a  case  the
             Zambrano principle would apply and  the  EU  citizen's  rights
             would have to be protected (save  for  the  possibility  of  a
             proportionate deprivation of  rights).   Accordingly,  to  the
             extent that the focus is on protecting the  substance  of  the
             right, that formulation  of  the  principle  already  provides
             protection from certain interferences with  the  enjoyment  of
             the right."

37. Ms Smyth takes up the words of Elias LJ that '[i]t is not  a  right  to
    any particular quality of life or to any particular standard of living'
    and classifies the current appeals as a wish to secure a better quality
    of life for the British citizens concerned which is outside  the  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.  That  right  remains  possible  as  a
    matter of substance.  In essence, she  asserts,  the  British  citizens
    seek both the right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  (which  they
    currently enjoy and which is guaranteed them both as British  citizens)
    and the right to reside with the lifestyle of their choice with  carers
    of their choice and in a place of their choice (which is not guaranteed
    under European law).  The corollary of the claims of  the  two  British
    citizens is that the relevant carers must also  be  provided  with  the
    benefit of a right of residence.  However, as their family  members  do
    not  enjoy  the  rights  they  claim  as  European  citizens,  the  two
    appellants are not entitled to derivative residence cards.

38. The decision of Hickinbottom J in Sanneh, R (on the application  of)  v
    the SS for Work and Pensions & Anor [2013]  EWHC  793  (Admin)  focuses
    upon a very different area of law but makes the same point that  if  an
    individual seeks to rely on his EU rights, it  is  not  enough  that  a
    British  citizen  suffers  a  detriment  if  that  detriment  does  not
    jeopardise her rights as an EU citizen.  Hickinbottom J said

         "95. In my judgment, the  Claimant's  claim  in  these  proceedings
             falls at the first hurdle, because she cannot  make  good  the
             first proposition upon which the claim is based,  namely  that
             the failure of the Defendants to pay the Claimant the benefits
             pending the ultimate resolution of her  entitlement  puts  her
             daughter's rights as an EU citizen to  reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom in jeopardy....

         96.  As I have indicated, it is generally for this  court,  on  the
             available evidence, to make a finding of fact  as  to  whether
             the decision to deny the Claimant the three  benefits  pending
             resolution of her  entitlement  to  those  benefits  puts  her
             daughter's rights to reside  in  jeopardy  (paragraph  19(iii)
             above). If I were required to make a finding on the  evidence,
             I  would  unhesitatingly  conclude  that  it  does  not.   The
             Claimant and her daughter have been in the United Kingdom  for
             nearly four years,  for  the  most  part  without  significant
             benefit support.  Whilst no one would suggest  that  money  is
             not scarce for the Claimant and her daughter  -  finances  for
             them are, to say the least, very tight  -  the  Claimant  does
             have (i) accommodation in the form of a  two-bedroomed  house,
             provided by the Council; (ii)  income,  the  amount  of  which
             (whilst not being entirely clear) appears to include  70  per
             week from the Council as part of their section 17 support (see
             paragraph 87 above) and about 50 per week from Mr Bah through
             the Child Support Agency  (the  Claimant's  15  November  2012
             Statement, paragraph 9); and (iii) the right to work....   She
             has management and human resources skills,  and  is  keen  and
             very hopeful of finding work....   Furthermore,  although  the
             ultimate resolution of her entitlement  to  the  benefits  may
             take some time, as the various proceedings  move  through  the
             judicial system, we are concerned here with a matter of months
             and not, as Mr Zambrano was, with many years.  In  any  event,
             all of the evidence points to the  Claimant  being  absolutely
             determined to stay in the United Kingdom, and there  being  no
             realistic possibility of  her  leaving  because  of  financial
             circumstances  during  the   currency   of   the   substantive
             proceedings...."

39. The submission  advanced  before  me  is  little  different  from  that
    attempted by Mr Knafler before Hickinbottom J but on which he  was  not
    successful:

         "99. First, he submitted that paragraph 44 of Zambrano  means  that
             it must be assumed (irrebuttably and hence, essentially, as  a
             matter of law) that a person in the place of the Claimant must
             be accorded both the right  to  residence  and  the  right  of
             access to a particular level of funds by way  of  earnings  or
             benefits.  However, I cannot accept that submission.

         100. As a matter of principle, EU law creates  rights,  but  it  is
             left to member states as to how those rights  should  be  made
             effective and effectively protected  within  their  territory.
             It would be remarkable if the European Court had laid  down  a
             particular way adequately to protect the right of residence of
             a minor with no  EU  ascendant  carer  relatives,  which  each
             member state would be bound to implement.  That is simply  not
             how the EU works."

40. Reliance on broad principles of human dignity as contained  within  the
    Charter of the Fundamental Rights of the European Union does not assist
    the appellants.   Whilst  the  principle  is  inviolable  and  must  be
    respected and protected, it does not lead to the  conclusion  that,  in
    order for there to  be  compliance,  it  is  necessary  to  secure  the
    presence of a relative as  a  carer.    Similarly,  Article  7  of  the
    Charter (the equivalent to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR)  and  the  Union
    citizen's right to respect for his or her private and family  life  and
    home does not require a non-national to reside in the country by reason
    of his role as a carer.  Nor can broad principles of non-discrimination
    assist.  The Immigration Rules create distinctions  between  those  who
    are permitted to remain and those who are not.  In the sense  that  the
    law treats one category more favourably than another, it  discriminates
    between them.  If the discrimination arises because one group is  under
    the age of 65 and the other over the age of 65, it discriminates on the
    basis of age but this  is  not  the  type  of  discrimination  that  is
    prohibited by the Charter or by the ECHR.  Implicit in the  meaning  of
    discrimination is the  drawing  of  distinctions  that  are  unfair  or
    unwarranted.  In order to permit the elderly to lead a life of  dignity
    and independence, the country of which he or she  is  a  national  must
    provide adequate facilities for their care but that does not imply this
    requires the national authorities to permit a right of residence to the
    carer of choice of its elderly citizens.

41. The appellants argue that the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the
    rights of their British family members  includes  the  right  of  those
    suffering the effects of increasing age, infirmity or illness should be
    protected against losing their home and losing  the  care  provided  by
    their family members.  The submission runs dangerously close to arguing
    that those who are unable to benefit  from  carers  from  within  their
    family are at risk of suffering a violation of their  rights  by  being
    cared for by local authority carers or social workers or by the NHS  or
    by being placed in a care-home.   This  is  simply  misconceived.   The
    support provided by local authorities, care agencies, residential homes
    and hospitals has at its core the preservation of the dignity of  those
    under their care.  Care workers would justifiably feel aggrieved at the
    suggestion that their care falls below a standard  that  preserves  the
    dignity of their patients.  The fact that examples can be found of care
    falling below acceptable standards is not to the point.  Whilst, in the
    course  of  argument,  Mr  Knafler  disavowed  any  suggestion  to  the
    contrary, it is the inevitable consequence of  his  reliance  upon  the
    Charter.  If he were not suggesting the two British citizens   involved
    in these appeals would suffer  a  loss  of  their  protected  right  to
    dignity if they were required to go into residential care, there  would
    have been no point in relying on the Charter.

The error of law - Ayinde

42. The evidence provided in Ayinde's appeal pointed in one direction only.
     His mother  wanted  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  is  a
    naturalised as a British citizen.  If he had to leave, he said  he  did
    not know what she would  do.  Pointedly,  he  did  not  say  she  would
    accompany him.  Indeed, he said she was scared of returning to Nigeria.
     The health facilities in Nigeria could not meet her requirements.  Her
    children in Nigeria could not support her there. In the United Kingdom,
    she had the house she liked, was able to go to church  every  week  and
    her friends were here.  They could not access the medication she needed
    in Nigeria.  She had her tumour monitored in this country  as  well  as
    the problem with her thyroid.  His mother needed daily care which could
    not be given if he had to leave.

43. The entirety of this evidence pointed to her remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom in the environment she knows and likes, without having  to  up-
    root herself.

44. Indeed, the substance of Mr Knafler's submission is that an  assumption
    should be made, or a hypothesis should be adopted, in which the fact of
    moving outside the Union  is  built  into  the  assessment.   The  word
    'assumed' is found in paragraph  44  of  Ruiz  Zambrano;  'It  must  be
    assumed that such a refusal would  lead  to  a  situation  where  those
    children, citizens of the Union, would have to leave the  territory  of
    the Union in order to accompany their parents.'  On a proper reading of
    the decision of the Court of Justice, however, it was not an assumption
    that the Court was making but a finding of fact or a prediction of what
    would inevitably occur: it was obvious the  parents  would  take  their
    children with them if they were forced to leave.

45. Mr Knafler's approach to  me  was  a  repetition  of  his  argument  to
    Hickinbottom J who recorded the submission in paragraph 99 of Sanneh, R
    (on the application of) v the SS for Work  and  Pensions  &  Anor  (see
    paragraph 37 above) in these terms: 'paragraph  44  of  Zambrano  means
    that it must be assumed (irrebuttably  and  hence,  essentially,  as  a
    matter of law)'.  Hickinbottom J rejected this submission.

46. The fact that Mr Knafler advances his case on the basis  that  such  an
    assumption is necessary is telling for it implicitly acknowledges  that
    the evidence itself does not support such  a  finding.   No  assumption
    would be necessary if the appellant had established as a matter of fact
    that the mother was leaving.

47. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not find as a  fact  that  she  would
    leave.  Indeed, the approach of both Judges was that it  would  not  be
    reasonable for them to do so.  In the context of  these  appeals,  this
    was no more than another way of saying that they would not.  The First-
    tier Tribunal Judges'  solution  in  adopting  a  reasonableness  test,
    namely, that it would not be reasonable for the British citizen  mother
    and husband to leave the United Kingdom,  diluted  the  relevant  test,
    perhaps even distorted it.  In any  event,  a  reasonableness  test  is
    difficult to apply in the context of appeals of  this  nature.   If  an
    assessment of reasonableness is applied simply as between the appellant
    and his mother or the appellant  and  her  husband,  the  result  is  a
    foregone conclusion.  Of course, given the  choice,  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the appellants to require their  mother  or  husband  to
    join them outside the Union or to expect the British citizens to demand
    to leave the country.

48. A reasonableness test, however, first demands to know the answer to the
    question, 'reasonable as between whom?'  If the reasonableness  of  the
    decisions involves a consideration of the competing  claims  of  family
    members legitimately wishing to remain together, to enjoy the  benefits
    and burdens of a shared family life, on the one hand and, on the other,
    the justifiable interest of the community  at  large  in  limiting  the
    right to settlement (and the burden this imposes) in the case of  those
    who may not be able to contribute to the financial implications of  it,
    the answer may well be very different.  A reasonableness  test  becomes
    almost impossible to  evaluate  where  the  carers  (as  in  these  two
    appeals) will both potentially increase the burden upon the state  with
    further recourse to public funds but at the same time may  also  lessen
    the burden to the tax-payer by offering care that would otherwise  have
    to be provided by the state or the local authority.   Whatever  may  be
    the legitimate approach to the solutions to these appeals, it is not to
    be  found  in  adopting  a  reasonableness   test.    In   adopting   a
    reasonableness test that confined itself to  a  consideration  of  only
    part of the competing  factors,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  undoubtedly
    erred.

49. When construing the words of reg. 15(4A)(iii)  that Mr Ayinde's  mother
    would be 'unable to reside in the United Kingdom' if Mr Ayinde were  to
    leave, the Judge excluded from consideration services provided  by  the
    local authorities' social services department  and  the  NHS  when  the
    policy itself clearly stated the opposite.  He did so he said  because,
    'every British citizen in this country is entitled to be cared  for  by
    those agencies in the absence of any other available carer'.  This  was
    no justification for the Judge to exclude the provision of  such  care;
    in particular, no justification arises because such care is provided by
    way of an entitlement to it under the NHS.  The Judge erred in  law  in
    construing the words of the regulation in  this  way.   The  respondent
    properly argued in the refusal letter that, if the appellant  were  not
    present in the United Kingdom to care for his mother, she could procure
    assistance from other sources with the help of  social  services.   Her
    ability to do this was a vital consideration in the appeal.

50. In summary, the Judge erred by failing to appreciate that an  essential
    element of the Zambrano principle was that it  had  to  be  established
    that Mrs Animashaun would leave the Union if  her  son  left.   On  the
    evidence, the appellant failed to establish this.  Indeed, the evidence
    established  she  would   not.    Secondly,   the   Judge   applied   a
    reasonableness test  which  was  inapplicable  when  the  question  was
    whether Mrs Animashaun was unable to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Thirdly, he excluded from his consideration the provision that would be
    made by social services and the NHS when this was a vital part  of  the
    assessment.  These errors require me to set aside his determination and
    enable me to re-make the decision.

The error of law - Thinjom

51. Mr Stevens is 85 years old and  truthfully  explained  that  living  in
    Thailand would not be possible for him  at  his  age.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge rejected that solution as  one  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for him to make.  The Judge accepted that if  the  appellant
    were forced to return to Thailand, he would have to be looked after  in
    a nursing home, which is an option that he clearly opposed.   In  other
    words, his intention was to remain in the United Kingdom and  his  wish
    was to do so with the appellant.

52. In summary and for the reasons I have already provided in the appeal of
    Ayinde, the Judge erred by failing  to  appreciate  that  an  essential
    element of the Zambrano principle was that it  had  to  be  established
    that Mr Stevens would leave the Union whereas the evidence  established
    that he would not.  Secondly, the Judge applied a  reasonableness  test
    which was inapplicable when the question was  whether  Mr  Stevens  was
    unable to remain in the United Kingdom.  In  fact,  he  was  unable  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

Generally

53. These situations are very different from  the  situation  in  Zambrano.
    Whilst a minor child can survive without his parents in that  adoption,
    foster-care or a children's home may  provide  a  proper  and  adequate
    level of care, such alternative care is only likely to be  contemplated
    if there are serious reasons for breaking the  relationship  between  a
    child and one or both of his parents.  Serious wrong-doing on the  part
    of both parents (or, more often, of one of the parents) may justify the
    separation.  However, elderly adults can more readily survive without a
    family member to act as their  carer  if  there  are  adequate  support
    mechanisms in existence to provide them with  alternative  care  to  an
    appropriate  standard.   It  is  beyond  the  range  of   proportionate
    responses that a minor should be required  to  go  into  some  form  of
    alternative care (be it adoption, foster-care or residential  care)  in
    order to enjoy his EU rights were both his parents required  to  leave.
    The same consideration does not  normally  apply  in  relation  to  the
    infirm or elderly.

54. The differential in the care provided by  a  family  member  acting  as
    carer and the standard  of  care  provided  by  social  services,  care
    agencies or the NHS does not engage the Zambrano  principle.   In  Ruiz
    Zambrano, it was not the difference between the standard of  care  that
    the Zambrano parents provided to the children at home and the  standard
    of care provided by child care agencies  that  prompted  the  Court  of
    Justice to reach  its  decision.   A  comparison  of  alternative  care
    arrangements was not being considered.   It  was  not,  therefore,  the
    quality of life or care that was in issue but what would happen to  the
    Zambrano children, that is, whether they would remain  or  leave.   For
    the Zambrano children, the answer was obvious: the  children  would  go
    with their parents.  It was impossible to  contemplate  an  outcome  in
    which they would not be driven to leave.  That is a far  cry  from  the
    situation facing Mrs Animashaun and Mr Stevens, neither  of  whom  will
    leave the United Kingdom.

55. The recognition  that  children  are  in  need  of  specific  forms  of
    protection is acknowledged in the UN Convention on the  Rights  of  the
    Child which recognises  that  children  should  grow  up  in  a  family
    environment.  Article 9.1 of the Convention provides  that  the  United
    Kingdom normally provides that a child should not be separated from his
    parents  against  their   will,   except   in   defined   and   limited
    circumstances.  Similarly, the Immigration Rules and the IDIs reinforce
    the special place that children have in the deportation of a parent who
    falls within the definition of a foreign criminal.  It is an  exception
    to the public interest in favour of removal if it is  established  that
    removal is 'unduly harsh' to a qualifying child, see s. 117C (5) of the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act,  2002,  as   amended.   No
    comparable system of regulation applies in relation to the needs of the
    elderly, certainly in the context of recognising the rights  of  family
    members  to  maintain  family  life  together.   The   distinction   is
    intentional.  It informs a consideration of the Zambrano principle when
    attempts are made to apply it to persons other than minor children.

56. The Tribunal is entitled to look critically at a claim  that  a  person
    will be forced to leave the EU because of a  refusal  by  the  national
    authorities to grant his carer leave to remain.  The reason for such  a
    critical look is because the claim advanced will be the very  opposite:
    it will be a claim that the  carer  be  permitted  to  remain  and  the
    British citizen will not be  required  to  move.   Mr  Knafler  himself
    referred to this in the course of argument as a paradoxical claim.

57. Secondly, if the claim is based on the British citizen being forced  to
    leave the Union, the likelihood of this occurring has to be assessed by
    reference to the benefits the Union citizen is receiving in the UK  and
    will be entitled to receive were the appellant to leave.  Hence, if the
    British  citizen  is  in  receipt  of   free   healthcare,   subsidised
    accommodation (or an allowance to assist in the payment  of  rent)  and
    state benefits, pensions and fringe benefits in the form of concessions
    available to the elderly, there will be a significant evidential hurdle
    in attempting to make out a case that the British citizen  will,  as  a
    matter of fact, leave the United Kingdom.  In reality if these benefits
    are not available in the country to which he claims he will  be  forced
    to travel by reason of the refusal of a grant of a derivative residence
    card to his carer, the likelihood of his  doing  so  is  likely  to  be
    remote.  Hence the Tribunal will also have to  compare  the  conditions
    that a British citizen will meet on being forced  to  settle  elsewhere
    when assessing whether he is being forced to leave the United  Kingdom.
    The greater the disparity, the less likely it will be that the  British
    citizen will in fact leave the United Kingdom.  A bare  assertion  that
    the British citizen will be forced  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  is
    unlikely to be sufficient; all the more so if this has  been  his  only
    home for many years.

58. Thirdly, whilst these appeals were put on the basis  that  the  British
    citizen has a right to human dignity which is inviolable  and  must  be
    respected and protected, (the violation of which acts as  the  spur  to
    his claim to be at risk of a forced departure from the United Kingdom),
    some care must be taken before reaching such a conclusion.  It  is  not
    enough that  the  British  citizen  would  prefer  that  his  carer  is
    permitted leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   There  is  nothing
    intrinsically  lacking  in  human  dignity   in   being   offered   the
    professional help of care workers  or  being  placed  into  residential
    accommodation with a sliding-scale  of  support  ranging  from  a  home
    adapted to the individual's needs,  through  to  accommodation  with  a
    warden, through to a residential home; through to  full  nursing  care.
    It would be plainly incorrect to say that  it  is  a  violation  of  an
    individual's rights to human dignity to  be  placed  into  care  or  to
    receive help from professional healthcare workers.

59. This leads us back to the words of reg. 15(4A) (iii) that  the  British
    citizen must be unable to reside in the United Kingdom if the appellant
    were to leave.  These words can readily be applied in both appeals: Mrs
    Animashaun and Mr Stevens are able to reside in the United Kingdom

60. From the foregoing, it is possible  to  derive  the  following  general
    principles:

      i) The deprivation of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of  the
         rights  attaching  to  the  status  of  European   Union   citizens
         identified in the decision in Zambrano is limited to safeguarding a
         British citizen's EU rights as defined in Article 20.

     ii) The provisions of reg. 15A of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 as amended apply when the effect of  removal
         of the carer of a British citizen renders the  British  citizen  no
         longer able to reside in the  United  Kingdom  or  in  another  EEA
         state.  This requires the carer to establish as  a  fact  that  the
         British citizen will be forced to leave the territory of the Union.



    iii) The requirement is not met by an assumption that the  citizen  will
         leave and does not involve a consideration of whether it  would  be
         reasonable for the carer to leave the United Kingdom.  A comparison
         of the  British  citizen's  standard  of  living  or  care  if  the
         appellant remains or departs is material only  in  the  context  of
         whether the British citizen will leave the United Kingdom.

     iv) The Tribunal is required to  examine  critically  a  claim  that  a
         British citizen will leave the Union if the benefits  he  currently
         receives by remaining in the United  Kingdom  are  unlikely  to  be
         matched in the country in which he claims  he  will  be  forced  to
         settle.

Re-making the decisions - Ayinde

61. Far from being unable to reside in the United Kingdom, the evidence  is
    that the appellant needs to reside in the United Kingdom if she  is  to
    maintain the same level of care for  her  paranoid  schizophrenia,  her
    type II diabetes and the residual effects from the brain  tumour.   Her
    need for treatment, medication and monitoring are  more  likely  to  be
    better met in the United Kingdom.   This  leaves  the  tasks  that  are
    performed by the appellant in the form of routine assistance in helping
    her to bathe, preparing food, shopping and ensuring that the bills  are
    paid.  If these cannot be performed by carers under the supervision  of
    social services, then she will need to go into  a  care  home.   Either
    way, it is simply impossible to claim that she is unable to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom once her son leaves.

Re-making the decisions - Thinjom

62. The couple met in 2012 and married on 13 August 2012.  Mr  Stevens  was
    then aged 82.  Had they not married, Mr Stevens would undoubtedly  have
    remained in the United Kingdom and, as his  heath  deteriorated,  would
    have had to look to social services increasingly  for  help  until  the
    point was reached when he could not live on his own and would have been
    forced  to  go  into   residential   nursing   care.    The   sheltered
    accommodation in which he lives  may  or  may  not  continue  to  be  a
    practical solution to his needs.  Prior to his marriage, Mr Stevens had
    been paying for a carer who visited him twice a week for two  hours  on
    each occasion.  He now needs care in the daily tasks.

63. Once again far from being unable to reside in the United  Kingdom,  the
    reality is that it is unlikely  that  Mr  Stevens  is  able  to  reside
    anywhere else.  He could not, realistically, hope to achieve  the  same
    level of care were he to start what would be at the age  of  85  a  new
    life in Thailand.  Hence, there is no real likelihood that he would  do
    so.

Conclusion on the re-making

64. For these reasons, the claim that in each of these appeals the Zambrano
    principle should be extended to permit their carers to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom must be rejected.   That,  as  Hickinbottom  J  said  in
    Sanneh, R (on the application of) v the SS  for  Work  and  Pensions  &
    Anor, 'is simply not how the EU works.'



The right forum

65. It is for these reasons that such a claim is more readily conceived  in
    terms of Article 8.  The factors that render the forced departure of  a
    British citizen less  and  less  likely  (dependence  on  the  raft  of
    assistance provided by the state, the local authority  and  the  health
    service) are likely to add  weight  to  a  human  rights  claim  whilst
    diminishing the strength  of  a  claim  based  upon  forced  departure.
    Where, however, the competing claims are expressed in the  alternative,
    namely either I will be forced to go or it is a violation of my, and my
    carer's, human rights to require my carer to leave, there is plainly an
    inconsistency in approach which may well prove difficult to argue.

66. In saying this, I do not seek to imply  what  the  appropriate  outcome
    will be in either of these two appeals.  It re-enforces,  however,  the
    soundness of the respondent's approach in the third of  these  formerly
    conjoined appeals.  As I said in paragraph 4 above,  the  third  appeal
    concerned the Algerian mother of a British citizen aged  3  who  sought
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom with  her  son  and  the  child's
    father.  Although she had sought leave to remain  as  the  carer  of  a
    Union citizen, the application was made pursuant to Article  8  of  the
    ECHR in pursuit of a protected private and family life  and  not  under
    the EEA Regulations.   Sensibly, the Secretary of State agreed to  make
    a fresh decision.  Whilst significantly  different  on  the  facts,  it
    underlines the place in the legal system  where  the  claims  of  these
    appellants properly lie.  The claims do not lie under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended.

DECISION

In each case, the Judge made an error on a point of law and I  substitute  a
determination dismissing each of the appeals on all the grounds advanced.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 21 May 2015
