







R (on the application of Isaac Kimondo) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department (relevant rules; AoS requirements) IJR [2014] UKUT 00565 (IAC)

                            In the Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                            Date of hearing:
                                                             10 October 2014




             In the matter of an application for judicial review




            The Queen on the application of Isaac Ngatia Kimondo


                                      v


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department




          Before the President, The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                      and Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul






           Having considered the papers lodged by  both  parties,  together
           with the oral and written submissions of Mr I Kumi (of Counsel),
           instructed by Whitworth and Green Solicitors, on behalf  of  the
           Applicant and  Mr  A  Byass  (of  Counsel),  instructed  by  the
           Treasury Solicitor, on behalf of the Respondent.


           1)  In  judicial  review   applications   transferred   by   the
              Administrative Court to the Upper  Tribunal,  the  applicable
              procedural regime is that contained in the Tribunal Procedure
              (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The Civil Procedure Rules  have
              no effect thereafter; although the procedural history may  be
              significant, particularly as regards time limits.


           2) The prohibition in rule 29(3) on a party who has not filed an
              acknowledgement  of  service  from   taking   part   in   the
              application  permission   (without   the   Upper   Tribunal's
              permission) applies also to a party who has failed to provide
              a copy of the AoS to  the  applicant,  as  required  by  rule
              29(2A).


                                   Decision on Preliminary Issue


            Introduction


              1. This decision was precipitated by a preliminary issue which
                 arose on the date when the Applicant's renewed  application
                 for permission to apply for judicial review was listed. The
                 circumstances are set forth in our decision of  10  October
                 2014, attached hereto as an appendix.   In  brief  compass,
                 the Respondent having failed to serve  the  Acknowledgement
                 of Service on the Applicant at the appropriate time, it was
                 suggested on behalf of the Applicant  that  the  effect  of
                 this was to disbar the Respondent from participating in the
                 hearing.  The issue having arisen in an ad hoc  manner,  we
                 adjourned the hearing, with some reluctance, to enable both
                 parties to provide  written  submissions  (see  our  ruling
                 appended hereto).  These have been  received  and  we  have
                 considered same.


              2. This judicial review application was transferred  from  the
                 Administrative Court to the  Upper  Tribunal.   During  its
                 period  of  currency  in  the  Administrative  Court,   the
                 Respondent filed an Acknowledgement of Service ("AoS"),  on
                 14 October 2013. On 31  October  2013,  the  Administrative
                 Court refused permission on the papers, and simultaneously,
                 acceded to the Respondent's application to extend time  for
                 service of its  AOS.   In  due  course,  the  oral  renewal
                 hearing was listed in this forum on 10  October  2014.   On
                 the previous day, the Applicant contacted the  Respondent's
                 solicitor, requesting a copy of the AOS, which was provided
                 at once by electronic means.


              3. The two issues upon which further argument was invited are:

                    a) The procedural regime applicable to  judicial  review
                       cases transferred from the  Administrative  Court  to
                       the Upper Tribunal.


                    b) The consequence of the Respondent's failure to  serve
                       its AOS on the Applicant.



           First Question: Governing Procedural Regime

              4. The provisions  of  primary  legislation  relating  to  the
                 transfer by  the  High  Court  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  of
                 specified cases are contained in section 31A of the  Senior
                 Courts Act 1981 and section 18 of the Tribunals, Courts and
                 Enforcement Act  2007.   These  are  to  be  considered  in
                 conjunction with the Direction of the Lord Chief Justice of
                 England and Wales made on 21 August 2013.  In  the  present
                 case, paragraph 2(ii) thereof is engaged viz permission  to
                 apply for judicial review was refused on paper  between  09
                 September 2013 and 04 November 2013, with no  oral  renewal
                 hearing having been convened between these dates.


              5. The first of the two questions formulated is not  addressed
                 in either of the statutory provisions  specified  above  or
                 the Direction.  Thus  we  turn  to  consider  the  relevant
                 provisions of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
                 2008  (the  "2008  Rules").   Rule  1,  under  the   rubric
                 "Citation, commencement, application and interpretation" is
                 framed, so far as material, in the following terms:

                       "(2)  These Rules apply  to  proceedings  before  the
                            Upper Tribunal.


                         3) In these Rules -


                                  'The 2007 Act' means the Tribunals, Courts
                                  and Enforcement Act 2007 ........


                                  'Applicant' means -


                                  (a)   A person who applies for  permission
                                       to bring, or  does  bring,  judicial
                                       review proceedings before the  Upper
                                       Tribunal  and,  in  judicial  review
                                       proceedings transferred to the Upper
                                       Tribunal from a  Court,  includes  a
                                       person  who  was   a   claimant   or
                                       petitioner   in   the    proceedings
                                       immediately   before    they    were
                                       transferred ........


                                  'Immigration judicial review  proceedings'
                                  means judicial  review  proceedings  which
                                  are designated as an immigration matter -


                                  (a)   In a direction  made  in  accordance
                                       with Part 1 of  Schedule  2  to  the
                                       Constitutional   Reform   Act   2005
                                       specifying a class of case  for  the
                                       purposes of  section  18(6)  of  the
                                       2007 Act; or


                                  (b)   In an order of  the  High  Court  in
                                       England and Wales made under section
                                       31A(3)  of  the  Senior  Courts  Act
                                       1981,  transferring  to  the   Upper
                                       Tribunal an application  of  a  kind
                                       described in section 31A(1) of  that
                                       Act .....


                                  'Judicial   review   proceedings'   means
                                  proceedings within  the  jurisdiction  of
                                  the Upper Tribunal pursuant to section 15
                                  or 21  of  the  2007  Act,  whether  such
                                  proceedings  are  started  in  the  Upper
                                  Tribunal  or  transferred  to  the  Upper
                                  Tribunal ....


                                  'Respondent' means ....................


                                  (c)   In judicial review proceedings -


                                          i) In proceedings started  in  the
                                             Upper  Tribunal,   the   person
                                             named by the Applicant  as  the
                                             Respondent;


                                         ii) In proceedings  transferred  to
                                             the   Upper   Tribunal    under
                                             ........   section  31A(2)   or
                                             (3) of the  Supreme  Court  Act
                                             1981,  a  person  who   was   a
                                             Defendant  in  the  proceedings
                                             immediately  before  they  were
                                             transferred."



              6.  These  provisions  speak  for  themselves  and,   in   our
                 estimation, give rise to the following two propositions:


                 (i)   In all judicial review proceedings, whether initiated
                       in the Upper Tribunal or transferred  to  this  forum
                       from  the  Administration   Court,   the   applicable
                       procedural regime from  the  date  of  initiation  or
                       transfer is that enshrined in the 2008 Rules.

                 (ii)   In  transferred  cases,  the  applicable  procedural
                       regime was that  contained  in  the  Civil  Procedure
                       Rules, specifically CPR54 and its associated Practice
                       Directions, prior to transfer but not thereafter.


                 We consider this analysis straightforward and,  insofar  as
                 any reinforcement is required, this is found in rule 27  of
                 the 2008 Rules, which, under  the  rubric  "Application  of
                 this part to judicial review proceedings transferred to the
                 Upper Tribunal", states, in material part:


                       "(1)   When  a  Court   transfers   judicial   review
                            proceedings to the Upper  Tribunal,  the  Upper
                            Tribunal -


                            (a)   Must notify each party  in  writing  that
                                  the proceedings have been  transferred  to
                                  the Upper Tribunal; and


                            (b)   must give directions  as  to  the  future
                                  conduct of the proceedings."


                 For  the  sole  purpose  of  directing  attention  to   its
                 existence, we draw attention also to rule 27(2);


                       "The directions  given  under  paragraph  (1)(b)  may
                       modify  or  disapply  for   the   purposes   of   the
                       proceedings any of the following rules in this Part."


              7. Thus, as appears from the above, we answer the first of the
                 two  questions  as  follows.   In  judicial  review   cases
                 transferred from the  Administrative  Court  to  the  Upper
                 Tribunal,  the  applicable  procedural   regime   is   that
                 contained in the 2008 Rules.  The  provisions  of  the  CPR
                 have no effect from the date of  transfer.  The  procedural
                 history may, of course,  be  significant,  particularly  as
                 regards time limits: compare CPR 54.5(1) and UT rule 28(2).
                 We would add that each of  these  conclusions  is  strongly
                 dictated by common sense and logic.




           Second question: consequences of failure to serve an AOS on  the
           Applicant


              8.   In   the   Upper   Tribunal   procedural   regime,    the
                 Acknowledgement of Service (hereinafter  described  as  the
                 "AOS")  is governed by rule 29 of  the  2008  Rules,  which
                 provides:


                      "(1) A person who is sent [or provided with]  a  copy
                      of an application for  permission  under  rule  28(8)
                      (application for permission to bring judicial  review
                      proceedings) [or rule 28A(2)(a)  (special  provisions
                      for [immigration judicial review]  proceedings)]  and
                      wishes to take part in the proceedings must [provide]
                      to the Upper Tribunal an acknowledgement  of  service
                      so that it is received no later than  21  days  after
                      the date on which the Upper  Tribunal  sent[,  or  in
                      [immigration   judicial   review]   proceedings   the
                      applicant provided,] a copy  of  the  application  to
                      that person.


                      (2) An acknowledgement of service under paragraph (1)
                      must be in writing and state-
                         (a) whether the person  intends  to  [support  or]
                            oppose the        application for permission;
                         (b) their grounds for any [support or]  opposition
                            under  sub-   paragraph  (a),   or   any   other
                            submission    or    information     which     it
                            considers may assist the Upper Tribunal; and
                         (c) the name and address of any other  person  not
                            named in the      application as a respondent or
                            interested party whom  the     person  providing
                            the   acknowledgement   considers   to   be   an
                            interested party."



                 An amendment of this rule was effected by Rule 9(b) of  the
                 Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  (Amendment)   Rules
                 2011/2343,  effective  from  17  October  2011.  This   was
                 designed to  make  special  provision  for   what  are  now
                 "immigration judicial  review  proceedings".   Rule  29(2A)
                 provides:


                       "In immigration judicial review proceedings, a person
                       who provides  an  Acknowledgement  of  Service  under
                       paragraph (1) must also provide a copy to -


                         a) the applicant; and


                         b) any other person named in the application under
                            rule 28(4)(a)  or  Acknowledgement  of  Service
                            under paragraph 2(c) no  later  than  the  time
                            specified in paragraph (1)."




                 This is followed by rule 29(3):


                       "A  person  who  is  provided  with  a  copy  of   an
                       application  for  permission  under  rule  28(8)   or
                       28A(2)(a) but does not provide an Acknowledgement  of
                       Service to the Upper Tribunal may not  take  part  in
                       the application for permission unless allowed  to  do
                       so by the Upper Tribunal, but may take  part  in  the
                       subsequent  proceedings   if   the   application   is
                       successful."




                 For completeness, we include  here  rule  28(8)  and  rule
           28A(2)(a):


                      "28(8)  [Except   where   rule   28A(2)(a)   (special
                      provisions   for   [immigration   judicial    review]
                      proceedings)  applies,]  when  the   Upper   Tribunal
                      receives the application it must send a copy  of  the
                      application and any accompanying  documents  to  each
                      person named in the application as  a  respondent  or
                      interested party."


                      "28A
                      ...
                      (2) Within 9 days of making an  application  referred
                      to in paragraph (1), an applicant must provide-
                       (a) a copy of the application and  any  accompanying
                         documents  to  each   person   named   in      the
                         application  as  a  respondent  or  an  interested
                         party; and... "






              9. Mr Byass, on behalf of the  Respondent,  founded  his  main
                 submission on the language of rule 29(3) of the 2008 Rules.
                  This provision contemplates the  discretionary  disbarment
                 of  the  Respondent  from   participation   in   permission
                 proceedings.   This  sanction   applies,   at   the   Upper
                 Tribunal's  discretion,  where  the  Respondent  "does  not
                 provide an Acknowledgement of Service to the Upper Tribunal
                 ....".  The burden of the Respondent's argument is that the
                 words "does not provide an Acknowledgement  of  Service  to
                 the  Upper  Tribunal",  which  embody  the  condition   for
                 discretionary disbarment, do not extend  to  a  failure  to
                 serve the AOS on the Applicant.  Implicit in this  argument
                 is the further contention that this additional  requirement
                 cannot reasonably be implied.  As a discrete aspect of this
                 argument, reliance is placed on the  comparable  provisions
                 of the CPR, 54.9, which, under the heading of  "Failure  to
                 File Acknowledgement of Service", provides:


                      "54.9
                      (1) Where a person served with  the  claim  form  has
                      failed to  file  an  acknowledgement  of  service  in
                      accordance with rule 54.8, he -
                         (a) may not take  part  in  a  hearing  to  decide
                         whether permission  should  be  given  unless  the
                         court allows him to do so; but
                         (b) provided he complies with rule  54.14  or  any
                         other direction of the court regarding the  filing
                         and service of -
                             (i) detailed grounds for contesting  the  claim
                             or supporting it on additional grounds; and
                             (ii) any written evidence,
                             may take part in the hearing  of  the  judicial
                             review.
                      (2) Where that person takes part in  the  hearing  of
                      the judicial review, the court may take  his  failure
                      to file an acknowledgement of  service  into  account
                      when deciding what order to make about costs.
                      (3) Rule 8.4 does not apply."




                 The able submissions of Mr Byass also drew attention to the
                 purpose and function of the  AOS,  with  reference  to  the
                 decision of the Upper Tribunal in R (Kumar) - v - Secretary
                 of State for the Home Department [2014] UKUT 104 (IAC),  at
                 [7] - [9] especially.




             10.  To  summarise,  the  Respondent's  argument  is  that  the
                 discretionary sanction of disbarment from participation  in
                 the permission hearing applies only where there has been  a
                 failure to lodge an AOS with the Upper  Tribunal,  but  des
                 not extend to cases where there has been a failure to serve
                 same on the Applicant.


             11. The riposte of Mr Kumi on behalf of the Applicant  resolves
                 to the following central contentions:

                   i) The Respondent failed to comply with the order of the
                      Administrative Court dated  31  October  2013  which,
                      retrospectively,  extended  time  for  the  "service"
                      thereof to 14 October 2013.


                  ii) CPR 54(8) addresses both filing and  service  of  the
                      AOS.

                 iii) In the Administrative Court, it is implicit that  any
                      Respondent  or  interested  party   who   attends   a
                      permission hearing absent an explicit direction  from
                      the Court does so on the  risk  of  bearing  its  own
                      costs.

                  iv) The Upper Tribunal should also  give  effect  to  CPR
                      Practice  Direction  54A,   paragraph   8.6   whereof
                      provides:

                            "Where a Defendant or any party does  attend  a
                            permission  hearing,   the   court   will   not
                            generally make an order for costs  against  the
                            Claimant."


             12. It  is  convenient  to  address  each  of  the  Applicant's
                 submissions, seriatim:


                   i)  In  a  context  where  the  Respondent's  AOS   was,
                      belatedly, merely filed in the Administrative  Court,
                      but was not served on the Applicant,  we  accept  the
                      argument  of  Mr  Byass  that  the   order   of   the
                      Administrative Court, made 17 days after the date  of
                      belated filing, must be construed as  extending  time
                      for filing, rather than service, of  the  AOS.   This
                      analysis is reinforced  by the   distinction  in  CPR
                      54.8 between the separate acts of filing an  AOS  and
                      serving same, each of which is governed  by  separate
                      time limits.


                  ii) The second of the Applicant's submissions is correct:
                      however, given our primary conclusion, this is of  no
                      avail to the Applicant.

                 iii) Ditto the third of the Applicant's submissions.

                  iv) By  reason  of  our  conclusion  in  [7]  above,  the
                      invitation to this Tribunal to give effect to  a  CPR
                      Practice Direction is misconceived. Furthermore, this
                      submission does not sound directly on either  of  the
                      questions formulated in [3] above. However,  it  does
                      not follow that the Upper Tribunal will not be guided
                      by  such  instruments  in  matters  of  practice  and
                      procedure in appropriate cases.





             13. We consider that the answer to the second question  depends
                 mainly upon the proper construction of rule  29(3)  of  the
                 2008 Rules. We are mindful of our duty, under rule 2(2), to
                 "seek to give effect  to"  the  overriding  objective  when
                 engaged in the interpretation of any  of  the  Rules.   The
                 overriding objective is formulated in the following terms:


                      "2 (1) The overriding objective of these Rules is  to
                      enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with  cases  fairly
                      and justly.
                      (2) Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-
                       (a)  dealing  with  the  case  in  ways   which   are
                         proportionate to the importance of the  case,  the
                         complexity of the issues,  the  anticipated  costs
                         and the resources of the parties;
                       (b)  avoiding  unnecessary  formality   and   seeking
                         flexibility in the proceedings;
                       (c) ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties
                         are able to participate fully in the proceedings;
                       (d) using any special expertise of the Upper Tribunal
                         effectively; and
                       (e) avoiding delay, so far as compatible with  proper
                         consideration of the issues.
                      (3) The Upper Tribunal must seek to  give  effect  to
                      the overriding objective when it-
                       (a) exercises any power under these Rules; or
                       (b) interprets any rule or practice direction.
                      (4) Parties must-
                       (a) help the Upper Tribunal to further the overriding
                         objective; and
                       (b) co-operate with the Upper Tribunal generally."




                 The factual  framework  within  which  we  are  obliged  to
                 construe the relevant provision of the Rules  and  to  give
                 effect to the  overriding  objective  is  one  wherein  the
                 Respondent delayed for approximately 1 year in serving  the
                 AOS on  the  Applicant  and,  when  service  was  belatedly
                 effected, did so on the eve of the oral permission hearing.
                  In these circumstances, the constituents elements  of  the
                 overriding objective which are engaged are:


                 (a)   the imperative to deal  with  each  case  fairly  and
                 justly; and


                 (b)    the  related  imperative  of  ensuring,  so  far  as
                      practicable, that the parties are able to participate
                      fully in the proceedings.




             14. In our judgment, the  question  to  be  determined  is  the
                 following:  does the sanction of  discretionary  disbarment
                 from participation in the permission application  where  an
                 AOS is not lodged with the Upper Tribunal extend  to  cases
                 where an AOS is lodged with  the  Upper  Tribunal  but  not
                 served on the Applicant, as required by rule 29(2A) of  the
                 2008 Rules?[1]


             15. The argument of Mr Byass, on behalf of the Respondent, drew
                 attention to certain passages in the decision of the  Upper
                 Tribunal in R (Kumar) - v - Secretary of State for the Home
                 Department [2014] UKUT  104  (IAC),  particularly  in  [3].
                 Therein the important role of the AOS and  summary  grounds
                 of defence is emphasised.  This  requires  no  elaboration.
                 The thrust of the argument appeared  to  be  that  provided
                 that an AOS is lodged with the  Tribunal,  it  matters  not
                 that it is not served on the Applicant.  We  consider  this
                 argument  misconceived.   The  framework  of  the  relevant
                 provisions of the 2008  Rules,  which  reflects  elementary
                 common law principles, is not confined to simply  requiring
                 that an AOS be served on the  Applicant.   It  is,  rather,
                 designed  to  give  effect  to  the  principle  that  every
                 litigant is entitled to be notified of the opposing party's
                 case  and,  in  this  way,  to  participate  actively   and
                 effectively in all relevant hearings before  the  Court  or
                 Tribunal concerned.


             16. By rule 29(1), the Respondent must lodge an  AOS  with  the
                 Upper Tribunal within 21 days of service of an  immigration
                 judicial review application.  Within  this  requirement  of
                 the Rules, considered in conjunction with  rule  28(8)  and
                 rule  28A(2)(a),  there  are  two   specific   obligations,
                 bilateral in nature.  First, the Applicant  must  serve  an
                 application for judicial  review  in  immigration  judicial
                 review proceedings on  the  Respondent  within  the  period
                 specified.  Second, the  Respondent  must  lodge  with  the
                 Upper Tribunal an  AOS  within  the  specified  period.   A
                 third,   related   obligation,    consistent    with    and
                 consequential upon  the  first  two,  is  imposed  by  rule
                 29(2)A, namely the Respondent must serve  the  AOS  on  the
                 Applicant.  Pursuant to this provision of  the  Rules,  the
                 Respondent must also  serve  a  copy  of  the  AOS  on  the
                 Applicant.  Thus both parties  are  subject  to  the  basic
                 duties of opposing litigants to be found in any  sphere  of
                 contemporary litigation: the party claiming must serve  its
                 claim on the party against whom the claim is made  and  the
                 latter, in turn, must serve its defence on the former.


             17. One grafts on to this uncontroversial construction  of  the
                 Rules  those  requirements  of  the  overriding   objective
                 highlighted above.  True it is  that  rule  29(3),  on  its
                 face, confines the sanction of discretionary disbarment  to
                 cases where the Respondent has (merely) failed to lodge its
                 AOS with the Upper Tribunal.  Construed  superficially  and
                 literally, this sanction does not extend to cases where the
                 Respondent has lodged its AOS with the Upper  Tribunal  but
                 has failed to serve same on the Applicant.  The 2008  Rules
                 are a measure of subordinate legislation, to  be  construed
                 in accordance with conventional principles.  Applying  this
                 approach, a requirement, provision or  consequence  may  be
                 imported  by  reasonable  implication.  Equally,  by   well
                 established principle, the Rules must be construed so as to
                 avoid an anomalous,  or  absurd,  result.  Furthermore,  by
                 virtue  of  the  overriding  objective,   the   substantive
                 provisions of the 2008 Rules do  not  exist  in  a  vacuum.
                 Rather, when  the  task  of  construing  them  arises,  the
                 requirement to give effect to the overriding  objective  is
                 not a matter of choice: it is, rather, a duty.


             18. Accordingly, we conclude that  the  discretionary  sanction
                 enshrined in rule 29(3) of the 2008 Rules is  not  confined
                 to cases where an AOS has not been lodged  with  the  Upper
                 Tribunal. Rather, applying a  purposive  construction  duly
                 infused with the overriding  objective,  we  are  satisfied
                 that this discretionary sanction extends to cases where the
                 AOS has been lodged with the  Tribunal  but  has  not  been
                 served on the Applicant.

             19. If we are wrong in this, our  primary,  conclusion  on  the
                 second question, we are satisfied  that  the  discretionary
                 sanction of disbarment from participation in the permission
                 proceedings is conferred on the Upper Tribunal by rule 7 of
                 the 2008 rules, which provides, insofar as material:

                       "(2)   If  a  party  has  failed  to  comply  with  a
                            requirement  in   these   Rules,   a   practice
                            direction or a direction,  the  Upper  Tribunal
                            may take such  action  as  it  considers  just,
                            which may include -


                             (a)   waiving the requirement;


                             (b)   requiring the failure to be remedied;


                            (c)    exercising  its  power  under   rule   8
                                  (striking out a party's case); or

                            (d)   except in a mental health case, an asylum
                                  or  an  immigration  case,  restricting  a
                                  party's participation in the proceedings."


                 In this context,  we  draw  attention  to  the  words  "the
                 proceedings",  juxtaposing  same  with   the   words   "the
                 application   for   permission"   and    "the    subsequent
                 proceedings" in rule 29(3). We are satisfied that there  is
                 a clear distinction between the permission  stage  (on  the
                 one hand) and the  substantive  stage  (on  the  other)  of
                 judicial  review  proceedings.  Giving  effect   to   those
                 provisions of the overriding objective  highlighted  above,
                 we conclude that the discretionary power  invested  in  the
                 Upper Tribunal to "take such action as it  considers  just"
                 in circumstances where the Respondent's failure  to  comply
                 with the Rules consists of a failure to serve  its  AOS  on
                 the Applicant, timeously or at all, incorporates a power to
                 disbar the Respondent from participating in any aspects  of
                 the permission stage of the proceedings.




           Omnibus Conclusions


             20. We conclude as follows:


                 (i)   The discretionary sanction enshrined in rule 29(3) of
                      the  2008  Rules  whereby  the  Upper   Tribunal   is
                      empowered to disbar from participation in a hearing a
                      respondent who has failed to lodge an AOS extends  to
                      cases where the Respondent's AOS has been lodged with
                      the  Tribunal  but  has  not  been  served   on   the
                      Applicant.


                 (ii)  Further, or in the alternative, the Upper Tribunal is
                      empowered to impose this sanction by rule  7  of  the
                      2008 Rules.




           Costs


             21.  As  we  have  ruled  on  the  preliminary  issue  in   the
                 Applicant's favour, we consider that the Respondent  should
                 pay the Applicant's costs  of  the  wasted  hearing  on  10
                 October 2014 and the further associated  and  consequential
                 costs.


           Relisting


           22.   The oral renewal hearing will be rescheduled as quickly  as
           possible.






                     Signed   Bernard  McCloskey














                             APPENDIX





                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 jr/276/2014

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

                                                     Friday, 10 October 2014

                                   Before

                       MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT
                     JUDGE RINTOUL, UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                            ISAAC NGATIA KIMONDO
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

For the Applicant:     Mr I Kumi (of Counsel), Whitworth & Green
Solicitors.

For the Respondent:          Mr A Byass(of Counsel), instructed by
      the Treasury Solicitor.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                         APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION
                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

THE PRESIDENT, MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY


   1.  From  somewhat  unpromising  beginnings,  this   renewed   permission
      application has  raised  two  points  of  practice  which  are  rather
      important. The first is:  which procedural rules regime applies in the
      cohort of judicial review cases in the Upper Tribunal which  has  been
      transferred from the Administrative Court?  This case is  one  of  the
      automatic November 2013 transfers, on account of its history.

   2. The second question concerns the consequences to be  attributed  to  a
      failure to serve the Acknowledgement of Service on the Claimant at the
      appropriate time.  The fact of this failure in the present case is the
      only proper construction, it seems to us, of the second  paragraph  of
      the letter of 09 October 2014 from the  Treasury  Solicitor's  office.
      This raises the issues of (a) costs and (b) the Secretary  of  State's
      right to be heard at the oral permission hearing.   The  second  issue
      will be dictated by the first to the following  extent.   If  the  CPR
      applies then, of course, there are specific relevant  rules.  However,
      if the CPR does not apply then we will  have  to  consider  the  Upper
      Tribunal Rules, together with considerations of good practice and  the
      overriding objective.

   3. While we are not happy about delaying the outcome of the oral renewal,
      our  preferred  course  is  to  make  a  considered  ruling   on   the
      aforementioned issues.  To summarise, the two issues are:

      (i)   which procedural regime applies to transferred cases?


      (ii)  what right of audience, if any, does the Secretary of State have
             in circumstances where it is accepted that the Acknowledgement
             of Service was not served on the Applicant?


      I recall that the  second  of  these  questions,  albeit  in  slightly
      different terms, was considered in a decision of  Mr  Justice  Ouseley
      some months ago.  My recollection, far from infallible,  is  that  the
      relevant CPR provisions are CPR 54 Rules 8 and 9




   4. We direct both parties to file a written submission within seven days.

   5. There is of course a risk that the Respondent may have  to  ultimately
      bear the costs for the obvious reason that it  is  conceded  that  the
      Acknowledgement of Service was not served until yesterday.  While that
      may have some irresistible costs consequences, we are unable to form a
      final view at this stage.

   6. The terms of our ruling on the above issues in due course will dictate
      the further course of the renewed permission  application  before  the
      Tribunal.  If  any  further  directions  are  required  they  will  be
      contained in the ruling.  The aspiration of the Tribunal would  be  to
      bring this case back into its lists as quickly as possible.

   ~~~~0~~~~








-----------------------
[1] 29(2A) In  [immigration  judicial  review]  proceedings,  a  person  who
provides an  acknowledgement  of  service  under  paragraph  (1)  must  also
provide a copy to-
      (a) the applicant; and
      (b) any other person named in the application under rule  28(4)(a)  or
        acknowledgement of service under paragraph (2)(c)
no later than the time specified in paragraph (1).


