

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  Kabia (MF: para 398 - "exceptional circumstances") 2013 UKUT 00569 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates Court         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 October  2013                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

                                   Between

                                 YAYA KABIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Nicholson instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mrs M. Morgan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   1) The new rules  relating  to  article  8  claims  advanced  by  foreign
      criminals seeking to resist deportation are a complete  code  and  the
      exceptional circumstances to be considered in the  balancing  exercise
      involve the application of a proportionality test as required  by  the
      Strasbourg jurisprudence: MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at para 43.


   2) The question being addressed by a  decision  maker  applying  the  new
      rules set out at paragraph 398  of  HC  395  in  considering  a  claim
      founded upon article 8 of the ECHR and that  being  addressed  by  the
      judge who carries out what was referred to in  MF  (Article  8  -  New
      Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC) as the second step in a two-stage
      process is the same one that, properly executed, will return the  same
      answer.

   3) The new rules speak of "exceptional circumstances" but,  as  has  been
      made clear by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria), exceptionality is a
      likely characteristic of a claim that properly succeeds rather than  a
      legal  test  to  be  met.   In  this  context,   "exceptional"   means
      circumstances in which deportation would result in unjustifiably harsh
      consequences  for  the  individual  or  their  family  such   that   a
      deportation would not be proportionate".


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Gambia born on  7  September  1990,
      appeals against a decision of  a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Judge Osborne sitting with Mr Getlevog, a  non-legal  member  of  the
      Tribunal) who,  by  a  determination  promulgated  on  19  July  2013,
      dismissed his appeal against a decision  of  the  respondent  that  he
      should be deported. That decision was made by the respondent  pursuant
      to the "automatic deportation" provisions of  section  32  of  the  UK
      Borders Act  2007.  That  was  because,  as  the  appellant  had  been
      convicted of 2 offences of conspiracy to  supply  Class  A  drugs  and
      sentenced to 40 months detention in a Young Offenders Institution  (he
      being under 21 years of age at  the  date  of  conviction)  he  was  a
      foreign criminal in respect of whom the  respondent  was  required  to
      make deportation order, such deportation being deemed to be  conducive
      to the public good because of the provision of section  32(4)  of  the
      2007 Act.


   2. The grounds for seeking permission to appeal, drafted by Mr  Nicholson
      with commendable clarity and economy, identify everything  that  could
      possible be advanced in challenge to the determination. Those  grounds
      are neatly summarised by First-tier Tribunal Judge Appleyard who  said
      this in granting permission to appeal:

           "The grounds.... contend that the appellant has a  diagnosis  of
           paranoid schizophrenia  and  needs  support  of  medication  and
           medical professionals, and of his family, and there is a lack of
           adequate treatment and support in Gambia. The  panel  found  the
           treatment would not be adequate in Gambia and  saw  this  to  be
           significantly in favour of the  appellant.  However,  the  panel
           then failed  to  make  conclusive  findings  because  of  errors
           applying the wrong threshold of "exceptionality", not adequately
           addressing case law and failing to deal properly with  evidence.
           In so doing the panel erred in coming to  wrong  conclusions  on
           the  appellant's   criminality   and   misdirected   itself   on
           submissions based on MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ  279.  It  is
           further contended that the Tribunal erred in distinguishing  the
           appellant's case too harshly from MM. Beyond that,  for  various
           reasons, the panel erred in its treatment of the evidence."

   3. At the beginning of the hearing  before  us,  Mr  Nicholson,  who  has
      appeared as counsel for the appellant  throughout  these  proceedings,
      helpfully narrowed the issued to be addressed. First, he  acknowledged
      that although there is ample evidence of the appellant's mental health
      difficulties and his  continuing  receipt  of  treatment  from  mental
      health professionals, there has in fact been no diagnosis of  paranoid
      schizophrenia. At least, it is not possible to find  evidence  of  any
      such diagnosis in the extensive documentary evidence before us and  so
      he conceded, quite properly, that it was not  appropriate  for  us  to
      proceed on the basis that such a diagnosis had in fact been made.


   4.  Secondly, although it was the appellant's case before the  First-tier
      Tribunal that he did have family life with his mother  and  sister  in
      the United Kingdom such as to engage the protection of  article  8  of
      the ECHR, and that remains his contention, Mr Nicholson,  again  quite
      properly and realistically, accepted that it  had  been  open  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal to find that no such family life existed  so  that
      any  relationship  with  those  adult  relatives  would  fall  to   be
      considered as part of the appellant's private life. Thus, he  accepted
      that finding is unassailable in an appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

   5. Third, it is important to recognise that, although the  appellant  has
      been receiving medical treatment for mental  health  difficulties,  he
      does not fall within any of the exceptions set out in section 33(6) of
      the 2007 Act. That subsection sets out a range of orders  relating  to
      those requiring treatment for mental health issues but  the  appellant
      falls within none of those categories. In any event, as is made  clear
      by section 33(7), even if one of these  exceptions  does  apply  to  a
      foreign criminal, the consequence  of  that  is  not  to  prevent  his
      deportation. It means only that the "automatic" deportation  provision
      does not apply and there is no presumption applied,  one  way  or  the
      other, as to whether deportation is conducive to the public good.  Put
      another way, in such a case a decision as to deportation will be  made
      in the light of the circumstances of that particular case.

   6. The relevance of this so far as this appellant is  concerned  is  that
      primary legislation has identified a range of circumstances  in  which
      those with mental  health  difficulties  should  be  considered  on  a
      different basis but this appellant does not fall within any  of  them.
      That does not mean, of course, that his medical  condition  is  to  be
      disregarded. As was recognised by the First-tier Tribunal, it  remains
      at the very core of his challenge to the deportation decision.

   7. The appellant's personal and immigration history is well known to  the
      parties and so we do not need to set it out in  complete  detail.  For
      present purposes the following summary will suffice.

   8. In December 2003 the appellant's mother was granted leave to enter  as
      the spouse of a person present and settled in the United  Kingdom  and
      the appellant and his sister accompanied his mother as dependants, her
      new  husband  accepting  them  even  though  their  biological  father
      remained in Gambia. Thus, on arrival the appellant was just  13  years
      old. In June 2004 the appellant returned to  Gambia  with  his  mother
      because his own father was seriously ill. His mother returned  to  the
      United Kingdom the following month but the appellant stayed in  Gambia
      for about 6 months. Following  his  father's  death,  the  appellant's
      mother travelled back to Gambia to bring the  appellant  back  to  the
      United Kingdom. This was in December 2004.

   9. However, by this time the appellant's  mother's  marriage  had  broken
      down and she and the appellant were refused leave to enter  when  they
      arrived back in  the  United  Kingdom.  They  were  granted  Temporary
      Admission and the appellant's  mother  submitted  an  application  for
      leave to remain for  compassionate  reasons  outside  the  immigration
      rules. In due course the appellant's mother and  sister  were  granted
      leave to remain, until February 2014, but the  appellant  was  refused
      leave because of his criminal offending.

  10.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  having  heard  oral  evidence  from   the
      appellant's mother and sister, as well as from the appellant  himself,
      set out a detailed account of this history at paragraphs 8  and  9  of
      the determination and then went on to  examine  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant's mental health  difficulties.  The  judge  noted  that  the
      appellant received treatment while "sectioned" under the Mental Health
      Act 1983 on two occasions in 2010. She said:

           "The   Appellant   himself   described   feelings   of   intense
           hopelessness during this period - he  was  not  able  to  access
           further education because of his immigration status - his family
           had broken up in circumstances which he  could  not  control  or
           influence and it had culminated in him being detained under  the
           Mental Health Act.


           The Appellant accepted that he had begun smoking cannabis  at  a
           relatively early age and the medical opinion  of  all  of  those
           involved in the  Appellant's  care  was  that  this  could  have
           exacerbated his mental health problems.  Within  his  sentencing
           remarks His Honour Judge Everett took  a  more  robust  approach
           stating:-


                 "I can only have some  limited  sympathy  for  him  in  the
                 medical condition that he has because it was in fact a drug
                 related psychosis, using cannabis,  which  has  caused  him
                 mental health problems.""

  11. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  noted  also  that  immediately  before
      appearing for sentence for the offences of conspiracy to supply  class
      A drugs the appellant said he had "gone on a bender"  the  consequence
      of which he was held in a segregation  unit  initially  following  the
      imposition of a custodial sentence.


  12. The judge then reviewed the circumstances of the appellant's relatives
      at the date of the hearing. His mother and sister  were  now  reunited
      after a period of  disruption  and,  in  particular,  his  sister  was
      "flourishing". Both indicated  a  willingness  to  provide  continuing
      support for the appellant, following his release from  detention.  The
      judge reviewed the evidence relating to the support being provided  to
      the appellant  by  medical  professionals  and  the  medication  being
      provided to him. He  was  being  prescribed  a  now  reduced  dose  of
      Olanzapine, an anti-psychotic drug. This was not available  in  Gambia
      but the evidence indicated that an alternative, Haloperidol, would  be
      available at the Royal Victoria Hospital  in  Banjul,  which  was  the
      hospital best placed to provide for the appellant  in  Gambia.  Having
      said that, the judge accepted that  the  treatment  available  to  the
      appellant in  Gambia  was  not  comparable  to  that  which  would  be
      available to him in this country.

  13. Having directed herself in terms of the guidance to be drawn  from  GS
      and EO (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012] UKUT  00397  (IAC)  the
      judge set out these clear findings of fact:

           "We find that in the Appellant's case he  is  likely  to  remain
           vulnerable  to  further  psychotic   episodes   which   may   be
           exacerbated by circumstances which he  finds  stressful  and  by
           continuing to spoke cannabis.  The  Appellant  himself  accepted
           that he had been a regular smoker of cannabis  since  his  early
           teenage years and that he had "gone  on  a  bender"  immediately
           before he was sentenced in June 2010.


           He experienced two periods of psychotic behaviour in 2010 before
           he was sent into custody  and  one  immediately  afterwards.  He
           expressed delusional  beliefs  and  behaved  in  a  disinhibited
           manner including aggressive outbursts  and  we  find  that  such
           behaviour, if repeated, would be bound to draw the Appellant  to
           the attention of others."


      The judge recorded the  appellant's  evidence  that,  in  addition  to
      medication, he needed the support of mental health  professionals  and
      that he believed, the judge thought with "ample  justification",  that
      such support would not be  available  to  him  in  Gambia.  The  judge
      considered carefully a report from Dr Pamela  Kea  about  the  limited
      availability of the medical treatment  the  appellant  would  wish  to
      access in Gambia and reached this conclusion:


           "We find that the prospects for good psychiatric care continuing
           to be available for  the  appellant  are  bleak.  We  take  into
           account his own lack of insight, the psychotic episodes  he  has
           thus far experienced and the paucity of available expertise  and
           facilities in Gambia."


      Thus, there can be no doubt at all that the judge had clearly in  mind
      the stark contrast in the availability of treatment that the appellant
      would face upon return to Gambia and, as she made clear  at  paragraph
      38 of the determination, that  the  appellant's  present  relationship
      with the health professionals  who  were  supporting  him  constituted
      "significant relationships" in the context of his private life.

  14. With all this in mind the judge considered the appellant's claim under
      article 8 of the ECHR, considered first under  the  immigration  rules
      applicable, as set out at paragraphs 398 and 399 of HC 395. The  judge
      recognised that in view of her findings in relation to family life the
      appellant could not succeed on the basis that  paragraph  399  applied
      and so considered paragraph 399A in respect of his private  life.  The
      judge concluded, correctly, that the appellant could not succeed under
      that provision because, despite the young age at which he had  arrived
      he had not, by the relevant date spent at least half  his  life  here.
      Indeed, he had spent the  first  13  years  of  his  life  in  Gambia,
      returning there for a further six months or so  when  his  father  had
      become ill.


  15. Having arrived at that position the judge went  on  to  carry  out  an
      assessment of the article  8  claim,  not  within  the  scope  of  the
      immigration rules, but by applying an assessment guided  by  the  five
      step approach  provided  by  Razgar,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v
      Sectretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27. The  judge
      cannot be criticised for that because in doing so  she  was  following
      the approach indicated as the correct one by the reported case  of  MF
      (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012]  UKUT  393  (IAC)  (31  October
      2012). As has now been made  clear  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
      (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
      1192 in fact the rules do provide a complete code and  so  it  is  not
      necessary to look outside them. That is because paragraph 398 provides
      that:

           "... the  Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
           consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does
           not, it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
           public interest in  deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
           factors."


      It is, therefore, at this stage that everything relevant is considered
      as the decision maker looks at the "other factors" not relevant to the
      application of paragraphs 399 and 399A to see  whether  they  outweigh
      the public interest in deportation.  That  is  the  same  exercise  of
      striking a balance between the competing interests  in  play  as  this
      judge carried out by applying the Razgar analysis. As was explained by
      the Master of the Rolls in MF (Nigeria) at paragraph 39:


           "... the rules expressly contemplate a weighing  of  the  public
           interest in deportation against "other factors".  In  our  view,
           this must be a reference to all other factors which are relevant
           to proportionality and entails an implicit requirement that they
           are to be taken into account."


      True it is that paragraph 398 speaks in terms of  circumstances  being
      "exceptional" but, as was pointed out in MF (Nigeria), that has to  be
      considered in the light of the "Criminality  Guidance  for  Article  8
      ECHR cases: issued by the respondent to decision makers:

           "... "exceptional"  means  circumstances  in  which  deportation
           would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for   the
           individual  or their family such that deportation would  not  be
           proportionate. That is likely to be the case only very rarely."

  16. Put another way, the question being  addressed  by  a  decision  maker
      applying the new  rules  set  out  at  paragraph  398  of  HC  395  in
      considering a claim founded upon article 8 of the ECHR and that  being
      addressed by the judge who carries out what  was  referred  to  in  MF
      (Article 8 - New Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC)  as  the  second
      step in a two-stage process is the same one that,  properly  executed,
      will return the same answer.


  17.  The new rules speak of "exceptional circumstances" but, as  has  been
      made clear by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria), exceptionality is a
      likely characteristic of a claim that properly succeeds rather than  a
      legal  test  to  be  met.   In  this  context,  ""exceptional"   means
      circumstances in which deportation would result in unjustifiably harsh
      consequences  for  the  individual  or  their  family  such   that   a
      deportation would not be proportionate".

  18. The new rules  relating  to  article  8  claims  advanced  by  foreign
      criminals seeking to resist deportation are a complete  code  and  the
      exceptional circumstances to be considered in the  balancing  exercise
      involve the application of a proportionality test as required  by  the
      Strasberg jurisprudence: MF (Nigeria) at para 43.

  19. Thus, nothing turns in this case upon the route taken by the judge  to
      her conclusion upon the article 8 claim. This brings  us  to  what  we
      understand to be the main challenge now pursued by Mr Nicholson  which
      is that, in applying her own assessment, the judge erred  in  applying
      too high a threshold as she considered there was in fact a requirement
      of  exceptionality.  This  is  because,  at  paragraph   48   of   the
      determination, the judge said:


           "We have concluded that there is nothing within the  Appellant's
           circumstances which would make it so exceptional as to enable us
           to finds that his Article 8 rights with  regard  to  his  mental
           health issues should be taken into account.  We  take  from  the
           judgment MM that there has never been a case  where  a  "health"
           case has succeeded under Article 8 but not Article 3"


      Having concluded already that the appellant could  not  succeed  under
      Article  3  the  judge  found  absent  the  nature  of   circumstances
      anticipated by the Court of Appeal as being required for a claim under
      Article 8 to succeed.


  20. The key to a correct understanding of the reasoning of  the  judge  is
      found, unsurprisingly, in the words used and  the  way  in  which  she
      expressed herself in this regard. It  is  plain,  unambiguously,  that
      here she  was  concerned  with  the  guidance  to  be  drawn  from  MM
      (Zimbabwe). That is the unavoidable conclusion from the  phrase  "with
      regard to his mental health issues" and the reference in the  sentence
      that follows to MM (Zimbabwe). This was a separate exercise from  that
      which followed in paragraph 49 of the determination, which we set  out
      in full below as here is found a summary of the reasoning that led  to
      the article 8 claim in its entirety, rather than that part of it being
      considered earlier, being rejected. This assessment  was  informed  by
      the summary of the appellant's case set  out  at  paragraph  38  which
      brought together everything that could be gleaned  from  the  evidence
      that spoke in the appellant's favour:


           "Having thus examined and considered the Appellant's  case  with
           care  we  have  concluded  that  the  Secretary  of  State   has
           established that the need for deportation in this case has  been
           established because of the need to put in place measures for the
           prevention of disorder or crime as set out in Article  8(2)  and
           this outweighs the Appellant's rights  to  have  his  Article  8
           rights respected to the extent that  he  should  be  allowed  to
           remain in the United Kingdom. He cannot claim that right  simply
           on the basis that he would receive better medical  treatment  in
           the United Kingdom than in  Gambia  and  other  aspects  of  his
           private life are not sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the
           interests of the Secretary of State.  In  the  circumstances  we
           find that the appeal must be dismissed."


  21.  For  these  reasons  we  must  reject  the  first  challenge  to  the
      determination. The judge did not apply an impermissibly high threshold
      of exceptionality. She carried out a very careful assessment in  which
      she confronted directly everything advanced on the appellant's  behalf
      and explained why those factors did not outweigh the  public  interest
      in deportation.


  22.  Nor  do  we  accept  that  the  judge  erred  in  distinguishing  the
      circumstance of this appellant with those on MM (Zimbabwe). There  are
      a number of reasons for doing so. MM had a clear diagnosis of  serious
      mental illness and had been made subject  to  a  transfer  order  from
      prison to a suitable hospital pursuant to sections 47 and  49  of  the
      Mental Health Act 1983, that being sufficient to bring him within  one
      of the exceptions in section 33(5) of the UKBA 2007. There was medical
      opinion to the effect that the fact he would be living with  the  same
      close family members he had before would be "protective" because  they
      would notice early signs of relapse and  would  refer  him  for  early
      treatment, as they  had  before.  There  was  no  suitable  medication
      available in Zimbabwe. And, perhaps most significantly,  there  was  a
      finding of fact that

           "Any risk of further offending behaviour is  closely  linked  to
           his mental health, his treatment, and to  his  family  and  home
           circumstances."

      That of course differs from the position of this  appellant,  who  has
      not been living with his close relatives for  some  considerable  time
      and whose offending was not related to a medical condition but to  his
      "destitution" and his resolve to make money by selling drugs. That was
      a clear finding of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal,  informed  by
      the sentencing remarks of the Crown Court Judge.

  23. The next challenge we address is that the judge is said to  have  gone
      behind the assessment  in  the  pre-sentence  report  put  before  the
      sentencing judge and as a consequence, wrongly,  substituted  her  own
      assessment of the risk the appellant posed to the community.  This  is
      because the author of the pre-sentence report had said:

           "He is assessed as a low risk of serious harm  and  therefore  I
           would  respectfully  ask  that  consideration  is  given  to   a
           Suspended sentence order...."


      But the judge said, at paragraph 47 of her determination:


           "Our own assessment of the risk posed by the Appellant  is  that
           he should be regarded as a medium risk of re-offending as stated
           by the Probation Officer but that the level  of  risk  posed  to
           others is likely to be at least medium if not high."

  24. In our judgment the judge was plainly entitled to depart from the view
      expressed in the pre-sentence report. It is clear that this conclusion
      chimed with the sentencing remarks of the judge who imposed what was a
      lengthy sentence given the appellant's youth and his guilty plea.  The
      sentencing judge, expressing his  fundamental  disagreement  with  the
      approach of the Probation  Officers  who  had  prepared  pre  sentence
      reports for the appellant and  his  co-defendant  by  saying  (in  the
      appellant's absence as he had been removed from the court after having
      become disruptive):


           "... It is a regret, it seems to me, that two separate probation
           officers have seen fit to raise the hopes of either you or  Yaya
           Kabia by suggesting alternatives, because the  Court  of  Appeal
           has made it very, very clear  that  only  a  substantial  prison
           sentence must follow as a result  of  the  sale  of  these  evil
           drugs."


      And then continued:


           "It is important to keep in mind the seriousness of the sale  of
           Class A controlled drugs. These drugs (heroin and crack  cocaine
           in particular) are a terrible evil on our  streets,  this  court
           sees all too often the end results of the sale and use of  these
           drugs, addicts, who cause terrible harm to themselves  by  using
           it, indeed on occasions with fatal  consequences,  not  only  do
           they put themselves at risk for their lives, they  do  not  care
           about where their next amount of money is going  to  come  from,
           they just need money for drugs, it is as simple as that and they
           will do anything to get that money to get those drugs  and  that
           behaviour extends to thefts from shops,  for  example  affecting
           the community, robberies, affecting the  community,  burglaries,
           affecting the community and of course as you and Yaya Kabia did,
           actually selling drugs and perpetrating that evil cycle.....


  25. Next, the grounds complain that the judge "speculated for  herself  on
      the role  of  cannabis  in  the  likely  recurrence  of  A's  criminal
      behaviour and ignoring the re-establishment of his  family  life  with
      both his mother and sister." As we have observed above,  Mr  Nicholson
      does not pursue the second limb of that challenge. He is plainly right
      to take that approach because such a challenge is  simply  unarguable.
      We are unable to accept that the  conclusion  reached  in  respect  of
      cannabis use and its consequences was  speculative.  There  was  ample
      evidence to support what was said by the judge. The appellant's  heavy
      and consistent use of cannabis was clearly associated with his medical
      condition. "Cannabis dependant syndrome" has been a consistent  aspect
      of the comment made in medical notes. A report before the  judge  from
      Dr Chaturvedi, Associate Specialist of the Prison in-reach Team  dated
      23 January 2012 noted that  the  Appellant  "admitted  using  cannabis
      daily", that "Once released he would go back to using cannabis  as  it
      helps him relax and helps him sleep". The doctor said:


           "... He appeared not to have any evidence of an active psychotic
           disorder...


           In summary I feel that Mr Kabia has  had  a  psychotic  illness,
           however, it is unclear whether this was solely due to  substance
           misuse which Mr Kabia does  not  accept.  It  appears  that  his
           symptoms  have  not  reoccurred  since  the  decrease   of   his
           medication from Olanzapine 15 mg to 5 mg... and he appears to be
           currently well...."

  26. Given the sentencing remarks, taken together with what was said in the
      pre-sentence report, it was open to the judge to find  an  association
      between the appellant's drug  use  and  his  propensity  to  reoffend,
      especially in the light of his lack of insight and asserted  intention
      to consume cannabis on his release.


  27. For these reasons we are satisfied that the determination of the First-
      tier Tribunal discloses no error of law and so shall stand.

  28. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date: 16 October 2013.

