

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Mitchell (Basnet revisited) [2015] UKUT 00562 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Promulgated on               |
|18 December 2014                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          SHANA MILINI JO MITCHELL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. The decision of the Tribunal in Basnet v SSHD [2012] UKUT  0113  (IAC)
      does not put the burden of proof on the Secretary of State  where  the
      application was, on its face, insufficiently completed.


   2. The evidence shows that the payment pages are retained for 18  months.
      Thus, within that period, any question of the reason  for  failure  to
      obtain payment can be investigated, although the reasons for declining
      a payment are available only to  the  bank  account  holder,  not  the
      Secretary of State.  In the light of this, a more nuanced approach  to
      the burden of proof may be needed.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Jamaica.  She has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 9 November 2002.  On 22 September 2012  she  applied  for
    leave to remain, outside the Immigration Rules, on health grounds.  The
    application was refused on 19 October 2013.   The  appellant  exercised
    her right of appeal against that  decision:  the  grounds  were  purely
    general.  On 20 May 2014 the  appellant's  representatives  raised  two
    specific further grounds on appeal.  The first was that  the  appellant
    had acquired ten years' lawful residence in  the  United  Kingdom;  the
    second was that she had a well-founded fear of persecution in  Jamaica.
    Following a case management review  hearing,  the  appeal  came  before
    Judge Agnew in the First-tier Tribunal.  The hearing extended over  two
    days, 15 July and 4 August 2014.   Judge  Agnew  dismissed  the  appeal
    insofar as it was based on the Immigration Rules,  but  concluded  that
    the appellant had established a well-founded fear of persecution.   She
    thus allowed the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.

 2. It  does  not  appear  that  there  is  now  any  suggestion  that  the
    application for leave ought to have been  granted  on  the  basis  upon
    which it was made.  Further, there  is  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    conclusion that the appellant had established her status as a  refugee.
     Nevertheless, the appellant sought and obtained permission  to  appeal
    to this Tribunal challenging the judge's conclusion in relation to  her
    ten years' residence in the United Kingdom.

 3. The respondent's position is that  the  appellant  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom without leave between 31 January 2010 (when her leave to remain
    as a student expired) and 24 September 2010 when she was granted  leave
    as a Tier 1 (Post Study) Student.  The  appellant's  position  is  that
    before her leave expired on 31  January  2010  she  had  made  a  valid
    application for further leave, so that her leave was extended beyond 31
    January 2010 by s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

 4. The history, as revealed by the evidence  before  Judge  Agnew,  is  as
    follows.  The appellant sent an application for  further  leave  on  29
    January 2010.  It was returned by the respondent on 18  February  2010,
    with a letter stating that the  application  was  invalid  because  the
    payment mandate section on the application form had  not  been  signed.
    The appellant sent a  new  application  on  1  March  2010,  which  the
    respondent appears  to  have  treated  as  a  valid  application.   The
    respondent wrote on 15 April 2010 seeking further evidence, and  on  11
    May 2010 refused the application.  The  reason  was  that  neither  the
    evidence of the appellant's academic award, nor  the  evidence  of  her
    funds,  met  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.   There   was   further
    correspondence between the appellant's solicitors and the Secretary  of
    State,  and  further  documents  were  provided,  following  which  the
    Secretary of State reconsidered the application and granted  it  on  24
    September 2010.

 5. The argument before Judge Agnew had two limbs.  The first was that  the
    appellant, apparently now for the first time,  said  that  the  payment
    mandate in the application of 29 January 2010 had indeed  been  signed,
    and that therefore that application was a  valid  in-time  application.
    She sought to put the Secretary of State to proof of its invalidity, on
    the authority of Basnet v SSHD [2012] UKUT  00113  (IAC).   Not  merely
    would the in-time application have given rise to the extension  of  her
    leave under s. 3C; its refusal would also have engendered  a  right  of
    appeal, which she could have exercised, and in the course of  it  could
    have remedied any defect in the documents accompanying the application.
     Secondly, the appellant  claimed  that  the  material  supporting  the
    application was in truth sufficient under the Rules to entitle her to a
    grant of leave.  Judge Agnew examined those  submissions.   It  is  not
    clear that she reached a firm conclusion on the Basnet point,  but  she
    clearly took the view that the material before her  did  not  establish
    that the appellant met the requirements of the Rules at any date before
    the submission of further evidence to the Secretary of State in  August
    2010.  She thus concluded that the respondent was correct in  asserting
    that the appellant had been in the United Kingdom  without  leave  from
    the expiry of her leave at the end of January 2010 until the  grant  in
    September stopped.  Permission to appeal to this Tribunal  was  granted
    on the Basnet point.

 6. Mr Ndubuisi took us through the facts and the assertions made about the
    evidence.  He relied on Basnet.  Mr Matthews'  position  was  primarily
    that it is simply too late to raise this issue, which should have  been
    taken up much closer to  the  time  in  question.   He  also,  however,
    provided important supplementary material  in  relation  to  the  facts
    underlying the decision in Basnet.

 7. In that case the appellant had completed all the requirements  for  the
    forms in relation to payment, but the Secretary of State was, she said,
    unable to obtain the fee from the appellant's  bank.   The  application
    was  therefore  returned  as  invalid.   The  matter  was   immediately
    challenged by the appellant, despite  indications  that  there  was  no
    right of appeal.  The Upper Tribunal's decision is to the  effect  that
    if the Secretary of State asserts before the Tribunal that there is  no
    right of appeal because a  fee  has  not  been  paid,  it  is  for  the
    Secretary of State to show that such authorisation was provided in  the
    application form was not sufficient to enable the fee to be recovered.

 8. Despite the assertions made on behalf of the  appellant  in  this  case
    that it is "on all fours" with Basnet, there are a number  of  striking
    differences.  The first is that, so  far  from  taking  up  the  matter
    straight away, the appellant in the  present  case  did  not  make  her
    assertion  about  having   signed   the   authorisation   until   these
    proceedings,  years  later.   Further,  the  more  nearly  contemporary
    evidence provides  no  support  for  her  assertion.   Her  solicitor's
    letter, dated 27 August 2010, contains the following sentence:

          "Please note that Ms Mitchell had  attempted  to  make  the  first
          application when her student visa was still valid,  but  this  was
          refused on the basis that she had not signed  the  bank  deduction
          mandate for payment by her credit/debit card."

    The letter goes on to discuss the appellant's  second  application  and
    asks that it be considered as in time.  There is no suggestion here  of
    any assertion that the first application was valid or in time.

 9. Secondly, in Basnet the form  submitted  was  good  on  its  face:  the
    difficulties are said to have risen in attempting to collect the fee on
    the strength of the information provided in the form.  In  the  present
    case the  position  as  asserted  by  the  respondent  (and  apparently
    accepted by the appellant and her legal representatives  in  the  years
    that followed) was that the form was not good on its face: the  mandate
    was not signed.

10. In Basnet the Tribunal took the view that, on the facts of  that  case,
    it was for the Secretary of State to establish that the  appellant  had
    no right to bring the appeal that he sought to  bring.   The  appellant
    had submitted an apparently good application form, and the Secretary of
    State's response to the appeal was to assert that the fee could not  be
    collected on the basis of the  authority  given.   This  was  a  matter
    solely within the knowledge of the  Secretary  of  State,  because  the
    crucial events had happened after the submission of the  form,  and  it
    was therefore for the Secretary of State to show  that  the  difficulty
    arose from a default by the appellant.  It does not appear to  us  that
    similar reasoning applies when the alleged defect was apparent  on  the
    face of the form itself,  and  so  was  within  the  knowledge  of  the
    applicant.  There is the further difficulty that these proceedings  are
    not on their face a challenge to the Secretary of State's conclusion as
    to the validity of the 29 January 2010 application, nor was  there  any
    challenge to that conclusion at the time.

11. We therefore reject the submission that, in the  circumstances  in  the
    present case, Basnet imposes on the Secretary of State  the  burden  of
    establishing that the application of 29 January 2010  was  invalid  for
    failure to sign the  payment  mandate.   In  any  event,  however,  the
    evidence available would, in our judgement, be sufficient to  establish
    the point in the Secretary of State's  favour:  that  evidence  is  the
    evidence showing that, during  2010  and  subsequently,  there  was  no
    suggestion that the form had in fact been validly completed,  including
    signing the mandate.

12. The appellant's failure to raise the  matter  at  the  time  has  other
    consequences, to which we must allude.  It is said on her  behalf  that
    if the 29 January 2010 application had been in time, she would have had
    a right of appeal against any refusal of that application.  That may be
    so, but questions as to whether she would have appealed  remain  purely
    speculative.  Further, the position is that at all relevant  times  the
    applicant knew that the Secretary of  State's  position  was  that  her
    leave had expired on 31 January 2010.  We have great sympathy  with  Mr
    Matthews's submissions that if she wanted to assert that the  Secretary
    of State's view was wrong, she should have done so at  the  time:  this
    view is if anything reinforced by the evidence to which we refer below.
     One reason why any difficulty needs to be taken up  promptly  is  that
    nobody  is  entitled  to  require  anybody  else  to   keep   documents
    indefinitely.

13. We shall therefore dismiss this appeal: the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    was right not to be influenced by Basnet.  She was right in  concluding
    that the appellant failed to establish ten years' lawful residence.

14. Before parting with the case we must draw attention to the material  Mr
    Matthews produced in relation to the Secretary  of  State's  accounting
    processes.  That material is contained in an affidavit affirmed  by  Mr
    Matthews on 16 January 2013 and intended for  use  in  judicial  review
    proceedings in the Court of Session in another case.  We see no  reason
    to doubt the accuracy of the matters asserted in that statement and  we
    therefore record  them  here.   The  relevant  facts  are  as  follows.
    Applications made by post and accompanied by a completed  payment  form
    are directed to the payment processing centre in Durham.   The  payment
    processing centre input details from the payment page on the  front  of
    the application form onto their system.  If full and valid card details
    are received these are input onto a system  called  TNS  and  sent  via
    Streamline to be processed.  The result is usually received  within  50
    minutes, and is either "successful" or "declined".  The  banks  provide
    no further details of the reason  for  declining  a  payment.   If  the
    payment  is  successful  the  application  is  treated   as   a   valid
    application.  There may be a number of reasons why a payment  might  be
    declined,  including  insufficient   funds,   exceeding   the   maximum
    transaction limit or the number of  transactions  permitted,  incorrect
    card number, or failure to indicate the amount to be taken.  All  cases
    where the payment is declined are classified as  "payment  exceptions",
    and an indication of that result is sent to the applicant  as  soon  as
    possible.  The payment pages  are  stored  at  the  payment  processing
    centre for eighteen months from the  date  of  receipt.   Thus,  within
    those eighteen months, it is, or should be, possible for an enquiry  to
    be made as to the success or otherwise of the payment process; and,  if
    the applicant obtains those details, he or she may be able to ascertain
    from the bank the reason for declining  the  payment.   After  eighteen
    months, however, the payment pages are destroyed.

15. We have set this out in  order  to  make  clear  and  public  what  the
    position is in relation to evidence  of  the  processing  of  payments.
    Generally speaking, the Secretary of  State  will  be  in  a  position,
    within eighteen months, to demonstrate that the payment was not  taken.
    Further, an applicant will be able to obtain the  payment  page  within
    that period.  It goes without saying also, of course, that an applicant
    can take up the matter with his  or  her  bank  without  involving  the
    Secretary of State at all.   This  may  be  regarded  as  casting  some
    factual doubt on the conclusions in Basnet.  It was there assumed  that
    the Secretary of State was not in a position  to  show  that  the  non-
    availability of the payment was the result of a decision  by  the  bank
    rather than an error by the Secretary of State.  It does  not  look  as
    though that was in truth the position at the time of Basnet; certainly,
    on the basis of  the  material  in  the  affidavit  to  which  we  have
    referred, it would not be the case now.  Given that  the  Secretary  of
    State does not have access to the reasons for declining a payment  that
    has been sought in accordance with a completed mandate, a more  nuanced
    approach to the burden of proof may be needed.

16. For the reasons we have given, the appeal in  relation  to  ten  years'
    residence remains dismissed; we therefore affirm the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in relation to  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    also in relation to the Immigration Rules.

17. This appeal was heard on 18 December  2014.   After  the  hearing,  the
    appellant's solicitors sought an anonymity order on the basis that "our
    client has been accepted as a refugee".  The Tribunal  understood  that
    to be an assertion that the Secretary  of  State  had  acted  on  Judge
    Agnew's findings and granted refugee status (including leave to remain)
    to the appellant.  The consequence of the  grant  would  be  that  this
    appeal  is  abandoned.   In  further   correspondence,   however,   the
    solicitors  clarified  the  position.   The  appellant  has  not   been
    "accepted" as a refugee: their letter was simply  a  reference  to  the
    findings of Judge Agnew.   We do not consider that the circumstances of
    this case are such that the normal rule that legal proceedings  are  in
    public should not apply.  Like Judge Agnew, we make no  order  for  the
    anonymity of the appellant.

18. The appeal is dismissed for the reasons we have given.










                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 14 September 2015
