
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   AS (s.55 "exclusion" certificate - process) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00571
                                    (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 September 2013                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     AS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel instructed by Shanthi &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



 1. Section 55 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 does not
    require a decision on exclusion from asylum to be made at the outset of
    a hearing and prior to consideration of any other matters.

 2.  The  effect  of  s.55  is  to  require  a  Tribunal  in  its   written
    determination to decide exclusion from asylum first, before  proceeding
    to address any other head of claim.

 3. Deciding exclusion first is merely common sense, regardless of  whether
    a s.55 certificate has been made by the  respondent  as  it  determines
    whether substantive consideration of the asylum claim is necessary.

 4. There is no statutory provision akin to s.55 that can be  applied  when
    an applicant makes a claim for Humanitarian Protection. However,  given
    the exclusion criteria in paragraph 339D of  HC  395  (the  Immigration
    Rules), which are very similar to those in Article  1F(a),  a  Tribunal
    should also decide on exclusion  from  Humanitarian  Protection  before
    substantive consideration of that claim.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka and was born in 1978.

Appeal History

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 15 October 2010 as  a  visitor  with
    his wife and two children. On 10 November 2010  the  appellant  applied
    for asylum and humanitarian protection status under  Council  Directive
    2004/83/EC  (the  Qualification  Directive)  with  his  family  as  his
    dependants. He also maintained that he was entitled to protection under
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

 3. In  a  letter  dated  1  September  2011  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application on all heads and made a decision under  Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 to remove the  appellant  and
    his family to Sri Lanka.

 4. In addition, the respondent  certified  the  appellant's  asylum  claim
    under s.55 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006  ("the
    2006 Act"). It is the respondent's case that the appellant is  excluded
    from the protection of the Refugee Convention by operation  of  Article
    1F (a), as there are serious reasons for considering he has committed a
    war crime or a crime against humanity.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal was heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mensah on 1 December 2011  and  6  January
    2012. In her determination dated 20 January 2012, Judge  Mensah  upheld
    the s.55 certificate and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 6. On 17 February 2012, the appellant was  granted  permission  to  appeal
    Judge Mensah's decision to the Upper Tribunal. After  a  hearing  on  4
    February  2013,  we  found  that  the  determination  of  Judge  Mensah
    disclosed a material error on a point of law such that it should be set
    aside.

 7. A copy of our decision  on  the  error  of  law  is  appended  to  this
    determination. The error of law was such that the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal had to be set aside entirely and re-made  de  novo.
    It is therefore our task now to re-make the asylum  and  other  claims,
    doing so in line with the provisions of s.55 of the 2006 Act.

 8. We must also make a decision on an additional submission made to us  by
    Ms Jegarajah, that the correct process  in  a  s.55  case  is  to  hear
    evidence and submissions and make a decision on exclusion at a  hearing
    before proceeding to hear evidence and submissions on any other  issue.



The Appellant's Claim

 9. In order to provide a context for the legal submissions made to  us  on
    the correct procedure for dealing with a s.55 certificate, we  now  set
    out the appellant's claim.

10. The appellant maintains that from 2007 to 2009 he worked as a member of
    a special unit of the Sri Lankan police force.  He worked in a team  of
    twelve people drawn from different armed services  and  his  team  also
    included members of the criminal underworld.

11. The appellant would receive orders directly from the Deputy General  of
    Police and the Superintendent of Police using a mobile phone  given  to
    him specifically and uniquely for this purpose.  The unit did not  have
    a fixed location but would meet in places such as abandoned houses.

12. The order would come to go  to  arrest  a  certain  person  who  was  a
    suspected LTTE member. The appellant and his colleagues would be armed.
    They would arrest and tie up and blindfold the detainee, and place them
    in the foot well of an unmarked vehicle.  The detainee  would  then  be
    handed over to other individuals working for the government, usually in
    an abandoned house, sometimes passing them over  to  men  from  another
    unmarked vehicle, sometimes taking the person to a police station,  the
    handover location only being given at the last minute.

13. The appellant maintains that for most of the time that  he  worked  for
    this unit, he did not know what happened to the people  arrested  after
    they left his charge. He knew only that the work he was doing was  part
    of an effort to stop the high number of LTTE  suicide  bombings  taking
    place at that time.

14. However, in approximately May 2009 he became aware of  reports  in  the
    media that it was likely that after people he arrested were handed over
    to others they were  tortured and possibly killed.

15. The appellant was greatly concerned by this but uncertain of what to do
    and concerned for his  own  safety.  He  applied  for  a  transfer  but
    remained active within the unit until December 2009 when he  took  part
    in an operation for the last time and then left  the  unit  in  January
    2010.  During 2009 the arrests were widened to include other  civilians
    and members of the criminal underworld who  were  suspected  of  acting
    against the government.

16. During 2010 the appellant signed on weekly but noticed that three other
    members of the unit, known to him only by their numbers, were no longer
    signing on. Another member, someone he had known previously and so  had
    known the name of, Ranatanuga, was also no  longer  going  to  the  gym
    where he had seen him regularly  since  leaving  the  unit.  He  raised
    Ranatanuga's absence with his superior but was told in clear terms that
    it was not his business. Ranatanunga's wife told the appellant that  he
    had  disappeared  but  that  the  police  were  not  investigating  his
    disappearance.

17. At the same time, the appellant's father reported  unknown  individuals
    hanging around the family home who, when  challenged,  said  that  they
    were waiting for a friend.  The appellant was  concerned  that  he  was
    being followed and spent as much time as possible away from his home at
    police barracks.

18. The appellant feared that he was at risk either from a government which
    suspected him of disclosing information about the torture and murder of
    LTTE suspects or  from  the  criminal  underworld  who  had  been  both
    informers to the unit and, in 2009, arrested by the unit. He decided to
    leave the country.

Procedure for a Section 55 Certificate

19. The relevant provisions of s.55 of the 2006 Act are as follows:

         Refugee Convention: certification

         (1)  This section applies to an asylum appeal where  the  Secretary
             of State issues  a  certificate  that  the  appellant  is  not
             entitled to the protection of Article  33(1)  of  the  Refugee
             Convention because-

             (a)  Article 1(F) applies to him  (whether  or  not  he  would
                  otherwise be entitled to protection), or

             (b)  Article 33(2) applies  to  him  on  grounds  of  national
                  security (whether or not he would otherwise be entitled to
                  protection).

         (2)  In this section-

             (a)  'asylum appeal' means an appeal-

                  (i)  which is brought under section 82, 83 or 101  of  the
                      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (c.  41)
                      or section  2  of  the  Special  Immigration  Appeals
                      Commission Act 1997 (c. 68), and

                  (ii) in which the appellant claims that to remove him from
                      or require him to leave the United Kingdom  would  be
                      contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
                      the Refugee Convention, and

             (b)  'the Refugee Convention' means the Convention relating to
                  the Status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28th July 1951.

         (3)  The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal or the Special Immigration
             Appeals Commission must begin substantive deliberations on the
             asylum appeal by considering the statements in  the  Secretary
             of State's certificate.

         (4)  If the Tribunal or Commission agrees with those statements  it
             must dismiss such part of the asylum appeal as amounts  to  an
             asylum claim (before  considering  any  other  aspect  of  the
             case).

20. Ms Jegarajah submitted that the wording of s.55 requires a Tribunal  to
    determine exclusion from asylum at the outset of a hearing  and  before
    going on to hear evidence or  submissions  on  any  other  claims.  Her
    skeleton argument maintained that  "the  current  practice  of  leaving
    matters until the conclusion of the hearing is contrary to statute."

21. Ms Jegarajah's argument  relied,  in  particular,  on  the  wording  of
    s.55(3)  and  s.55(4),  that  the  Tribunal  "must  begin   substantive
    deliberations on the asylum appeal by considering the statements in the
    Secretary of State's certificate" and, if the  certificate  is  upheld,
    dismiss the asylum claim "before considering any other  aspect  of  the
    case."

22. Deciding  exclusion  from  asylum  at  the  outset  of  a  hearing  was
    consistent with the intention of s.55(3), Ms Jegarajah continued.  This
    was to ensure that the  respondent's  case  against  an  appellant  was
    clearly defined at the beginning of a hearing. This, in turn, prevented
    an insubstantial case for exclusion being augmented or  altered  during
    the hearing as a result of the appellant's evidence, thereby  depriving
    the appellant of an opportunity to rebut the new allegations  from  the
    respondent that could lead to exclusion.

23. Mr Jarvis did  not  accept  that  dealing  with  the  s.55  certificate
    discretely at the outset of proceedings was a correct interpretation of
    the statute or that this procedure was  practical.  In  his  view,  the
    statute could not be read as a "procedural straitjacket" in  the  terms
    put forward by Ms Jegarajah.

24. We did not find that we could agree with Ms Jegarajah for a  number  of
    reasons. Firstly, we did not accept that an ordinary and normal reading
    of the wording of s.55 permitted the interpretation  she  put  forward.
    The provisions of s.55(3) require the Tribunal to address exclusion  at
    the beginning of its "substantive deliberations on the asylum  appeal."
    In  our  judgement,  this  was  a  straightforward  reference  to   the
    assessment conducted by a Tribunal after a hearing in order to  make  a
    decision. There is no  reference  to  the  "substantive  deliberations"
    taking place at a hearing. For the statute to provide for the procedure
    described by Ms Jegarajah, far clearer and more specific wording  would
    be required.

25. Secondly, it was also our view that there is nothing in the wording  of
    s.55(4) that supports an interpretation that a  decision  on  exclusion
    must take place at the  beginning  of  a  hearing.  The  words  "before
    considering any other aspect of the case" in s.55(4) are, again, simply
    a reference to the judicial assessment that  may  (and  in  such  cases
    usually does) take place after a hearing.

26. Thirdly, we did not consider that, in practice, it would  be  expedient
    or possible to deal with the exclusion issue in isolation at the outset
    of a  hearing.  It  is  not  uncommon,  as  in  this  appeal,  for  the
    respondent's exclusion case and the appellant's refugee claim  to  rely
    on the same evidence. Hearing evidence  on  the  exclusion  case  would
    inevitably include  evidence  on  the  appellant's  substantive  asylum
    claim.

27. Fourthly, even if the exclusion case and the substantive  asylum  claim
    are founded on different parts of the appellant's evidence, it would be
    artificial to make a finding on one entirely separately from the other.
    An  assessment  of  whether  an  appellant  is  excluded  from  refugee
    protection, even if the standard for that assessment is different, must
    take account of his evidence as a whole, not just a part of it.

28. Fifthly, we did not accept that unfairness would  inevitably  arise  if
    the exclusion issue was not decided at the outset of a hearing.  It  is
    the nature of litigation,  certainly  in  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber, for new evidence or issues to arise during  a  hearing.  If  a
    party considers that they have not been given a sufficient  opportunity
    to deal with the new point, an application for an  adjournment  can  be
    made. If the respondent's case on exclusion changes  during  a  hearing
    this can be addressed in the same way,  by  an  adjournment,  short  or
    longer, depending on the particular circumstances.   Alternatively,  it
    would be open to the Tribunal to rule that, in  the  circumstances,  it
    would be unfair to raise the new matter.

29. It is therefore our view that s.55  does  not  require  a  decision  on
    exclusion from asylum to be made at the outset of a hearing  and  prior
    to consideration of any other matters.

30.  The  effect  of  s.55  is  to  require  a  Tribunal  in  its   written
    determination to decide exclusion from asylum first, before  proceeding
    to address any other head of claim.

31. Deciding exclusion first is merely common sense, regardless of  whether
    a s.55 certificate has been made by the  respondent  as  it  determines
    whether substantive consideration of the asylum claim is necessary.

32. There is no statutory provision akin to s.55 that can be  applied  when
    an applicant makes a claim for Humanitarian Protection. However,  given
    the exclusion criteria in paragraph 339D of  HC  395  (the  Immigration
    Rules), very similar to those in Article 1F(a), a Tribunal should  also
    decide on exclusion from  Humanitarian  Protection  before  substantive
    consideration of that claim.

Exclusion from the Refugee Convention - The Law

33. Following our own guidance, we turn first to the  question  of  whether
    the appellant is excluded from the Refugee Convention.

34. We looked first at the law and legal definitions for the various  tests
    that the respondent must make out.








    War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity

35. Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention states:

         The provisions of this Convention shall not  apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:

         (a)  He has committed a crime against peace,  a  war  crime,  or  a
             crime  against  humanity,  as  defined  in  the  international
             instruments drawn up to make  provision  in  respect  of  such
             crimes;

36. The terms of Article  1F  are  reflected  in  Article  12  (2)  of  the
    Qualification Directive, the provision under which the appellant  seeks
    to be recognised as a refugee.

37. In R (JS) (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 15 Lord Brown said  that  when
    considering whether an applicant is disqualified from asylum by  virtue
    of crimes against humanity  under  Article  1F(a)  the  starting  point
    should be the Rome Statute of the International  Criminal  Court  ("the
    ICC Statute").

38. Article 7(1) of the ICC Statute  defines  crimes  against  humanity  as
    follows:

         1.   For the purpose of this Statute "crime against humanity" means
             any of  the  following  acts  when  committed  as  part  of  a
             widespread or systematic attack directed against any  civilian
             population, with knowledge of the attack:

             (a)  Murder;

             (b)  Extermination;

             (c)  Enslavement;

             (d)  Deportation or forcible transfer of population;

             (e)  Imprisonment or  other  severe  deprivation  of  physical
                  liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international
                  law;

             (f)  Torture

             (g)   Rape,  sexual  slavery,  enforced  prostitution,  forced
                  pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any  other  form  of
                  sexual violence of comparable gravity;

             (h)    Persecution   against   any   identifiable   group   or
                  collectivity  on  political,  racial,  national,   ethnic,
                  cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3,  on
                  other  grounds  that   are   universally   recognized   as
                  impermissible under international law, in connection  with
                  any act referred to in this paragraph or any crime  within
                  the jurisdiction of the Court;

             (i)  Enforced disappearance of persons;

             (j)  The crime of apartheid;

             (k)  Other inhumane acts of a similar character  intentionally
                  causing great suffering, or serious injury to body  or  to
                  mental or physical health.

     Joint Criminal Enterprise and Aiding and Abetting

39. Art 12(3) of the Qualification Directive provides that someone does not
    have to personally commit the excluded act and can be excluded if  they
    "instigate or  otherwise  participate  in  the  commission  of  [crimes
    against humanity]". Article 25(3)(b) of the ICC Statute sets  out  the
    different levels of involvement that an  individual  must  have  to  be
    criminally  responsible.  Article   25(3)(c)   establishes   individual
    criminal  responsibility  if  a  person   "aids,  abets  or   otherwise
    assists..." as a subsidiary form of participation.

40. The case of MT (Article 1F (a) - aiding and abetting)  Zimbabwe  [2012]
    UKUT 00015 (IAC) explains at [119] that:

             "Aiding   and   abetting   differs   from    joint    criminal
             responsibility (jce) in that whilst the former generally  only
             requires the knowledge that the assistance contributes to  the
             main crime,  participation  in  jce  requires  both  a  common
             purpose and an intentional  contribution  of  the  participant
             (Triffterer,  pp.  756-758)  to  a  group  crime.  Aiding  and
             abetting   encompasses    any    assistance,    physical    or
             psychological, that has a substantial effect on the commission
             of the crime. Article 2 para  3(d)  of  the  1996  Draft  Code
             requires that  aiding  and  abetting  should  be  "direct  and
             substantial", i.e.  the  contribution  should  facilitate  the
             commission of a crime in "some  significant  way".  The  Trial
             Chamber in Tadic II, the Trial Chamber  in  the  Prosecutor  v
             Naletilic and  Martinovic  (IT-98-34)  cases  and  the  Appeal
             Chamber in Prosecutor v Akeyesu (Case No. IT-95-14/l-T), paras
             484,  706)  interpreted  "substantial"  to   mean   that   the
             contribution has an effect on the commission, that is  have  a
             causal relationship with the result and it included within the
             concept "all acts of assistance by words  or  acts  that  lend
             encouragement or support". In Prosecutor v Furundzija  (IT-95-
             17/1-T, 10 December 1998), paras 199, 232, 273-4,   the  Trial
             Chamber said that assistance  need  not  be  tangible:  "moral
             support and encouragement" can suffice, albeit it must "make a
             significant difference to the commission of the  criminal  act
             by the principal": see also Prosecutor v Brdanin  (IT-99-36-A,
             Appeal Chamber, 3 April 2007) and  Prosecutor v Perisic (IT-04-
             81-T, 6  September  2011).  The  requisite  knowledge  may  be
             inferred from all  relevant  circumstances,  i.e.  it  may  be
             proven by circumstantial evidence (Prosecutor  v  Tadic,  para
             689; Prosecutor v Akeyesu para 498)."

    Duress

41. Article 31 of the ICC Statute provides:

        Article 31
        Grounds for excluding criminal responsibility


        (1)   In  addition  to  other  grounds   for   excluding   criminal
        responsibility provided for in this Statute, a person shall not  be
        criminally responsible if, at the time of that person's conduct:
              ...
         (d)  The conduct which is alleged to constitute a crime within  the
             jurisdiction of the Court has been caused by duress  resulting
             from a threat of imminent death or of continuing  or  imminent
             serious bodily harm against that person or another person, and
             the person acts  necessarily  and  reasonably  to  avoid  this
             threat, provided that the person does not intend  to  cause  a
             greater harm than the one sought to be avoided.  Such a threat
             may either be:


             (i)  made by other persons; or
             (ii) constituted by other circumstances beyond  that  person's
                  control.

42. Article 33 of the ICC Statute operates to exclude the  "only  following
    orders" defence as orders to commit  crimes  against  humanity  are  by
    reason of their subject matter deemed "manifestly unlawful".

    Standard of Proof

43. There was agreement between the parties that the standard of proof when
    deciding  exclusion  was  for  there  to  be   "serious   reasons   for
    considering" which  imported  a  higher  test  than  what  is  commonly
    referred  to  as  the  "lower  standard"  of  "reasonable  grounds  for
    suspecting" used in asylum and Article 3 substantive claims.

44. The Supreme Court indicated at [75] of Al-Sirri v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home  Department  [2012]  UKSC  54  that  although  a  domestic
    standard of proof could not be imported into the Refugee Convention:

             "...if the decision-maker is satisfied that it is more  likely
             than not that the applicant has not committed  the  crimes  in
             question or has not  been  guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the
             purposes and principles of the United Nations, it is difficult
             to see how there could be serious reasons for considering that
             he had done so. The reality is that there are unlikely  to  be
             sufficiently serious reasons for considering the applicant  to
             be guilty unless the decision-maker can be  satisfied  on  the
             balance of probabilities that he is."

45. We applied this guidance in reaching  our  findings  on  the  exclusion
    issue, bearing in mind also that the burden in that regard falls on the
    respondent.

Exclusion from the Refugee Convention - Our Findings

46. The respondent's case  (at  M1  of  her  bundle)  is  that  whilst  the
    appellant was in the special unit from 2007  to  2009  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities committed a widespread and systematic  attack  against  the
    civilian population, Tamils in particular, and that the  appellant  had
    knowledge of that attack.

47. The respondent also maintains that the appellant committed  war  crimes
    or  crimes  against  humanity  either  as  part  of  a  joint  criminal
    enterprise and/or aided and abetted the crimes  of  torture  and  extra
    judicial killings by arresting terrorist suspects and handing them over
    for interrogation.

48. The respondent goes on to submit that the appellant  knew  that  people
    who were arrested by his unit and handed over to other authorities were
    then tortured and extrajudicially killed.

49. The respondent does not accept that the appellant was under  duress  or
    attempted to  distance himself from those crimes.

    "Widespread  or  Systemic  Attack   Directed   Against   Any   Civilian
Population"

50. As confirmed in MT, the chapeau  requirement  of  Article  7(1)  is  an
    essential element in the definition of a crime  against  humanity.  The
    appellant's acts must have been committed "as part of a  widespread  or
    systematic  attack  directed  against  any  civilian  population,  with
    knowledge of the attack, a crime against humanity"  and  the  appellant
    must have had "knowledge" of that attack.

51. Ms Jegarajah submitted that  the  respondent  had  not  made  out  this
    primary part of her case.

52. We, however, found that during the period of the appellant's service in
    the special unit that the actions of Sri Lankan authorities were  well-
    characterised as "a widespread and systematic attack" directed  at  the
    civilian population, in particular those of Tamil ethnicity. Indeed, it
    was difficult to conclude otherwise, this  being  the  consistent  view
    across the human rights and country  reports  on  Sri  Lanka  for  that
    period.

53. Ms Jegarajah provided  us  with  an  extract  from  "UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs of  Asylum-
    Seekers from Sri Lanka" dated 21 December 2012.  Reference to the  full
    section of this report dealing with exclusion from  refugee  protection
    reveals the position of UNCHR to be as follows:


        "Since the issuance of the July 2010  guidelines,  testimonies  and
        footage have been released  in  the  public  domain  with  credible
        information on serious violations by all parties  of  international
        human rights and international humanitarian law during the conflict
        in Sri Lanka. The findings of the UN  panel  of  experts  concluded
        that  both  government  forces  and  the  LTTE  conducted  military
        operations "with flagrant disregard  for  the  protection,  rights,
        welfare and lives of civilians and failed to respect the  norms  of
        international law." Mistreatment or torture in detention facilities
        or police stations both during  and  after  the  conflict  is  also
        documented in recently published reports.


        ...


        In the context of Sri Lanka, exclusion considerations may arise  in
        the cases of asylum-seekers with certain backgrounds and  profiles.
        Careful consideration needs  to  be  given  in  particular  to  the
        following profiles (in no particular order):


        ...


        (iii) Certain (former) members of  the  Sri  Lanka  Police  Service
        (SLPS), including the Criminal Investigation  Division  (CID),  the
        Terrorist Investigation Department (TID) and the Special Task Force
        (STF)... "

54. The US State Department Human Rights  Report   2007  (issued  in  2008)
    states:
        "The government's respect for human rights continued to decline due
        in part to the escalation  of  the  armed  conflict.  While  ethnic
        Tamils composed approximately 16 percent of the overall population,
        the overwhelming majority of victims of  human  rights  violations,
        such as  killings  and  disappearances,  were  young  male  Tamils.
        Credible reports cited  unlawful  killings  by  government  agents,
        assassinations  by  unknown  perpetrators,  politically   motivated
        killings and  child  soldier  recruitment  by  paramilitary  forces
        associated with the government, disappearances,  arbitrary  arrests
        and detention, poor prison conditions, denial of fair public trial,
        government corruption and lack  of  transparency,  infringement  of
        religious  freedom,  infringement  of  freedom  of  movement,   and
        discrimination against minorities. There were numerous reports that
        the   army,   police,   and   progovernment   paramilitary   groups
        participated in  armed  attacks  against  civilians  and  practiced
        torture, kidnapping, hostage-taking, and extortion  with  impunity.
        The  situation  deteriorated  particularly   in   the   government-
        controlled Jaffna peninsula. By year's end  extrajudicial  killings
        occurred  in  Jaffna  nearly  on  a  daily  basis   and   allegedly
        perpetrated  by   military   intelligence   units   or   associated
        paramilitaries. There were few arrests and  no  prosecutions  as  a
        result of these abuses, although a number of older cases  continued
        to make slow  progress  through  the  judicial  system.  Government
        security forces used the broad 2005 emergency regulations to detain
        civilians arbitrarily, including journalists and members  of  civil
        society.
        ...
        There were numerous, credible reports that the  government  or  its
        agents committed arbitrary or unlawful killings.
        During the year approximately 1,000 of the estimated  3,200  deaths
        associated with the hostilities between government security  forces
        and  the  LTTE  were  civilians,  according  to   public   sources.
        International organizations have documented approximately one-third
        of these. The casualties occurred in part as a result of  artillery
        fire into populated areas, aerial bombings, land mines,  and  other
        military action, but international organizations noted that most of
        the civilian casualties occurred in "individual incidents," such as
        extrajudicial killings. Reliable statistics on such  killings  were
        not available, since this crime often goes unreported  by  families
        who fear reprisals if they file complaints. The numbers reported by
        different organizations therefore vary widely. In addition,  it  is
        likely that the majority of those reported as "disappeared,"  about
        whom there has been no further information, died.
        ...
        According to credible  sources,  including  UN  Special  Rapporteur
        (UNSR) on Torture Manfred Nowak, the use of torture by  police  and
        security forces to extract admissions and confessions  was  endemic
        and conducted with impunity. In addition, the emergency regulations
        make confessions obtained  under  any  circumstance,  including  by
        torture, sufficient to detain a  person  until  the  individual  is
        brought to court. On October 29, following his one week  assessment
        mission to the country, Nowak attributed the  lack  of  convictions
        for torture to the absence of effective  investigation,  inadequate
        protection for victims and witnesses of torture, and  an  excessive
        minimum sentence for torture. He stated also that the  police  used
        threats of violence or fabrication of criminal cases to prevent the
        victims of torture by police officers from filing complaints. Nowak
        added that detainees reported that the magistrates did not  provide
        them an opportunity to complain  about  police  torture  while  the
        perpetrators often accompanied the victims to courts  and  remained
        present during medical examinations."

55. The US State Department Human Rights reports for 2008 and 2009  contain
    substantially similar if not identical passages.

56. The  Amnesty  International  (AI)  Annual  Report  2008  on  Sri  Lanka
    (covering 2007) observed that:
        "2007 was characterized by impunity for violations of international
        human rights and humanitarian  law.  Soaring  human  rights  abuses
        included hundreds of enforced disappearances, unlawful killings  of
        humanitarian  workers,  arbitrary  arrests  and  torture.  Lack  of
        protection for civilians  was  a  key  concern  as  heavy  fighting
        resumed between government forces  and  the  Liberation  Tigers  of
        Tamil Eelam (LTTE).
        ...
        Several hundred cases of enforced disappearances were  reported  in
        the first six months of 2007.  Jaffna  Peninsula  was  particularly
        affected with 21 cases of enforced disappearances reported  in  the
        first three weeks of August alone. Enforced disappearances  in  the
        north and east  appeared  to  be  part  of  a  systematic  counter-
        insurgency strategy devised by the government. There  were  also  a
        number of abductions and suspected enforced disappearances reported
        from Colombo.

        ...

        The Sri Lankan police conducted mass arrests  of  more  than  1,000
        Tamils, allegedly in response to the suicide bombings  carried  out
        in Colombo on 28 November. The arrests were made on  arbitrary  and
        discriminatory grounds using sweeping powers granted  by  emergency
        regulations. According to reports,  "Tamils  were  bundled  in  bus
        loads and taken for interrogation."

57. The AI Annual Report 2009 states that "Government allied  armed  groups
    committed unlawful killings  and  enforced  disappearances",  that  the
    "government arrested and detained increasing numbers of Tamils  without
    charge"  and that:

         "Enforced disappearances continued to be part of a pattern of abuse
         apparently linked to the government's counter-insurgency  strategy.
         Enforced disappearances were reported in the north and east as well
         as previously unaffected parts of the country including in  Colombo
         and the south. Many enforced disappearances took place inside high-
         security zones and during curfew hours."

58. The AI Annual Report 2010 stated:

         "The government continued to carry out enforced disappearances  as
         part of its counter-insurgency  strategy.  Enforced  disappearances
         were reported  in  many  parts  of  the  country,  particularly  in
         northern and eastern Sri Lanka and in Colombo."

59. Paragraph 8.38 of the Country of Origin Information  Report  (COIR)  on
    Sri Lanka dated 11 November 2010 contains an extract from the  European
    Commission "Report on the findings of the investigation with respect to
    the effective implementation of certain human rights conventions in Sri
    Lanka" dated 19 October 2009. The EU report states:


          "Sri Lanka has among the highest number of disappearances  in  the
          world since 2006. The numbers  provided  for  disappearances  vary
          between different organisations but all  reports  agree  that  the
          number of disappearances is substantial. The UN High  Commissioner
          for Human Rights has stated that  some  1500  persons  disappeared
          between December 2005 and December 2007. Human  Rights  Watch  has
          reported 1000 cases of disappearances were reported to the NHRC in
          2006 and over 300 in the first four months of 2007. In June  2008,
          the UN Working Group on Enforced  and  Involuntary  Disappearances
          noted that it had  sent  22  urgent  actions  to  the  Sri  Lankan
          Government in the previous two months alone and  that  both  women
          and humanitarian aid workers were being targeted. The  former  Sri
          Lankan Minister of Foreign Affairs Mangala Samaraweera in  January
          2007 was quoted in several news agencies stating that a person was
          abducted in Sri Lanka every five hours. The figures made available
          in  November  2008  by  Judge  Tillekeratne,   Chairman   of   the
          Presidential Commission on Disappearances, showed that 886 persons
          disappeared in less than 12 months.


          Reports indicate that in a significant number of cases individuals
          who initially disappeared were subsequently  discovered  in  state
          detention. This strongly suggests that the state was implicated in
          their original disappearance. The UN Working Group on Enforced and
          Involuntary Disappearances has found that the Sri Lankan army, the
          police and the TVMP/Karuna group were responsible for many of  the
          disappearances between November 2006 and November 2007. The report
          noted a growing culture of impunity  enjoyed  by  members  of  the
          security forces and pro-government armed  groups  who  perpetrated
          enforced disappearances as the government took no steps to  combat
          the problem. Disappearances appear to be part of the  Government's
          counter-insurgency strategy."

60. The same European Commission report is quoted at paragraph 8.45 of  the
    COIR as stating:

        "Unlawful killings perpetrated by soldiers, police and paramilitary
        groups with ties to the Government, have been a persistent  problem
        in  Sri  Lanka.   According   to   reports,   many   killings   and
        disappearances of civilians have been carried out  against  persons
        suspected of being informants for, or collaborators with, the LTTE.
        The  army  assisted   by   pro-government   Tamil   paramilitaries,
        reportedly  engaged  in  a  deliberate  policy  of   extra-judicial
        killings against those they considered  to  be  supportive  of  the
        LTTE... Reports from a wide range  of  sources  indicate  that  the
        overall number of  extrajudicial  killings  increased  dramatically
        between 2006 and 2008...Reports also indicate that the police  have
        engaged in summary executions. Several persons have  been  shot  in
        police custody, while others have died as a result of torture."

61. We were satisfied that there was ample evidence of a  "widespread"  and
    "systemic" attack conducted by the Sri Lankan authorities, the  AI  and
    EU reports referring in terms to the  abuse  of  the  Tamil  population
    being part of a government "strategy".

     The Appellant's Knowledge of the Widespread or Systemic Attack

62. For the appellant's actions to be categorised as war crimes  or  crimes
    against humanity, Article 7(1) of the  ICC  Statute  requires  that  he
    committed them  "with  knowledge"  of  the  "widespread  or  systematic
    attack" directed against the Tamil population.

63. The appellant maintains that he did not know of the  widespread  abuses
    that were taking place in Sri Lanka.

64. We did not accept that part of the appellant's evidence.

65. As above, it is our view that the country evidence shows overwhelmingly
    that the Sri Lankan authorities were specifically attacking  the  Tamil
    population, the police force being agents in that attack, certainly  by
    the way of torture and kidnapping. The US State  Department  refers  to
    "numerous reports that the army, police, and progovernment paramilitary
    groups participated in armed attacks against  civilians  and  practiced
    torture, kidnapping, hostage-taking, and extortion with  impunity"  and
    to the use of torture by police to extract confessions being "endemic".
     We did not find it credible that, if only  from  his  service  in  the
    police from 2003 to 2009, that  the  appellant  did  not  know  of  the
    routine and serious abuse of Tamils.

66. We also noted that the extract from the EU report at [58] above  refers
    to  information  about  abductions  being  covered  in  "several   news
    agencies" in 2007 and to a Commission in Sri Lanka reporting in 2008 on
    disappearances. It was therefore not only outside Sri  Lanka  that  the
    abuses were being covered in the media, as submitted for the appellant.
    It was our view that the appellant could only but  have  known  of  the
    treatment of Tamils by the police, other services and of the government
    strategy to attack the Tamil population.

    The Appellant's Knowledge of the Abuse of People he Arrested

67. The appellant does not dispute that those he arrested and  handed  over
    were subsequently tortured or killed but maintains that he did not know
    this until May 2009.

68. We also did not accept that to be so.

69. Firstly, it is not credible where we have found that  he  knew  of  the
    wider abuses taking place that he would not have known  that  those  he
    arrested would be subject to the same.

70. Secondly, it appeared to us that the appellant could only but have been
    aware of the difference between the treatment of those he  arrested  as
    part of his police work prior to joining the special unit and those  he
    dealt with in 2007 and 2009.

71. At questions 64 and 65 of his second asylum interview conducted  on  14
    April 2011 (which he adopted in its entirety before us)  the  appellant
    described his police work prior to 2007. When  he  arrested  people  he
    would put them before the courts and sometimes  they  would  be  fined,
    sometimes imprisoned.  When he arrested those people:

         "We told them what they'd done wrong.  Take  all  the  details  and
         produce him to the courts.  In between we take  a  statement,  keep
         them in a police cell and then take them to court.  Some OIC  could
         give bail in some cases."

    At question 69 he referred to an officer asking a sergeant  to  take  a
    statement and the sergeant asking questions.

72. In his work in the special unit, he did not meet or know the identities
    of his commanding officers.  He did not  know  the  identities  of  his
    colleagues, knowing his friend Ranatanuga only by chance.  He  did  not
    have an office or regular location but they would meet in an  abandoned
    house.  The unit used unmarked vehicles and would not say  anything  to
    those arrested, other than they were being taken for  questioning.   He
    would be told only immediately before he had to act of where he had  to
    go.  He would be told only after having picked up the person  concerned
    where he had to take them.  He would take them to a variety of  places,
    including abandoned houses.  He would usually hand them over  to  other
    vehicles or take them to an abandoned property.

73. The contrast between the appellant's earlier police work  and  that  in
    the special unit is stark. It would have been obvious to  him  that  it
    was very different and far more serious for those who were arrested. It
    would have been obvious, in the  context  of  widespread  human  rights
    abuses that we have set out above, of which we find he was aware,  that
    those subject to this process were highly likely to be abused.

74. Further, in his first asylum interview conducted on 7 January 2011, the
    appellant stated  at  question  45  that  his  duties  were  mainly  to
    "abduct", at question 46 that he "abducted" people and helped carry out
    "extrajudicial executions" and at question  87  that  he  was  told  to
    "abduct" members of the criminal underworld.

75. The appellant maintains  that  his  answers  to  these  questions  were
    incorrectly translated. He stated that he participated in "arrests" not
    "abductions" and did not use the term  "extrajudicial  executions".  He
    also states that the first interview record is incorrect at question 43
    in the use of the word "bring" when what he said was "arrest".

76. He also maintains that he  told  his  previous  solicitor  about  these
    errors but his concerns not were not raised with the  respondent  until
    he transferred his case to his current representatives who  raised  the
    issue in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  after  the
    respondent placed weight on the comments in the first interview in  the
    refusal letter.

77. We did not accept the appellant's  claim  that  he  was  misinterpreted
    during the first interview.

78. The appellant's case is that the interpreter was  unable  to  translate
    correctly the term "arrest" from Sinhala into English at questions  45,
    46 and 87.  The transcript shows, however, that at questions 81, 82 and
    87 the interpreter used the term "arrest" and the  appellant  does  not
    dispute that at these points the interview record is correct. We  found
    that the correct  translation  of  "arrest"  at  these  points  of  the
    interview suggested that the interpreter was able to translate the term
    "arrest" correctly and that the reason the word  does  not  feature  at
    questions 45, 46 and 87 is because this was not the Sinhala  word  that
    the appellant used.

79. Ms Jegarajah highlighted  the  failure  to  record  the  identification
    number of the interpreter in the first interview. We did not find  that
    we could infer from this that the interpreter was not competent or that
    this indicated that there was  a  deliberate  attempt  to  conceal  his
    identity in order to  allow  him  to  mistranslate  key  parts  of  the
    appellant's case.

80. Also, if the appellant had asked his former legal advisers  to  contact
    the respondent about a material mistranslation but the  solicitors  did
    not do so, we would expect there to be something from the appellant  or
    his current legal representatives raising this serious failing with the
    previous  solicitors  or  making  a  complaint   to   the   appropriate
    authorities. There is nothing  of  that  nature  before  us.  There  is
    nothing to show that  the  appellant  raised  any  concerns  about  the
    transcript of his first interview until after its contents were  relied
    on against him in the refusal letter.

81. In addition, the appellant maintains that the second  interview  record
    is reliable. If so, it provides evidence that undermines his claims not
    to have known what was happening or to have been party to those abuses.



82. At question 26 he stated that "I never  arrested  anyone  at  all."  At
    questions 27, 28, 31, 36 and elsewhere,  however,  he  states  that  he
    arrested people.

83. At questions 23, 94 and 118 of his second interview he stated  that  he
    was in charge of twelve people and was the  Officer  in  Charge  (OIC).
    This contrasts with the statement in his  witness  statement  dated  24
    November 2011 that he was not in command and that in his second witness
    statement dated 30 November 2011 that there was no command  within  the
    unit.

84. At questions 108 and 109 of the second interview he stated that he "did
    not know what to do" when, in May 2009, he found out about  the  abuse,
    that he "couldn't sleep  or  speak  to  anyone"  but  "couldn't  see  a
    specialist" as he would have to have spoken  about  what  he  knew  and
    carried on with  the  arrests.   In  his  witness  statement  dated  24
    November 2011, however, he states that from May  to  December  2009  he
    only had "misgivings" and was "not  certain"  about  what  happened  to
    those arrested.

85. There appeared to us to be a pattern with each ensuing account  of  the
    appellant seeking to minimise what he did during 2007 to 2009. At first
    he abducted people and was involved in extrajudicial killings. He seeks
    to retract those statements in the  second  interview,  maintaining  he
    only arrested people or even did not carry out any arrests.  He  stated
    in his second interview that he was in charge of his unit of twelve men
    and then sought to retract those statements.  His  level  of  knowledge
    from May to December 2009 as expressed in the second  interview  caused
    him significant anxiety such that he  felt  he  needed  but  could  not
    access specialist help but in  his  later  witness  statement  was  not
    certain and experienced only "misgivings".

86. Further, in his first interview at question 45 the appellant  talks  of
    how "we were guaranteed by high-ranking officers" that:

             "this would not be revealed to anyone else. What we were doing
             to our duty (sic) was not known to anyone, only  Tamilnet  was
             publishing this news. If any other agency published this  they
             would be killed or punished."

87. We considered this to be an admission that the appellant knew that what
    he was doing was unlawful and had to be covered up. If he believed  his
    work was only arresting and  handing  over  suspects  with  no  serious
    consequences for them, he would not have needed a  guarantee  that  his
    work would not be revealed.

88. It was our conclusion that, at the least, the appellant knew that those
    he arrested were subject to torture and extrajudicial killing.

    Joint Criminal Enterprise or Aiding and Abetting

89. The respondent maintains that the appellant aided and  abetted  or  was
    part of a joint criminal enterprise in the crimes of torture and  extra
    judicial killings.

90. It was  not  clear  to  us  from  the  refusal  letter  or  Mr  Jarvis'
    submissions that it was the respondent's case that  the  appellant  had
    the "intentional contribution" required for the appellant to have  been
    part of a joint criminal enterprise so we take that matter no further.

91. It was our view that the appellant's work  arresting  suspects  between
    2007  and  2009  was  a  significant  contribution   to   torture   and
    extrajudicial killing and that he knew this to be so.  This  conclusion
    is inevitable given the "clandestine" nature of the  arrests  conducted
    by his team of which he was the senior member, that description of  the
    work being used by the appellant himself in his response to the refusal
    letter, that he knew that what he  was  being  asked  to  do  was  very
    different from his previous police work and given that  we  have  found
    that he knew that abuse followed on from those arrests.

92. We also agreed with Mr Jarvis' submission  that  it  follows  from  the
    appellant's   acceptance  that  from  May  2009  to  December  2009  he
    continued to hand over those he arrested even though by  then  he  knew
    that  it  was  highly  probable  that  they  would   be   tortured   or
    extrajudicially killed, the appellant aided and abetted the  committing
    of crimes against humanity.

    Duress

93. The appellant maintains at question 87 of his first interview that  his
    life would have been in danger if  he  had  refused  to  work  for  the
    special unit and that he did not do so "willingly or voluntarily".

94. The appellant maintains at question 63 of his second interview that  it
    was not possible to refuse to carry out the arrests and  that  "I  knew
    what would happen" if he did so. At question 105 he  repeated  that  it
    was not possible to refuse.

95. On page 11 of his response to the reasons  for  refusal  the  appellant
    states that he applied for a transfer after May 2009 but, at  page  12,
    that if he had pushed any harder for a transfer this would have "caused
    a danger to my life and that of my family."  He  also  states  that  he
    "consciously tried to take a back seat role during this period".

96. We did not find that these statements were sufficient to show that  the
    appellant was at any time faced with a threat of imminent death  or  of
    continuing or imminent serious  bodily  harm.   We  did  not  have  any
    country evidence showing that police officers who resigned or  deserted
    met with  threats of ill-treatment or that those threats  were  carried
    out. We have indicated above that it was our view  that  the  appellant
    has tried to minimise his culpability as his evidence has developed and
    that this undermined his claim to have acted as he did under duress.

    Exclusion from the Refugee Convention - Our Conclusion

97. Ms Jegarajah submitted that if this appellant were to be found to  come
    within Article 1F(a) then this would mean that all Sri Lankan policemen
    would equally do so which was an absurd outcome.

98. We have been careful to indicate why this particular appellant falls to
    be excluded because of the particular nature of the work  that  he  was
    carrying out and the extent to which it differed from the more  routine
    police work he had been doing previously. We therefore did  not  accept
    Ms Jegarajah's submission.

99. We found that for the reasons set out above the  respondent  has  shown
    that there are serious reasons  for  considering  that  as  part  of  a
    widespread  or  systematic  attack  directed   against   the   civilian
    population, with knowledge of  the  attack,  the  appellant  aided  and
    abetted war crimes and crimes against humanity.

100. In line with s.55 of the 2006 Act, we dismiss  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim.

Humanitarian Protection

101. Article 17 of the Qualification Directive states that:

             A third country national or a  stateless  person  is  excluded
             from being eligible for subsidiary protection where there  are
             serious reasons for considering that:

                  (a) he or she has committed a crime against peace,  a  war
                  crime, or a crime against humanity

102.  Article 17 (2) of the Qualification Directive  provides  that  someone
    does not have to personally commit the excluded act and can be excluded
    if they "otherwise participate in the commission" of the act.

103. These provisions are reflected in paragraph  339D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

104. The reasons we have set out for finding that the appellant is  excluded
    from the Refugee Convention apply equally to his claim for Humanitarian
    Protection.

105. We therefore find that the  appellant  is  excluded  from  Humanitarian
    Protection and dismiss that part of his appeal.

Article 3 of the ECHR

106. Article 3 of the ECHR is an absolute right. There is no  provision  for
    exclusion if the appellant can show  that  there  is  a  real  risk  or
    reasonable likelihood that he will face torture or inhuman or degrading
    treatment or punishment on return to Sri Lanka. We  have  applied  that
    standard of proof when assessing this aspect of the case.

107. The appellant's case is that after he left the  special  unit  he  came
    under suspicion of having revealed or merely being  in  a  position  to
    reveal details of the  abuses  perpetrated  by  government  forces.  He
    suspects that four of his colleagues from the special unit, one of them
    his friend Ranatanuga, have disappeared for that reason.  The  specific
    interest in him comprised unknown individuals hanging around the family
    home and the appellant being followed on a few occasions.

108. We did not find that the appellant's account showed that he  was  under
    suspicion or wanted by the authorities or anyone else in Sri Lanka.

109. Firstly, he claims that he left the special unit in  January  2010.  He
    and his family remained in Sri Lanka  until  October  2010.  There  was
    ample opportunity for  those  who  wished  him  harm  to  act  in  some
    substantive way against him but his account at  its  highest  does  not
    include any such evidence. If  the  appellant  was  at  risk  from  the
    government itself or members of the criminal  underworld,  we  did  not
    find it credible that they would not have been able to access him  even
    if he had been staying mostly in army barracks as he claims.  There  is
    no suggestion that any of his family were harmed or threatened and they
    remained living openly.

110. Secondly, he claims that four members of his unit  disappeared  because
    of adverse interest from the government or criminal underworld. We  did
    not find that this could be inferred from their not signing  on  weekly
    or his friend Ranatanuga not going to the  gym.   There  could  be  any
    number of innocent explanations, transfer to another unit  or  part  of
    the country for example.

111. If the appellant believed that his friend  Ranatanuga  had  disappeared
    and that the police had failed to follow up the wife's report of  this,
    we did not find it credible that the appellant made no further  attempt
    whilst in Sri Lanka or after coming to the UK to contact the wife or in
    some other way find out if his friend had returned or exactly what  had
    happened to him. We did  not  find  his  failure  to  do  so  could  be
    explained  by  his  evidence  that  he  did   nothing   further   about
    Ranatanuga's disappearance as he was more concerned for the  safety  of
    his own family.

112. Thirdly, the appellant relies on three letters from his mother sent  to
    him after he came to the UK. The first letter states  that  the  police
    came to look for him as he had not reported for work for two weeks. His
    parents told them that he had left the country. The other  two  letters
    state that the police continued to  come  to  ask  for  the  appellant,
    searched, asked questions and made threats  and  that  the  appellant's
    parents decided to move to the home of a relative.

113. We did not find we could place weight on these letters for a number  of
    reasons. They are very basic in form and could have  been  produced  by
    anyone in order to bolster the appellant's claim. The letter  referring
    to the appellant having not reported for work for 2 weeks is postmarked
    2011. As above, he came  to  the  UK  in  October  2010.  This  is  not
    consistent with  the  letter  having  been  sent  in  2011.  Also,  the
    appellant's statement at the hearing that he did not  want  to  contact
    Ranatanuga's wife from the UK as he did not  want  the  authorities  to
    find out that he was here is not consistent with the indication in  the
    first letter that the authorities were told of this by his parents.

114. We accept that the Country Guidance case of GJ and  others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) confirms that  the
    Sri Lankan authorities may harm journalists or human  rights  activists
    whom they suspect  of  criticising  the  human  rights  record  of  the
    government or who are associated  with  publications  critical  of  the
    government or individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
    Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the authorities.

115. The appellant's evidence does not show that through their work  in  the
    special unit he or any of his colleagues come within  those  categories
    so as to be of adverse interest to the authorities.

116. The appellant also maintains that the fact of his  asylum  claim  which
    implicitly criticises the Sri Lankan authorities and reveals details of
    state-sanctioned abuses will lead to him being mistreated on return. He
    cannot be expected to conceal the fact or substance  of  his  claim  on
    return. His having left the country whilst a serving officer and making
    an asylum claim which criticise the state will draw heightened  adverse
    interest as he will be viewed as a traitor.

117. We also did not find that this claim was made out.

118. From what we have said above, it will be clear that the case of  GJ  is
    not authority for someone who has criticised the Sri Lankan  government
    or revealed details of atrocity in an asylum claim made in the UK being
    of significant adverse interest on return.

119. This appellant has a valid Sri Lankan passport. There is  therefore  no
    need for any approach to the Sri Lankan authorities in London in  order
    for him to be able to return to Sri Lanka.

120. In addition, paragraph 309 of GJ states that  those  "with  Sri  Lankan
    passports returning on scheduled flights will be able to  walk  through
    Colombo airport without difficulty, unless their names are on a  "stop"
    list". The appellant does not claim to be on a "stop" list.

121. Ms Jegarajah drew our attention to paragraph 9 of the  evidence  of  Mr
    Callum Macrae in Appendix H of GJ. This refers to Tamil  doctors  being
    forced to recant accounts they had given of abuses they  had  observed.
    This appellant claims, firstly, that he has not observed  such  abuses,
    knowing of them only from secondary sources. Secondly, as above, he  is
    in a position to return to Sri Lanka without being  questioned  by  the
    authorities as to the substance of his asylum claim or even whether  he
    has claimed asylum.

122.  Ms  Jegarajah  also  highlighted  the  "paranoid  culture  of   ultra-
    nationalism" in Sri Lanka described by Mr Macrae at paragraph 24 of his
    evidence. We do not dispute the paranoia but did not accept that it had
    been shown that this  would  lead  to  someone  with  this  appellant's
    profile being questioned about his asylum claim on return.

123. We were also taken to the written evidence of Dr Sutharan Nadarajah  at
    paragraph 45 of Appendix K of GJ. This states that there is "a risk  to
    people who were even suspected of having evidence of  war  crimes,  who
    were present in Sri Lanka between January and May 2009." This was not a
    risk category adopted by the Tribunal in their conclusions in GJ having
    heard and assessed all of the evidence before them. As with much of the
    evidence in GJ, it is made in the context of Tamils being  returned  to
    Sri Lanka, not a Sinhala former police officer  returning  on  a  valid
    passport.

124. In conclusion, we did not find that the appellant  had  shown  that  he
    has or will be of adverse interest on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  for  any
    reason such that his rights under  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  would  be
    breached.

Decision

125. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law  such  that  its  decision
    was set aside.

126. We re-make the decision as dismissed on asylum, humanitarian and  human
    rights grounds.

Anonymity

We make an anonymity order under rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which are likely to lead members of the public  to  identify
the appellant.





Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
APPENDIX - ERROR OF LAW DETERMINATION DATED 12 FEBUARY 2013


APPELLANT:    AS

RESPONDENT:   SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

CASE NO:      AA/10534/2011

DATE OF INITIAL HEARING IN UPPER TRIBUNAL: 4 FEBRUARY 2013


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms S Jegarajah, instructed by Shanthi & Co
For the Respondent: Ms M Tanner, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


REASONS FOR FINDING THAT THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW,  SUCH
THAT ITS DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE AND RE-MADE

   1. This is an appeal against a decision dated 20 January 2012  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Mensah who dismissed  the  appellant's  claims  on
      asylum and human rights grounds.

   2. The appellant asserts that as part of his  work  for  the  Sri  Lankan
      police he joined a special unit from 2007 to 2010 and  that  his  work
      there included the extrajudicial arrest of LTTE suspects. He maintains
      that he applied for a transfer in 2009 when  he  first  realised  that
      suspects were being tortured.

   3. In the refusal letter dated 1 September 2011, the respondent  accepted
      the appellant's account of his work for the special unit  but  was  of
      the view that he knew at all material times the  individuals  that  he
      arrested would be tortured. As a  result,  the  respondent  maintained
      that the appellant came within the  exclusion  provisions  of  Article
      1F(a) of  the  Refugee  Convention.   The  respondent  also  issued  a
      certificate  under  Section  55  of  the   Immigration,   Asylum   and
      Nationality Act 2006 which stated that the appellant was not  entitled
      to the protection of the Refugee Convention.

   4. Section 55 of the 2006 Act also states that the Tribunal  "must  begin
      substantive deliberations on the  asylum  appeal  by  considering  the
      statements in  the  Secretary  of  State's  certificate."  Mrs  Tanner
      accepted that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in failing to  apply
      this provision of section 55. The judge did not begin her  substantive
      findings by considering the matters raised in the certificate but from
      [14] to [49] purported to assess whether the appellant had shown  that
      he would face a risk of mistreatment on return to  Sri  Lanka.  Having
      found that his claim had not been made out, the judge stated at [50]:

      "As a result of my findings, I have not needed to consider whether the
      appellant should be excluded from  the  refugee  convention  (sic)  on
      account of his involvement in arresting individuals  who  he  admitted
      were tortured and killed in circumstances where I have  found  he  had
      knowledge."

   5. Mrs Tanner submitted that this error was  not  material,  however,  as
      whether or not the appellant fell to  be  excluded  from  the  Refugee
      Convention, the judge's findings  that  his  claim  for  international
      protection was not made out were sustainable. Even if  the  judge  had
      made a  decision  that  the  appellant  could  not  be  excluded  from
      protection, the appellant's claim on asylum and human  rights  grounds
      would still have failed.

   6. We did not  find  that  we  could  agree.  Notwithstanding  the  clear
      indication at [50],  the  judge  does  appear  to  consider  and  make
      findings on matters pertaining to the exclusion issue; see [14], [16],
      [25], [27] - [30], [32] - [33], [35]  and  [41].  We  should  indicate
      immediately that these paragraphs do not show that the judge did  make
      a proper decision on whether the appellant should be excluded from the
      Refugee Convention. She could not be said to have done so in the light
      of her statement at [50] and  the  absence  of  any  reference  to  or
      application of the correct criteria for assessing exclusion,  set  out
      in JS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 15 and  Al-Sirri  v  SSHD  [2012]
      UKSC 54. The difficulty raised by these  paragraphs  is  that  matters
      which should  have  been  assessed  within  the  legal  framework  for
      consideration of exclusion are inextricably tied up with  the  judge's
      findings on the separate matter  of  the  merits  of  the  appellant's
      asylum and human rights claims.

   7. At [25], for example, the judge states:

      "In my opinion  the  appellant  has  given  contradictory  answers  to
      whether his Unit met with the officer in command of the  Unit  or  not
      and this negates the appellant's credibility as (sic) the way the Unit
      received instructions and his role in charge of that Unit...",


    and at [29] that the evidence:

      "... suggests the appellant stayed in the special force and  continued
      to arrest people even after May 2009  and  knowing  those  individuals
      faced potential torture and death. Overall, I am of the view that this
      evidence undermines the appellant's credibility ...",

and at [30]:

      "I do not find it credible that the appellant only discovered  he  was
      responsible for arresting people who were being tortured and killed in
      May 2009 and yet continue (sic) to arrest individuals and wait some  9
      months before applying for a passport to  enable  him  to  escape  the
      country."

   8. The judge appears to rely on the negative findings on the  appellant's
      responsibility  for  and  knowledge  of  torture   and   extrajudicial
      killings, as above, made outside the correct legal framework, to  find
      that his claim to fear mistreatment on return lacked credibility.   It
      is therefore not possible to extract clear or  untainted  findings  on
      the appellant's substantive claim and we concluded that  we  were  not
      able to preserve any part of the determination.

   9. We also accepted that there was merit in Ms Jegarajah's fourth  ground
      of appeal that the First-tier Tribunal  judge did not  assess  whether
      the act of leaving Sri Lanka  and  revealing  details  of  his  police
      activities as part of his asylum claim in the UK would lead to a  risk
      on return for reason of imputed political opinion. This  was  a  claim
      made by the appellant in his witness statement,  referred  to  in  the
      skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal and would  appear  to
      be the submission recorded at [38] of  the  determination.  The  judge
      assesses only whether the authorities had an adverse interest  in  the
      appellant before he left Sri Lanka because of what he knew rather than
      as a result of his asylum claim made after coming to the UK,  however;
      see [38] and [39].

  10. For these reasons, we  found  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law and had to be set  aside
      entirely and the appeal re-made de novo.


Signed:                                      Date: 12 February 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt















