

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

         Bali (Family member: 3 month visit) [2013] UKUT 00570 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|3 October 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

            MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                     and
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, BEIRUT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MHD MUTASEM BALI

                                                                  Respondent


A non -  EEA  national  family  member  travelling  to  the  United  Kingdom
accompanied by the EEA national family member concerned for the  purpose  of
a visit of not more than  three  months'  duration  is  entitled  to  enter,
pursuant to regulations 11(2), 12(1) and 13(1) and (2)  of  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, read together.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Bali, Sponsor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

[1]  By a decision dated 30 November 2012, the Entry Clearance  Officer  for
    Beirut ("the ECO") refused Mr Bali's EEA family permit  application  in
    the following terms:-


        "You have not provided satisfactory original evidence to show  that
        you are related to an EEA national who is exercising  their  Treaty
        rights to live in the UK, nor that you are dependant upon them"


    MHD Mutasem Bali (hereinafter "the Respondent"), who was the subject of
    this decision, exercised his right of  appeal.   By  its  determination
    promulgated on 19 July 2013, the First-tier Tribunal  ("the  Tribunal")
    allowed the appeal finding that  Mr  Bali  was  entitled  to  a  family
    permit.  The ECO was granted permission to appeal this decision on 15th
    August 2013 on the ground that it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge had erred in law because Mr Bali was merely intending to
    visit and would therefore not be residing in the UK in accordance  with
    the Regulations and his wife was not and would  not  on  arrival  be  a
    qualified person.


[2]  The material facts are  uncontentious.   The  Respondent  is  a  Syrian
    national.  He resides there with his spouse  who  is  an  EEA  National
    (being  of  German  nationality).   His  daughter,   also   of   German
    nationality, is an EEA National, resident in the United  Kingdom.   His
    application for permission to enter the United  Kingdom  was  made  and
    pursued by his daughter.  She compiled and pursued the  application  on
    the basis and on the understanding that she was the relevant person for
    the purposes of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the EEA Regulations"). She confirmed that the Respondent was not
    and is not dependent upon her.  The application for the grant of  entry
    clearance to  the  Respondent  contained  two  notable  statements,  or
    representations.  The first was that the Respondent  was  intending  to
    travel to the United Kingdom some four months later for the purpose  of
    visiting his daughter and to remain there, pursuant  to  such  purpose,
    for a period of two months.  The second was that his  spouse  would  be
    travelling with him.  These are two of the key facts in the matrix.

[3]  It is necessary to consider the application actually made to  the  ECO.
    It was made on behalf of the Respondent, it requested recognition of  a
    right under the Regulations to enter the  United  Kingdom  and  it  was
    based on the Respondent's  status  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    National.  It would appear that  the  ECO  was  unduly  influenced,  or
    distracted, by the factor of the Respondent's daughter.   He  evidently
    failed to appreciate that the relevant EEA National in the  matrix  was
    the Respondent's spouse.  This failure  generated  a  further  failure,
    which was his inability to recognise that the husband and wife would be
    entering the United Kingdom together, thereby  requiring  consideration
    of regulations 11 and 13.

[4]  Recourse to the EU Directive on which the  EEA  Regulations  are  based
    assists in the exercise of providing the  correct  answer  to  the  net
    question of law which arises in this  appeal.   As  emphasised  in  its
    recitals, Directive 2004/38/EC regulates the right of citizens  of  the
    Union and generally their family members  to  move  and  reside  freely
    within the territory of the Member States.  The Directive was  designed
    to simplify and strengthen the right of free movement and residence  of
    all EU citizens.  One of the mechanisms  devised  for  fulfilling  this
    purpose was to grant the same right to family members, irrespective  of
    their nationality.   To this end, a definition of "family  member"  was
    formulated.  Recital (9) states:

     "Union citizens should have the right of residence in the host  Member
        State      for a period not exceeding three  months  without  being
        subject to  any  conditions  or  any  formalities  other  than  the
        requirement to hold a valid  identity  card  or  passport,  without
        prejudice to a more favourable treatment applicable to  job-seekers
        as recognised by the case-law of the Court of Justice"

     As appears from recital (10), an unqualified right of residence for  EU
    citizens and their family members is confined to the initial period  of
    three months.  Upon the expiry of this period, the right is subject  to
    conditions.  This  is  in  furtherance  of  the  aim  of  avoiding  the
    imposition of unreasonable burdens on the social assistance  system  of
    the host Member State.  Permanent residence becomes possible  upon  the
    expiry of a continuous period of five years.


[5]  The regime established  by  the  Directive  system  promotes  both  the
    "feeling" of EU citizenship and social cohesion, which is  one  of  the
    fundamental objectives of the EU, per  recital  (17).   By  Article  2,
    "family member" includes the spouse of an  EU  citizen.   Article  6(1)
    provides:-

        "Union citizens shall have the right of residence on the  territory
        of another Member State for a period of up to three months  without
        any conditions or any formalities other  that  the  requirement  to
        hold  a  valid  identity  card  or  passport.   The  provisions  of
        paragraph 1 shall also apply to family members in possession  of  a
        valid  passport  who  are  not  nationals  of   a   Member   state,
        accompanying or joining the Union citizen".

    The right enjoyed by the Respondent's spouse, as an EEA national, under
    the transposing EEA Regulations is expressed in regulation 11(1) thus:-

        "An EEA National must be admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  if  he
        produces on arrival a valid  national  identity  card  or  passport
        issued by an EEA State".

    The right potentially enjoyed by  the  Respondent,  being  the  husband
    [and, hence a "family member"] of an  EEA  National,  is  contained  in
    regulation 11(2):-

        "A person who is not an EEA National must be admitted to the United
        Kingdom if he is a family member  of  an  EEA  National.......  and
        produces on arrival -


              a) a valid passport; and


              (b)   an EEA family permit, a residence  card,  a  derivative
              residence card, or a  permanent residence card".


    It is not suggested that  the  Respondent  was  at  any  material  time
    capable  of  complying  with   the   second   of   these   "production"
    requirements.  Accordingly, any right of entry to  the  United  Kingdom
    enjoyed by him is not derived  from  Regulation  11(2).   In  order  to
    identify any such right it is necessary to delve a little  deeper  into
    the Regulations.

[6]  The outworkings of  the  right  of  admission  to  the  United  Kingdom
    conferred on the Respondent's spouse as an EEA National, are  found  in
    regulation 13(1):-

        "An EEA national is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom for  a
        period not exceeding three months beginning on the date on which he
        is admitted to the United Kingdom provided that he  holds  a  valid
        national identity card or passport issued by an EEA State".

    The related right which the  Respondent  can  seek  to  invoke  in  the
    present  case  is  expressed  in  the  next  succeeding  paragraph,  in
    regulation 13(2):-

        "A family member of an EEA National or  a  family  member  who  has
        retained the right of residence  who  is  residing  in  the  United
        Kingdom under paragraph (1) who is not himself an EEA  National  is
        entitled to reside in the United Kingdom provided that he  holds  a
        valid passport".

     We consider that the analysis applicable to the factual matrix of  the
    present case is to be conducted in the following sequence:-

        a)  the Respondent's spouse has a right of admission to the  United
           Kingdom under regulation  13(1).
        b)   following admission, the Respondent's spouse  is  entitled  to
           reside there  for  a  maximum  period  of  three  months,  under
           regulation 13(1).
        c) the Respondent thereby acquires an entitlement to reside in  the
           United Kingdom also: per regulation 13(2).


[7]  We consider it  necessary  to  address  the  question  of  whether  the
    Respondent's spouse is required to be already in the United Kingdom  at
    the time he seeks entry.

     Regulation 12(1) provides:-

        "An Entry Clearance Officer must issue an EEA family  permit  to  a
        person who applies for one if the person is a family member  of  an
        EEA National and -


        a) the EEA National -
             (i)    is  residing  in  the  UK  in  accordance   with   these
Regulations; or
             (ii)  will be travelling  to  the  United  Kingdom  within  six
               months of the date of the
                    application  and will be an EEA National residing in the
               United Kingdom in
                    accordance with these  Regulations  on  arrival  in  the
               United Kingdom; and
             (iii) the family member will be accompanying the  EEA  National
                 to the United
                    Kingdom or joining the EEA National there".

    In the present case,  the  EEA  national  concerned,  the  Respondent's
    spouse, intimated in the entry clearance application  an  intention  to
    travel to the United Kingdom within the  following  six  months.   Upon
    doing so, she would become "an EEA  National  residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with  these  Regulations"  viz  under  regulation
    11(1) and  regulation  13(1).   Furthermore,  the  Respondent  was  put
    forward in  the  application  as  "the  family  member  [who]  will  be
    accompanying the EEA National to the United Kingdom...".  Giving effect
    to the latter words, the meaning whereof  we  consider  clear,  we  are
    satisfied that the Regulations do not require the  Respondent's  spouse
    to precede the Respondent, arriving in the United Kingdom  before  him.
    Thus the conditions  for  the  grant  of  an  EEA  family  permit  were
    satisfied.   This being so, the ECO has - and had - no  discretion:  he
    "must" issue an EEA family permit to the Respondent if he  applies  for
    one.  The issue of such a permit unlocks  the  door  to  entry  to  the
    United Kingdom under regulation 11(2).  Thus the ECO's failure to issue
    a family permit was erroneous in law.

[8]  One issue further raised was the submission by Mr  Saunders  about  the
    meaning of the word "residing" in regulation 12(1). It was argued  that
    this requires permanence or, at  least,  an  intention  to  permanently
    reside. In this case, the clearly expressed intention of the Respondent
    and his spouse was to visit the UK for two months.   They  proposed  to
    undertake a simple, time limited family visit.  We  consider  that  the
    ECO's argument is confounded by the clear wording of  Article  6(1)  of
    the Directive (supra). We refer also to recitals (9) and (10)  (supra).
    In short, the Directive plainly contemplates  temporary  residence.  It
    therefore follows  that  the  Respondent  has  at  all  material  times
    satisfied the requirements of the Regulations, specifically regulations
    12(1) (a) (ii) and 13(2).

[9]  The First-tier Tribunal Judge, in a brief  determination,  referred  to
    the assumed understanding of the ECO that the Respondent was seeking to
    come within the Regulations as a family member of his daughter.  Having
    set out regulation 12, he concluded that the Respondent  was  intending
    to travel with, and was thus entitled to a family permit as, the spouse
    of his EEA national wife. He decided  that  the  Respondent  "fulfilled
    entirely the provisions of paragraph 12 of the EEA Regulations."


[10]  We  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  correctly  allowed  the
    appeal.  While the Tribunal did not adopt the analytical  approach  set
    out above, we are satisfied that it reached the correct decision.   Our
    decision is that a non - EEA national family member travelling  to  the
    United Kingdom accompanied by the EEA national family member concerned,
    for the purpose of a visit of not more than three months' duration,  is
    entitled to enter, pursuant to regulations 11(2), 12(1) and  13(1)  and
    (2), read together.

    Decision

[11] It follows that there was no error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.   Accordingly  we  dismiss  the  ECO's  appeal  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.
                                                                     Signed:


                                                The Hon Mr Justice McCloskey



                                             President of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber




                                                      Dated: 25 October 2013






