
    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Osoro (Surinder Singh) [2015] UKUT 00593 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination promulgated    |
|on 08 September 2015                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                   Between

                               WYCLIFFE OSORO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

Appellant:    In person, accompanied by his sponsor
Respondent:       Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


 i) The rationale of the decision in R v Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  and
    Surinder Singh ex parte Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [1992] ECR I-4265 is formed by two principles, namely the principle  of
    the efficacious enjoyment of Treaty rights and the  principle  of  non-
    discrimination.


ii) These are the two principles to which Tribunals  must  have  particular
    regard in deciding cases in which the appellant does not satisfy any of
    the provisions of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations.


iii) The co-existence of the  decision  in  Surinder  Singh  with  Directive
    2004/38/EC  ("the  Citizens  Directive")  raises  questions  which  may
    require to be determined in some appropriate future case.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (hereinafter the  "Secretary
    of State"), the Respondent, dated 30 April 2014 whereby the Appellant's
    application  for  a  residence  card  under   the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 (hereinafter the "EEA Regulations") was refused.   The
    Appellant's appeal against this decision  was  dismissed.  The  central
    question of law raised  by  this  appeal  concerns  the  ambit  of  the
    decision of the European Court of Justice (the "ECJ ") in the case of R
    v Immigration Appeal Tribunal and Surinder Singh, ex parte Secretary of
    State for the Home  Department  (Case  C-370/90);  [1992]  ECR  I-04265
    (hereinafter Surinder Singh).

Factual Matrix

 2. The material facts are uncontentious. The Appellant is  a  national  of
    Kenya, aged 29 years.  His application for a residence card is dated 15
    March 2014.  In his application he was required to provide  particulars
    of his EEA national family member. He identified  this  person  as  his
    uncle, a male British national born in 1975.

    Section 5 of the application form,  entitled  "Surinder  Singh  Cases",
    recognises, by implication,  that  the  decision  in  "Surinder  Singh"
    provides a specific route to the acquisition of a residence  card.   In
    completing   this   section,   the   Appellant   made   the   following
    representations:


    (a)  His British citizen family member (his uncle) had exercised Treaty
           rights as a worker in another EEA member state, Belgium.


    (b)  The Appellant was the family member of the  British  citizen  (his
           uncle) during such period.


    (c)  The Appellant did not reside with his uncle during such period.


    (d)  His uncle worked in Belgium between 01 July and 15 November  2013,
           returning to the United Kingdom on 19 December 2013.

 3. At the hearing before us the uncontentious factual matrix was amplified
    somewhat.  The Appellant's uncle explained that the Appellant had  been
    living with him and his family in London since 1996, when he  was  aged
    around eight. The Appellant has been a member of his uncle's  household
    ever since.  When  the  uncle  went  to  Belgium  in  mid-2013  he  was
    accompanied by his wife.  At that time their plan, stimulated mainly by
    the apparent prospect of long term employment, was to reside there  for
    some  considerable  time.   However,  the   employment   period   which
    materialised was unexpectedly short and, further, some family  problems
    developed in London. As a result, they returned to the family  home  in
    London  in  December  2013.   Throughout  the  intervening  period  the
    Appellant lived in the family home with other members  of  the  uncle's
    family.  The uncle added that his spouse has an EEA family permit.

 4. The "Surinder  Singh"  section  of  the  Form  contains  the  following
    instruction:

         "You must provide evidence to show that  you  resided  in  the  EEA
         member state at a time  when  your  family  member  was  exercising
         Treaty rights in that EEA member state."

    No such evidence was provided. Appended to his application were various
    materials, including  his  passport,  his  birth  certificate  and  the
    Belgium identity card of his  uncle.   There  was  also  a  species  of
    certification from  the  Kenya  Ministry  of  Interior  describing  the
    relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the  British   citizen   as
    nephew/uncle and representing that they lived together in London.  None
    of this is contentious.

The Secretary of State's Decision

 5.  The  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for  refusing  the   Appellant's
    application were formulated in the following terms:


         "It is noted that your sponsor ...  is a British citizen  and  thus
         not an EEA national as claimed.  This therefore means that you have
         no basis of application under the [EEA  Regulations]  as  you  have
         failed to provide evidence that you are the family member of an EEA
         national. ...


         In addition to the above, it is  noted  that  you  have  failed  to
         provide any evidence of your dependency and/or residence with  your
         sponsor prior to entering the United Kingdom pursuant to regulation
         8(2)(a)."

         The decision also articulates  the  following  omnibus  reason  for
refusal:

         "Your application is therefore refused under regulation 8(2) ..  as
         you have not provided evidence that you are the relative of an  EEA
         national."

    As these passages indicate, the decision maker viewed  the  Appellant's
    application exclusively  through  the  lens  of  the  EEA  regulations.
    Notwithstanding the invitation in the Secretary of State's  application
    form to seek a residence card under the "Surinder Singh"  route,  there
    is no mention of this decision and no recognition of any such route  in
    the determination. We shall revisit this issue presently.

The Decision In Surinder Singh

 6. Mr Singh, a national of India, married a British national in the United
    Kingdom in 1982.  From 1983 to 1985  both  were  employed  in  Germany,
    following which they  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to
    establish a business.  In 1986 Mr Singh was granted  limited  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as the husband of a British national.  The
    following year Mr and Mrs Singh were divorced.  This  was  the  impetus
    for a decision refusing  to  grant  him  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    Subsequently, at a stage when he had no leave to remain  a  deportation
    order was made against him under section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act
    1971.

 7. The provisions of EU law raised by this preliminary reference from  the
    United Kingdom High Court for a preliminary ruling were Articles 48 and
    52 of the EEC Treaty and Council  Directive  73/148.   The  two  Treaty
    provisions are concerned with the freedom of movement  of  EU  citizens
    throughout EU Member States for the purpose of working or  establishing
    oneself. The Court also considered the  prohibition  of  discrimination
    prescribed by Article 7 of  the  Treaty.  The  subject  matter  of  the
    Council Directive, which is complimentary  to  the  substantive  Treaty
    provisions, is the abolition of restrictions on movement and  residence
    within the community for nationals of  Member  States  with  regard  to
    establishment and the provision of services.  The EU law framework  has
    altered subsequently.  Regulation 1612/68 was  repealed  by  Regulation
    492/2011, Article 41 while Directive 68/360 was repelled  and  replaced
    by Directive 2004/38/EC, the  so-called  "Citizens  Directive".   These
    measures were designed to, inter alia, develop  and  fortify  the  free
    movement principles enshrined in the Treaties.

 8. What did Surinder Singh decide? The essence  of  the  decision  of  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal was that Mr Singh had a Community law right
    as the spouse of a British citizen who, in turn, had  a  Community  law
    right to set up business in the  United  Kingdom.   This  decision  was
    challenged by the Secretary of State by  an  application  for  judicial
    review, giving rise to the reference  to  the  ECJ  for  a  preliminary
    ruling.  The ECJ ruled in favour of Mr Singh.  Its  decision  was  that
    Article 52 of the Treaty and the Council Directive, in tandem,  require
    a Member State to grant leave to enter and reside in its  territory  to
    the spouse, of whatever nationality, of a national  of  that  state  in
    circumstances where both have travelled  to  another  Member  State  in
    order to work, following which the national concerned  returns  to  the
    Member State of which he or she  is  a  national  for  the  purpose  of
    establishing a business.  Vis-�-vis the British citizen concerned  (Mrs
    Singh), both movements were protected by Treaty provisions.  The  first
    was protected by Article 48 of the Treaty.  The second was protected by
    Article 52.


 9. The Court further held that,  by  virtue  of  the  prohibition  against
    discrimination, the non-national spouse must enjoy at  least  the  same
    rights as would be granted to him or her under Community law if his  or
    her spouse entered and resided  in  another  Member  State.   In  [21],
    notably, family members were  clearly  at  the  heart  of  the  Court's
    thinking. What is the essential reasoning of the decision?   The  Court
    reasoned, in [23], that the rights conferred by Articles 48 and  52  of
    the Treaty:

         "....  cannot be fully effective if [an EU citizen] may be deterred
         from exercising them by obstacles raised in his or her  country  of
         origin  to  the  entry  and  residence  of  his  or   her   spouse.
         Accordingly, when a Community national who has availed  himself  or
         herself of those rights returns to his or her  country  of  origin,
         his or her spouse must enjoy at least the same rights of entry  and
         residence as would be granted to him or her under Community law  if
         his or her spouse choose to enter  and  reside  in  another  Member
         State."

     Within this passage one readily identifies the  familiar  principle  of
    efficacious enjoyment of Community law rights and the  related  concept
    of dissuasion, or  deterrence,  coupled  with  the  principle  of  non-
    discrimination.  This, viewed through a common law prism, is the  ratio
    decidendi.


10.  Summarising, the effect of the decision of the ECJ was to grant to  the
    third country spouse of a EU citizen the right of  residence  under  EU
    law in the country of the EU citizen provided that  the  third  country
    spouse had accompanied the EU citizen from   the "first"  EU  state  to
    the "second" EU state, the object of the  transition  being  to  pursue
    employment or self-employment on  the  part  of  the  EU  citizen,  and
    further accompanied the  EU  citizen  spouse  on  the  reverse  journey
    undertaken with the same purpose.  The central breach of EU  law  found
    by the Court was that the conditions in the United  Kingdom  applicable
    to Mr Singh upon return were less favourable than those from  which  he
    benefited when the first movement was made. In thus deciding,  the  ECJ
    rejected the  argument  of  the  United  Kingdom  Government  that  the
    position of the returning spouse of the  EU  citizen  was  governed  by
    national law, holding that the rights engaged were those  conferred  by
    Articles 45 and 49 of the Treaty.

     Post - Surinder Singh

11.  There has been some  evolution  in  the  case  law  of  the  ECJ  since
    Surinder Singh was decided.  In Akrich, (Case C-109/01); [2003] ECRI  -
    9607, the ECJ made clear that the right identified  in  Surinder  Singh
    arises where the national concerned returns  to  his  Member  State  of
    origin in either an employed or self employed capacity: see [47] - [48]
    especially.  The focus is on re-entry to the EU citizen's Member State,
    rather  than  departure  therefrom.  The  concept  of  deterrence,   or
    discouragement, features strongly in  the  Court's  judgment.   As  the
    Court's case law developed subsequently, one of its themes was that  of
    derivative rights, namely rights derived by family members from the  EU
    citizen concerned.  The Court has recognised that national  limitations
    on the rights conferred by Articles 45 and 49 TFEU  may  be  lawful  if
    they pursue a legitimate objective compatible with the  Treaty  and  is
    justified by pressing reasons of public interest: see  Kraus  (Case  C-
    19/92); [1993] ECRI - 1663, at [37] especially.  In  Gebhard  (Case  C-
    55/94); [1995] ECRI - 4165, the Court formulated  the  four  conditions
    which must be satisfied, at [37]:

         "National measures liable to hinder or  make  less  attractive  the
         exercise of fundamental freedoms  guaranteed  by  the  Treaty  must
         fulfil  four  conditions:  they   must  be  applied   in   a   non-
         discriminatory  manner;  they  must  be  justified  by   imperative
         requirements in the general interest; they  must  be  suitable  for
         securing the attainment of the objective which  they  pursue;   and
         they must not go beyond what is necessary in  order  to  attain  it
         ...."


    We draw attention to this decision  as  forming  part  of  the  broader
    juridical matrix.

12. In Grzelczyk (Case C-184/99); [2001] ECRI - 6193, the  Court  made  the
    following landmark declaration:

         "Union citizenship is destined to  be  the  fundamental  status  of
         nationals of the Member States, enabling those who find  themselves
         in  the  same  situation  to  enjoy  the  same  treatment  in   law
         irrespective of their nationality, subject to  such  exceptions  as
         are expressly provided for."

    This  decision  foreshadowed  the  advent  of  the  co-called  Citizens
    Directive (2004/38).  This measure governs  the  exercise  of  movement
    between and residence within the territories of  Member  States  by  EU
    citizens and their family members.  The Directive is  not  constitutive
    of the rights of movement and residence.  Such rights are conferred  by
    primary EU legislation.  By Article 21  TFEU,  Union  citizens  have  a
    right to move and reside freely within the  territory  of  any  of  the
    Member States subject to the limitations and  conditions  contained  in
    the  Treaties  and  secondary  legislation.    Union   citizenship   is
    established  by  Article   20   TFEU.    Article   18   prohibits   any
    discrimination on grounds of nationality.


13.  Subsequently, in Minister Voor  Integratie  v  Eind  (Case  C-291/05);
    [2007] ECR I - 10719, a case involving family reunification,  the Grand
    Chamber stated:

         "[37]    Barriers to family reunification are therefore  liable  to
                  undermine the right to free movement which  the  nationals
                  of the Member States have under Community law ...."

    In [44] it repeated the familiar theme of eliminating obstacles to  the
    exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaties.    One
    of the Court's more recent major pronouncements on Articles 21  and  45
    TFEU and the Citizens Directive is contained in Cases C-456/12  and  C-
    457/12, O, B, S and G, where the Netherlands authorities had refused to
    grant a right of residence to a third-country national who was a family
    member of an EU citizen of Netherlands nationality.  The Court held  as
    follows:

       i) Article 21(1) TFEU  and  Directive  2004/38  do  not  confer  any
          autonomous  rights  on  third-country  nationals.    Any   rights
          conferred on them by provisions of EU law  on  Union  citizenship
          are rights derived from the exercise of freedom of movement by  a
          Union citizen.


      ii) Directive 2004/38 does not establish a derived right of residence
          for third-country nationals who are family  members  of  a  Union
          citizen in the Member State of which that citizen is a national.

     iii) The purpose and justification of a derived right of residence  is
          that the denial thereof would interfere with the Union  citizen's
          freedom of movement  by  discouraging  him  from  exercising  his
          rights of entry into and residence in another Member State.   The
          trigger for the derivative right  is  the  return  of  the  Union
          citizen to his Member State of nationality.

      iv) The conditions for granting a derived right of residence  to  the
          third-country family member should not, in principle be  stricter
          than the  grant  of  a  derived  right  of  residence  under  the
          Directive, even though this does not govern  the  return  of  the
          Union citizen to his home Member State, following  his  migratory
          movement to a host Member State in the exercise of Treaty rights.

       v) The effectiveness of the right to freedom of movement of  workers
          may require that a derived right of residence  be  granted  to  a
          third-country national who  is  a  family  member  of  the  Union
          citizen in the latter's Member State.  Such a  derived  right  of
          residence may arise in  circumstances  where  its  refusal  would
          interfere with the exercise of fundamental freedoms guaranteed by
          the Treaty.

    Thus the link between the relevant provisions of primary and  secondary
    Community   legislation   continues   to   feature   in   the   Court's
    jurisprudence.

15.  Accordingly, where an EU citizen has, pursuant  to  and  in  conformity
    with the provisions of the Directive relating to a right  of  residence
    for a period exceeding  three  months,  genuinely  resided  in  another
    Member State and, during such period, a family life  has  been  created
    and/or fortified, the effectiveness of Article 51  TFEU  requires  that
    the citizen's family life  in  the  host  Member  State  continue  upon
    returning to his Member State of origin.  In  such  cases,  the  third-
    country national who is a member of the EU citizen's family may qualify
    for  the  grant  of  a  derived  right  of  residence.   An   essential
    prerequisite is that the  third-country  national  must  have  had  the
    status of family member of the EU citizen during at least part  of  the
    period of residence in the host (or second) Member State.

     The EEA Regulations

16. The measure of domestic law which implements the Citizens Directive  in
    the United Kingdom is the EEA Regulations. It is instructive to reflect
    on the question of whether the decision in Surinder Singh survives  the
    advent of the Directive and  the  Regulations.   Since  these  measures
    apply only to those who are in the territory of a  Member  State  other
    than that of their nationality, the decision in Surinder  Singh,  which
    focuses on the second element of the matrix viz the return of the Union
    citizen from the host Member State to the Member  State  of  which  the
    citizen is a national, is of no import.  However,  the  decision  would
    appear to have some continuing impact in the context of the application
    of the primary Treaty provisions.  This  issue  did  not  generate  any
    argument before us and is best reserved for consideration in a suitable
    future case.

17. Regulation 9 of the  EEA  regulations,  which  is  concerned  with  the
    conferral of rights of "family members" of British citizens, is couched
    in terms which resonate strongly with the decision in  Surinder  Singh,
    albeit more prescriptively. It provides:


        "9.- Family members of British citizens
        (1) If  the  conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are  satisfied,  these
        Regulations apply to a person who is the family member of a British
        citizen as if the British citizen ("P") were an EEA national.
        (2) The conditions are that-
              (a) P is residing in an  EEA  State  as  a  worker  or  self-
              employed person or was so residing before  returning  to  the
              United Kingdom;
              (b) if the family member of P is P's spouse or civil partner,
              the parties are living together  in  the  EEA  State  or  had
              entered into the  marriage  or  civil  partnership  and  were
              living together in the EEA State before the  British  citizen
              returned to the United Kingdom; and
              (c) the centre of P's life has transferred to the  EEA  State
              where P resided as a worker or self-employed person.
        (3) Factors  relevant  to  whether  the  centre  of  P's  life  has
        transferred to another EEA State include-
              (a) the period of residence in the EEA State as a  worker  or
              self-employed person;
              (b) the location of P's principal residence;
              (c) the degree of integration of P in the EEA State.
        (4) Where these Regulations apply to the family member of P,  P  is
        to be treated as holding a valid passport issued by  an  EEA  State
        for the purpose of the application of regulation 13 to that  family
        member."

     "Family member" is defined by Regulation 7.  By regulation 8 there  is
    a free standing category of "extended family members".  The  mechanisms
    applicable to qualifying persons under the Regulations are a  residence
    card, a permanent residence card and  an  EEA  family  permit.   It  is
    instructive to recall the rationale underpinning these provisions.   It
    is expressed in recital (5) of the Citizens Directive in these terms:

         "The right of all Union citizens to move and reside freely  within
          the territory of  the  Member  States  should,  if  it  is  to  be
          exercised under objective conditions of freedom  and  dignity,  be
          also granted to their family members, irrespective of  nationality
          ....."


    The cornerstone of the regime is the act of migration by  the  national
    of a Member State to the territory  of  another  Member  State  in  the
    exercise  of  free  movement  or  establishment  rights,  coupled  with
    subsequent residence there.

This Appeal

18. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted in the following
    terms:

         "It is arguable  that  the  [FtT]  erred  in  concluding  that  the
         decision in Surinder Singh was not applicable to the facts of  this
         case and/or that its application was  limited  to  cases  where  an
         appellant is a family member (as defined) of a British citizen."

    The determination of the FtT contains only a fleeting reference to  the
    decision of the ECJ in Surinder Singh.  While the Judge  recorded  that
    the Appellant's application was made on the  basis  of  this  decision,
    there is no consideration of or engagement with  the  decision  itself.
    Neither the FtT nor this Tribunal received any argument on the question
    of the enduring impact of the decision in Surinder Singh in the wake of
    the Citizens Directive and EEA  Regulations.   While  it  is  at  least
    conceivable that the decision will continue to apply in  context  where
    the applicant's case is based on resort to primary  Treaty  provisions,
    we reserve questions such as these to an appropriate future case.

19. It was argued before  the  FtT  that  the  Appellant  qualified  for  a
    residence card under regulation 9 of the EEA Regulations and  that  the
    Secretary of State had erred in law in considering, and  refusing,  the
    application under regulation 8. The FtT decided, in summary:


     i.  The Appellant does not fall  within  the  scope  of  regulation  8
        because his uncle is a United Kingdom national  by  virtue  of  the
        definitions contained in Regulation 2.  Further and in  any  event,
        the  Appellant  is  unable  to  satisfy  any  of  the   disjunctive
        requirements enshrined in regulation 8(2)(a), (b) and (c)  or  (3),
        (4) or (5).


    ii.  The Appellant does not fall within the scope of Regulation 9 since
        he does not  satisfy  any  of  the  other  relationships  or  other
        requirements in Regulation 7.




      The FtT was plainly correct in thus deciding.  The correctness of  its
      conclusions under the  EEA  regulations  lies  outwith  the  grant  of
      permission to appeal.

20. Having regard to the grounds of appeal and the grant of  permission  to
    appeal in tandem,  the reality is that  this  appeal  proceeds  on  the
    basis of an acknowledgement  on behalf of the Appellant that he  cannot
    satisfy the provisions of the EEA Regulations and, hence, that the  FtT
    committed no error of law in this respect.  His case is confined to the
    single proposition that he qualifies for the grant of residence in  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to the decision in Surinder  Singh.   We  shall
    determine the appeal on this basis.


21.  One of the unmistakeable features of the factual matrix of  this  case
    is that the Appellant was at all material times inert.  The EU  citizen
    concerned, his uncle, made the two movements in question viz  from  the
    United Kingdom to another EU Member State and, some months  later,  the
    reverse, without the Appellant. The EU citizen in the matrix  exercised
    and enjoyed his Treaty rights fully and  without  interference  of  any
    kind.  Nor is there any element of discriminatory treatment.  In short,
    the principles of efficacious  enjoyment  of  Treaty  rights  and  non-
    discrimination, the twin  cornerstones  of  the  decision  in  Surinder
    Singh,  are  fully  satisfied.   The  Appellant's  case  is  confounded
    accordingly.

22. Finally, we have been alerted to the (unreported) decision of the Upper
    Tribunal  in  Secretary  of  State  of  the  Home  Department  v   Cain
    [IA/40868/2013].  The Appellant sought to rely  on  this  decision.  It
    involved a person who secured leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a
    student, not as a family member of an EEA national but as  someone  who
    was the unmarried partner of the EU citizen concerned.  The Appellant's
    application for a residence card qua family member of an  EEA  national
    was refused by the Secretary of State.  The  conclusion  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal was twofold.  First, it agreed with the FtT that the  Surinder
    Singh principle  applied  to  the  Appellant.   Second,  it  considered
    regulation 9 of the 2006 Regulations to  be  "inconsistent  with"  this
    principle - see [54] - because it does not embrace "a durable  partner"
    as an extended family member.  The rationale of the Tribunal's decision
    appears in [32]:

         "In our judgment, the exercise of the right of free movement by  an
         EEA national is as likely to be adversely affected by the inability
         of a durable partner to reside with the EEA national  in  the  host
         State, as it would  be  where  his  or  her  spouse  to  be  denied
         residence status."

23. It would appear that there was no exercise  of  Treaty  rights  in  the
    matrix of the Cain appeal.  This  per  se  distinguishes  it  from  the
    present appeal. It would appear that permission to appeal to the  Court
    of Appeal has been requested of, and refused by,  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Authoritative and binding guidance will become available if  the  Court
    of  Appeal  accedes  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  application   for
    permission to appeal. Some of the issues which  may  foreseeably  arise
    for  determination  include  the  impact  of  the  relevant   secondary
    Community Law viz the Citizens  Directive  and  the  corresponding  EEA
    regulations; whether it is  necessary  to  identify  any  provision  of
    primary  Community  law  said  to  render   the   secondary   Community
    legislation in some way incompatible or  inadequate  as   the  Tribunal
    appears to have held; and whether the Tribunal was competent to  decide
    that there was a defect in the relevant secondary Community legislation
    and the corresponding United Kingdom legislative code because both are,
    in the Tribunal's view, too narrow.

24.  We  conclude  that  the  decision  in  Cain  has  no  bearing  on  the
    determination of this appeal.

25. We would add, finally, that the linguistic formulation  "the  principle
    in Surinder Singh" requires particular care and circumspection  on  the
    part of both practitioners and judges in their consideration  of   what
    was actually decided in Surinder Singh, which was a fact sensitive case
    decided by the CJEU by  resort  to  the  free  movement  provisions  of
    primary Community law.   The  case  was  decided  accordingly  and  its
    rationale, or ratio decidendi, has the twofold doctrinal components  of
    the principle of efficacious enjoyment of Community law rights and  the
    principle of non-discrimination.  These are the  two  principles  which
    demand attention in any given context.  It is  not  clear  to  us  that
    Surinder Singh is authority for some principle  of  wider  application.
    In law, discipline is everything.

DECISION

  26. For the reasons elaborated above we  find  no  error  of  law  in  the
      decision of the FtT and  affirm  same  accordingly.    The  appeal  is
      dismissed.
                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Dated:  09 October 2015
