
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      Islam (Para 245X(ha): five years' study) [2013] UKUT 00608 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                            MOHAMMAD FOYZUL ISLAM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Ahmed of Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Paragraph 245X(ha) of HC 395 must be read as requiring  the  calculation  of
the five years spent in the UK as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Migrant  or  as  a
student studying at degree level  or  above  to  include  time  spent  as  a
student before the introduction of Tier  4.  Nothing  in  relevant  Guidance
permits a contrary result.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 6  July  1980.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 February  2005  with  a  student
    visa valid until 6 August 2005.  Subsequently he  was  granted  further
    leave as a student until 30 November 2009.  Thereafter, he was  granted
    leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student initially until 7 November 2011 and
    thereafter until 29 August 2012.  On 29 August  2012,  he  applied  for
    further leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student in  order  to  undertake  a
    Chartered Institute of Management Accounts (CIMA) course at NQF level 7
    at the Lea Valley College. The course was due to  start  on  8  October
    2012 and its expected end date is 31 August 2015.

 2. On 5 November 2012, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application under para 245ZX of the  Immigration  Rules  (Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395  as  amended).   Given  that  the
    appellant had first been granted leave to enter  as  a  student  on  10
    February 2005, the Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant met the requirement in para 245ZX(ha), namely that:

         "The grant of leave to remain the applicant  is  seeking  must  not
         lead to the applicant having spent more than 5 years in the UK as a
         Tier 4 (General) Migrant, or as  a  Student,  studying  courses  at
         degree level or above ..."

 3. The Secretary of State concluded that  the  appellant  had  studied  at
    degree level for his BSc in Computing for 4 years.  If granted leave to
    study a Master's course at a non-Recognised Body  or  Higher  Education
    Institution for a further 3 years, he would exceed the maximum 5  years
    study at degree level or above permitted by para 245ZX(ha).

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 24 January 2013, Judge Knowles dismissed the appellant's  appeal.
    The judge found that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    para 245ZX; the respondent's decision was consistent with the  relevant
    Tier 4 Guidance; there was nothing unfair in the respondent's decision;
    and no breach of Art 8 was established.

 5. On 19 February 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bailey) granted the
    appellant permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before us.

 6. The judge made a number of findings in relation to that  history  which
    are not challenged before us.

 7. The appellant first entered the UK as a student on  10  February  2005.
    His leave was valid until 5 August  2005  but  was  extended  until  30
    November 2009.  The basis upon which he entered the UK was to undertake
    study for a BSc course in computing at the University of  the  West  of
    England.  That course began in September 2005.  His leave was  extended
    until 30 November 2009 - the equivalent of four  academic  years  -  in
    order to complete that course.  In fact, the appellant 'dropped out' of
    the BSc course after two years.  It appears that the appellant did  not
    study again for some two years.  However, in 2007 he  enrolled  at  the
    City of Bath College to undertake a  foundation  degree  course.   That
    course, unlike his BSc degree that he had  not  completed,  fell  below
    study at "degree level" at NQF level 5 (see para 6 of the Rules).   His
    leave to study that course was extended to 7 November 2011 as a Tier  4
    Student and again, on that basis  until  29  August  2012.   The  judge
    accepted that the appellant had taken three years to complete  the  two
    year foundation course and that he was awarded a foundation  degree  in
    Applied Computing in October 2012.  The appellant's current application
    for leave is in order to undertake a CIMA course at NQF  level  7  (and
    therefore at or above degree level study) from 8 October 2012 until  31
    August 2015.

 8. The relevant Immigration Rule  is  para  245ZX(ha)  which  provides  as
    follows:

         "To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student under
         this rule, an applicant must meet the requirements listed below. If
         the applicant meets these requirements, leave  to  remain  will  be
         granted. If the applicant does not  meet  these  requirements,  the
         applicant will be refused.

         Requirements:

         ....

         (ha) If the course is at degree level or above, the grant of  leave
         to remain the applicant is seeking must not lead to  the  applicant
         having spent more than 5 years in the UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Migrant, or as a Student, studying courses at degree level or above
         unless:

         (i) the applicant has successfully completed  a  course  at  degree
         level in the UK of a minimum duration of 4 academic years, and will
         follow a course of study at Master's degree level  sponsored  by  a
         Sponsor that is a Recognised Body or a body in  receipt  of  public
         funding as a higher education institution from  the  Department  of
         Employment and Learning in Northern Ireland, the  Higher  Education
         Funding Council for England, the Higher Education  Funding  Council
         for Wales or the Scottish Funding Council, and the grant  of  leave
         to remain must not lead to the applicant having spent more  than  6
         years in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant,  or  as  a  Student,
         studying courses at degree level or above; or ...."

 9. The new Tier 4 structure, including para 245ZX, came into effect on  31
    March 2009 by virtue of HC  314.   Paragraph  245ZX(ha),  however,  was
    inserted into the rule with effect from 6 April 2012 by  virtue  of  HC
    1888.

10. It is not suggested in this appeal that the Lea  Valley  College  is  a
    "Recognised  Body"  or  a  "Higher  Educational  Institution"  for  the
    purposes of the Rules.  The appellant's application fell, therefore, to
    be determined by applying the  initial  paragraph  of  para  245ZX(ha),
    namely that the individual must not spend "more than 5 years in the  UK
    as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant, or as a  Student,  studying  courses  at
    degree level or above" (our emphasis).

11. In his submissions, Mr Ahmed accepted that the appellant could not meet
    the requirements of para 245ZX(ha).  He accepted that the rule required
    that time spent at degree level by the appellant as a student under the
    pre-Tier 4 rules had to  be  taken  into  account  in  calculating  the
    maximum period of  "5  years"  in  para  245ZX(ha).   That  is  plainly
    correct.  To date, the appellant has  been  in  the  UK  with  4  years
    (approximately) leave as a student  at  degree  level  (the  foundation
    degree not counting for this purpose) and he  now  seeks  a  further  3
    years leave (approximately) at or above that level to study  a  further
    course.  Mr Ahmed did not suggest in his oral submissions that only the
    appellant's time actually spent studying should be taken into  account.
    (We did not understand Mr Ahmed to pursue the point made in para 12  of
    the grounds.) The evidence was that the appellant had 'dropped out'  of
    his BSc course after 2 years.  Again, in our judgment, that is correct.
     The appellant had leave as a student for 4 years to pursue his  degree
    course; that he chose to 'drop out' (and not inform UKBA of that  fact)
    does not deny that the whole of the period of leave (excluding pre- and
    post-course leave granted  under  para  245ZY(b))  counts  towards  the
    maximum 5 year period and whatever he chose to do in  that  period,  he
    did it during a period of leave as a student.  It is the period of  the
    leave and not the actual study which is the measure for calculating the
    period spent in the UK imposed by para 245ZX(ha).

12. Instead, having accepted the appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Rules, Mr Ahmed relied upon the Tier 4  Policy  Guidance  (July  2012),
    especially para 87.  He submitted that the  Guidance  stated  that  the
    maximum "5 year" period at degree level or above only included time  as
    a Tier 4 Student.  The Secretary of State had acted unlawfully  by  not
    applying this policy to the appellant and the judge had erred in law in
    rejecting that argument and dismissing the appeal.

13. Mr Ahmed relied upon para 87 of the Tier 4 Policy Guidance (July  2012)
    which is in the following terms:

         "87. In addition to the 3 years of  permitted  study  below  degree
             level for Tier 4 (General) Students and any time spent in  the
             Tier 4 (Child) category, the time that a Tier  4  Student  can
             spend studying at or above degree level will be limited  to  5
             years ...."

14. The paragraph then goes on to state a number  of  exceptions,  none  of
    which are directly relevant to the appellant.

15. Mr Ahmed submitted that para 87 excluded from the calculation of the "5
    years" period any leave as a student under the pre-Tier 4  scheme.   He
    submitted that the Secretary of State had, in this guidance, sought  to
    overcome any unfairness caused to students who had  already  accrued  a
    period of study in the UK at degree level prior to the introduction  of
    the Tier 4 category and who would now be prejudiced by  the  imposition
    of a five year maximum period of study if it inhibited their ability to
    complete a degree already commenced.   He  submitted  that  the  policy
    should be interpreted so as to avoid that unfairness by excluding  pre-
    Tier 4 leave from the calculation of the maximum period  of  "5  years"
    study.

16. We have no hesitation in rejecting Mr Ahmed's submissions.

17. First, the wording of para  87  of  the  Policy  Guidance  is,  in  our
    judgment, clear and its meaning unequivocal.   It  fully  reflects  the
    terms of para 245ZX(ha).  It states that a person  who  is  a  "Tier  4
    Student" can only study at degree level or above for a  maximum  of  "5
    years".  It does not exclude time spent  in  the  past  studying  by  a
    person who is now a Tier 4 Student, with leave as a student  under  the
    pre-Tier 4 rules.  If that had been the intention in para 87  then  the
    wording would, in our judgment, have had to read  along  the  following
    lines with the words which we set out in italics included:

         "The time that a Tier 4 Student can  spend  studying  at  or  above
         degree level (as a Tier 4 Student) will be limited  to  five  years
         ..."

18. Without those words, the bullet-point captures the (now) Tier 4 student
    who has had the requisite student leave for a cumulative  period  of  5
    years whether under the Tier 4 or former student rules.

19. Secondly, there is no basis for believing, as  Mr  Ahmed's  submissions
    would require, that the Secretary of State in  July  2012,  only  three
    months after the "5 years" maximum period was inserted in the Rules  on
    6 April 2012, intended by the Guidance to change the  position  adopted
    by Parliament in the Rules that periods of study at degree level  prior
    to the introduction of the Tier  4  scheme  should  count  towards  the
    maximum period of study of "5 years".  It  is  clear  to  us  that  the
    Guidance is no more than a  guide  to  the  application  of  the  Rules
    themselves.  Mr Ahmed did not rely upon any part of the Guidance, apart
    from para 87, to demonstrate that the Guidance went  any  further  than
    offering an explanation of the meaning and application  of  the  Rules.
    Ms Martin drew our attention to para 54 of the  Guidance.   It  is  the
    first  paragraph  appearing  under  the  heading  "Tier   4   (General)
    Students".  It refers the reader to  the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the
    Immigration Rules "for full details of the requirements of the  Tier  4
    (General) Student category."

20. Thirdly, if Mr Ahmed's submissions were correct, then an anomaly  would
    arise because of one of the exceptions  set  out  in  para  87  to  the
    maximum of five years' study.  That is set out in  bullet  point  2  as
    follows:

         "Those Tier 4 (General) Students studying for Masters degrees at  a
         Recognised  body  or  at  a  Higher  Education  Institution  (HEI),
         following completion of an undergraduate degree where the  duration
         of that degree course was four or five academic years.   For  these
         students the limit will be set at six years  in  total  instead  of
         five".

21. This bullet-point reflects an exception to the  "5  years  maximum"  in
    para 245ZX(ha)(i). Looking at this  at,  or  after,  the  time  of  the
    introduction of the "5 years" maximum  on  6  April  2012,  the  policy
    contemplates someone applying to undertake a  Masters  degree  who  has
    already completed a degree course of four  or  five  years.   In  April
    2012, one or two of those years will have been prior to 31  March  2009
    when the Tier 4 scheme came into effect.  Indeed, it is likely to  have
    been sometime after that date before applications arose  where  all  of
    the 4 or 5 years spent studying a degree course  fell  after  31  March
    2009.  Importantly for our purposes, there would  be  no  need  for  an
    extension of the maximum period of study at degree level or above  from
    five to six years if the pre-Tier 4 period of study  (before  31  March
    2009) did not count towards the maximum period of  "5  years".   If  Mr
    Ahmed is right this paragraph is wholly  unnecessary.   Further,  given
    that pre-Tier 4 leave is taken into account here, it would be  curious,
    in our judgment, if this were the only situation when pre-Tier 4  leave
    as a student was taken into account.

22. Finally, we would not accept Mr Ahmed's submission that if the  wording
    of para 87 is ambiguous (which it is not) we should interpret it so  as
    to exclude pre-Tier 4 leave.  We see no  basis  for  adopting  such  an
    interpretation.  As we have said, the clear import of this part of  the
    Guidance is simply to offer an explanation of the  application  of  the
    Rules in an accessible form for  applicants  and  others.   We  do  not
    accept Mr Ahmed's submission that there is necessarily a potential  for
    unfairness if the Rule is applied  on  its  own  terms.   Certainly  as
    regards further study at Masters level at a Recognised Body  or  Higher
    Educational Institution,  any  potential  unfairness  of  the  5  years
    maximum is mitigated if an individual has  completed  an  undergraduate
    degree lasting four or five years, because the maximum period  is  then
    set at six years (see  para  245ZX(ha)(i)).   We  also  note  that  the
    amendment to para 245ZX to include sub-para (ha) from 6 April 2012  was
    announced in March 2011 a  year  before  it  was  implemented  (Student
    Visas: Statement of Intent and Transitional Measures).   Further,  para
    245ZX(ha) is subject to a transitional provision that it does not apply
    to applications made before 6 April 2012 but not decided at  that  date
    (HC 1888).

23. An individual cannot have  a  legitimate  expectation  of  studying  at
    degree (or above) level for an undefined period.  The only  expectation
    that an individual can legitimately have is that  he  or  she  will  be
    permitted to study in accordance with the Immigration Rules in force at
    the date of decision (see Odelola v SSHD [2009] UKHL 25).

24. For these reasons, para 87 does not support Mr Ahmed's submission  that
    pre-Tier 4 periods of leave to study at degree level or above should be
    ignored in calculating the maximum "5 year" period of  study.   In  our
    judgment, para 87 directly reflects the requirement in  para  245ZX(ha)
    which Mr Ahmed accepted the appellant could not meet.

25. Mr Ahmed did not seek to challenge  on  any  other  basis  the  judge's
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

26. For the reasons we have  given,  the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal.

27. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

