
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG [2013] UKUT 00611 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 and 18 September 2013                   |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                                     MS
                                     FZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms M Benitez of Counsel, instructed by  Irving  &  Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

Law


    In relation to a country which is in a state of emergency affecting the
    life of the nation and which takes measures strictly  required  by  the
    exigencies  of  the  situation,  its  ability  to  afford  adequacy  of
    protection under Directive 2004/83/EC (the Qualification Directive)  is
    to be assessed by reference to its general securement of  non-derogable
    rights as set out in the ECHR.


Country guidance

 1. Notwithstanding that there is inadequate  state  protection  of  Coptic
    Christians in Egypt, they are not at a general risk of  persecution  or
    ill-treatment contrary to Article 3, ECHR.


 2. However,  on  current  evidence  there  are  some  areas  where  Coptic
    Christians will face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment
    contrary to Article 3. In general these will be (a) areas  outside  the
    large cities; (b) where radical Islamists have a strong  foothold;  and
    (c) there have been  recent  attacks  on  Coptic  Christians  or  their
    churches, businesses or properties.


 3. On the evidence before the Upper Tribunal, the following are particular
    risk categories in the  sense  that  those  falling  within  them  will
    generally be able to show a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  treatment
    contrary to Article 3, at least in their home area:

        i) converts to Coptic Christianity;
       ii)    persons    who    are    involved    in    construction    or
           reconstruction/repair of churches that have been the target  for
           an attack or attacks;
      iii) those accused of proselytising where the accusation  is  serious
           and not casual;
       iv) those accused of being physically or emotionally involved with a
           Muslim woman, where the accusation is  made  seriously  and  not
           casually.

 4. Coptic Christian women in Egypt are not in  general  at  real  risk  of
    persecution  or  ill-treatment,   although   they   face   difficulties
    additional to other women, in the form of sometimes being the target of
    disappearances, forced abduction and forced conversion.


 5. However, depending on the particular circumstances of the case,  Coptic
    Christian women in Egypt aged between  14-25  years  who  lack  a  male
    protector, may be at such risk.


 6. If a claimant is able to establish that in their home  area  they  fall
    within one or more of the risk  categories  identified  in  3  (i)-(iv)
    above or that they come from an area where the local Coptic  population
    faces a real risk of persecution, it will not necessarily  follow  that
    they qualify as refugees or as beneficiaries of  subsidiary  protection
    or Article 3 ECHR protection. That will depend on whether they can show
    they would not have a viable internal relocation alternative.  In  such
    cases there will be need for a fact-specific assessment but, in general
    terms, resettlement in an area where Islamists  are  not  strong  would
    appear to be a viable option.


 7. None of the above necessarily precludes a  Coptic  Christian  in  Egypt
    from being able to  establish  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
    treatment in the particular circumstances of their case, e.g.  if  such
    an individual has been the target of attacks because he  or  she  is  a
    Coptic Christian.

                                  CONTENTS

Introduction                                                              1-
5

Scope of the Hearing                                                6

Background Evidence                                                 7

   US Department of State Report on International Religious Freedom:
   Egypt (USSDIRF), 20 May 2013                                     8-14
   The US Commission on International Religious Freedom,
   United States Commission on International Religious Freedom
   Annual Report 2013, Egypt (USCIRF), 30 April 2013                      15-
   16
   Recent Reports                                                   17-23
   UKBA COIS Egypt: Bulletin, 17 April 2013                               24
   UK Home Office Border Agency, Operational Guidance Note:
   Egypt (v1 7 May 2013), 07 May 2013                                     25-
   26

Case Law

   ME v France (app no. 50094/10), 6 June 2013                            27

Expert            Evidence            of             Mr             Marshall
    28

   Written Report: 6 June 2013                                            29-
   37
   Supplementary Written Report:  18 July 2013                            38-
43
   Written Addendum Report: 18 July 2013                                  44-
45
   Further Written Addendum Report: 15 September 2013                     46
   Mr Marshall: Oral Evidence                                             47-
64

Legal Framework                                                     65

   Regulation 4 of the Protection Regulations                             66-
   75

Submissions

   Mr Wilding                                                       76-85
   Ms Benitez                                                       86-96

Our Assessment                                                      97

   ME v France (app no. 50094/10) and Strasbourg Case Law                 98-
   99
   Mr                          Marshall's                           Evidence
100-10
   Home Office OGN: 7 May 2013                                      111
   Reliability       of       Figures       Relating       to       Violence
112-13
   State Actors                                                     114-15
   Non-State Actors                                                 116
   International                                                     Concern
117
   State                                                          Protection
118-23
   Attacks                        and                         Discrimination
124-26
   Levels of Violence                                               127-31
   Displacement                        and                        Emigration
132
   Prognosis
133-36
   Geographical Dimension                                           137-39
   Particular                        Risk                         Categories
140-50

Summary of Conclusions                                              151

   Law
   Country Guidance

The Appellants

   Asylum-Related Grounds                                           152-55
   Article              8              of              the              ECHR
156-59

Summary of the Evidence

   Evidence         before         the          First-tier          Tribunal
   160

   Asylum Interview                                                 161
   The      Appellant's      Statement      of      21      March       2012
162
   AA's         Statement         of         21          March          2012
163
   MS's         Statement         of         21          March          2012
164
   Oral      Evidence       before       the       First-tier       Tribunal
165-68
   Findings          of          the           First-tier           Tribunal
169-70

   Evidence and Submissions before the Upper Tribunal

   The      Appellant's      Statement      of      29       July       2013
   171
   AA's Statement of 29 July 2013                                   172
   MS's Statement of 29 July 2013                                   173
   The     Appellant's     Statement     of      17      September      2013
174
   The Appellant's Oral Evidence                                    175-79
   AA's Oral Evidence                                               180
   MS's Oral Evidence                                               181
   Submissions                                                      182-83

   Our      findings      on      Article      8      of      the       ECHR
   184-200




Appendices

   A. Documentary Evidence before the Upper Tribunal
   B. Expert Evidence before the Upper Tribunal
   C. List of Churches Burned or Damaged since August 14
   D. Maspero Youth Union Summary of Attacks since 14 August 2013

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Copts in Egypt go back to the time of the Pharaohs.   From 400AD  until
    the mid-10th century and the Muslim conquest of the country, Copts  who
    had Christianised were a majority of the population.   But  since  that
    conquest their position has altered  dramatically.   Coptic  Christians
    are  now  a  religious  minority  comprising  between  5-15%   of   the
    population, the other 90% being predominantly Sunni Muslim.   Yet  even
    in the context of Egypt's sizeable population, some  83  million,  they
    are the region's largest non-Muslim  community.   The  biggest  numbers
    live in Cairo and Alexandria and in Minya (sometimes  spelt  Menya)  in
    Upper (i.e. southern) Egypt.  Throughout Egypt there  are  said  to  be
    108,395 mosques and 2,869 churches.  In March 2012,  Pope  Tawardos  II
    was confirmed as the new leader of Egypt's Coptic  Christians  and  the
    consequences of his active support for the army's ousting of  President
    Morsi in July 2013 is one of the matters we must  analyse  below.   The
    ousting of Morsi coupled with the earlier popular revolution leading to
    the resignation of  President  Mubarak  in  February  2011  (which  was
    followed by an interim period in which the Supreme Council of the Armed
    Forces (SCAF) ruled, lasting until Morsi was elected President in  June
    2012) means that the country has experienced  two  major  upheavals  in
    less than three years.  It is against  this  background  that  we  must
    address the issue of whether Copts - or Coptic  Christians  (in  modern
    times the two terms are used interchangeably) - in Egypt  are  at  real
    risk of persecution or ill-treatment.

 2. The case arises in the context of appeals brought by a mother, MS,  and
    her minor, disabled son, FZ (who is now aged 12), against a decision by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge C M Phillips) against  the  respondent's
    decision of 21 February 2012 to remove them from the UK, having refused
    to grant them asylum.  For convenience we shall refer for the most part
    hereafter to the first appellant simply  as  "the  appellant"  and  the
    second appellant as "her son".  The basis of the appellant's  claim  to
    have experienced serious harm was that she had  suffered  verbal  abuse
    and physical attacks at a school in Cairo where she  had  worked  as  a
    teacher since 1992, and an attempt to kidnap her by the Muslim  brother
    of a teacher colleague.  She said  she  had  left  Egypt  for  fear  of
    further attacks.

 3. Judge Phillips found the appellant's account to be  a  fabrication  and
    that even if the events she narrated had taken place,  she  would  have
    available to her a sufficiency of protection, and also (even if he  was
    wrong about that) a viable internal relocation alternative.

 4. On further appeal, Designated Upper Tribunal Judge Shaerf set aside the
    decision of Judge Phillips in the following terms:

         "7.      I find the Judge's limited  treatment  of  the  background
             evidence and her failure to address in detail  the  background
             evidence which was before her amounted to a material error  of
             law.  Additionally, the Judge was obliged, notwithstanding her
             adverse credibility findings, to consider  if  there  was  any
             general risk to the Appellants by virtue  of  their  faith  as
             Coptic Christians on return to Egypt in  the  context  of  the
             consequences of the fall of the Mubarak regime.


         8. There is no reason for the  Judge's  findings  on  the  personal
             circumstances and narrative of the Appellants to be set  aside
             or her  findings  on  their  claim  under  Article  8.   These
             findings should be preserved but the Judge's conclusions about
             the general situation of Coptic Christians in  Egypt  and  the
             risk on return in general to Coptic  Christians  must  be  set
             aside."

 5. In subsequent directions issued by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Keki?  on  18
    April (as amended on 30 April) 2013, the agreed country guidance issues
    were specified as:

         ". The risk of persecution and/or ill treatment on  return  to  the
             appellants' usual place of residence either at  the  hands  of
             the authorities or Muslim  Egyptian  nationals  and  including
             persecution arising out of discrimination and/or harassment.


         .  The risk of persecution and/or ill treatment on return to  other
             places in Egypt, including Cairo, either at the hands  of  the
             authorities  or  Muslim  Egyptian  nationals   and   including
             persecution arising out of discrimination and/or harassment.


         .  The willingness and ability of the authorities to protect Coptic
             Christians  generally  and,  in  particular,  the   appellants
             against persecution and/or ill treatment including persecution
             from discrimination and/or  harassment  from  Muslim  Egyptian
             nationals amounting to persecution/ill treatment.


         .  The impact upon risk of the first  appellant's  condition  as  a
             single mother and divorc�e without any other familial or  male
             support in Egypt."

    Since the appellant's home area is a suburb of Cairo, we  construe  the
    reference to Cairo in the second bullet  point  above  to  mean  "other
    parts of Cairo".

Scope of the Hearing

 6. At the outset of the hearing Mr Wilding asked us to confine  the  scope
    of the appeal to the asylum-related  issues  and  to  exclude  anything
    related to Article 8, pointing out  (correctly)  that  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal made no mention of this provision.  We ruled that  we
    would not exclude Article 8.  We have to bear in mind in re-making  the
    decision on these  appeals  that  pursuant  to  section  85(4)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  we  have  to  consider
    matters as they are at the date of hearing before us, and although  all
    the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  about  the
    appellant's personal circumstances have been preserved, including those
    relating to her and her son's private  and  family  life,  the  hearing
    before that judge took place over a year ago, in March  2012,  and  the
    original grounds of appeal did raise Article 8, and in  particular  the
    family and private life circumstances of the appellant and her disabled
    son. In the particular circumstances of this case we  do  not  consider
    that the failure of  the  appellant  to  identify  or  produce  further
    evidence in accordance with  rule  15(2A)  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 is fatal and we apply rule 7  of  the  same
    Rules.

Background Evidence

   7. The full body of materials submitted to the Tribunal in this  case  is
      set out at Appendix A.  Here we confine ourselves to a summary of what
      is said in the major country reports dealing with Egypt and the  state
      of religious freedom in that country as well as  some  other  reports,
      including by Christian NGOs, and the Home  Office  Country  of  Origin
      Information Service bulletin of 17 April 2013, a May 2013 OGN on Egypt
      and 5 August 2013 letter from  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
      (FCO) Egypt desk.  We should also mention that when below we use terms
      such as "radical Islamists"/"Islamists" it is because they are used in
      the major country reports.

US Department of State Report  on  International  Religious  Freedom:  Egypt
(USSDIRF), 20 May 2013

 8.  In  this  May  2013  report  concern  is  expressed  about  the   2012
    constitution introduced by President Morsi and the fact  that  it  made
    the right to practise religious rituals and establish places of worship
    conditional by adding the ambiguous clause "as regulated by  the  law".
    It also made the principles of Sharia (Islamic law) the primary  source
    of legislation.  The report's executive summary observes that:

         "While recognised  and  unrecognised  religious  minorities  mostly
         worshipped without harassment, the government generally  failed  to
         prevent, investigate,  or  prosecute  crimes,  against  members  of
         religious  minority  groups  especially  Coptic  Christians,  which
         fostered a climate of impunity."

 9. The government often sponsored or permitted  "reconciliation  sessions"
    following  communal  violence  and   sectarian   attacks   instead   of
    prosecuting perpetrators of crime.

10. Along with other religious minorities, Coptic Christians face  personal
    and collective discrimination, especially in government employment  and
    in their ability to build, renovate and repair places of worship.   The
    report adds:

         "There were reports of societal abuses or discrimination  based  on
         religious  affiliation,  belief  or  practice.    Although   lethal
         sectarian attacks decreased markedly  during  the  year,  compelled
         expulsion and collective  punishment  increased.   Local  Islamists
         also  carried  out  isolated  acts  of  intimidation  against  some
         Christians in Upper Egypt..."

11. The report  mentions  the  concerns  of  the  US  administration  about
    religious   violence   and   discrimination,   failure   to   prosecute
    perpetrators of  sectarian  violence,  discriminatory  prosecution  and
    sentencing of Christians.

12. The report notes that the government  in  Egypt  interprets  Sharia  as
    forbidding Muslims from converting to another  religion  despite  there
    being no statutory prohibition on conversion.  Converts from  Islam  to
    Christianity lose all rights of inheritance. Neither  the  constitution
    nor the civil and penal codes prohibit proselytising and the government
    generally tolerates foreign religious workers proselytising so long  as
    it is not to Muslims.  Both Islamic and Coptic Orthodox  religious  law
    prevent Coptic men and Muslim women from marrying each other.

13. As regards kidnappings of Coptic women for forced conversion to  Islam,
    the report describes opinion being divided as to  how  common  or  rare
    these were, noting that "[f]amilies  sometimes  claim  kidnapping  when
    women or girls ran away for reasons ranging  from  abuse  to  voluntary
    conversion or elopement".

14.  Under  a  heading  "Positive  Developments  in  Respect  of  Religious
    Freedom", the report notes (then) President Morsi  on  5  October  2011
    ordering increased security for  Christians  in  Al  Arish  and  having
    spoken about the need for Muslims  and  Christians  to  stand  together
    against  violent  extremism,  telling  Copts  "your  security   is   my
    security".   It  noted  that  Morsi   had   met   twice   with   senior
    representatives of Egypt's Christian churches, something neither Former
    President Mubarak nor the SCAF had done in decades.  Belated action  to
    protect Christians was noted in Dahshour.  In  a  section  on  societal
    respect for religious freedom, the report states that lethal  sectarian
    attacks decreased during the year.  "Communal tensions  remained  high,
    although Christians and Muslims share a  common  culture  and  in  most
    cases  continued  to  live  peacefully  as  neighbours  throughout  the
    country".

The  US  Commission  on  International  Religious  Freedom,  United   States
Commission on International Religious Freedom  Annual  Report  2013,  Egypt,
(USCIRF) 30 April 2013

15. This report provides a similarly mixed picture.  On  the  one  hand  it
    notes some improvements relating to freedom of  religion  and  positive
    societal progress, a significant decrease in deaths and  injuries  from
    sectarian violence, and,  over  the  past  two  years,  the  government
    beginning to re-open more than 50  churches.   On  the  other  hand  it
    records Coptic Orthodox Christians and  their  property  continuing  to
    experience sustained attacks and the government failing or  being  slow
    to protect religious minorities from violence, all of  this  continuing
    to foster a climate of impunity.  The  report  recommended  that  Egypt
    remain on its own (USCIRF) Watch  List  as  a  "country  of  particular
    concern" (CPC) as it had been since 2002.

16. From the report it can be gleaned  that  the  occurrence  of  two  huge
    popular upheavals within the space of two and a half years  has  to  be
    viewed in the context of the country's  worsening  economic  situation.
    The revolution of 2011 hit  tourism  receipts  and  foreign  investment
    declined, leaving the  country's  foreign  reserves  to  fall  acutely.
    Unemployment has grown to  over  13%.   Corruption  remains  prevalent.
    Egypt was ranked 118 out of  176  countries  surveyed  in  Transparency
    International's 2012  Corruption  Perceptions  Index  (the  higher  the
    ranking the less the transparency).

Recent Reports

17. The Christian Solidarity International (USA) report, "Tell My Mother  I
    Miss Her": the Disappearance, Forced Conversions and  Forced  Marriages
    of Coptic Christian Women in Egypt, 17 July 2012,  says  that  although
    there is no systematic data collection  within  the  Coptic  community,
    this community has become increasingly  vulnerable  to  persecution  on
    account of the upsurge of militant Islam  following  the  overthrow  of
    President Mubarak. Young Coptic women are  particularly  vulnerable  to
    forced disappearances, abduction  and  forced  conversion.  Cases  have
    escalated since January 2011.  One attorney interviewed for the  report
    indicated first-hand knowledge of over 1,600 cases  of  Christians  who
    had converted to Islam in recent years, and who are now petitioning  to
    have  their  Christian  identities  restored,  60%  being  women.  Four
    attorneys collectively report a total of over 550 cases of  abductions,
    disappearances and petitions to restore  Christian  identity  following
    abduction, forced marriage and forced  conversions  over  a  five  year
    period.

18. A report issued in February 2013 by Freedom House commenting on  events
    of 2012 states that "[s]ectarian violence has increased in recent years
    with Christians bearing the brunt of the violence".

19. In a press release of 23 July 2013, Amnesty International recounts that
    under President Mubarak  at  least  15  major  attacks  on  Copts  were
    documented.  Sectarian violence continued under the SCAF and  following
    the election of President  Morsi.   At  least  six  attacks  on  Coptic
    churches or buildings took place in 2013 during  the  final  months  of
    Morsi's administration.

20. On 15 August 2013, Mr Adam Dieng, UN Special Advisor on the  Prevention
    of  Genocide  and  Ms  Jennifer  Welsh,  UN  Special  Advisor  on   the
    Responsibility to Protect, addressing the situation in  Egypt  deplored
    both the excessive use of force by  Egyptian  security  forces  against
    demonstrators in  Cairo  and  the  number  of  Christian  churches  and
    institutions that had been targeted "reportedly in retaliation  to  the
    incidents in Cairo".

21. On 22 August 2013 Human Rights Watch said that since  14  August  2013,
    attackers had "torched and looted  scores  of  churches  and  Christian
    property across the country, leaving  at  least  4  people  dead".   42
    churches were identified as having been  burned  or  damaged  since  14
    August 2013.  The list of  churches  burned  or  damaged  and  churches
    attacked not damaged is given at Appendix C.

22. Most of the attacks occurred in Upper Egypt.  The  Acting  Middle  East
    Director states that  "for  weeks  everyone  could  see  these  attacks
    coming, with Muslim Brotherhood members accusing Coptic Christians of a
    role in ... Morsi's ouster, but the authorities did little  or  nothing
    to prevent them".  The  report  says  that  sectarian  attacks  against
    Christians had increased even before the 14 August actions: while a few
    Muslim Brotherhood leaders had condemned these attacks, they needed  to
    tell the group's followers to stop inciting violence by insinuating the
    Coptic minority is responsible for the  crackdown.   Local  groups  and
    religious leaders had also incited the groups to target Christians.

23. Shedding light on events in the first half of 2013  the  UK  Parliament
    House  of  Commons  Library  document  "Coup  in   Egypt   04/07/2013",
    chronicles growing popular disaffection  with  the  Morsi  regime  from
    November 2012 onwards. Noting that  Morsi  ignored  large  protests  in
    bringing forward a referendum on his new  constitution,  this  document
    records that the constitution was approved by about 57% of the votes on
    a turnout of perhaps  one-third  of  the  electorate,  a  figure  which
    starkly underlined the  growing  disillusionment  with  the  democratic
    process as offered by the Muslim Brotherhood.  On  the  anniversary  of
    Morsi's  installation  as  President   enormous   demonstrations   were
    organised  by  the  Tamarud  movement  (primarily  a  youth  movement).
    Millions took to the streets, especially in Cairo.

UKBA COIS Egypt: Bulletin, 17 April 2013

24. This bulletin identifies numerous sources finding  that  discrimination
    and  sexual  harassment  and  violence  against  women  in   Egypt   is
    widespread. Social class and economic background tend to  be  the  main
    factors in determining the manner in which poverty affects women.

UK Home Office Border Agency, Operational Guidance Note: Egypt  (v1,  7  May
2013) 7 May 2013

25. This guidance note observes that  inter-religious  bloodshed  has  been
    increasing in recent years,  with  Christians  suffering  most  of  the
    violence.  Through inaction the government failed to  prevent  violence
    against Christians or stop the destruction of  churches  and  religious
    minority  owned  property.   There  is  inadequate  protection  against
    sectarian violence. In addition Christians face official  and  societal
    discrimination.  Two key paragraphs are 3.9.18 and 3.9.19:

         "3.9.18  Conclusion: The constitution allows  for  the  freedom  of
                citizens  to  practise  one  of   the   three   monotheistic
                religions, i.e. Christianity, Islam or Judaism.  However  in
                practice, Christians in Egypt do face  generalised  societal
                discrimination and in recent years, levels of  violence  and
                ill-treatment  have  become  increasingly  severe  and  more
                overt.  Christians  may  face   intimidation   and   serious
                harassment which in many cases will amount  to  persecution.
                Case owners must carefully consider each case on its  facts.
                The  authorities  frequently  fail  to   provide   effective
                protection to Christians, or to  investigate  and  prosecute
                instances of serious harassment and ill-treatment. Where  an
                individual is able to demonstrate that they are  at  serious
                risk  of  persecution  on  account   of   their   particular
                individual  circumstances   and   internal   relocation   is
                unavailable, a grant of asylum will be appropriate.


         3.9.19   Christian converts from Islam face serious risks of severe
                ill-treatment ... Where it is accepted that the applicant is
                a Christian who has converted from Islam, a grant of  asylum
                will be appropriate in the majority of cases."

26. In a letter of 5 August, 2013,  the  FCO  (Egypt  desk)  estimates  the
    Coptic Christian population of Egypt as between 7-11 million. Since the
    military's removal of Morsi there has been a  rise  in  the  number  of
    violent sectarian attacks. The response of the  police  and  the  state
    more widely to sectarian violence has been inadequate. NGOs  report  an
    increase in the number of arrests of  Coptic  Christians  charged  with
    blasphemy during Morsi's presidency. NGOs report that  it  is  becoming
    more difficult for Coptic Christians in Upper Egypt  to  find  housing,
    school facilities and jobs and more difficulty with single mothers.

Case Law

27. In the case of ME v France (app no. 50094/10) 6 June 2013, the European
    Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) Court held at paragraph 50:

         "On the general situation in Egypt, the reports consulted decry the
         many acts of  violence  and  persecution  suffered  by  the  Coptic
         Christians of Egypt in the course of 2010 and 2011, as well as  the
         reluctance of the Egyptian authorities to prosecute the aggressors.
          The parties adduce  no  evidence  that  would  indicate  that  the
         situation of the Copts improved in 2012.  In  spite  of  that,  the
         Court, given the information available to it,  is  of  the  opinion
         that it is not permissible to conclude  that  there  is  a  general
         risk, for all Copts, that would suffice to entail  a  violation  of
         Article 3 in the event of a return to Egypt."


Expert Evidence of Mr Marshall

28. We received written and oral evidence (by way of  video-link)  from  Mr
    Paul Marshall who is a  Senior  Fellow  of  the  Center  for  Religious
    Freedom, Hudson Institute, Washington, D.C.  He  has  authored  or  co-
    edited over 20 books including seven that deal with freedom  in  Egypt,
    the latest being "Persecuted: The Global Assault on Christians",  2013.
    He has given expert testimony in cases to a  number  of  US  government
    bodies. He has been certified as an expert witness before a  number  of
    US immigration courts. He has written for numerous newspapers and media
    outlets, including the New York Times and the Wall Street  Journal.  He
    states  that  he  is  in  regular  contact   with   Egypt,   frequently
    interviewing Egyptian religious figures and human  rights  workers,  he
    maintains research files on Egypt and acts as  host  to  visitors  from
    Egypt.

Written Report: 6 June 2013

29. In a report dated 6 June 2013 Mr Marshall summarises general conditions
    in Egypt, highlighting general changes since February  2011,  he  notes
    the fact that in the November 2011 - 3 January 2012 elections  for  the
    lower House of Parliament, the Salafists Al-Nour party   won  45  seats
    (25%) and the Muslim Brotherhood won 150 seats (46%).

30. Mr Marshall explains that there  is  no  uniform  system  of  reporting
    attacks  on  Copts  or  other  religious  minorities,  which  makes  it
    difficult to document religious persecution, but he is  confident  that
    attacks on Copts from extremists and  security  forces  have  continued
    since Mubarak's resignation "and have markedly increased".   Copts  are
    described as "suffer[ing] from a systemic pattern of  persecution  from
    Islamic  extremists".   He  notes  that  Article  2  of   Morsi's   new
    constitution had provided for an official role for Al-Azhar to give its
    opinion on all matters pertaining to the Sharia. "[T]his new  article",
    he states "places a  non-elected  religious  body  above  the  Egyptian
    parliament as arbiter and explainer of state laws".  He describes  this
    constitution as a "clear set-back for religious freedom".

31. We should explain that Al-Azhar is a university in  Cairo  which  dates
    back to 970 AD and combines the study of Islam and Islamic law  with  a
    secular curriculum. It is widely considered the chief centre of  Arabic
    literature and Islamic learning  in  the  world.  Its  Islamic  schools
    render edicts (fatwas) on disputes submitted to them from all over  the
    Sunni Muslim world. In July 2012 after the law  restricting  Al-Azhar's
    autonomy was modified by President Morsi, Al-Azhar's governing  Council
    was reformed. The Al-Azhar Council, is tasked with nominating the Grand
    Mufti of Egypt (subject to  Presidential  approval)  and  electing  the
    Grand Imam  of  Al-Azhar  mosque  in  Cairo.  Although  this  Council's
    decisions are not binding, it is considered difficult for the  Egyptian
    Parliament to pass laws and decrees without support from  the  Council.
    Al-Azhar  is  strongly  opposed  to  Salafist  tendencies  in  Egyptian
    society.

32. Mr Marshall notes that since 1992 some Islamic  groups  (including  the
    Muslim Brotherhood under its previous leader) have maintained that non-
    Muslims (in this context Christians and Jews) should be given "dhimmi",
    i.e. a separate and subordinate status, under Sharia law, and must  pay
    a special tax, jizya, to secure their protection.  Those who refuse  to
    pay may have their homes or  businesses  attacked,  and  themselves  or
    their families beaten, maimed or killed: "several reports suggest  that
    thousands of Christians have paid jizya in recent years and  that  many
    Christians have been killed for failing to pay" (3.4.1).

33. Mr Marshall states that most reporting agencies depict the situation of
    Copts as having worsened  since  February  2011.  In  response  to  the
    USSDIRF report stating that the rate of killing of Copts  decreased  in
    2012 from 2011, Mr Marshall writes that this is only a function of  the
    fact that major incidents occurred in 2011.

34. Mr Marshall  states  that  there  is  a  general  climate  of  impunity
    concerning attacks on Copts, indicating that the Egyptian government is
    either unwilling or unable to provide protection to Copts.  In response
    to a Home Office statement made in the reasons for refusal letter  that
    many Egyptian Muslims do not support human rights abuses,  Mr  Marshall
    writes:

         "However, in terms of persecution of  Copts,  the  fact  that  most
         Muslims in Egypt do not persecute Copts tells us little.   If  only
         2% of Muslims in Egypt were to persecute  Copts,  or  tolerate  the
         persecution of Copts by others, or might be whipped into attacks on
         Copts by radical Imams, then Copts would be endangered  by  over  a
         million people.  The real existence of moderates does  not  obviate
         the real and pervasive persecution of Copts."

35. On the issue of the geographical spread of violence against  Copts,  he
    writes  that  while  certain   areas   such   as   Upper   Egypt   have
    proportionately more attacks on Copts, "there is no area of the country
    where harassment and persecution of Copts does not occur ..."

36. Mr Marshall refers to the pervasiveness in Egypt of  sexual  harassment
    and sexual assault.  On the  evidence  regarding  abduction  of  Coptic
    women and girls, he says that whilst it is  true  there  are  instances
    where voluntary conversion, elopement or marriage is  described  as  an
    abduction, the threat of kidnapping  of  Coptic  women  and  girls  "is
    real".

37. In a section headed "Discrimination" Mr Marshall opines that there  are
    virtually no Copts in senior government,  in  the  senior  echelons  of
    public universities, and mentions discrimination in  payment  of  taxes
    (which include an element for mosques, Muslim schools and  universities
    and Imams).

Supplementary Written Report:  18 July 2013

38. On July 18 2013 Mr Marshall produced a supplementary report  addressing
    eleven questions from the Home Office. He states that Copts  throughout
    Egypt are threatened by  attacks  or  are  at  risk  because  of  their
    religion in ways they would not be if they were not Copts.  This was as
    true for Copts living in high percentage Christian areas such as  Upper
    Egypt as elsewhere.  Proportionately Copts suffer more attacks in Upper
    Egypt.

39. Asked if it was his view that particular groups  of  Coptic  Christians
    may be  targeted,  arrested,  imprisoned  and  physically  attacked  by
    government agents,  Mr  Marshall  writes  that  government  agents  had
    targeted  converts,  people  who  work  with  them,  those  accused  of
    proselytising, those accused of being sexually or romantically involved
    with a Muslim woman, those who are outspoken about their  religion  and
    those who work visibly in the community,  or  are  involved  in  church
    construction or repair.  "These categories of  Copts  are  more  likely
    than the average Copt to be targeted by government agents".

40. He does not consider that the US Department of State 2012 Report of May
    2013 and its statement that "...recognised and  unrecognised  religious
    minorities mostly  worshipped  without  harassment"  conveyed  anything
    about other  aspects  of  freedom  of  religion  such  as  building  or
    repairing places of worship,  raising  one's  children  in  the  faith,
    maintaining educational, social and welfare projects, training  clergy,
    access to and use of media, freedom to  propagate  and  changing  one's
    religion etc.  This was therefore a "very weak claim, and could be true
    even if [sic] while there is ongoing widespread persecution of Copts".

41. Mr Marshall says he accepts many claims of kidnapping of  Coptic  girls
    were designed to deflect shame from a Christian family  if  a  daughter
    marries a Muslim, but adds  that  there  are  real  instances  of  such
    abductions.

42. Asked to address the comment in the USSDIRF report of May 2013 that the
    rate of killing of Copts had decreased in 2012 from 2011,  Mr  Marshall
    says that was true but other forms of oppression and attacks  continued
    or increased.  He remarks that the same report noted  an  increase  for
    2012 in compelled expulsions and collective punishment.  Since February
    2011 nearly 100 Coptic Orthodox Christians  have  been  killed  due  to
    sectarian violence, surpassing the death toll of the previous ten years
    combined.

43. In reply to a question as to whether there was  any  evidence  to  show
    that Coptic  Christian  women  are  subject  or  vulnerable  to  sexual
    assaults on account of their faith, Mr Marshall says that he  knows  of
    no evidence that Coptic women are more subject to this  than  women  in
    general; but Coptic women were subject to a particular form of assault:
    abductions, kidnapping, coerced marriage and conversion.

Written Addendum Report: 18 July 2013

44. Because of changes in the political situation  of  Egypt,  Mr  Marshall
    produced an Addendum dealing with the situation since  the  ousting  of
    Morsi.  Attacks on Copts are said to have escalated in part because the
    new Coptic Pope attended the military's July 2013  public  announcement
    of a 'roadmap' and because most Copts appear to have supported  Morsi's
    ousting.  Black crosses have been painted on Christian  shops  to  mark
    them for arson and mobs have attacked churches and besieged  Christians
    in their homes.  Mr Marshall gives a list of attacks since 3 July 2013.

45. His Addendum concludes:

         "3.2.6    The  future  is  uncertain,  but,  given  the  degree  of
                restrictions on religious freedom in Egypt,  the  widespread
                public  sentiment  sceptical  of  religious   freedom,   the
                limiting  of  religious  freedom  in   the   July   8   2013
                constitutional declaration, the continuing influence of  the
                Salafists and the upsurge in attacks since  Morsi's  ouster,
                my view of the likely situation of Copts is the same as  [in
                my] June 6, 2013 report."

Further Written Addendum Report: 15 September 2013

46. Mr Marshall produced a further addendum of 15 September  "[b]ecause  of
    the numerous attacks on Copts in Egypt".  In it he  notes  the  interim
    cabinet appointed on 16 July 2013 had three Copts as ministers (out  of
    33) and that the 50-strong committee set up to draft a new constitution
    includes four Copts.  He then details attacks on Copts  since  14  July
    2013, dealing in a separate sub-section with "Major Attacks  of  August
    14-16, 2013".  The list he gives for the latter is that produced by the
    Maspero Youth Union on 14 August 2013, which  is,  he  states,  a  list
    referenced by Amnesty International and the New York Times.   The  list
    and his subsequent comments are set out at Appendix D below.


    The comments he goes on to make regarding this list are as follows:

           "2.11.4       Some additional features of the attacks were:


         2.11.5   There are reports from several  governorates  that  before
                  many of the attacks,  Christian  homes  were  marked  with
                  graffiti or crosses to distinguish them.


         2.11.6    Military  spokesmen  stated  that  it  would  assist   in
                  rebuilding the destroyed churches.


         2.11.7   On August 16, 2013, Islamists  gathered  and  held  Muslim
                  prayers in three of the churches  they  had  attacked  and
                  burned in the Minya region  in  Upper  Egypt.   The  three
                  churches were the Holy Virgin and Anba Abra'am  in  Dalga,
                  the Evangelical church in Badini, and the church  of  Anba
                  Moussa al-Aswad in the town  of  Minya.   This  action  is
                  believed to be an attempt to make sure that these churches
                  are never rebuilt.  The military has  pledged  to  rebuild
                  all the churches the Islamists  destroyed  but  in  Muslim
                  tradition, any place in which they pray has to  be  turned
                  into a mosque or place for Muslim prayers.


         2.11.8   There were also attacks on some of Egypt's cultural sites,
                  such as the museum in Mallawi, and the  great  library  in
                  Alexandria.


         2.11.9   My colleague Samuel Tadros, author of a new  book  on  the
                  history of the Copts,  Motherland  Lost,  states  that  he
                  believes that the period August 14-16, 2013 was  the  most
                  extensive series of attacks on Copts since 1321, under the
                  Mamluks, when a similar wave of church burnings  signalled
                  a centuries-long period of intense  persecution  that  saw
                  the Coptic Christian community decline from somewhat  less
                  than  half  of  Egypt's  population  to  its  current   10
                  approximately percent.


         2.11.10  Attacks continued after August 16, 2013.   On  August  17,
                  2013,  after  burning  a  Franciscan  school   in   Cairo,
                  Islamists  paraded  three  nuns  on   the   streets   like
                  "prisoners of war" before  a  Muslim  woman  offered  them
                  refuge.  Two  other  women  working  at  the  school  were
                  sexually harassed and abused  as  they  fought  their  way
                  through a mob."

Mr Marshall: Oral Evidence

47. Mr Marshall said there had been no official survey of  the  numbers  of
    Coptic Christians in Egypt but he followed the  USSDIRF  reports  which
    said estimates ranged from 5-15 million and in terms of percentages  he
    used 10%, that being a mid-point on the range of reasonable  estimates.
    Of the religious minorities in Egypt, Copts comprised around 99%.   The
    majority Muslim population were predominately Sunni Muslim.

48. Mr Marshall said he conceded the fact that for the past 15 years  there
    had been cordial relations between the heads of the Coptic  Church  and
    the Sunni Muslims (Coptic Pope and Grand Sheikh), but he felt that this
    told us little about the  levels  of  violence  and  persecution  Copts
    suffered mainly at the hands of the Salafists and Muslim Brotherhood.

49. Asked whether he considered Egypt was in a state of emergency, he  said
    that although Egypt's long-running  official  state  of  emergency  had
    expired on 31 May 2012,  the  country  remained  in  one  functionally:
    restrictions on government powers had been lifted and the normal  legal
    regime suspended.  Officially Egypt had been declared  as  being  in  a
    state of emergency in 1981 upon the killing of President Sadat and this
    remained in force until the overthrow of President Mubarak.  On 14 June
    2012 the Supreme Court  held  the  elections  to  the  lower  house  of
    Parliament to be illegal  and  on  20  December  2012  President  Morsi
    decreed his decisions were not subject to the court.   Since  President
    Morsi was deposed in July  2013,  the  country  has  been  run  by  the
    military.  The upper house of Parliament is now dissolved.

50. Cross-examined by Mr  Wilding,  Mr  Marshall  agreed  that  the  Hudson
    Institute worked to promote religious freedom.

51. Mr Wilding enquired why, despite stating in his report that he had read
    the court documents relating to the appellant's case, he had gone on to
    give his assessment of her case on the assumption she had been  telling
    the truth.  Mr Marshall said he did not know whether the Upper Tribunal
    could revisit the facts: in the US, equivalent jurisdictions  sometimes
    could, so he included section 5.1-5.13 in case.  He had not read  Judge
    Phillip's findings as excluding that the appellant had been the subject
    of attacks or that she had been the subject  of  abuse  or  harassment.
    His own opinion on the discriminations affecting  Copts  generally,  in
    various areas of Egyptian society, taxes etc. was not conditional on  a
    general assumption of credibility.

52. Quizzed as to whether he  considered  all  Copts  to  be  at  risk,  Mr
    Marshall replied yes, although he did  not  mean  that  they  were  all
    actively persecuted.  Copts who had had problems before would  be  more
    at risk.  Asked whether he was ignoring the positive improvements since
    the fall of Mubarak chronicled in the 2013 USSDIRF report, he  said  he
    did not think he was.  He accepted there was a reduction  in  sectarian
    violence in 2012, but 2011 had seen two major incidents.   He  did  not
    believe that there was  a  downward  trend  in  2013.   Destruction  of
    properties was  increasing.   His  report  had  noted  that  the  Morsi
    government had spoken about beginning to re-open some 50  churches  and
    the fact that three drivers of vehicles used in the Maspero attacks had
    been convicted and sentenced, but the overall picture was  negative  by
    reference to the numbers  killed  or  injured  and  by  the  number  of
    instances of failure of protection.  Only three low-level soldiers  had
    been convicted and only for manslaughter due to neglect/mistake.  There
    was a climate of impunity.  The  Al-Azhar  University  had  spearheaded
    initiatives in support of freedom of religion but the new  constitution
    planned by Morsi had effectively undermined that.  He was not aware  of
    any official dialogue between the Copts and Al-Azhar.  Al-Azhar was not
    having much effect and some of its activities were  hostile  to  Copts.
    Dialogue was not having an effect on the ground.  One cannot infer from
    this type of development that the Egyptian state wants dialogue and  an
    end to attacks on Copts.  For Copts at large state persecution was  not
    the biggest problem. The biggest problem was attacks by  Salafists  and
    other non-state  actors  and  he  questioned  the  willingness  of  the
    government to protect Copts, although there has been protection on some
    occasions.  The overall pattern was lack of protection.  Sometimes  the
    lack of protection was due to lack of resources, e.g. attacks  by  mobs
    on police stations, but when it came to  attacks  on  Copts  in  Cairo,
    Alexandria and Suez, it looked rather more like  a  conscious  decision
    not to intervene.

53. Mr Marshall was asked  whether  he  thought  there  was  a  correlation
    between areas of Egypt (e.g. Minya in Upper Egypt) where  there  was  a
    higher proportion of Copts, and areas where there was a  higher  levels
    of violence against Copts.  He said there was.  In Upper Egypt  Islamic
    radicalism was everywhere.  It was a poor region, so  Copts  were  more
    vulnerable.  At the same time, it was important to note that attacks on
    churches in Cairo included that city's outlying areas, so out of the 61
    attacks identified, around eight were in Cairo or other big cities.

54. In Egypt as a whole there was a sectarian element, Copts were the  ones
    targeted.  There were mob attacks and the marking of crosses on houses,
    sometimes with messages sent beforehand  threatening  attacks.   Whilst
    police are also targeted they are not in the same position  as  unarmed
    civilians.  He had done his best to update the situation.

55. Asked about abduction and  kidnapping  of  Coptic  women,  he  said  he
    considered the Christian Solidarity International USA  report  of  July
    2012 on the disappearance, forced conversion and  forced  marriages  of
    Coptic women to be reliable, but on reflection he did  not  think  that
    his reference in his report to a separate risk group  of  Coptic  women
    with children was correct; having or not  having  children  was  not  a
    separate  factor,  although  having  children  may  result  in  greater
    vulnerability.  As regards age, women aged between 14  -  25  were  the
    most at risk.  Risk to such women was more prevalent  in  Upper  Egypt,
    but there were instances outside.

56. Mr Wilding put to Mr Marshall that his report appeared  to  accept  the
    statistics on kidnapping of Coptic women  at  face  value  despite  the
    Freedom Report of 2012 noting that some  instances  were  not  in  fact
    kidnapping and many of the reports were false.  He accepted  many  were
    false reports, to disguise family shame and he believed his report  had
    made that clear.  The numbers were lower  than  the  hundreds  a  month
    alleged by some Coptic activities.  He did not agree with the statement
    of one Coptic leader that victims were limited to females who were "not
    educated"; they included university students.  He considered levels  of
    kidnappings were increasing.

57. Attention was drawn by Mr Wilding to the section of  his  report  which
    referred to several reports suggesting  that  thousands  of  Christians
    have paid jizya notwithstanding that it was illegal under Egyptian  law
    to impose such a tax.  He said that  in  the  village  of  Dalgarin  in
    Minya, jizya had been paid by hundreds of  people  until  the  military
    intervened.  It was a neglected area of research, but  he  thought  the
    phenomenon of jizya occurred throughout the country,  including  Cairo,
    not just in rural areas, although it was more prevalent in the south.

58. In re-examination Mr Marshall said he did not know any reason  why  the
    occurrence of jizya  would  have  dropped  off.   In  relation  to  the
    kidnapping of Coptic women he believed some  Coptic  leaders  chose  to
    rely on the rationale that if they  make  a  big  fuss  about  it,  the
    government would repress them, as they would perceive  such  statements
    as lowering the reputation of Egypt abroad.  Having  said  that,  Copts
    have become more outspoken since the fall of Mubarak and the new Coptic
    Pope is more outspoken.

59. Asked if there would be a risk to the appellant as a lone female Coptic
    woman with a disabled child, Mr Marshall said he considered  she  would
    be vulnerable and would also be a possible  target  for  conversion  by
    abduction or inducement.  Women without men were relatively  rare.   It
    had also to be borne in mind that there was currently a climate of fear
    and threats, with church services being cancelled.

60. In reply to questions from the panel, Mr Marshall said he was not  able
    to assist with the figures during the recent periods of civil unrest as
    to the number of deaths and injuries  in  the  civilian  population  of
    Egypt as a whole or for homicides.

61. In relation to his statement that Egypt was "functionally" in  a  state
    of emergency, he said he considered that the authorities' suspension of
    ordinary legal processes was justified in response  to  the  widespread
    violence and the instability being experienced throughout the  country,
    with radical  Islamists  now  targeting  government  targets.   It  was
    possible the situation could tip over into civil war.

62. He agreed that in the areas where radical Islamists  were  most  highly
    concentrated, e.g. Minya and Asyut, the risk to Coptic  Christians  was
    greater, but this did not mean there was no risk  to  Copts  elsewhere.
    Asked about the reference in  background  materials  to  100,000  Copts
    having left Egypt recently, he said it tended to be the wealthier Copts
    who were leaving.

63. Mr Marshall was asked about  his  written  response  to  the  following
    question from the Home Office - "Is it your view that particular groups
    of  Coptic  Christians  may  be  targeted,  arrested,  imprisoned   and
    physically  threatened  by  government  agents?"   He  said   that   he
    considered the list of categories he had given would also  serve  as  a
    valid list for those threatened by non-state actors, although he  would
    add to that list all Copts who are outspoken about their religion.   He
    reiterated, however, that in his view Coptic Christians as a group  are
    targeted, not just  those  particular  categories,  and  supporters  of
    ousted President Morsi saw them as responsible for his overthrow.

64. In questions arising, Mr Wilding asked whether the majority  of  deaths
    through violence since 2011  had  been  in  the  context  of  political
    clashes in Cairo and Alexandria.  Mr Marshall said that  was  true  but
    levels of violence against Copts were still on the increase and, unlike
    the situation of pro and anti-Morsi  supporters  involved  in  clashes,
    where guns were used, Copts were unarmed and the violence was all  one-
    way.

Legal Framework

65. Before summarising submissions we should first record that what  we  go
    on to say about the  issue  of  availability  of  protection  in  Egypt
    applies the principles set out by Auld LJ  in the Court of Appeal  case
    of   Bagdanavicius  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1605  at   [54]-[55]   (guidance
    unaffected by the subsequent decision of the House of Lords in the same
    case: [2005] UKHL 38), including propositions 11  -12  of   [55]  which
    read:

           "11)   In most, but not necessarily all, cases  of  ill-treatment
             which, but for state protection, would  engage  Article  3,  a
             risk of such ill-treatment will be more readily established in
             state-agency cases than in non-state actor cases - there is  a
             spectrum of circumstances giving rise to  such  risk  spanning
             the two categories, ranging from breach of a duty by the state
             of a negative duty not to inflict article 3 ill-treatment to a
             breach of a duty to take positive  protective  action  against
             such ill-treatment by non-state actors; Svazas.


          12)     An assessment of the threshold of risk appropriate in  the
             circumstances to engage  Article  3  necessarily  involves  an
             assessment of the sufficiency of state protection to meet  the
             threat of  which  there  is  a  such  risk  -  one  cannot  be
             considered without the other whether or not  the  exercise  is
             regarded as "holistic" or  to  be  conducted  in  two  stages;
             Dhima, Krepel, Svazas [2002] EWCA Civ 74."


Regulation 4 of the Protection Regulations

66. It will also assist to refer to relevant provisions of The Refugee  and
    Persons in Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations
    2006  which  implement  EU  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  on  minimum
    standards for the qualification and status of third  country  nationals
    or stateless persons as refugees  or  as  persons  who  otherwise  need
    international protection and the content of the protection granted,  OJ
    L304/12 of 30.9.2004 (hereafter "the Directive").

67. Mirroring Articles  9,  6  and  7  of  the  Directive,  the  Protection
    Regulations set out, inter alia, definitions  of  acts  of  persecution
    (regulation 5), actors of persecution or serious  harm  (regulation  3)
    and actors of protection (regulation 4).  Regulation 5(1) states that:

         "5.(1)   In deciding whether a  person  is  a  refugee  an  act  of
             persecution must be:


             (a) sufficiently serious by its nature  or  repetition  as  to
                  constitute a severe violation of a basic human  right,  in
                  particular a right from which derogation  cannot  be  made
                  under Article 15 of the Convention for the  Protection  of
                  Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or


             (b) an accumulation of various measures, including a violation
                  of a human right which is sufficiently severe as to affect
                  an individual in a similar manner as specified in (a)."


68. Regulation 4 in its material parts provides:

         "1)      In deciding whether a person is  a  refugee  or  a  person
             eligible  for   humanitarian   protection,   protection   from
             persecution or serious harm can be provided by:


             (a)       the State; or


             (b)         any   party   or   organisation,   including   any
                  international organisation, controlling  the  State  or  a
                  substantial part of the territory of the State.


         (2)      Protection shall be regarded as  generally  provided  when
             the actors mentioned in paragraph 1(a) and (b) take reasonable
             steps to prevent the persecution or suffering of serious  harm
             by operating an effective  legal  system  for  the  detection,
             prosecution and punishment of acts constituting persecution or
             serious harm, and the person mentioned in  paragraph  (1)  has
             access to such protection.
         ...".


69. The wording here is substantially the same as the text of Article 7  of
    the Directive save that regulation 4(2) omits the phrase  "inter  alia"
    immediately before "by operating". Article 7(2) states that "Protection
    is generally provided when the actors mentioned  in  paragraph  1  take
    reasonable steps to prevent the persecution  or  suffering  of  serious
    harm, inter alia, by  operating  an  effective  legal  system  for  the
    detection, prosecution and punishment of acts constituting  persecution
    or serious harm, and the applicant has access to such protection".

70. Like the wording of Article 7(2) the  wording  of  regulation  4(2)  is
    unmistakeably defeasible: "[p]rotection shall be regarded as  generally
    provided ..." (emphasis added). It is not stated  that  the  taking  of
    "reasonable steps to  prevent  the  persecution  ...  by  operating  an
    effective legal system  ..."  will  amount  to  provision  of  adequate
    protection in every case, although it is  said  that  it  will  in  the
    generality of cases.

71. Given that we are concerned with a case alleging religious persecution,
    attention should also be paid to what was said about this very  subject
    by the Court of Justice of the European Union in 2012 in Joined Cases C-
    71/11 and C-99/11, Germany v Y & Z (Y and  Z)  confining  ourselves  to
    paragraphs [63] (in part) and [64]:


         "[63]    ... Acts which may constitute a 'severe violation'  within
             the meaning  of  Article  9(1)(a)  of  the  Directive  include
             serious acts which interfere with the applicant's freedom  not
             only to practice his faith in private circles but also to live
             that faith publicly.


         [64]     That interpretation is likely to ensure that Article  9(1)
             of the Directive is applied in such a manner as to enable  the
             competent authorities  to  assess  all  kinds  of  acts  which
             interfere with the basic right of freedom of religion in order
             to determine whether, by their nature or repetition, they  are
             sufficiently  severe  as  to  be  regarded  as  amounting   to
             persecution."


72. The Court thereby made clear that unless they cumulatively give rise to
    a severe violation of a non-derogable  human  right,  infringements  of
    derogable human rights  will  not  constitute  persecution  within  the
    meaning of Article 9(1) of the Directive.


73. In accordance with the terms of Article  9(1),  ascertainment  of  what
    constitutes a derogable human right must be by reference to Article  15
    of the ECHR. This provides:


         "1.      In time of war or other public emergency  threatening  the
             life of  the  nation  any  High  Contracting  party  may  take
             measures derogating from its obligations under this Convention
             to the extent strictly  required  by  the  exigencies  of  the
             situation, provided that such measures  are  not  inconsistent
             with its other obligations under international law.


         2.       No derogation from Article 2 [right to  life],  except  in
             respect of deaths resulting from lawful acts of war,  or  from
             Articles 3, 4 (paragraph 1) and 7 shall  be  made  under  this
             provision.


         3.       ..."


74. We deal below at [120]  with  why  we  consider  that  Article  15  has
    relevance to the context of third countries in the context of assessing
    risk on return  notwithstanding  its  reference  to  "High  Contracting
    parties". But in general terms, given that we are concerned  under  the
    Protection  Regulations  and  under  the  Directive  with   "protection
    [preventative of] persecution" ( Article  7(2);  regulation  4(2)),  it
    follows that a state which is  in  a  state  of  emergency  within  the
    meaning of Article 15(2) of the ECHR cannot be said to have  failed  to
    provide protection generally solely by virtue of its failure to prevent
    violations of derogable rights - even if the latter taken  cumulatively
    give rise to the equivalent of a violation of one or more non-derogable
    rights. The converse of this proposition is that if a state in a  state
    of emergency is generally able to afford  protection  of  non-derogable
    human rights, its conduct does not amount to persecution.

75. We turn then to  the  parties'  submissions  concerning  asylum-related
    issues; it is convenient to deal with their submissions  on  Article  8
    separately later.

Submissions

Mr Wilding

76. In written and oral submissions Mr Wilding maintained that none of  the
    evidence  before  us  justified  taking  a  different  view  from  that
    expressed by the ECtHR in the ME v France case which  was  that  Coptic
    Christians were not in general at real risk of  ill-treatment  contrary
    to Article 3.

77. In relation to Mr Marshall's evidence, Mr Wilding asked  us  to  attach
    limited weight to it.  His  report  was  a  useful  although  sometimes
    selective collection of background evidence, but when  he  went  beyond
    summarising those  his  analysis  lacked  depth.   The  fact  that  the
    entirety of section  5  of  his  June  report  was  predicated  on  the
    acceptance that the appellant was credible showed  a  serious  lack  of
    attention to his brief as an expert.

78. The Tribunal should not downplay, as Mr  Marshall  sought  to  do,  the
    significance of the initiatives to improve religious cohesion  and  co-
    existence and combat religious extremism  undertaken  by  the  Al-Azhar
    University.  These were an important indicator at the top of the  state
    structure that there was an intention to protect, not persecute, Copts.
     This more  positive  ideological  orientation  was  reflected  by  the
    situation on the ground; reports showed that in the two  years  between
    January 2011-January 2013 there  had  been  a  reduction  in  sectarian
    violence.  Over this period the number of Coptic Christians killed  was
    only around 100, which, however regrettable, represented a small number
    out of a population of about 8-11 million. One quarter of  that  figure
    were composed of those killed at Maspero in October  2011.    The  main
    casualties in Egypt currently were those involved in political  clashes
    between  the  government  (and  anti-Morsi  supporters)  and  pro-Morsi
    groups.  Since July 2013 reported incidents against  Coptic  Christians
    were isolated.  In  particular,  there  was  very  little  evidence  of
    attacks on individual Copts in Cairo; the  bulk  of  incidents  are  in
    Upper Egypt; Luxor and Minya  have  been  particular  flashpoints.  The
    'lawless' province of North Sinai has also been afflicted by  sectarian
    violence. Further, incidents of violence against Coptic Christians tend
    to have a catalyst, e.g. discovery of the body of a Muslim resident for
    whose death locals suspected that Coptic Christians  were  responsible.
    To many of the attacks there is a mob mentality at  a  localised  level
    and in  several  of  the  anti-Copt  incidents  the  police  were  also
    attacked.   In some cases, e.g. in the August  2012  incidents  in  the
    Dahshur village in Giza, some Copts were also involved in the violence.
    The attacks on churches in areas  of  sectarian  tension  do  not  show
    individual Coptic Christians are being targeted.

79. As regards the evidence relating to jizya, it does not  go  so  far  as
    showing it is something demanded of every Copt, but it could well be  a
    risk factor in certain cases.

80. Mr Wilding said that the fact that there were some  influential  Muslim
    scholars within Al-Azhar advocating tolerance to Coptic Christians  was
    not negated by the fact that there were others preaching the  opposite.
    Al-Azhar had the role in the Egyptian state of  defining  Sunni  Muslim
    orthodoxy. Even if in an individual case there was established  a  real
    risk of persecution in a Coptic Christian's home area (be  that  Cairo,
    the South or other areas) there would be  other  areas  of  Egypt  that
    would be safe.  So  far  as  concerns  internal  relocation  the  FCO's
    evidence pointed to increasing difficulties in housing,  schooling  and
    jobs for Copts in Upper Egypt, but there was little more which  pointed
    to there being undue hardship in relocating to the Northern cities such
    as Cairo and Alexandria.

81. Given that Mr Marshall agreed that the risk to Copts was  predominantly
    greater from non-state actors, it was significant  to  note  situations
    where the authorities had intervened or assisted, where for example the
    police have broken up mobs.  And where there was a situation  of  civil
    unrest the authorities did not always have the  resources  to  respond.
    The evidence showed a willingness of the state to prevent and prosecute
    sectarian violence.

82. As regards risk of kidnapping of Coptic Christian women and  girls,  Mr
    Marshall had accepted there was evidence that a significant  number  of
    allegations of this  were  false.   None  of  the  evidence  points  to
    kidnappings in Cairo. Coptic Christian women were not  at  an  enhanced
    risk in Egypt. In terms of discrimination against women, class  appears
    to play a more important role than religion. And in any event there was
    evidence that there were state or charitable networks  of  support  for
    abandoned and divorced women.   Also,  so  far  as  the  appellant  was
    concerned, she was not in the age range Mr Marshall identified as being
    most at risk.  According to her evidence, she had lived for 11 years as
    a single mother bringing up her  son.   She  was  educated  and  had  a
    profession as a teacher. Given the credibility  findings  already  made
    there was no reason why she would be unable to recommence teaching.

83. Asked by the panel what he considered we should make of  Mr  Marshall's
    reply to a Home Office question about particular  risk  categories,  Mr
    Wilding said that Mr Marshall's insistence that all  Coptic  Christians
    were at risk made that answer difficult to start with.  The  respondent
    would regard all of the proposed categories save for converts  as  very
    contingent on the individual facts.  For example,  it  did  not  appear
    that those who preached to other (non-Coptic) Christians (as opposed to
    Muslims) would have problems.  The Home Office  questions  were  put  a
    month before President Morsi was deposed.  The background evidence  did
    not point  to  mobs  attacking  Coptic  Christians  because  they  were
    proselytisers.

84. It was significant, argued Mr Wilding, that Mr  Marshall  had  accepted
    that Coptic Christians were at greater risk in areas where there  is  a
    concentration of radical Islamists.  The obverse  was  surely  that  in
    areas where there was not a significant number  of  radical  Islamists,
    the risk was lesser.


85. As adumbrated earlier, Mr Wilding's submissions on Article  8  are  set
    out separately later.

Ms Benitez

86. In her written and oral submissions Ms  Benitez  said  that  whilst  Mr
    Marshall's  assumption  of  the  appellant's   truthfulness   justified
    disregarding some aspects of section 5 of his report,  the  rest  stood
    and indeed his observations on discrimination applied in any event.  We
    should  find  Mr  Marshall  an  informed  expert  who  also  had  given
    sufficient references and reasons to back up his findings.  His finding
    of an upward trend of violence against Copts which goes  unpunished  or
    is insufficiently protected against was sound.  Mr Marshall's  list  of
    attacks enumerated 86 incidents since January 2011, some of them  being
    multiple attacks.  The message from the authorities was they would  not
    protect Coptic Christians. The pattern was slowly  establishing  itself
    of Coptic Christians being seen as acceptable targets for violent  acts
    unworthy of protection.  The respondent seemed to  disregard  the  fact
    that the 'sectarian violence' has been solely or primarily directed  at
    the Coptic Christian community.  Moreover, the evidence was  that  most
    of these attacks were planned and concerted attacks, not  mob  attacks.
    There was an increase, not a  reduction,  in  sectarian  violence.  The
    reduction had been in the death toll only, not in violent incidents and
    threats and attacks on churches and homes. Since  February  2011  until
    June 2013 Mr Marshall had cited at least 59 dead, 25 churches attacked,
    912 Copts wounded, 141 families forced to evacuate and 14  Copts  tried
    for blasphemy.  It was also extremely likely that the number of attacks
    perpetrated against Copts is much larger than  that  reported  in  that
    since the fall of Mubarak there is no  uniform  system  of  documenting
    religious persecution.

87. The size of a minority population such as the Coptic  Christians  tells
    us nothing about whether they are currently at risk in  Egypt.   Whilst
    there are large Coptic populations in Cairo and Alexandria, most of the
    deaths have been in these cities, showing that  ill-treatment  is  most
    likely to be widespread rather than the opposite.  It was dangerous  in
    any event to say 100 deaths between January 2011  -  January  2013  was
    small when there was a clear trend on the part of pro-Morsi  supporters
    and Salafists to target Copts.  The  Salafists,  often  instigators  of
    violence against Copts, have received a great deal of foreign financial
    support in the recent past and nothing had been done to stop  it.  They
    previously held 25% of the seats in the people's  assembly,  the  lower
    house of Parliament and were now in alliance with the present  military
    leadership. Unlike those active in civil unrest, Copts had done nothing
    to attract this violence.  Mr Wilding's submission that most  incidents
    involving violence against Coptic Christians had a catalyst such  as  a
    Muslim man being found dead was very dangerous.  Whatever the  pretext,
    violence ensued and there were only two instances of this in any event.

88. The fact that Christian communities and Al-Azhar have cooperated to try
    to prevent religious extremism told us nothing about the  situation  of
    religious freedom for the Copts or the risk of  persecution.  Both  the
    suspended  constitution  of  ex-President   Morsi   and   the   current
    constitutional declaration awaiting approval in a referendum  reflected
    an increased role for conservative interpretations of Sharia law.

89. The Al-Azhar group was not a political group, but a university group of
    scholars and some of its own pronouncements  were  actually  advocating
    that Copts pay jizya.  The rhetoric used by Salafists  and  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood was no less strident than in 2011 when 1,000 Copts had been
    killed. These two groups were not involved or working with Al-Azhar.

90. As regards the question of what significance should be attached  to  Mr
    Marshall's identification of  particular  risk  categories,  this  list
    identified those at risk over and above that facing  Copts  in  general
    and there was no evidence that attacks by non-state actors  related  to
    any of these categories, although for some of these categories it was a
    matter of common sense they would be at greater risk.

91. The European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in  ME  v  France  had  limited
    background evidence before it and this case was decided  in  July  2012
    and since then the political landscape  has  materially  changed.   The
    evidence relating to jizya was alarming, affecting  20,000  inhabitants
    in one village in Minya and it was not just in Minya.

92. It was unrealistic to say there was safety in Cairo or other big cities
    as Cairo had had the biggest death toll  and  there  had  been  attacks
    throughout the country.  The fact that there  was  a  concentration  of
    radical Islamists in certain areas did not preclude threats  elsewhere.
    The threats were more serious since the  Muslim  Brotherhood  had  lost
    power, as they blamed the Coptic Christians  for  conspiring  with  the
    army to achieve that. On any view the evidence demonstrated that  there
    is no valid geographical difference in the nature or level of  risk  of
    persecution and ill-treatment of Copts either at the hands of the state
    or the Muslim population. Copts are persecuted throughout the  country.
    Violence was now widespread with the  pro-Morsi  movement  becoming  an
    insurgency.  This backdrop meant that there would  not  be  any  viable
    option for Copts of internal relocation. As state agents are one of the
    feared persecutors and they are presumed to act throughout the country,
    an internal relocation alternative is not available  and  alternatively
    there is an insufficiency of protection against non-state actors.

93. The discrimination of Copts together with  much  day-to-day  harassment
    and violence creates a background against  which  further  extremes  of
    abuse could be perpetrated with impunity. Copts are underrepresented in
    all  spheres   of   public   life.   There   is   widespread   societal
    discrimination. Government restrictions generally and public opposition
    to religious pluralism have also increased.


94. As regards sufficiency of protection, in the first place  state  actors
    participated in abuses committed against Copts. Whilst there had been a
    change of government the law  enforcement  agencies  remain  unchanged,
    with  the  same  personnel,  premises  and  behaviour.   Human   rights
    organisations reported that the Egyptian police continue systematically
    to deploy  violence  and  torture.  In  addition  the  authorities  had
    demonstrated an unwillingness and inability to protect Copts.   It  was
    not enough to point to instances where local police  themselves  lacked
    resources.  The military could have helped but had  not  even  done  so
    when attacks on Coptic Christians had been pre-announced.  There  is  a
    marked failure to intervene when sectarian  violence  arises,  lack  of
    arrests and prosecutions, lack of adequate  investigation,  failure  to
    put in place measures to avoid further violence and a flagrant  failure
    to punish the perpetrators. In many  instances  the  police  encouraged
    'reconciliation' as an alternative to the  implementation  of  the  law
    where the non-Copt is found guilty of  violence,  thereby  facilitating
    the impunity of the aggressors. The issue was one  of  total  impunity.
    There had only been two cases of prosecution.  There had only been  one
    conviction to date, of a police cadet on 11 January 2011 (sentenced  to
    death 14 May 2012).

95. As regards the position of women, police routinely fail to  investigate
    violence and harassment against women; the authorities do  not  enforce
    the law prohibiting rape. Recently women have faced  brutal  treatment,
    including sexual abuse, at the hands of the security forces. During the
    protests religious and  political  leaders  openly  stated  that  women
    protestors were to blame for the beatings and rapes.  There was  little
    or no participation of women in the formulation of  government  policy,
    including constitutional and legal frameworks and virtually no women in
    public office. The FCO states that single mothers have difficulties  in
    finding housing, schooling for their children and  jobs  generally  and
    that there is no state support for  single  mothers.  Coptic  Christian
    women are subject to a particular form of assault,  namely  abductions,
    coerced marriage and conversion to which  Muslim  women  would  not  be
    subject.  Anti-Christian  employment  discrimination  was  evident  and
    extensive.

96. Turning to the appellant's circumstances, she  is  a  lone  mother  who
    faces  additional   risks   including   discrimination   amounting   to
    persecution,  sexual  attacks  and  harassment,   abductions,   coerced
    marriage, conversions and kidnapping.  Ms Benitez highlighted the cases
    of abduction of Coptic Church women who had been older women  and  also
    educated women.  Whilst it was true the appellant had lived in Cairo as
    a single mother for nearly 12 years, the country had radically changed.
     She would be isolated, without any male or  familial  support  network
    and would be returned to a country in a functional state of  emergency.
    As regards the significance of the fact that the country was in a state
    of emergency, that may  well  mean  citizens  could  not  expect  their
    derogable right to be protected in the ordinary way, but the  risks  to
    Coptic Christians were primarily to their non-derogable rights.


    Our Assessment


97. In assessing the country guidance issues at stake in this case we  must
    conduct a holistic assessment which takes account of a  wide  range  of
    considerations.

ME v France (app no. 50094/10) and Strasbourg Case Law

98. As the Tribunal has made clear in the previous cases, e.g.  AMM  &  ors
    (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT
    00445 (IAC) and AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163
    (IAC), whilst Strasbourg cases dealing with Article 3 risk on return to
    broad categories of persons are not binding on the Tribunal  they  have
    persuasive value, particularly when the  assessment  (1)  is  based  on
    comprehensive background materials; and (2) is still current.  However,
    in ME the parties only brought the Court's attention to three  reports,
    namely the Amnesty International report of  12  January  2010  and  the
    USSDIRF reports published in November 2010 and July 2012  respectively.
    In effect its findings were based on only one recent report (albeit one
    which itself sought to  distil  other  sources).   Further,  since  the
    events chronicled in the July 2012 report there has been a  significant
    change in the political situation with the army, supported by huge anti-
    Morsi demonstrations, ousting President Morsi.  In  such  circumstances
    we agree with Ms Benitez that ME is of  limited  assistance.   We  also
    observe that it does not appear to have been pre-identified or heard by
    the Court as a "lead case".  Further, whilst it is correct to  say  the
    Court rejected the contention that Coptic Christians  per  se  were  at
    real risk of ill-treatment, they did find that for France  to  seek  to
    return ME, a devout Coptic Christian who, along  with  his  family  had
    suffered a number of attacks and  was  sentenced  to  three  years  for
    proselytising, would violate Article 3, so in that regard its  judgment
    does at least suggest that in certain circumstances  Coptic  Christians
    were then  able to demonstrate a real risk of ill-treatment.

99. We note several reports which refer (in somewhat vague  terms)  to  the
    number of Egyptians receiving asylum in the  US  (most  thought  to  be
    Copts) as having jumped five-fold in recent  years  and  of  the  Dutch
    ambassador saying in a  TV  interview  that  his  government  had  been
    prompted to make the  asylum  process  easier  because  of  reports  of
    persecution of Copts and a lack of adequate government protection.   We
    should emphasise that we do  not  know  what  background  evidence  was
    before the US or Dutch authorities and in any event we must assess  the
    situation on the evidence before us and give an ex nunc assessment.

Mr Marshall's Evidence

100. We reject Mr  Wilding's  invitation  to  count  against  Mr  Marshall's
    expertise that he  had  disregarded  instructions  not  to  assume  the
    appellant's account was credible.  We accept he  did  this  out  of  an
    abundance of caution, being unsure what remit the United Kingdom  Upper
    Tribunal had to revisit findings of fact about  credibility.  We  agree
    with Ms Benitez that in any event section 5 of  his  June  2013  report
    contains observations of a general   nature  which  merit  taking  into
    account.

101. We see some force in Mr Wilding's  characterisation  of  Mr  Marshall's
    use of evidence as "selective", at least inasmuch as for the most  part
    his reports do not identify positive features of the situation in which
    Coptic Christians find themselves, but we put that down to his  concern
    to draw attention to what he clearly feels, in common with a number  of
    informed observers, is an alarming situation to which the  world  needs
    to wake up.

102. Mr Wilding did not seek in terms to portray Mr Marshall as  a  partisan
    witness, although he clearly wanted us to keep in mind that Mr Marshall
    was associated with   a network of commentators who strongly sided with
    the  cause  of  religious  freedom  and  Christian  religious   freedom
    throughout the world.  In any event, we wish to make it clear  that  we
    do not regard Mr Marshall's or any of the Christian NGO evidence as  of
    any less value simply because they seek to promote and defend religious
    freedom.  It is often the case that situations of persecution are  only
    brought  to  the  world's  attention  by  dedicated   scholars   and/or
    activists.

103. In general we find Mr Marshall an informed and helpful witness who  had
    considerable grasp of detail and of the history of  the  Copts  and  of
    recent events.  That is not to say we do not have concerns  about  some
    features of his evidence over  and  above  a  tendency  (in  parts)  to
    selectivity.

104. Some passages in his reports  suffer  from  serious  imprecision.   For
    example at 2.4 of his June 2013 report he states that attacks on  Copts
    "from  extremists  and  from  security  forces  have  continued   since
    Mubarak's resignation, and have markedly increased".  Assuming for  the
    moment  that  was  considered  correct  in  relation  to  attacks  from
    extremists, it is  nevertheless  palpably  inaccurate  in  relation  to
    attacks  from  security  forces  since  June  2012  when  Morsi  became
    President.  Between June 2012 and the present there  are  virtually  no
    documented  instances  of  attacks  by  security   forces   on   Coptic
    Christians.

105. Some  passages  in  Mr  Marshall's  written  reports  belie  an  unduly
    dismissive approach to questions.  For example, when asked by the  Home
    Office in a written question what he made of the observation in the May
    2013 USSDIRF Report that "...  recognised  and  unrecognised  religious
    minorities mostly worshipped without harassment", he described it as  a
    "weak claim". It is clear from what he goes on to say, that this is not
    because he considered it was incorrect but  because  there  were  other
    aspects or dimensions of freedom of religion. But there is  nothing  to
    suggest the authors of the USSDIRF Report were unaware of  these  other
    dimensions.  Further, as then described by  Mr  Marshall,  these  other
    dimensions included several which were not  identified  in  either  the
    background evidence or his own reports  as  aspects  of  Coptic  Church
    persecution (e.g. raising one's children in the faith).  Theoretically,
    he is of course right to say in a reply  to  another  written  question
    that being able to worship without harassment  could  occur  even  when
    there was widespread persecution of a religion in other  respects,  but
    that should have been addressed  by  reference  to  the  evidence,  not
    rhetorical responses.  In any event, it is hard to  see  how  the  mere
    statement of fact about the lack of  harassment  to  worship  generally
    could be regarded as a "claim", let alone a weak one.

106. Another example is Mr  Marshall's  characterisation  of  the  statement
    found in the USSDIRF reports that in most cases Muslims and  Christians
    do live peacefully as neighbours as a "weak claim" because "[t]he  real
    existence  of  moderates  does  not  obviate  the  real  and  pervasive
    persecution of Copts".  Once again, it is  not  at  all  clear  why  Mr
    Marshall sees fit to depict this statement as a  "claim"  let  alone  a
    weak one.  On its face it is at  least  evidence  that  it  is  only  a
    minority of the population who act towards Copts in a persecutory way.

107. Our  principal  concern  is  the  lack  of  correspondence  between  Mr
    Marshall's assessment of the situation of Copts and that found  in  the
    major country reports,  including  the  USSDIRF.   Were  Mr  Marshall's
    reports based on his own direct research there may be justification for
    such a lack, but he is adamant in each of his reports (and was  adamant
    in his oral evidence also)  that  the  evidential  foundation  for  his
    conclusions is predominantly the major  country  reports  and  he  says
    nothing to suggest he disagrees with  anything  of  significance  which
    they state.  Whilst these reports do say in  terms  that  the  Egyptian
    state has been unable and unwilling to protect Copts  against  attacks,
    they do not state, or convey, that there is a general risk to Copts  as
    such in Egypt which amounts to the level of persecution  or  Article  3
    ill-treatment.  The authors of these reports are closely familiar  with
    international human rights norms and if they considered that the levels
    of violence had reached the high threshold necessary to establish  that
    Coptic Christians as a class faced persecution or treatment contrary to
    the prohibition on torture or inhuman or degrading treatment, we  would
    expect them to say so either in terms or comparable language.

108. We might have been prepared to overlook Mr Marshall's  seemingly  loose
    use of words or expressions identifying Copts as existing in a state of
    persecution if he was an expert unfamiliar with asylum and human rights
    law.  But from his CV it  is  clear  he  has  frequently  given  expert
    evidence in the US asylum courts.  Whilst we have no  reason  to  doubt
    that his expertise in such contexts has been seen in a positive  light,
    we can only go by the reports of his that are before us, which  in  our
    opinion do not, as we have emphasised,  merit unqualified  endorsement.
    (We should also note that it has not been suggested that the US  courts
    have held that Coptic Christians as a class have a well-founded fear of
    persecution).

109. There are also occasional overbroad generalisations not  backed  up  by
    sufficient evidence, e.g. in his 18 July report, describing  the  post-
    President Morsi situation, Mr Marshall states at 2.5 that black crosses
    have been painted on Christian shops to mark them  for  arson,  without
    specifying where, when or on  how  many  occasions.  In  his  September
    Addendum he  does  say  that  there  have  been  reports  from  several
    provinces saying this, but it does  not  appear  he  has  any  detailed
    information. We would have expected more care in making that clear. His
    observation about jizya being widespread affords another example.  When
    pressed by Mr Wilding he had to agree that he only had limited evidence
    regarding this and there was a need for more research.  To  the  extent
    that in support of his claims about the prevalence of jizya reliance is
    placed on the Assyrian International News Agency report of 13 September
    2013, that focuses on the shooting dead of two Copts in the village  of
    Sahel Selim in Assuit Province, for refusing to pay jizya and  then  on
    the situation in the village of Delga, Deir Mawas, 160 miles  south  of
    Cairo in Minya where Muslim Brotherhood gangs are  said  to  completely
    control the village after  the  ouster  of  ex-President  Morsi.  "They
    target  the  20,000  Coptic  inhabitants  by  imposing  jizya  on  them
    allegedly to "safeguard" them from acts of violence  and  vandalism  to
    their homes and shops..."  The  report  ends  by  noting  that  "[m]any
    Egyptian activists have sounded the  alarm  on  what  is  happening  to
    Christians. In an open letter to the  Egyptian  provisional  government
    prominent journalists Fatma Nahoot said "Where is the  government,  the
    Interior Minister and General al-Sisi on what is happening to the Copts
    in Minya, including harassment, murder, intimidation, displacement  and
    imposing jizya on them?" There is a further report from the  Washington
    Times of 10  September  2013  dealing  with  the  same  village  (Dalga
    village) and the jizya tax. There is also an article by Raymond Ibrahim
    of 6 March, 2013 about statements made by one of the professors of  Al-
    Azhar University who exhorted that the Copts  should  pay  jizya.  Such
    evidence falls well short of establishing the  practice  is  widespread
    throughout Egypt.


110. Accordingly, whilst finding Mr Marshall's reports edifying, we are  not
    able to attach unqualified weight to them.

Home Office OGN: 7 May 2013

111.  Although  Mr  Wilding  did  not  make  it  a  central  plank  of   his
    submissions, we should point out that this particular OGN is unusual in
    that it is largely comprised of summaries  of  background  sources.  We
    take them into account but recall what  is  said  in  the  Home  Office
    Asylum Policy Instructions about OGNs of this kind  at  paragraph  265,
    namely that insofar as they include background material, that  material
    "is to be regarded like any other background  information,  subject  to
    the fact that its selection may not have the same  objectivity  and  is
    not independently scrutinised". So far as concerns the policy  position
    set out in this OGN, we again take it into account  but  note  that  at
    least as concerns sufficiency of protection it is  much  less  sanguine
    than Mr Wilding's own submission. A similar comment could be made about
    the FCO letter of 5 August 2013.

Reliability of Figures Relating to Violence

112. We note that there is no systematic monitoring  of  violence  in  Egypt
    including the number of deaths, wounded, attacks on properties and  the
    like. Ms Benitez has argued that it  is  very  likely  there  is  under
    reporting. Whilst we do not see  any  firm  evidence  to  support  that
    proposition we note that in the background materials  there  is  little
    dispute about the figures given  by  Amnesty  International  and  Human
    Rights  Watch  even  though  it  might  possibly  be  said  they   draw
    uncritically on reports by Coptic activists in Egypt. We consider  such
    figures  can  therefore  be  treated  as  broadly  accurate.  We   make
    allowances for possible under reporting but that is mainly  out  of  an
    abundance of caution rather than clear evidence.

113. It is pertinent  next  to  identify  the  main  actors  who  have  been
    responsible for  incidents  of  violence  and  threats  to  the  Coptic
    communities in Egypt.

State Actors

114.  It  is  incontrovertible  that  both  before  and  after  the  popular
    revolution that led to the resignation of President Mubarak in February
    2011, and whilst the SCAF was in power there were  incidents  of  state
    aggression  against  Copts  -  attacks  against  Coptic  Christians  by
    soldiers,  attacks  whose  nature  and  extent  went  well  beyond  the
    reasonable use of force: e.g. the storming of the 4th Century  St  Paul
    monastery near the Red Sea on 20 February 2011, the use by soldiers  of
    live ammunition against unarmed Copts  during  a  land  dispute  at  St
    Bishop monastery in Wadi Natroun and on February 23 of  the  same  year
    against the monastery of St. Makarios of Alexandria in Wady  el-Fayoun.
    Undoubtedly the most notorious incident occurred on 9 October  2011  in
    the vicinity of the Maspero TV station in Cairo when soldiers killed 23
    Copts and injured 300.

115. However,  in the period when President Morsi was  in  power  from  June
    2012 - July 2013, there were virtually no  incidents  of  active  state
    persecution in the form of attacks  by  soldiers,  security  forces  or
    police, although there were incidents  of  unjustified  conviction  and
    seemingly blatant political use of the blasphemy  laws.   There  is  of
    course, as observed by the Court of Appeal in  Svazas,  a  spectrum  of
    circumstances spanning state and  non-state  actors,  but  the  pattern
    during this period was one of state complicity in (or state inaction in
    the face of) non-state actor attacks or actions.  The same is  true  of
    the period since the ousting of Morsi to the present.

Non-State Actors

116. Turning then to non-state actors, according to the available  evidence,
    the two principal organisations which have either conducted or  incited
    many of the attacks on Coptic Christian targets in the period since the
    resignation  of  Mubarak  have  been  the  Salafists  and  the   Muslim
    Brotherhood, although both in different ways interconnect with what  is
    generally described  as  the  ultraconservative  tendency  in  Egyptian
    society.  The main political party of  the  Salafists  is  the  Al-Nour
    party, which is the second largest political party in Egypt  and  which
    currently is in uneasy alliance with the military leadership.   If  one
    aggregates  the  votes  cast  in  recent  elections  for   the   Muslim
    Brotherhood and the Al-Nour party, it is clear they  comprise  a  large
    majority.  It is true that  certainly  within  the  Muslim  Brotherhood
    there are various factions, some advocating  tolerance  towards  Coptic
    Christians, some advocating violence and vendettas.  But  the  evidence
    does not suggest that the factions advocating tolerance have been  able
    to halt the actions of other hostile to Coptic Christians.

International Concern

117. Open Doors International, World Watch List  (WWL)  on  8  January  2013
    said that Islamic extremism was the "main persecution dynamic in Egypt"
    and that Egypt ranks as 25th  on  its  WWL,  in  the  category  "Severe
    Persecution".  The USCIRF in its April 2013 report described  Egypt  as
    one of seven "countries of particular concern" (CPC),  the  six  others
    being Iraq, Nigeria, Pakistan, Tajikistan,  Turkmenistan  and  Vietnam.
    In July 2013 the Pew Research  Center  calculated  that  Egypt  had  an
    overall score of 8.9 out of 10 on the 2011 Government Restrictions  [on
    Religion] Index, a score much higher than Middle Eastern-North  African
    countries as a whole, where the median score index is 5.9.

State Protection

118. Whilst it is a well-established principle that a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution will not obtain if there exists a sufficiency of protection
    against serious harm (see Horvath [2000] UKHL 37) it is an equally well-
    established principle that when assessing  whether  there  is  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution we are to conduct a holistic  inquiry  (see
    [12] of Lord  Justice  Auld's  judgment  in  Bagdanavicius)   in  which
    evidence showing ineffective protection can shed light on whether  such
    well-founded fear exists.


119. For the past few years Egypt has been under  a  de  jure  or  de  facto
    state of emergency and Mr Marshall's view  was  that  in  the  face  of
    widespread civil unrest and breakdown of law and order the  police  and
    security  forces  and  the  army  were  justified,   in   accord   with
    international human rights norms, in suspending a  range  of  derogable
    human rights protections.  Mr Marshall did not for one moment  mean  to
    suggest by that that all of the actions of the Egyptian army  over  the
    past  decade  or  so  have  been  proportionate  or  justified  by  the
    exigencies of the situation, but he did mean, we think, that imposition
    of a state of emergency has had a valid function as a response  to  the
    law and order situation and its factual existence was relevant  to  the
    issue of the extent of the state's duty to protect against a wide range
    of human rights violations, derogable as well as non-derogable.

120. This evidence is important  because  when  assessing  the  adequacy  of
    protection in a  country  in  which  there  exists  a  valid  state  of
    emergency, at least in respect of  measures  taken  that  are  strictly
    required by the exigencies of the situation, a state cannot be expected
    to secure the non-derogable rights of its citizens. That is made  clear
    by the wording of regulation 5(1) of the  Protection  Regulations  (and
    the corresponding text of Article 9(1) of the Qualification Directive):



      "In deciding whether a person is a refugee an act of persecution  must
      be: (a) sufficiently serious  by  its  nature  and  repetition  as  to
      constitute a severe violation of a basic human right, in particular  a
      right from which derogation cannot be made under  Article  15  of  the
      [ECHR]."

    Where Article 15 operates,  a  state  cannot  be  expected  to  protect
    against non-securement of derogable rights because such  non-securement
    does not amount to persecution. A very similar provision is to be found
    in Article 4 of the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political
    Rights (ICCPR)  and  its  treaty  monitoring  body,  the  Human  Rights
    Committee,  has  indeed  dealt  on  occasions  with  issues  about  the
    proportionality of emergency measures taken  by  state  authorities  in
    Egypt   (see   e.g.   Concluding   Comments   on   Egypt   (1993)    UN
    doc.CCPR/C/79Add.56, [13]). Of  course,  Article  15  of  the  ECHR  is
    drafted with a view to defining the obligations  of  "High  Contracting
    state" parties to the ECHR, but the jurisprudence of the ECtHR has  not
    excluded Article 15 from having extra territorial effect in the context
    of assessing risk on return to a country of origin (its application  is
    far more problematic in  the  different  context  of  extra-territorial
    jurisdiction under Article 1: see e.g. app.no.  52207/99  Bankovic  and
    others v Belgium and 16 Other Contracting States  (Grand  Chamber)  and
    the recent Supreme Court case  of   Smith  and  others  v  Ministry  of
    Defence [2013] UKSC 41 at [60]); and there is in logic  no  reason  why
    Article 15 should  not  have  such  extra-territorial  effect.  Indeed,
    although regulation 5(1)(b) and Article 9(1) recognise that persecution
    can arise not just from a violation of non-derogable  rights  but  from
    "an accumulation of various measures, including a violation of a  human
    right which is sufficiently severe as to  affect  an  individual  in  a
    similar manner specified in (a)" (to  use  the  wording  of  regulation
    5(1)(a)), that is made expressly subject to Article 15. If  Article  15
    had no application to assessment of persecution  and  protection  in  a
    country of origin, it would be quite illogical to have expressly relied
    on it in Article 9.  Hence assessment  of  persecution  and  protection
    must be different, depending on whether there is a state  of  emergency
    falling within the conditions specified in Article 15. What this  means
    in the context of  Egypt  currently  is  that  in  order  to  establish
    ineffective protection on the part of the state against serious harm by
    non-state actors, it is necessary to demonstrate a general inability to
    secure  non-derogable rights against which the state cannot  adequately
    protect, given the existence of a  functional  state  of  emergency.  A
    general inability to secure derogable rights will not suffice.

121. The situation of Coptic Christians is such, in our opinion, that  where
    an individual appellant can establish a real risk of serious  harm,  by
    virtue of some characteristic  additional  to  merely  being  a  Coptic
    Christian,  it  is  quite  unlikely  he  or  she  will  have  available
    protection,  even  when  we  limit  that  to  mean  protection  against
    violations of non-derogable rights. Physical  attacks  and  threats  to
    life are of course the clearest example.

122. We do not mean by this to assert that  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    protection of Copts is all one way.  There is evidence that on  certain
    occasions the police and security forces have been willing and able  to
    take action to prevent attacks, e.g. on 3 July 2013, in Qena and Luxor,
    soldiers were successful in  thwarting  scattered  attempts  to  attack
    churches.  There are also instances where Copts have been able to exert
    effective legal remedies. In March 2012 a Coptic  priest  sentenced  to
    six months imprisonment and a fine for violating a  repair  permit  (by
    building too tall a church steeple) won his appeal  against  conviction
    and never served jail time. It can also be seen that  there  were  many
    instances of actions by the authorities which could be said  to  afford
    partial  protection:  e.g.  in  January  2012,   after   a   visit   by
    parliamentarians to the village of Sharbat near Alexandria after Muslim
    residents sacked homes and shops of Christian residents resulting in an
    order by police and local leaders to evict  eight  Christian  families,
    the eviction was overturned.

123. But predominantly the evidence  of  what  has  been  occurring  before,
    during and after attacks on Christian targets indicates  a  failure  to
    protect (even confining ourselves as we  must  to  general  failure  to
    secure   non-derogable   rights).    Indeed,   despite   Mr   Wildings'
    animadversions to the contrary, both the Home Office OGN  and  the  FCO
    August 2013 letter accept that protection is  broadly  ineffective.  In
    our view the Amnesty International assessment in April 2013,  that  the
    Egyptian government is constantly failing to protect and  defend  Copts
    and does not punish their attackers, closely accords with the  emerging
    evidence.  It is unnecessary for us  to  decide  to  what  extent  this
    failure stems from an unwillingness  to  protect  or  an  inability  to
    protect, although it seems to us that whether it is one or the other or
    both depends on the particular time and place and the  specific  actors
    involved.  Ms Benitez is right  to  identify  incidents  in  which  the
    police and/or security forces and army have appeared to collude in  the
    attacks, but there are also many where there is no suggestion  of  such
    conduct.  Mr Wilding is right to point out that in some  incidents,  it
    would appear that efforts by the police and security forces to  protect
    have been frustrated by lack of manpower  and/or  resources,  but  that
    does not negate the fact that protection was not forthcoming.   Overall
    there has been and is an insufficiency of state protection.

Attacks and Discrimination

124. Attacks  and  discrimination  against  Coptic  Christians  are,  sadly,
    nothing new.  Under President Mubarak there were at least fifteen major
    attacks on Copts.  Under  the  SCAF,  the  military  body  which  ruled
    between the downfall of President Mubarak  in  February  2011  and  the
    election of Morsi as President in 2012, things did not improve.   On  7
    October 2011 there occurred the worst act of violence against  Egyptian
    Christians in modern history, when the army began shooting at Christian
    protestors marching through Cairo in the vicinity  of  the  TV  station
    Maspero. Under President Morsi, Egypt witnessed  a  rise  of  sectarian
    rhetoric by Muslim Brotherhood members and supporters  and  attacks  on
    churches and other Christian targets continued, in many cases with  the
    police and security forces providing inadequate protection.

125.  Among  the  attacks  on  churches  which  took  place  under   Morsi's
    presidency was the 8 April 2013 attack on St Mark's Cathedral in Cairo,
    the central church for the Coptic Orthodox, which was  set  upon  by  a
    large mob.  Although security forces turned  up  and  fired  tear  gas,
    Human Rights Watch said there was concrete evidence of  police  failing
    to intervene and in fact shooting at the cathedral walls.  Coptic  Pope
    Tawadros II said afterwards that this church had been a national symbol
    for 2,000 years and had not been subjected to anything like  this  even
    during the dark ages.

126. Discrimination is prevalent  in  many  areas  of  society.   Copts  are
    significantly  underrepresented   in   Egypt's   military,   judiciary,
    diplomatic corps, academia and almost all electoral bodies.

Levels of Violence

127. We are handicapped in assessing the levels of violence  experienced  by
    Copts by the lack  of  any  uniform  monitoring  or  the  existence  of
    statistics that have wide agreement. At the  same  time  we  note  that
    Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch  have  generally  accepted
    reports given by leading  Christian  NGOs  and  some  Coptic  Christian
    organisations as reliable and we are not aware that  any  international
    observers have sought to dispute their general reliability.  Therefore,
    we see no reason to disagree with the USSDIRF  report  assessment  that
    2012 saw a reduction in sectarian violence. However, the USSDIRF report
    went on to note that alongside this decline there was  an  increase  in
    compelled expulsion and collective punishment.

128. In any event, whilst 2013 is not yet completed, it is clear  that  even
    to September 2013 the level of sectarian violence in 2013  has  already
    been worse for Copts than 2012. Attacks on Christian churches and other
    Christian targets have increased as Christians have been the target  of
    a sudden pro-Morsi backlash which blamed them for supporting  the  army
    and openly criticising  Morsi  as  divisive.  We  reject  Mr  Wilding's
    submission that there has not been an increase and  observe  that  that
    submission is difficult to square in any event with the FCO letter of 5
    August which at paragraph 5 states that "[s]ince the military's removal
    of President Morsi from power on 3 July, there has been a rise  in  the
    number of violent sectarian attacks".


129. Mr  Wilding  has  argued  that  much  of  the  anti-Copt  violence  has
    comprised localised and spontaneous mob violence, but we do  not  think
    it would be safe to read the  evidence  that  way.  That  is  not  only
    because as Ms Benitez has pointed out some of  these  attacks  by  mobs
    have been announced beforehand but because in general terms  there  are
    clearly anti-Coptic extremists operating at national and  local  levels
    whose agenda is inciting  local  populaces  to  acts  of  violence  and
    hostility. It also seems to us  to  be  irrelevant  that  some  of  the
    incidents seem to have a catalyst. Incidents of  religious  persecution
    often do.

130. Nevertheless, whilst the levels of violence against  Copts  have  risen
    in the immediate aftermath of the ousting of President Morsi, we do not
    think that they are or are likely to be for the foreseeable  future  at
    such a level as  to  cause  Copts  as  such  to  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution and serious harm. Figures of deaths, woundings, attacks  on
    churches and Coptic Christian homes etc are concerning  but  we  cannot
    ignore their limited scale and intensity  relative to the size  of  the
    population of over 80-85 million and also relative  to  the  number  of
    Copts which is generally estimated  as  between  8-10  million.  It  is
    relevant for example that in 2013 the number of  churches  attacked  in
    the August 2013 reprisals taken by pro-Morsi supporters who blamed  the
    Copts for his ousting constituted less than 3% of the total  number  of
    Coptic churches in Egypt (i.e. 61 out of 2,869 churches) and  that  the
    preponderance of attacks have taken place in Upper Egypt and  in  areas
    in which radical Islamists have a strong presence.

131. As regards dhimmi statutes for  Christians  and  imposition  of  jizya,
    whilst we consider that Mr Marshall's observations on this went  beyond
    the evidence presently available, it is certainly a  factor  that  some
    Islamist extremists have sought to impose jizya and that,  while  there
    has been no formal ideological sanction for such practices, there is at
    least  one  professor  at  the  Al-Azhar  University  who  has   openly
    championed it. The fact too that the Al-Nour  Party,  a  fundamentalist
    Salafist movement, is said to have formed an alliance with the  liberal
    and secular forces to oust the Muslim Brotherhood may mean that it  can
    apply as a price more pressure to re-introduce jizya,  but  it  remains
    that jizya is illegal under Egyptian law and that (see below)  it  does
    not appear reasonably likely that the next planned elections will  lead
    to a government that actively pursues an Islamist agenda.


Displacement and Emigration

132. It is a relevant factor pointing to continuing  difficulties  affecting
    Coptic Christians in Egypt that a significant number of Copts have left
    Egypt.  Precise figures and research are hard to come  by,  but  it  is
    said by several sources that some 100,000- 200,000 Copts have fled  the
    country since the  fall  of  Mubarak  in  February  2011  and  Egyptian
    nationals, mostly Copts, are said to form the second largest  group  to
    be granted political asylum  in  the  US.  At  the  same  time,  whilst
    alarming we note that  this  represents  roughly  1-2%  of  the  Coptic
    population and Mr Marshall, in common with several  sources,  considers
    that those fleeing are predominantly the wealthier Copts. That  feature
    alone does not lessen the significance of the  numbers  and  indeed  it
    might be said that flight by persons  in  this  category  will  have  a
    greater knock-on  effect  in  terms  of  the  economic  confidence  and
    security of those remaining; but it remains, in our view, that  present
    figures do not indicate that the situation for  Copts  who  remain  has
    crossed the threshold of persecution or serious harm.

Prognosis

133. We are  unable  to  derive  from  the  background  evidence  any  clear
    indication of how events will unfold in Egypt.  We  know  that  Egypt's
    economy remains in a poor state, which is very likely  to  fuel  or  at
    least maintain civil unrest. Mr Marshall fears the country could  slide
    into civil war, other  commentators  disagree.  Given  the  very  large
    popular support shown to the military during its ousting  of  President
    Morsi notwithstanding its use of excessive force and serious abuses  of
    human rights we consider we should  do  more  than  regard  the  likely
    situation as one in which the army will be the main enforcer of law and
    order with the  country  facing  an  uncertain  period  until  promised
    elections are held and a new constitution voted on. We  shall  need  to
    keep the situation in the country under close review.

134. We also think it of importance that since the fall of  President  Morsi
    the army has not itself engaged in acts of aggression against Copts and
    its present leadership under General al Sisi has seen fit to  seek  and
    obtain the support for its interim regime from Pope Tawadros  II.  This
    had immediate negative consequences in terms of  provoking  attacks  on
    Copts by pro-Morsi supporters in August 2013 but it is some  indication
    that the authorities themselves are no  longer  involved  in  attacking
    Copts  or  responding  violently  to  Coptic  demonstrations  etc.  The
    military has also publicly pledged to help the rebuilding of  destroyed
    or damaged Coptic churches and although that was  also  promised  under
    Morsi without much evidence of delivery on those promises, it is  still
    an  indication  that  the  authorities  are  not  actively   supporting
    increased marginalization of Copts.  It  is  also  pertinent  that  the
    Egyptian authorities are likely to be influenced by the approach  taken
    by the US towards maintaining its  large  amount  in  aid.  Threats  or
    action to withdraw such aid are likely to be significant levers on  the
    direction the military is likely to  take  and  US  foreign  policy  is
    subject to strong lobbying  by  Christian  organisations  domestically.
    Whilst it is unclear precisely what will be the  political  orientation
    of the civilian government that is expected to  govern  once  elections
    are held, it is most unlikely to be one that pursues an Islamist agenda
    as actively as did the former Morsi government and even if the Salafist
    parties are given a role it will not be to implement such an agenda. We
    do not read too much into the fact that the new cabinet sworn in on  16
    July contained three Copts and three women, but it  does  suggest  that
    the general pattern of discrimination against Copts  in  political  and
    social life is not absolute.

135. So far as concerns the constitutional position, even  though  the  army
    has removed some of the Islamist provisions  favoured  by  ex-President
    Morsi, its interim constitutional declaration still seeks to  emphasise
    that Islam is the religion of the state. In terms of the recent history
    of elections, the evidence demonstrates a heavy domination by  Islamist
    parties, the Muslim Brotherhood and the Salafist Al-Nour Party  between
    them obtaining a large  majority  of  the  votes.  At  the  same  time,
    notwithstanding the current alliance between the army and  the  Al-Nour
    Party, we do not think we can ignore the  evidence  as  to  the  events
    surrounding the ousting of Morsi in which the army's coup was supported
    by huge popular demonstrations,  even  when  there  were  incidents  of
    excessive  and  lethal  violence  being  deployed   against   pro-Morsi
    supporters. There has been a broad consensus  that  there  has  been  a
    widespread reaction against Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood's  attempt
    to move Egypt in the direction of a more Islamist agenda and a  concern
    that the government of the country should concentrate on repairing  the
    economy and attending to everyday concerns separate from religion.

136.  We  would  agree  with  Ms  Benitez  that  the  conciliatory  approach
    advocated towards Coptic Christians by Al-Azhar  does  not  necessarily
    have any impact on local Islamists, but we concur with Mr Wilding  that
    the great eminence and respect accorded to Al-Azhar by  Egyptian  state
    institutions and under the interim constitution indicates that  at  the
    level of state ideology there is no official support for a campaign  of
    persecution against Copts, even though there are one or two  professors
    of this university who publicly voice hostile sentiments.

Geographical Dimension

137. Miss Benitez has urged us to accept Mr Marshall's position that  it  is
    unhelpful to consider whether Copts are persecuted in particular  parts
    of Egypt because they are persecuted throughout Egypt.  Given  that  we
    have not accepted that there is persecution of  Copts  in  Egypt  as  a
    whole, we need to clarify whether we accept nevertheless that there  is
    persecution of Copts  in  particular  parts  of  the  country.  In  our
    judgement, it is highly likely that in respect of certain areas of  the
    country Coptic Christians will face a real risk of persecution.  On the
    available evidence they do not face such risk in the large  cities  but
    rather in certain areas outside them and  in  locations  where  radical
    Islamists have a strong foothold  and  where  there  have  been  recent
    attacks on Coptic Christians (or attempts to  bring  blasphemy  charges
    against some of them) or their  churches  or  business  or  properties.
    Examples of such areas (at least during the  periods  specified)  would
    include: the village of Rafah, near the Egyptian  border  of  the  Gaza
    Strip, where Copts had suffered attacks on their churches  in  February
    2011 and twice in September 2012; the village Delga in  Minya  province
    the majority of whose population of  165,000   Coptic  Christians  were
    forced to flee following attacks on two churches (Independent, February
    9 August 2013) and where in September  50  families  among  the  20,000
    Coptic inhabitants had left the village after pro-Morsi supporters took
    control and sought to impose jizya on all Copts in the village, without
    exception. Other examples based on 2013  incidents  would  include  the
    village of Dahshour, Wasta in Beni Suef; and  Arish  city  in  northern
    Sinai.  There will very  likely  be  others.   In  general  terms,  the
    enhanced vulnerability of Copts in these areas appears to  result  from
    the combination of a strong presence of  radical  Islamists  and  local
    police and political leaders with an animus against Copts.

138. At the level of provinces Minya would appear to be the  province  where
    Copts are most at risk but we lack enough evidence  to  decide  whether
    its Coptic Christian population is at general risk.

139. If, however, a claimant is able to establish they  come  from  an  area
    where the local Coptic population faces a real risk of persecution,  it
    will not necessarily  follow  that  they  qualify  as  refugees  or  as
    beneficiaries of subsidiary protection or Article  3  ECHR  protection.
    That will depend on whether they can show they would not have a  viable
    internal relocation alternative. In such cases there will be need for a
    fact-specific assessment but in general terms we agree with Mr  Wilding
    that resettlement in an area  where  Islamists  are  not  strong  would
    appear to be a viable option. In general Coptic Christians at real risk
    of persecution or ill-treatment in their home  area  will  be  able  to
    relocate in safety to large cities such as Cairo or Alexandria or areas
    where radical Islamists do not have a  significant  presence,  but  (it
    must be emphasised) that is not to say in particular cases where  there
    are relevant circumstances creating  undue  hardship  that  individuals
    will have much difficulty in establishing that it would be unreasonable
    to expect them to relocate.

Particular Risk Categories

140. This case was identified  to  address  the  issue  of  risk  to  Coptic
    Christians generally, but in the light of our  negative  conclusion  on
    it,  and  the  observations  made  by  Mr  Marshall  about   particular
    categories of Copts which he  considered  were  at  enhanced  risk,  we
    sought submissions from the parties as to whether, if we found Copts in
    general were not  at  risk,  we  should  nevertheless  find  particular
    categories at risk. We remind ourselves that Mr Marshall's treatment of
    this issue arose  in  the  context  of  a  written  question  from  the
    respondent as to his  view as to whether particular  groups  of  Coptic
    Christians  may  be  targeted,  arrested,  imprisoned  and   physically
    attacked by government agents. His written response was that government
    agents had targeted converts, people who work with them, those  accused
    of proselytising, those  accused  of  being  sexually  or  romantically
    involved with a Muslim woman,  those  who  are  outspoken  about  their
    religion and those who work visibly in the community, or  are  involved
    in church construction or repair. He stated that:  "[t]hese  categories
    of Copts are more likely than  the  average  Copt  to  be  targeted  by
    government agents".  In his oral testimony he said the same  categories
    were also at risk from non-state actors and he said that he  would  add
    to them all Copts who are outspoken about their religion [it  seems  to
    us that in point of fact such a category  is  already  covered  by  his
    category concerned with those who are "outspoken about their religion":
    see [39] and [63]  above,  but  nothing  hangs  on  that].  In  closing
    submissions Mr Wilding said  the  respondent  accepted  that  Christian
    converts may well be a particular risk category and  he  also  accepted
    that in certain areas action by local Islamists to impose jizya may  be
    a risk factor.

141. Given that the issue of particular risk categories was not  flagged  at
    the case management stage we are  hesitant  about  attempting  to  make
    definitive findings, but concerned at the same time not  to  avoid  any
    comment at all, given that we may  not  deal  with  such  issues  in  a
    country guidance case in the near  future  and  that  in  the  meantime
    decision-makers, including judges, may encounter cases of  persons  who
    fall into such categories or arguably do. We have the  expert  evidence
    of Mr Marshall as a starting-point.

142. As regards Christian converts we note that the respondent  in  the  May
    2013 Egypt OGN accepts that such persons are in a risk category.  Given
    that the Egyptian Supreme  Court as recently as July  2011  ruled  that
    Christian converts could reconvert and be identified as  Christians  on
    their national identity and birth certificates, it does not seem to  us
    that there is obvious state persecution of Christian converts,  but  in
    view of what we have found about ineffective state protection of Coptic
    Christians we think  that  persons  in  this  category  -  confined  to
    converts to Coptic Christianity - must be unusually vulnerable to  harm
    from non-state actors who may also seek to  have  them  prosecuted  for
    blasphemy.

143. We consider the suggested addition "people  who  work  with  them"  too
    vague; certainly we have  not  been  directed  to  any  clear  body  of
    evidence to support it and in our view too much  would  depend  on  the
    circumstances  in  which  such  persons  work  closely  with  Christian
    converts to make this a viable category in itself.

144. We also think Mr Marshall's suggested additional category of those  who
    are outspoken about their religion and work visibly in the community is
    overbroad because there is little  evidence  that  Christian  activists
    have been targeted  in  attacks  or  that  Coptic  Christian  political
    organisations have been targeted. On the other hand  in  an  individual
    case, if a Christian activist is able to establish that he or  she  has
    been or would be targeted, that may well suffice to cause them to be at
    greater risk than ordinary Copts.

145. As regards "those who are involved in church construction  or  repair",
    which   in   context   appears   to   mean   church   construction   or
    reconstruction/repair, we  consider  it  likely,  given  the  scale  of
    attacks on churches, that persons who are involved in  construction  or
    reconstruction/repair of churches that have been the target for  recent
    attacks run a greater risk than ordinary Copts.

146. We would accept that "those accused of proselytising" is likely  to  be
    a risk category if the accusations are shown to be made in  a  serious,
    rather than a casual, manner. Whilst the numbers of Copts charged  with
    blasphemy is relatively small, it is clear that once  accused  in  this
    way there are both ineffective protection and a heightened risk of laws
    against blasphemy being used as instruments of persecution.

147. We  think  that  "those  accused  of  being  sexually  or  romantically
    involved with a Muslim woman" are also likely to be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution, so long as it can be established that the  accusation  has
    not merely been made or would only be made casually without anything to
    suggest it will be pursued seriously. We  prefer,  however,  to  phrase
    this category slightly differently, in terms of "physical or  emotional
    involvement": see below [151].

148. One specific issue that was identified as a country guidance  issue  in
    this case was that concerning risk to  Coptic  women  who  were  single
    mothers and divorced without any other  familial  or  male  support  in
    Egypt.

149. Working from the general to the particular, we note  that  it  has  not
    been argued before us that women in Egypt generally are at real risk of
    persecution, although Ms Benitez accurately in our view drew  attention
    to the fact that women faced a number of problems, not least a range of
    societal  discrimination  and  a  society  prepared   to   tolerate   a
    significant incidence of sexual harassment and  violence  and  domestic
    violence against women.

150. As regards Coptic women, the evidence does demonstrate in  our  opinion
    that they face additional difficulties, arising out of  the  fact  that
    some elements of the Sunni  Muslim  community  have  undertaken  forced
    disappearances, abductions and forced conversions of such women. At the
    same time, we attach considerable weight to Mr  Marshall's  concern  to
    distance himself from some observers who consider this problem as being
    a widespread one. Whilst the evidence  clearly  indicates  this  is  an
    additional dimension of risk for Coptic women, it seems to us that  any
    assessment of whether  it  crossed  the  threshold  of  persecution  or
    serious harm would depend very much on the particular circumstances  of
    any  case  and  the  degree  of  vulnerability   and   isolation   such
    circumstances disclose. Despite Ms Benitez's  efforts  to  persuade  us
    that the risk of women being the victims of such actions affects a wide
    range of women, not just young or uneducated women, the broad thrust of
    the evidence taken as a whole does not go that far. Rather  it  broadly
    supports what Mr Marshall said in oral  evidence,  namely  that  it  is
    Coptic women aged between 14-25 years  and  who  do  not  have  a  male
    protector who are the main victims. That caveat needs to  be  borne  in
    mind in any individual assessment. For women outside this  category  it
    will be significantly more  difficult  to  establish  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3.


Summary of Conclusions


151.  Drawing  together  the  above  we  have  arrived  at   the   following
    conclusions:


         Law


    In relation to a country which is in a state of emergency affecting the
    life of the nation and which takes measures strictly  required  by  the
    exigencies  of  the  situation,  its  ability  to  afford  adequacy  of
    protection under Directive 2004/83/EC (the Qualification Directive)  is
    to be assessed by reference to its general securement of  non-derogable
    rights as set out in the ECHR.


Country guidance

      1.  Notwithstanding that  there  is  inadequate  state  protection  of
      Coptic Christians in  Egypt,  they  are  not  at  a  general  risk  of
      persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3, ECHR.


      2. However, on current evidence there  are  some  areas  where  Coptic
      Christians will face a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment
      contrary to Article 3. In general these will be (a) areas outside  the
      large cities; (b) where radical Islamists have a strong foothold;  and
      (c) where there have been recent attacks on Coptic Christians or their
      churches, businesses or properties.


      3. On the evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  following  are
      particular risk categories in the sense that those falling within them
      will generally be able to show a real risk of persecution or treatment
      contrary to Article 3, at least in their home area:

           (i) converts to Coptic Christianity;
           (ii)   persons   who   are   involved   in    construction    or
           reconstruction/repair of churches that have been the target  for
           an attack or attacks;
           (iii) those accused of proselytising  where  the  accusation  is
           serious and not casual;
           (iv) those accused of being physically or  emotionally  involved
           with a Muslim woman where the accusation is made  seriously  and
           not casually.

      4. Coptic Christian women in Egypt are not in general at real risk  of
      persecution  or  ill-treatment,  although   they   face   difficulties
      additional to other women, in the form of sometimes being  the  target
      of disappearances, forced abduction and forced conversion.


      5. However, depending on the particular  circumstances  of  the  case,
      Coptic Christian women aged  between  14-25  years  who  lack  a  male
      protector, may be at such risk.


      6. If a claimant is able to establish that in  their  home  area  they
      fall within one or more of the risk categories identified  in  3  (i)-
      (iv) above or that they come from  an  area  where  the  local  Coptic
      population faces a real risk of persecution, it will  not  necessarily
      follow that they qualify as refugees or as beneficiaries of subsidiary
      protection or Article 3 ECHR protection. That will depend  on  whether
      they can show  they  would  not  have  a  viable  internal  relocation
      alternative. In such cases there will  be  need  for  a  fact-specific
      assessment but, in  general  terms,  resettlement  in  an  area  where
      Islamists are not strong would appear to be a viable option.


      7. None of the above necessarily precludes a Coptic Christian in Egypt
      from being able to establish a real risk of persecution or ill-
      treatment in the particular circumstances of their case, e.g. if such
      an individual has been the target of attacks because he or she is a
      Coptic Christian.

The Appellants

Asylum-Related Grounds

152. Insofar  as  the  appellant  and  her  son  rely  on  general  risk  of
    persecution to them as Coptic Christians,  we  have  already  concluded
    their appeals cannot succeed. Their home area is a suburb of Cairo  and
    it is not an area where relative to their numbers Copts  are  currently
    facing severe difficulties.

153. Insofar as the grounds rely on the  first  appellant's  position  as  a
    lone Coptic woman, first of all we cannot  accept  that  she  would  be
    returned as a lone or single woman.  We do not consider she has given a
    credible account about this.  Our reasons are set out below  at  [184]-
    [199] when we consider her Article 8 grounds.  In any  event,  we  have
    not accepted that there is a  general  risk  category  of  lone  Coptic
    women: see above.

154. Insofar as the appellants rely on the second appellant's position as  a
    disabled child, we note that  Ms  Benitez  expressly  stated  that  the
    appellants did not put their case forward as a "health" case  based  on
    there being difficulties in obtaining adequate treatment sufficient  to
    amount to violations of Article 3.  For reasons given below  at  [192]-
    [197] we do not accept, in any case, that the  second  appellant  would
    not have available an adequate level of care for  his  disability.   It
    would not be optimal, but that is not the relevant test.

155. In considering the position of the  appellants  together,  even  taking
    account of their circumstances in  the  round,  so  as  to  include  in
    particular the fact that they would be returning  to  a  country  where
    there are currently very significant  difficulties  facing  the  Coptic
    Christian community and insufficient protection for those at real  risk
    of serious harm, we are not satisfied they have demonstrated  either  a
    real risk of persecution or  serious  harm  or  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3.

Article 8 of the ECHR

156. As we have made clear, the error  of  law  found  by  Designated  Judge
    Shaerf related only to the First-tier Tribunal's findings on the asylum
    and Article 3 claims. Its decision  and  findings  on  Article  8  were
    specifically preserved. Whilst there has been no further  challenge  to
    that decision, we are  asked  to  revisit  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant's removal and that of her son would breach Article 8  on  the
    basis of a change in the family's circumstances. That  change  is  two-
    fold and consists of the grant of indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  17
    April 2012 to the appellant's mother, AA, (a  date  subsequent  to  the
    hearing before the First tier Tribunal judge) and her  claim  that  she
    would not return to Egypt with the appellant and her grandson, and  the
    enrolment of the appellant's son in full-time education in  the  United
    Kingdom. Although Mr Wilding sought to oppose  any  re-opening  of  the
    Article 8 claim, we considered, as noted earlier, that we were bound to
    assess the circumstances at the date of the hearing before us  and,  as
    such, to make findings on the impact of the change in the circumstances
    on the appellant's claim.

157. We would emphasise that there has never been any  suggestion  that  the
    appellant could meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 was pursued only in its wider context. As  a  result  of  the
    Court of Appeal judgment in MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA Civ  1192 we must
    look afresh at the position of the appellant and her son in a two-stage
    way under the Immigration Rules.

158. Accordingly we heard further oral  evidence  from  the  appellant,  her
    mother AA and her brother MS, but on the clear understanding that  that
    evidence was to relate only to events subsequent to the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal and that the findings of  fact  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal continue to be preserved.

159. We set out a general summary of all the  evidence,  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, as follows.

Summary of the Evidence

Evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

160. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal consisted of the record  of
    the appellant's  asylum  interview  of  2  February  2012,  her  appeal
    statement of 21 March 2012 and that of her mother and  brother  of  the
    same date and their oral evidence. Insofar as the Article  8  claim  is
    concerned, we summarise the evidence and the findings of the First-tier
    Tribunal as follows.

Asylum Interview

161. The appellant stated that she was born in Saeed and lived  there  until
    her marriage in 2000, when she moved to Shubra, Cairo. Her father  died
    in 2004 and her mother came to live with her and her  husband  at  that
    time. Her sister lived in Saeed. Her brother MS had lived in the United
    Kingdom for approximately twenty years and was a British citizen.   She
    and her mother were currently staying with him. Her  son  was  born  in
    August 2001 and her husband left her three months after  his  birth  in
    November 2001. She was still legally married to  her  husband  although
    she did not see him at all. They were  unable  to  divorce  because  of
    their Coptic Christian faith. Her mother had travelled  to  the  United
    Kingdom with her and would be returning to her sister in Egypt when her
    visa expired. She could not stay with her sister herself as her  sister
    was married with children. Her son was not permitted to  attend  school
    in Egypt because of his medical condition. He was born  with  water  on
    his brain and had a valve inserted in his brain when he  was  ten  days
    old. He was on a lot of medication and last had an operation  in  Egypt
    in February 2010. She was able to buy his medication from  the  chemist
    without a  prescription  and  it  was  easily  available.  He  was  not
    attending school in the United Kingdom.

The Appellant's Statement of 21 March 2012

162. In a statement produced for her appeal, the appellant gave  details  of
    her son's medical condition, stating that he was so  severely  disabled
    that he did not have much speech but he  understood  quite  a  lot.  He
    could not eat or drink unaided and was incontinent. He could  not  walk
    or move without  help  and  was  partially  blind.  His  hip  had  been
    dislocated during a session of physiotherapy and she had  been  advised
    by doctors that that could not be remedied. Her son was also  epileptic
    and took medication for that condition. In the United  Kingdom  he  was
    able to move around in a wheelchair but in Egypt  he  had  to  be  kept
    indoors, as disability was frowned upon.  He  was  extremely  dependent
    upon her mother and had formed a strong bond with  her.  The  appellant
    stated that she had had three years of unpaid leave after his birth and
    looked after him during that time, but in 2004  she  decided  that  she
    needed more help and so her mother moved in with them. In Egypt she had
    only one cousin and a sister who lived in Northern Cairo where she  was
    a French teacher. Her sister's husband refused to support her  and  her
    son and did not like them staying at his house. Her sister and  husband
    lived in a one-bedroom flat and could not afford to move.  With  regard
    to her husband's flat, where she had  lived  prior  to  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom, she would not be  allowed  to  move  back  in  and  the
    neighbours had told her that her husband had recently taken  possession
    of it and had moved back in. They would have  nowhere  to  go  if  they
    returned to Egypt and had no savings. Her cousin could not  accommodate
    them.

AA's Statement of 21 March 2012

163. The appellant's mother, AA, confirmed that  the  appellant's  statement
    was correct and true. She was no longer able fully to  look  after  her
    grandson because she was frail. She could not carry or move him. He had
    had six operations in total. They  were  very  much  attached  to  each
    other. He had changed a lot since coming to the United Kingdom and  was
    now a happy child.

MS's Statement of 21 March 2012

164. The appellant's brother, MS, confirmed that the  appellant's  statement
    was correct and true. He said that aside from a cousin  and  a  sister,
    they had no family in Egypt. The appellant would have no support and no
    income to return to. He could support her in  the  United  Kingdom  but
    could not afford to pay for a carer for  her  son  and  for  all  their
    living expenses.

Oral Evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

165. The oral evidence of the appellant, AA and MS  is  summarised  in  some
    detail  at  paragraphs  27  to  50   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination.

166. The appellant, in response to an enquiry as to why a  UK  BUPA  medical
    report produced in support of the appeal referred to a  court  case  in
    Egypt, stated that she had commenced proceedings in a court in Cairo to
    order her husband to pay compensation to  her  and  child  support  for
    their child. The case was still ongoing. She was not aware of any plans
    to raise a court case from England, although there had been neglect  by
    the hospital. With regard to her son, she would be able to  obtain  the
    required medication for him through her connections.  Her  brother  had
    assisted her with paying for the medication. Prior  to  leaving  Egypt,
    she had lived in a flat owned by  her  husband  and  was  living  there
    legally as she was her son's caretaker. According to the judiciary  she
    could stay there until further notice. A neighbour had  told  her  that
    her husband had taken over the flat when he  found  out  that  she  had
    left.

167. The appellant's mother, AA,  stated  that  it  was  only  her  and  the
    appellant who cared for her grandson.

168. The appellant's brother, MS, stated that he was present at the time  of
    the BUPA medical examination and that the reference  to  submission  of
    the report to a court in Egypt was not correct. The report was intended
    for submission to a court in the United Kingdom. The doctor who saw the
    appellant's son gave some hope of further  treatment  with  a  view  to
    enabling him to start walking, but that would take a long time. He  had
    been supporting the appellant financially and would continue to  do  so
    within his limits. He worked as a director of a company  importing  and
    exporting fruit and vegetables and also as  the  director  of  a  hotel
    company.  The  appellant's  son  had  been   seen   in   Egypt   by   a
    physiotherapist and a neurosurgeon, paid for privately by  himself  and
    the appellant. With regard to the court case in Cairo, it had taken too
    long and the appellant would get nothing from her husband.  The  family
    had  no  relationship  with  her  husband.  He  had  been  informed  by
    neighbours that her husband now occupied the flat where she had  lived.
    They had not divorced because divorced women were looked down  upon  in
    their community.

Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

169. The  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  a  "concerning"  discrepancy  in  the
    evidence about the purpose and preparation of the BUPA  medical  report
    for the son, in that the report referred to  the  family  looking  into
    submitting reports from various consultations in London to a  Court  in
    Egypt, but the appellant denied there being any such plans and referred
    only to the current court action in Cairo about compensation and  child
    support. The appellant's brother had added further confusion as he said
    that the reference to the submission of medical reports to a  court  in
    Egypt was a mistake. The Tribunal  accordingly  had  doubts  about  the
    appellant's intentions when the report was prepared. The Tribunal found
    that the appellant had accommodation in  Egypt  protected  by  judicial
    proceedings in order to provide for a home for her son  and  that  that
    accommodation would be available to her on return to Egypt.

170. The Tribunal did not accept  that  family  life  had  been  established
    between the appellant and her brother MS and neither  did  they  accept
    that private life had  been  established.  However,  they  went  on  to
    consider proportionality in the alternative and found as follows:  that
    the appellant and her son had been in the United  Kingdom  for  only  a
    short period of time and the appellant had always been fully aware that
    she did not  have  settled  status  here;  that  the  appellant  had  a
    protected right to remain in her accommodation in Egypt because of  her
    son;  that  there  was  ongoing  court  action   in   Egypt   regarding
    compensation and maintenance; that the appellant's job was  still  open
    to her in Egypt; that whilst her son had significant disabilities,  the
    appellant was able to care for him  and  had  not  had  any  difficulty
    obtaining medication for him in Egypt; that the evidence did  not  show
    that the appellant's son's life expectancy  or  developmental  progress
    would be reduced or limited by return to Egypt and that the appellant's
    brother MS would continue to provide the appellant  and  her  son  with
    financial  support.  The  Tribunal   agreed   with   the   respondent's
    conclusion, that the appellant's son's best  interests  would  be  best
    served by returning with her to Egypt and that if AA chose to remain in
    the United Kingdom any separation would be a matter  of  choice  rather
    than of necessity. The Tribunal concluded that the appellant's  removal
    to Egypt and that of her son would not be in breach of Article 8.

Evidence and Submissions before the Upper Tribunal

The Appellant's Statement of 29 July 2013

171. The appellant relied upon her previous statement and  gave  details  of
    the changes to her circumstances since coming to  the  United  Kingdom.
    She stated that her son had changed a lot and had started to  integrate
    in society and make friends and acquaintances outside the family  which
    he had not done previously. He had received various forms of treatment:
    he had been given glasses; he had had  some  teeth  removed  which  had
    improved his speech; he had received physiotherapy to soften the muscle
    in his left leg which would then enable him to  have  an  operation  to
    move the bones. He had been attending school for one month and was in a
    class for children with special needs and loved school. His  confidence
    had increased. In Egypt he was  not  able  to  go  to  school  and  was
    confined to the house. The appellant said that she  had  not  seen  her
    husband since three months after their  son's  birth  and  had  had  no
    contact with him at all since  that  time.  She  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom with her mother and her brother's family. Her mother took  care
    of her son some of the time and they were very close. He  got  on  well
    with  her  brother's  children.  Her  husband's  house  was  no  longer
    available to her in Egypt as he had repossessed  it.  She  had  only  a
    sister and cousin in Egypt and her sister's husband had made  it  clear
    that she could not go to live with them and would not support them.

AA's Statement of 29 July 2013

172. AA relied on her previous statement. She confirmed that  she  had  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.  She  lived
    with her son and his wife and children, together with the appellant and
    her grandson. She still cared for her grandson some  of  the  time  and
    would wash him and  feed  him  and  speak  with  him.  He  had  changed
    considerably since coming to the United Kingdom. He had got much better
    since starting school and had started socialising. He  spoke  more  and
    was generally happier. He was not happy in Egypt and could  not  go  to
    school. He went out only to attend church once a week. She  would  stay
    in the United Kingdom if the appellant and her grandson had  to  return
    to Egypt, as she was on medication and was dependent upon her son.

MS's Statement of 29 July 2013

173. MS stated that the appellant and her son and his mother lived with  him
    and his wife and children in  the  United  Kingdom.  He  and  his  wife
    assisted the appellant in the care of her son and the appellant and his
    mother helped  him  and  his  wife  looking  after  his  children.  The
    appellant's son had changed a lot and was thriving in  school  and  had
    come out of his shell. He was starting to speak some English.

The Appellant's Statement of 17 September 2013

174. The appellant relied on her previous statements and sought  to  clarify
    differences between her evidence in her statements and the  information
    provided in her visa application  form.  She  had  used  a  translation
    office to prepare the application forms as she did  not  speak  English
    and had answered the questions put to her. On her son's application  it
    stated that he was a student, but he had in fact never been  to  school
    in Egypt. She had merely been told to give the name of something and so
    had named the [day care] because that was where he had  attended  as  a
    baby. The institute was a kind  of  day  care  centre  for  very  young
    children with physical disabilities but it was not a  school.  She  had
    attempted to enrol him in  three  different  schools  when  he  reached
    school age, but none had accepted him. With regard to  the  information
    in her application form, she had told the translation company that  she
    was married, because that was still the case, but the agency must  have
    presumed that she was still living with her husband  as  was  usual  in
    Egypt. She was not specifically asked if she was living with  him.  She
    did not want to say that she was separated  from  her  husband  because
    that was frowned upon.  She  had  not  lived  with  her  husband  since
    approximately  three  months  after  the  birth  of  their   son.   The
    translation agency must also have assumed that  her  husband  would  be
    paying for her travel to the United Kingdom,  as  that  was  normal  in
    Egypt, but she had stated that only she and her  brother  were  funding
    her trip.

The Appellant's Oral Evidence

175. The appellant relied on her previous three statements.  She  said  that
    the school her son was attending had a mixture of ordinary and  special
    needs children. Her son had radically changed since  attending  school.
    His pronunciation of words had greatly  improved  and  his  ability  to
    engage in conversation had developed  considerably.   He  had  a  great
    social life and had integrated  with  the  other  children  and  formed
    friendships. He could move his right hand as a result of  physiotherapy
    and could eat by himself. He was happy that he was learning English and
    he looked forward to music lessons. Generally it was the case in  Egypt
    that neither state nor  private  schools  provided  any  resources  for
    children  with  learning  difficulties.  Private  schools   were   very
    expensive and could cost about 25,000 pounds a  term,  whilst  she  had
    earned at the most 1500 pounds a month. In Egypt they had generally not
    gone out of the house, except to attend church on Sundays. On occasions
    some teachers would attend the church and give her son some lessons. It
    was difficult for them to go out as the pavements were not designed for
    wheelchairs and she would be exposed to sexual harassment.  There  were
    no facilities for disabled people on public transport.

176. The appellant said that it  would  be  nearly  impossible  for  her  to
    return to her work in Egypt as she had left  suddenly  because  of  the
    problems she was facing and the school was full of Islamists. It  would
    be difficult also from the point of view that  her  son  would  not  be
    accepted into any schools and she would have to be  available  to  care
    for him. It would also break his heart if he had to  be  taken  out  of
    school here. He had no friends in Egypt and was isolated. Her  son  was
    very close to her mother and considered her as another  mother  and  it
    would be very difficult to go back there without her.

177. When cross-examined the appellant confirmed that she had  a  cousin  in
    Nasser City in Cairo but, when asked why he could not assist her,  said
    that he held dual Egyptian and American nationality and  was  currently
    in the USA. He would not offer her help in  Egypt,  in  any  event.  He
    worked in Egypt but was always travelling between Egypt  and  USA.  She
    was not sure when he last went to the USA and was not really in contact
    with him. Her sister's husband had made it clear that she and  her  son
    could not live with them as he could not afford to be  responsible  for
    them and it was a burden to look  after  a  special  needs  child.  Her
    sister and her husband lived in Suhaj, in Upper Egypt  and  had  always
    lived there. Her evidence in her statement that  her  sister  lived  in
    Cairo was wrong. Her sister lived in an apartment complex on the fourth
    floor and there  was  no  lift  for  the  wheelchair.  In  response  to
    questions about the information given  in  her  visa  application,  the
    appellant again said that the translation  company  must  have  assumed
    that she lived with her husband and that he was paying for her trip, as
    that was the culture there. Her husband would not give  her  money  for
    her son's medication and  was  ashamed  of  him.  With  regard  to  the
    information on her son's application form, she had had to  state,  when
    getting a passport, that he was in school as she could be  charged  for
    not having him in school and the translation company must have got  the
    information from the passport.

178. When asked about the court case mentioned in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination, the appellant said that the case was  about  maintenance
    and divorce. Her husband had requested permission from the church for a
    divorce  but  had  been  refused.  She  had  taken  him  to  court  for
    maintenance payments but there had been no  progress  as  the  judicial
    proceedings were on hold in Egypt owing to the conflict and the setting
    on fire of lots of the courts. With regard to the flat in which she had
    been living in Egypt, she said initially that it  was  legally  in  her
    name but her husband had entered it and was squatting there,  but  when
    asked to clarify that evidence, she said that the flat was in his  name
    but he had left it and moved in with his parents whilst she and her son
    were living there. He had now returned to the flat.

179. The appellant said that her son had attended the [day  care]  until  he
    was three years  of  age.  He  had  received  physiotherapy  there.  He
    attended for one year and from then on  had  no  education  whatsoever,
    aside from some lessons given at the church. She had tried to  get  him
    into various schools but they would only take him if he could stand  up
    with crutches, which he could not do.  There  were  Coptic  schools  in
    Cairo but they were private and  very  expensive.  When  asked  if  the
    courts had awarded her accommodation in the flat, she  said  that  they
    had not and that she had only been able to live there  because  of  the
    circumstances. Her husband had kicked her out once but  her  uncle  had
    managed to persuade him to let her return. That had occurred a year and
    a half after her marriage, after the birth of her son. Her uncle was no
    longer alive. She had been thrown out  of  the  house  by  her  husband
    several times and he had physically abused her as well.

AA's Oral Evidence

180. The appellant's mother, AA, said that her grandson  had  changed  since
    attending school and was able to feed himself and spoke a  lot  clearer
    and enjoyed games with other children. He was  not  allowed  to  attend
    school in Egypt as he could not stand, even with crutches. Her daughter
    and grandson could not return  to  their  flat  in  Egypt  because  her
    husband had repossessed it and had probably sold it by now. When cross-
    examined she  said  that  they  had  received  a  telephone  call  from
    neighbours who told them that they had not seen him at the flat because
    he had sold it.  He had another key. AA said that the only  family  she
    had in Egypt was her brother-in-law's children. They  lived  in  Cairo.
    She then said that she was not sure if they were currently in Egypt  as
    they could be in the USA staying  with  their  brother.  There  was  no
    contact with the appellant's husband. When re-examined,  AA  said  that
    she had a daughter in Suhaj but the appellant could not live  with  her
    because there were a lot of  Islamic  terrorists  there.  Her  daughter
    could not move to Cairo because her husband was a doctor and could  not
    transfer his work. In response to our further enquiries, AA  said  that
    it was correct that there were incidents when the  appellant's  husband
    threw her out of the  flat.  It  happened  after  2002  and  2003.  She
    confirmed that it was one and a half years after her grandson was born.

MS's Oral Evidence

181. MS said that the appellant's child had completely changed and was self-
    confident and sociable. He had attended a health centre in Egypt, where
    he had physiotherapy, but had only been there for a year until  he  was
    three years old. He could not go to school. MS said that he  had  tried
    to find a private school for children with disabilities but there  were
    none. He needed to be independent and to walk with crutches. His mother
    had moved in with the appellant after the death of his father, so  that
    she could go back to work. The appellant's son was very attached to his
    mother. The flat where they were living in Egypt was in  her  husband's
    name and after they left the neighbours told them  that  he  had  taken
    over it. He did not know if he had sold it.  The  appellant  could  not
    live with their sister as she had no children and her husband was  very
    sensitive and did not like noise or having children around. His  sister
    had refused to have them  living  there.  MS  said  that  he  had  been
    supporting the appellant and her son and would continue to do so for as
    long as he could. They had a cousin living in Nasser City but he  could
    not assist them. With regard to the court case in Egypt, the court  had
    refused the appellant's husband permission to divorce her and  she  had
    asked for maintenance but he was not sure if she got any.  Her  husband
    stopped giving her money and the court case  ended  after  one  or  two
    payments. He thought that the court case was closed before she came  to
    the United Kingdom. He did not know anything about judicial proceedings
    allowing her to remain in the property.

Submissions

182. Mr Wilding submitted that the changes in the appellants'  circumstances
    since the First-tier Tribunal's decision had not altered  the  position
    as regards Article 8. The First-tier Tribunal had made findings on  the
    basis that the appellants' removal would involve a  separation  between
    the second appellant and his grandmother and the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain did not, therefore, change the  situation.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal had made significant adverse credibility findings against
    the appellant, finding that she had accommodation available to  her  in
    Egypt. The education upon which the second appellant  had  embarked  in
    the United Kingdom was relatively recent. There was no question of  him
    not receiving medical treatment in Egypt. Education was a factor in the
    consideration of  best  interests,  but  that  was  only  part  of  the
    proportionality exercise. The evidence about the court proceedings  was
    very confusing. It was  difficult  to  know  where  the  truth  lay  in
    particular as regards the appellant's husband. Her explanation for  the
    evidence contained in her visa application form was not credible. There
    were inconsistencies in the evidence about her  family  in  Egypt.  The
    only finding that the Tribunal could make was that  the  appellant  was
    not telling the truth. The appellant and  her  son  would  be  able  to
    return to Egypt. There was evidence of special needs  education  there.
    The  evidence  of  MS  was  that  he  was  currently  able  to   assist
    financially. Removal would not be disproportionate.

183. Ms  Benitez  submitted  that  the  primary  findings,  which  were  not
    undermined by the adverse credibility findings, were that the  son  and
    his grandmother had an unusually strong bond, that  she  had  been  his
    main carer since 2004 and that she was like a mother to  him;  that  AA
    would not return to Egypt as she was elderly and ill  and  would  be  a
    burden on the first appellant and  that  there  would  therefore  be  a
    separation between them; and that the son had had no schooling in Egypt
    and would not have schooling available to him. It  was  unrealistic  to
    suggest that he could have a shadow teacher at a special needs  school,
    as referred to in the IPS report, and in any event that  would  prevent
    him having contact with his peers, an integral part of his development.
    The idea of having a tutor was vague and there was no evidence to  show
    that tutors would be available or  that  that  would  be  a  sufficient
    substitute for school. Ms Benitez conceded that the son's health  needs
    were not  part  of  the  consideration  as  he  would  have  access  to
    facilities in Egypt. It was not in the son's best  interests  to  leave
    his school in the United Kingdom. The  appellant  would  have  to  look
    after him in Egypt and would therefore be unable to work. The  evidence
    about accommodation was not inconsistent and it  had  always  been  the
    evidence that the flat in which they were living was in the appellant's
    husband's name. That was consistent  with  the  background  information
    about women's rights in  Egypt.  Her  evidence  about  the  information
    contained  in  the  visa  application  forms  was  plausible  and   was
    consistent with the reports showing the stigmatisation of divorced  and
    separated women. The appellant was not receiving  maintenance.  Removal
    would be in breach of Article 8.

Our findings on Article 8 of the ECHR

184. The effect of the changed circumstances since the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal is that the appellants' Article 8 claim is  pursued
    primarily on the basis of the family life established by the  son  with
    his grandmother, AA, and the private life he  has  established  in  the
    United Kingdom. With regard to the former, the First-tier Tribunal  did
    not  make  specific  findings  on  family  life  between  him  and  his
    grandmother, but considered in any event that any interference would be
    through choice, given that it was open to her to return to  Egypt  with
    the appellants. We  accept,  on  the  basis  that  the  son  has  lived
    continuously with AA since 2004 and that she has provided  a  level  of
    care for him jointly  with  the  appellant,  that  family  life  exists
    between them. Proceeding on the basis that AA would not return to Egypt
    with the appellants (although we cannot be entirely sure that  that  is
    the case), the appellants' removal would clearly  interfere  with  that
    family life. With regard to the latter, there is no doubt that  removal
    would interfere with the son's private life, and accordingly also  with
    the private life of the appellant, in the United Kingdom. The issue  in
    this case is thus one of proportionality.

185. As case law has established, a  primary  consideration  when  assessing
    proportionality is the best interests of the child, in  this  case  the
    son. The starting point in the  case  of  the  son,  which  is  not  in
    dispute, is that his best interests lie in remaining with  his  mother,
    the appellant, his main carer. However, it is claimed  that  she  would
    not be able to care and provide for him in Egypt and  that  accordingly
    his best interests lie in remaining with her  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    where he would have access to  all  necessary  resources  in  terms  of
    family support, accommodation, educational and developmental needs.

186.  Turning  first  of  all  to  the  question  of  family   support   and
    accommodation, it is the case that the appellants live  in  the  United
    Kingdom with MS who provides for  them  financially  and  with  AA  who
    assists with the son's basic needs such as feeding him. It is  claimed,
    however, that in the event that they are required to return  to  Egypt,
    although MS would continue  to  provide  financial  assistance  to  the
    limits of his ability, bearing in mind his own family responsibilities,
    they would have nowhere to live and no further source of  income  owing
    to  the  appellant's  inability  to  work.  We   have   given   careful
    consideration to that claim, which we note is based on little more than
    the oral evidence of the witnesses. Unfortunately, however, we find the
    oral testimonies of the witnesses to be  lacking  in  reliability,  not
    only on the basis of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, but  also
    on the basis  of  the  inconsistent  and  contradictory  evidence  they
    presented before us.

187. It is the appellant's claim that her estranged husband had  taken  over
    the flat that she and her son had previously occupied with her  mother,
    following their departure from the country. That was  her  case  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and remained her case before us. The First-tier
    Tribunal, having noted inconsistencies in the evidence before  them  in
    that regard, concluded that the appellants had accommodation  available
    to them which had been secured by way of judicial proceedings. We  find
    no reason to depart from the finding that  the  accommodation  remained
    available to the appellants.  The  evidence  before  us  regarding  the
    current situation was equally  inconsistent,  with  differing  accounts
    given from each of the three witnesses. The appellant  maintained  that
    she had been informed by neighbours that her husband had moved into the
    flat and it was  her  understanding  that  he  was  living  there.  Her
    evidence was initially that the flat was legally in her  name  but  her
    husband had occupied it. She then changed that account when  asked  for
    clarification and said that it was in his name but that they had had  a
    right to stay there by law whilst they remained in Egypt, a right  they
    had lost following their departure. Her mother's evidence, however, was
    that the neighbours had informed them that her  husband  had  sold  the
    flat and that he had not been seen there.  The third witness,  MS,  was
    not sure if the appellant's husband had taken over the flat  or  if  he
    had sold it.

188. Indeed, the entire account of the  appellant's  relationship  with  her
    husband and the status of their marriage was  full  of  contradictions.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not make specific findings  on  the  matter
    but it is clear from its references to court proceedings in relation to
    maintenance that it proceeded on the basis that  the  claim  that  they
    were separated was not a  matter  of  dispute.  However,  the  evidence
    produced before us raises further issues in that regard. Of  particular
    note is the information provided in the  appellants'  visa  application
    forms, dated 26 June 2011, in  which  the  appellant  stated  that  her
    husband currently lived with her and that he was to pay for her  travel
    to the United Kingdom. That was supported by the reference in the son's
    application form to the financial support provided by his parents.  The
    appellant's explanation, that the information was provided on the basis
    of assumptions made by the agent who completed the  application  forms,
    is not one that we can accept, given that other recorded answers in the
    appellant's visa application form referred to payments to  be  made  by
    her brother. We also bear  in  mind  the  overall  adverse  credibility
    findings made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  other  contradictions
    arising between the first appellant's evidence in her statement  of  29
    July 2013 and her evidence before us as to the contact she had had with
    her husband. Whilst her evidence at paragraph 4 of  her  statement  was
    that she had not seen her husband or had any  contact  with  him  since
    three months after the birth of  the  second  appellant,  her  evidence
    before us was that her husband had  thrown  her  out  of  the  flat  on
    several occasions after the birth of their son but they had  reconciled
    following the intervention of an uncle. Her mother  AA  confirmed  that
    that occurred a year and a half after the birth of her son and  several
    times since then in 2002 and 2003.

189. With regard to the question of court  proceedings  in  Egypt,  we  note
    that that arose before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  a  result  of  a
    reference in a letter dated 21 March 2012 from  BUPA  to  reports  from
    medical consultations being obtained  for  submission  to  a  court  in
    Egypt. The First-tier Tribunal noted  inconsistencies  arising  between
    the evidence of the appellant and MS in regard to the  purpose  of  the
    medical report and in regard to court proceedings for  maintenance  and
    compensation  in  Egypt.  The  evidence   before   us   was   similarly
    inconsistent, with the appellant claiming that such proceedings were on
    hold as a result of the conflict in Egypt and remained unresolved,  but
    with MS claiming that the case was closed after  his  sister's  husband
    ceased making payments of support.

190. Further inconsistencies  arose  in  the  evidence  about  other  family
    members living in Egypt. It was common  ground  between  the  witnesses
    that the appellant had a  sister  and  a  cousin  there,  although  the
    evidence as to whether the cousin was permanently residing in Egypt  or
    whether he  was  in  the  USA  differed  between  the  witnesses.  More
    significant, however, was the inconsistent evidence about  her  sister.
    In her asylum interview the appellant stated that her sister  lived  in
    Sohag, as was the claim of all three witnesses in the  evidence  before
    us. However we note that the evidence in her statement of 21 March 2012
    before the First-tier Tribunal, as confirmed in the  statements  of  AA
    and MS, was that her sister lived in Northern Cairo. Different  reasons
    were given as to why the appellants could not live  with  her  if  they
    returned to Egypt. The appellant said that her sister's  husband  could
    not afford to be responsible for her son and that the accommodation was
    unsuitable for him since they lived in a fourth floor apartment without
    a lift. The reason given by AA was that  the  sister's  husband  was  a
    doctor and could not move from Sohag because of his work and  that  she
    would not wish her daughter to live there because of  the  presence  of
    Islamic terrorists. The reason given by MS was that his sister and  her
    husband had no children and  that  her  husband  did  not  like  to  be
    disturbed by the noise of children. That in turn does  not  sit  easily
    with the appellant's response to question 126 of  her  interview,  that
    she could not live  with  her  sister  because  she  was  married  with
    children.

191. Having regard to such  highly  discrepant  evidence  we  find  that  we
    cannot be satisfied that we have been  presented  with  a  genuine  and
    reliable account of the circumstances to  which  the  appellants  would
    return in Egypt. The evidence simply does not support  the  claim  that
    there is no accommodation or family support available to them on return
    or even that the appellant would be returning  to  Egypt  as  a  single
    woman without the presence and support of a spouse. We  do  not  accept
    that they would be returning to the situation  claimed  and  find  that
    there would, at the  very  least,  and  even  on  the  basis  that  the
    circumstances of the marriage were as claimed, be support available  to
    them from family members. We do not accept that the appellant would  be
    unable to find employment. The First-tier Tribunal did not  accept  her
    claim in regard to her problems at her  place  of  work  and  were  not
    satisfied that her job as a teacher would no  longer  be  available  to
    her. Whilst we accept that the general security situation in Egypt  has
    deteriorated since the Tribunal made their decision and whilst we  have
    accepted, to the extent stated, the difficulties faced  by  the  Coptic
    Christian community, we do not find that the evidence demonstrates that
    she would not be able to find work. We note that in  the  school  where
    she worked  previously  there  were  several  other  Coptic  Christians
    employed there. However, even if it were the case that the  absence  of
    AA would prevent her from returning to employment,  we  find  that  the
    appellants would have adequate means of support through  the  financial
    assistance of MS and other family members in Egypt.

192. We turn next to the impact on the son of returning to Egypt,  in  terms
    of his education and development. We note that the Article 8 claim  has
    never been pursued on the  grounds  of  absence  of  medical  care  and
    treatment and Ms Benitez confirmed that that remained the case.

193. The son suffers from various medical conditions which are  detailed  in
    a report dated 23 July 2012 from  Ealing  Hospital  and  which  include
    congenital hydrocephalus and cerebral palsy.   As  a  result  of  those
    conditions he has severely delayed development and  is  confined  to  a
    wheelchair.  Since the end of April 2013 he has been  attending  school
    and a report on his progress has been submitted in  evidence.  Although
    we have not been provided with any other evidence of his  developmental
    progress, we note the evidence of  the  first  appellant  that  he  has
    developed substantially  since  commencing  school,  in  terms  of  his
    pronunciation  of  words,  his  engagement  in  conversation  and   his
    integration with his peer group and that as a result  of  physiotherapy
    his range of movement has increased.  He is now able to move his  right
    hand and feed himself and is extremely happy at school. It  is  claimed
    that he had no access to education in Egypt and  that,  as  a  disabled
    child who was not able to move independently, he was  denied  entry  to
    schools and lived a solitary life, leaving  his  home  only  to  attend
    church and Sunday classes.

194. Reliance is placed upon the findings of the Upper Tribunal in the  case
    of MK (best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 475  with  regard  to
    the impact on the best interests of the son of being  deprived  of  the
    educational and developmental opportunities available  to  him  in  the
    United Kingdom. Particular reference is made to paragraph 41 of MK:

         "When it comes to the  subject  of  education  in  the  context  of
         Article 8 we must consider a child's  educational  development  and
         also the issue of any "loss of educational opportunities" (para  30
         of ZH (Tanzania)), so as to pay proper regard to  how  his  or  her
         educational progress is likely to be affected in a broad sense  and
         not just in the short-term. That entails in this case having regard
         not only to the children's past and present educational setting but
         also  to  the  educational  setting  likely  to  confront  them  if
         returned to their country of origin."

195. The evidence before us in regard to facilities  available  to  disabled
    children in Egypt is extremely limited. It comprises little  more  than
    an Inter Press Service report entitled "Egypt: Looking  Away  from  the
    Disabled" which we accept paints a dismal picture of the circumstances,
    although we note that that report dates back to April 2010 and has  not
    been supported by more recent information. The report is based, for the
    most part, upon extracts  from  an  interview  with  Hanaa  Helmy,  the
    regional coordinator of MOVE Middle East, a NGO working to improve  the
    mobility of children with severe disabilities. Whilst we note that  the
    report supports the claim that disabled children encounter difficulties
    accessing education in public and private schools, we also note that it
    refers to state schools for special needs children, albeit stating that
    such schools may require parents to hire a shadow  teacher  at  a  cost
    that many could not afford. It is thus clear that such  schools  exist.
    Indeed, whilst the appellant has maintained throughout the  proceedings
    that her son received no education or schooling in Egypt, her claim was
    contradicted by the information provided in the second appellant's visa
    application form referring to him currently being a student at the [day
    care]. The first appellant's explanation was that she was  required  to
    provide some information of education and that  her  son  had,  in  the
    past, attended that institute, which was no more than a day care centre
    for very young children with physical  disabilities,  as  a  baby.  Her
    evidence before us, and that of her mother  and  brother,  is  that  he
    attended there for one year until the age of three. However in view  of
    the unreliability of her evidence and that of the  witnesses  in  other
    respects as outlined above, we  simply  cannot  be  satisfied,  on  the
    limited evidence before us, that we have been told the truth about  her
    son's inability to access any form of education and schooling in  Egypt
    since the age of three. Indeed, given that the lack of such  facilities
    largely forms the basis for the appellants' Article 8 claim  and  given
    the claimed  severity  of  the  circumstances  in  Egypt  for  disabled
    children, we  are  somewhat  surprised  that  such  little  documentary
    evidence was produced.

196.  Nevertheless,  mindful  of  the  difficulties  faced  by  those   with
    disabilities, as referred to in the IPS report, we proceed on the basis
    that access to educational  and  developmental  opportunities  for  the
    second appellant in Egypt would fall well short of those  available  to
    him in the United Kingdom. We do not, however, accept that he would  be
    denied any form of education in Egypt and consider that  the  appellant
    would have a level of financial assistance available to her to  provide
    at the very least home schooling for her son. She has been involved  in
    the teaching profession herself for many years in  Egypt,  as  was  her
    father, and we consider that she would  have  the  contacts  and  tools
    available to  her  to  provide  her  son  with  an  adequate  level  of
    educational and developmental care.

197. Taking all of the above into consideration, in particular the level  of
    care available to the son in terms of his education and development and
    immediate family support, and  considering  also  the  current  general
    situation  of  unrest  and  in  particular  that  facing   the   Coptic
    communities in Egypt, and despite the adverse findings we have made, we
    are willing to accept, on  balance,  that  it  would  be  in  the  best
    interests of the son to remain in the United Kingdom with the appellant
    and his grandmother AA, although,  as  we  have  outlined,  we  do  not
    consider that his welfare in Egypt would be neglected. However, that is
    clearly not the end of the matter and is only  one,  albeit  a  primary
    consideration, in assessing proportionality.

198. The appellants are Egyptian citizens and have cultural,  religious  and
    linguistic ties with Egypt. For the reasons given above, we have  found
    that they would not be  at  risk  on  return  on  the  basis  of  their
    religion. They have family remaining there and  we  are  not  satisfied
    that those family ties are as limited as the appellants claim.  On  the
    contrary, we have found that the appellants  would  have  accommodation
    and family support available to them. We note, as  accepted,  that  the
    son has had access to more than adequate medical treatment in Egypt and
    it is not disputed that such treatment would be  available  to  him  on
    return. Whilst we accept that family life has been established  between
    the son and his grandmother and  that  the  appellants'  removal  would
    result in their separation,  we  see  no  reason  to  depart  from  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal that that separation has an element
    of choice and would not in any event be disproportionate.  Although  AA
    has now been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  and  whilst  the
    appellants' grounds of appeal assert that the decision for AA to remain
    in the United Kingdom ought not to be  considered  as  one  of  choice,
    given her ill-health and age, the fact remains that  she  came  to  the
    United Kingdom as  a  visitor  and,  at  the  time  the  appellant  was
    interviewed about her asylum claim, it was  her  claimed  intention  to
    return to Egypt. In any event, on the basis of the evidence of AA's own
    care needs, it is clear that the level of care that she is able to give
    the son is limited and, whilst  their  separation  may  be  emotionally
    difficult, it cannot be considered to be disproportionate in the  light
    of all the circumstances.

199. We bear in mind the weight to be attached to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining a firm but fair immigration control. The appellants came to
    the United Kingdom as visitors with a stated intention of returning  to
    Egypt and have no other basis of  stay  here.  They  do  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  They  have  been  here  for  a
    relatively short period of time, of still less than two  years.  Whilst
    the son has commenced schooling here and is  said  to  be  content  and
    progressing well, he has in fact  been  in  attendance  for  only  five
    months to date. The appellant has presented a claim  for  asylum  which
    has been comprehensively disbelieved. She has been untruthful about her
    ties  to  Egypt  and  has  given  an  account  which  is  significantly
    contradicted by the information she provided when  applying  for  entry
    clearance. Although  we  have  the  utmost  sympathy  for  her  in  the
    situation in which she finds herself in terms of her  son's  needs  and
    the responsibilities that that entails, and similarly for her  son  who
    appears to be happy  and  settled  at  school,  we  must  consider  the
    circumstances within the confines of the law. We find that the  balance
    has to fall in favour of removal and that requiring the  appellants  to
    return to Egypt would not put the United Kingdom in breach of Article 8
    of the ECHR.

200. We re-make the decision as follows:

 The appellants' appeals are dismissed on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
(Articles 3 and 8 ECHR). The appellants are not entitled  to  the  grant  of
humanitarian protection.

201. The writing of this determination is one to which  each  of  the  panel
    has contributed.



Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

                                 APPENDIX A

               Documentary Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

| Item| Document                                           | Date            |
|     |Assyrian International News Agency (AINA), "Two     |13 September 2013|
|     |Christians Murdered in Egypt for Refusing to Pay    |                 |
|     |Jizya to Muslims" by Mary Abdelmassih               |                 |
|     |http://www.aina.org/news/20130913143703.htm         |                 |
|     |Washington Times, "Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood to    |10 September 2013|
|     |Coptic Christians: Convert to Islam, or pay 'jizya' |                 |
|     |tax" by Jessica Chasmar                             |                 |
|     |http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2013/sep/10/egyp|                 |
|     |ts-muslim-brotherhood-convert-islam-or-pay-jiz/print|                 |
|     |/                                                   |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch, "Egypt: Mass Attacks on         |22 August 2013   |
|     |Churches"                                           |                 |
|     |The Guardian, "Egypt's Coptic Christians report     |15 August 2013   |
|     |fresh attacks on churches"                          |                 |
|     |United Nations Press Release, "Statement by Mr.     |15 August 2013   |
|     |Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the  |                 |
|     |Prevention of Genocide, and Ms. Jennifer Welsh,     |                 |
|     |United Nations Special Adviser on the Responsibility|                 |
|     |to Protect, on the situation in Egypt"              |                 |
|     |BBC News, "Egypt's Coptic Christians dread further  |12 August 2013   |
|     |backlash" by Caroline Wyatt                         |                 |
|     |http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-23662698|                 |
|     |BBC News, "Egypt" Article                           |9 August 2013    |
|     |Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies, "Islamist |7 August 2013    |
|     |Groups Must Stop Inciting Sectarian Violence;       |                 |
|     |Protection of Christians Responsibility of the      |                 |
|     |State"                                              |                 |
|     |Foreign & Commonwealth Office (Egypt Desk) letter   |5 August 2013    |
|     |Amnesty International, "Egypt: Security forces      |23 July 2013     |
|     |abandon Coptic Christians during deadly attack in   |                 |
|     |Luxor"                                              |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch, "Egypt: Sectarian Attacks Amid  |23 July 2013     |
|     |Political Crisis"                                   |                 |
|     |Amnesty International, "Egypt: 'There was no door on|23 July 2013     |
|     |which I did not knock': Coptic Christians caught in |                 |
|     |attacks and state's failures"                       |                 |
|     |World Watch Monitor USA, "Pro-Morsi backlash turns  |18 July 2013     |
|     |deadly for some Christian Communities"              |                 |
|     |BBC News, "Egypt's Coptic Christians pay price of   |17 July 2013     |
|     |political tumult"                                   |                 |
|     |http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-23337659|                 |
|     |Barnabas Aid (UK), "Kidnapped Christian man found   |16 July 2013     |
|     |beheaded in Egypt amid Islamist backlash"           |                 |
|     |Aid to the Church in Need (UK) "Egypt: UK head of   |16 July 2013     |
|     |Aid to the Church in Need appeals for peace after   |                 |
|     |sudden increase in attacks on Christians"           |                 |
|     |Voice of the Copts, "Egypt Christians Greet         |15 July 2013     |
|     |Revolution Against Muslim Brotherhood" by Peter     |                 |
|     |Jesserer Smit                                       |                 |
|     |http://www.voiceofthecopts.org/index.php/categories/|                 |
|     |op-eds/10521-egypt-christians-greet-revolution-again|                 |
|     |st-muslim-brotherhood                               |                 |
|     |WJLA, "Coptic Christians escape religious           |9 July 2013      |
|     |persecution in Egypt"                               |                 |
|     |Morning Star News, "Christians in Egypt Fearful     |8 July 2013      |
|     |after Five Copts Killed"                            |                 |
|     |The Independent, "Now Egypt's Christians targeted in|7 July 2013      |
|     |sectarian violence"                                 |                 |
|     |The Independent, "Egypt analysis: Post-Morsi chaos  |7 July 2013      |
|     |is the moment the Salafist Al-Nour Party has waited |                 |
|     |for"                                                |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch, "Egypt: Threat of Escalating    |7 July 2013      |
|     |Street Violence"                                    |                 |
|     |Morning Star News, "Morsi Supporters Attack         |6 July 2013      |
|     |Christian Targets in Egypt after Removal of         |                 |
|     |President"                                          |                 |
|     |The Telegraph, "Egypt: Coptic Christian priest shot |6 July 2013      |
|     |dead"                                               |                 |
|     |Reuters, "Coptic priest shot dead in Egypt attack:  |6 July 2013      |
|     |sources"                                            |                 |
|     |http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/07/06/us-egypt-p|                 |
|     |rotests-priest-idUSBRE96505O20130706                |                 |
|     |Ecumenical News, "Egyptian Coptic Pope supports     |6 July 2013      |
|     |ousting of Morsi" by Timothy Fowler                 |                 |
|     |http://www.ecumenicalnews.com/article/egyptian-copti|                 |
|     |c-pope-supports-ousting-of-morsi-22324              |                 |
|     |'Belief' Blog, "Christians in Egypt increasingly    |5 July 2013      |
|     |vulnerable" by Lauren E. Bohn                       |                 |
|     |http://www.globalpost.com/dispatches/globalpost-blog|                 |
|     |s/belief/christians-egypt-copts-increasingly-vulnera|                 |
|     |ble                                                 |                 |
|     |UK Parliament, "Coup in Egypt" Commons Library      |4 July 2013      |
|     |Standard Note SNIA/6680 by Ben Smith                |                 |
|     |http://www.parliament.uk/briefing-papers/SN06680    |                 |
|     |Morning Star News, "Church Permit from Morsi Viewed |2 July 2013      |
|     |as Token, Given Difficulties Egyptian Christians    |                 |
|     |Face"                                               |                 |
|     |NBC News, "Egypt's Coptic Christians say they are   |20 June 2013     |
|     |'no longer safe'"                                   |                 |
|     |Amnesty International, "Egypt's worrying rise in    |11 June 2013     |
|     |criminal blasphemy cases"                           |                 |
|     |Morning Star News (USA), "Teacher in Egypt Sentenced|11 June 2013     |
|     |for 'Defaming' Islam"                               |                 |
|     |European Court of Human Rights, Press Release issued|6 June 2013      |
|     |by the Registrar of the Court "Removal of a Coptic  |                 |
|     |Christian to Egypt would expose him to a risk of    |                 |
|     |torture and inhuman or degrading treatment" ECHR 169|                 |
|     |(2013) (Case of ME v France (Application            |                 |
|     |No.50094/10)                                        |                 |
|     |Arabic Network for Human Rights Information (via    |4 June 2013      |
|     |International Freedom of Expression Exchange),      |                 |
|     |"Coptic Egyptian lawyer accused of defaming Islam   |                 |
|     |sentenced to prison"                                |                 |
|     |Index on Censorship (via International Freedom of   |28 May 2013      |
|     |Expression Exchange), "Coptic Egyptian teacher faces|                 |
|     |jail for allegedly insulting the Prophet"           |                 |
|     |Amnesty International, "Annual Report 2013: Egypt"  |23 May 2013      |
|     |UN Women, "Study on Ways and Methods to Eliminate   |23 May 2013      |
|     |Sexual Harassment in Egypt (UN-Reports)"            |                 |
|     |http://www.peacewomen.org/portal_resources_resource.|                 |
|     |php?id=1897                                         |                 |
|     |US Department of State, "2012 Report on             |20 May 2013      |
|     |International Religious Freedom: Egypt"             |                 |
|     |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, "Egypt:    |16 May 2013      |
|     |Whether the government in Egypt has made head       |                 |
|     |covering mandatory for women"                       |                 |
|     |Morning Star News (USA), "Jail Time Extended for    |13 May 2013      |
|     |Teacher Accused of Blasphemy in Egypt"              |                 |
|     |UK Border Agency, "Operational Guidance Note: Egypt"|7 May 2013       |
|     |(v.1 7 May 2013)                                    |                 |
|     |US Commission on International Religious Freedom,   |30 April 2013    |
|     |"United States Commission on International Religious|                 |
|     |Freedom Annual Report 2013: Egypt"                  |                 |
|     |Mail Online, "Egyptian police refuse to protect     |27 April 2013    |
|     |Coptic Christians during gun and machete attack on  |                 |
|     |mourners at cathedral"                              |                 |
|     |US Department of State, "2012 Country Reports on    |19 April 2013    |
|     |Human Rights Practices: Egypt"                      |                 |
|     |UK Border Agency, Country of Origin Information     |17 April 2013    |
|     |Service Bulletin on Women in Egypt                  |                 |
|     |The Independent, "Coptic Christians under siege as  |8 April 2013     |
|     |mob attacks Cairo cathedral"                        |                 |
|     |The Independent, "Coptic Christians: The minority   |7 April 2013     |
|     |who are an easy target in tough times"              |                 |
|     |Morning Star News (USA), "Christian Killed in Attack|7 April 2013     |
|     |on Coptic Mourners in Egypt"                        |                 |
|     |Amnesty International, "Egypt's Coptic Christians   |27 March 2013    |
|     |must be protected from sectarian violence"          |                 |
|     |Refugee Documentation Centre (Legal Aid Board,      |26 March 2013    |
|     |Ireland) (via UNHCR Refworld Website), "Egypt:      |                 |
|     |Information on Christian - Muslim issues between    |                 |
|     |March 2012 and March 2013.  Information on the      |                 |
|     |Muslim brotherhood intimidating Christians in an    |                 |
|     |attempt to get them to convert to Islam"            |                 |
|     |Egypt Independent, "International Women's Day:      |17 March 2013    |
|     |Through the eyes of Soheir" by Jenifer Evans        |                 |
|     |http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/international-w|                 |
|     |omen-s-day-through-eyes-soheir                      |                 |
|     |Magharebia, "Benghazi Coptic Church torched"        |15 March 2013    |
|     |Amnesty International, "Fighting for Justice and    |15 March 2013    |
|     |Human Rights - Egypt's Women Activists tell of their|                 |
|     |Struggle"                                           |                 |
|     |http://www.amnesty.org/ar/library/asset/MDE12/011/20|                 |
|     |13/ar/4b46a265-c3db-443d-b22a-a70e6d9fb0fd/mde120112|                 |
|     |013en.pdf                                           |                 |
|     |Egypt Independent (via Make Every Woman Count),     |8 March 2013     |
|     |"EGYPT: International Women's Day in Egypt: 3       |                 |
|     |profiles"                                           |                 |
|     |http://www.makeeverywomancount.org/index.php?option=|                 |
|     |com_content&view=article&id=5167:egypt-international|                 |
|     |-womens-day-in-egypt-3-profiles&catid=38:political-p|                 |
|     |articipation&Itemid=64                              |                 |
|     |Al Azhar Scholar, "Christian Copts Will Pay Jizya"  |6 March 2013     |
|     |by Raymond Ibrahim                                  |                 |
|     |http://www.raymondibrahim.com/islam/al-azhar-scholar|                 |
|     |-christian-copts-will-pay-jizya/                    |                 |
|     |US Commission on International Religious Freedom,   |28 January 2013  |
|     |"Did you know... that since the beginning of the    |                 |
|     |Egyptian Revolution, two years ago, nearly 100      |                 |
|     |Coptic Orthodox Christians have been killed in Egypt|                 |
|     |due to sectarian violence?"                         |                 |
|     |The Christian Post, "Muslim Group Threatens Egypt's |26 January 2013  |
|     |Coptic Christians; Tells Them to 'Pay Tribute'"     |                 |
|     |http://www.christianpost.com/news/muslim-group-threa|                 |
|     |tens-egypts-coptic-christians-tells-them-to-pay-trib|                 |
|     |ute-88941/                                          |                 |
|     |Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, "State     |22 January 2013  |
|     |crimes remained unpunished: the Interior Ministry is|                 |
|     |above the law and the Public Prosecution is missing |                 |
|     |in action"                                          |                 |
|     |Christian Solidarity Worldwide (UK), "Egypt: Coptic |17 January 2013  |
|     |church building destroyed"                          |                 |
|     |Wilson Centre (USA), "Women's Rights Under Egypt's  |16 January 2013  |
|     |Constitutional Disarray"                            |                 |
|     |Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2013: Egypt"   |16 January 2013  |
|     |Open Doors International, "World Watch List 2013:   |8 January 2013   |
|     |Egypt"                                              |                 |
|     |BBC News, "Worry taints Egyptian Coptic Christmas"  |3 January 2013   |
|     |by Bethany Bell                                     |                 |
|     |http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-20896896|                 |
|     |Washington Times, "FRANKS: Future looks bleak for   |21 December 2012 |
|     |Egypt's Coptic Christians" by Rep. Trent Franks     |                 |
|     |http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2012/dec/21/futu|                 |
|     |re-looks-bleak-for-egypts-coptic-christians/        |                 |
|     |Amnesty International, "Agents of repression:       |2 October 2012   |
|     |Egypt's police and the case for reform"             |                 |
|     |Amnesty International, "Brutality Unpunished and    |2 October 2012   |
|     |Unchecked: Egypt's Military Kill and Torture        |                 |
|     |Protestors with Impunity"                           |                 |
|     |US National Public Radio (NPR), "Coptic Christians  |14 September 2012|
|     |in US fear 'Terrible' reaction in Egypt to Muhammed |                 |
|     |Film" by Krishnadev Calamur                         |                 |
|     |Copts United, "Ismailia: Leaflets by Terrorist      |15 August 2012   |
|     |Groups Incite Killing Christians"                   |                 |
|     |Islam Translated, "Egypt's Jihad Organizations Call |14 August 2012   |
|     |for Christian Genocide" by Raymond Ibrahim          |                 |
|     |US Department of State, "2011 Report on             |30 July 2012     |
|     |International Religious Freedom: Egypt"             |                 |
|     |US Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe |18 July 2012     |
|     |(US Helsinki Commission), "Escalating violence      |                 |
|     |against Coptic women and girls: will the new Egypt  |                 |
|     |be more dangerous than the old?" (Testimony of      |                 |
|     |Michele Clark, George Washington University)        |                 |
|     |US Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe |18 July 2012     |
|     |(US Helsinki Commission), "Escalating violence      |                 |
|     |against Coptic women and girls: will the new Egypt  |                 |
|     |be more dangerous than the old?" (Testimony of Walid|                 |
|     |Phares, Transatlantic Legislative Group on          |                 |
|     |Counterterrorism)                                   |                 |
|     |US Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe |18 July 2012     |
|     |(US Helsinki Commission), "Escalating violence      |                 |
|     |against Coptic women and girls: will the new Egypt  |                 |
|     |be more dangerous than the old?" (Testimony of      |                 |
|     |Coptic Solidarity)                                  |                 |
|     |Christian Solidarity International (USA), ""Tell My |17 July 2012     |
|     |Mother I Miss Her": The Disappearance, Forced       |                 |
|     |Conversions and Forced Marriages of Coptic Christian|                 |
|     |Women in Egypt (II)"                                |                 |
|     |CNS News Group, "In Egypt, Clinton Fends Off        |16 July 2012     |
|     |Allegations of U.S. Support for Muslim Brotherhood" |                 |
|     |by Patrick Goodenough                               |                 |
|     |Times247, "Egyptian Copts Fear Persecution by       |12 July 2012     |
|     |Brotherhood" by Gracy Howard                        |                 |
|     |International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH),   |7 June 2012      |
|     |"Egypt: Impunity Impedes Democratic Transition"     |                 |
|     |Egypt Independent, "Rights group requests           |29 May 2012      |
|     |investigation into Morsy's statements against Copts"|                 |
|     |Newsmax, "Obama Overlooks Christian Persecution" by |24 May 2012      |
|     |James Walsh                                         |                 |
|     |Compass Direct (USA), "Salafist Leaders Celebrate   |23 March 2012    |
|     |Death of Coptic Pope in Egypt"                      |                 |
|     |US Commission on International Religious Freedom,   |20 March 2012    |
|     |"U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom |                 |
|     |Annual Report 2012: Egypt"                          |                 |
|     |Integrated Regional Information Networks News       |19 March 2012    |
|     |(IRIN), "Egypt: Health system needs cash injection" |                 |
|     |Compass Direct (USA), "Nuns Traumatized after School|16 March 2012    |
|     |Attack in Egypt"                                    |                 |
|     |Compass Direct (USA), "Court Sentences Priest from  |7 March 2012     |
|     |Attacked Church Building"                           |                 |
|     |Amnesty International, "Egypt: Systematic failure to|22 February 2012 |
|     |rein in security forces"                            |                 |
|     |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for  |15 February 2012 |
|     |Human Rights (OHCHR), "Written statement submitted  |                 |
|     |by the Jubilee Campaign (Domestic human rights and  |                 |
|     |religious freedom situation in Egypt)"              |                 |
|     |Human Rights Watch, "World Report 2012: Egypt"      |22 January 2012  |
|     |Refugee Documentation Centre (Legal Aid Board,      |28 December 2011 |
|     |Ireland), "Egypt: Information on available state    |                 |
|     |protection for Copts"                               |                 |
|     |Associated Press, "Egypt's Christians Worried by    |5 December 2011  |
|     |Islamist Surge" by Adam Plowright                   |                 |
|     |US National Public Radio (NPR), "Voice of America"  |29 November 2011 |
|     |by Elizabeth Arrott                                 |                 |
|     |Compass Direct (USA), "Massacre in Egypt Said to    |1 November 2011  |
|     |Cost Government All Credibility"                    |                 |
|     |Compass Direct (USA), "Egyptians Mourn Massacre of  |10 October 2011  |
|     |Coptic Christians"                                  |                 |
|     |Compass Direct (USA), "Hard-line Muslims in Egypt   |30 September 2011|
|     |Attack Coptic Church, Homes"                        |                 |
|     |US Department of State, "July-December, 2010        |13 September 2011|
|     |International Religious Freedom Report: Egypt"      |                 |
|     |Global Post, "Embassy Violence: Coptic Christians in|12 September 2011|
|     |the crosshairs" by Alex Pearlman                    |                 |
|     |US Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe |26 July 2011     |
|     |(US Helsinki Commission), "Chairman Smith calls     |                 |
|     |attention to plight of Coptic Christians in Egypt"  |                 |
|     |Refugee Review Tribunal of the Government of        |26 July 2011     |
|     |Australia (RRT), "Egypt - EGY38986 - Coptic         |                 |
|     |Christians - State Protection - Employment"         |                 |
|     |Women's UN Report Network (WUNRN),                  |25 July 2011     |
|     |"Egypt - Rigid Coptic Christian Divorce Law         |                 |
|     |Challenged" by Jessica Gray                         |                 |
|     |http://www.wunrn.com/news/2011/07_11/07_25/072511_eg|                 |
|     |ypt.htm                                             |                 |
|     |Assyrian International News Agency (AINA), "Egyptian|13 July 2011     |
|     |Muslim Ring Uses Sexual Coercion to Convert         |                 |
|     |Christian Girls: Report" by Mary Abdelmassih        |                 |
|     |Assyrian International News Agency (AINA), "Sexual  |1 July 2011      |
|     |Harassment of Christian Wife Turns Into Violence    |                 |
|     |Against Christian Villagers in Egypt"               |                 |
|     |Refugee Review Tribunal of the Government of        |30 June 2011     |
|     |Australia (RRT), "Egypt - EGY38823 - Coptic         |                 |
|     |Christians - Current Situation - State Protection"  |                 |
|     |Jihadwatch, "Egypt: More Christian girls abducted,  |27 June 2011     |
|     |forced to convert to Islam"                         |                 |
|     |Amnesty International, "Annual Report 2011: Egypt"  |13 May 2011      |
|     |Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2011: Egypt"   |12 May 2011      |
|     |US Department of State, "2010 Country Reports on    |8 April 2011     |
|     |Human Rights Practices: Egypt"                      |                 |
|     |Refugee Review Tribunal of the Government of        |4 February 2011  |
|     |Australia (RRT), "Egypt - EGY38046 - Evangelical    |                 |
|     |Christians - Churches - Presence - Activities -     |                 |
|     |Treatment Proselytising"                            |                 |
|     |Minority Rights Group Egypt Report, "State of the   |2011             |
|     |World Minorities" (Extract)                         |                 |
|     |Inter Press Service, "Egypt: Looking Away From the  |7 April 2010     |
|     |Disabled" by Cam McGrath                            |                 |
|     |http://www.ipsnews.net/2010/04/egypt-looking-away-fr|                 |
|     |om-the-disabled/                                    |                 |
|     |Freedom House (via UNHCR Refworld), "Women's Rights |3 March 2010     |
|     |in the Middle East and North Africa 2010 - Egypt"   |                 |
|     |http://www.refworld.org/docid/4b990125f.html        |                 |
|     |UNHCR, "Guidelines on International Protection:     |22 December 2009 |
|     |Child Asylum Claims under Articles 1(A)2 and 1(F) of|                 |
|     |the 1951 Convention and/or 1967 Protocol relating to|                 |
|     |the Status of Refugees"                             |                 |
|     |Compass Direct (USA), "Two Copts in Egypt Imprisoned|20 August 2009   |
|     |after Reporting Attack"                             |                 |
|     |Compass Direct (USA), "Police Collusion Suspected in|17 July 2009     |
|     |Attack on Church in Minya, Egypt"                   |                 |
|     |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin Information Key|13 July 2009     |
|     |Documents - Arab Republic of Egypt"                 |                 |
|     |Compass Direct (USA), "Two Clashes Shake Egypt's    |7 July 2009      |
|     |Coptic Community"                                   |                 |
|     |UNHCR, "UNHCR Guidelines on Determining the Best    |May 2008         |
|     |Interests of the Child"                             |                 |
|     |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, "Egypt:    |26 February 2007 |
|     |Treatment of Christians, including Coptic           |                 |
|     |Christians, and availability of state protection"   |                 |
|     |Compass Direct (USA), "Coptic Christian Dies after  |20 January 2006  |
|     |Muslims Set Fire to Church"                         |                 |
|     |Unicef, "Egypt"                                     |Undated          |



                                 APPENDIX B

                  Expert Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

| Item | Document                                        | Date            |
|  1.  |Hudson Institute, addendum to Expert Report by Mr|15 September 2013|
|      |Marshall                                         |                 |
|  2.  |CV and Biography of Expert from the Hudson       |12 September 2013|
|      |Institute, Mr Marshall                           |                 |
|  3.  |Email exchange with Hudson Institute's expert, Mr|11 September 2013|
|      |Marshall                                         |                 |
|  4.  |Responses to Respondent's questions in relation  |18 July 2013     |
|      |to the Hudson Institute Expert Report by Mr      |                 |
|      |Marshall dated 6 June 2013                       |                 |
|  5.  |Hudson Institute, addendum to Expert Report by Mr|18 July 2013     |
|      |Marshall                                         |                 |
|  6.  |Respondent's questions to Mr Marshall, Expert    |10 July 2013     |
|      |from the Hudson Institute                        |                 |
|  7.  |Hudson Institute, Expert Report by Mr Marshall   |6 June 2013      |
|  8.  |Mark Henderson & Alison Pickup, "Best Practice   |31 May 2012      |
|      |Guide to Asylum and Human Rights Appeals" -      |                 |
|      |Chapter 22 "The Expert's Role"                   |                 |
|  9.  |Annex A - Summary of reported attacks on Coptic  |Undated          |
|      |Christians (extracts from the Expert Report and  |                 |
|      |addendums by Mr Marshall of the Hudson Institute)|                 |
|      |and summary of assaults/attacks since 15 July    |                 |
|      |2013 provided by Maspero Youth Union as          |                 |
|      |referenced by the New York Times and Amnesty     |                 |
|      |International                                    |                 |




                                 APPENDIX C

|List of Churches Burned or Damaged since August|                       |
|14                                             |                       |
|                                               |Minya city             |
|Al-Amir Tadros Coptic Church                   |Minya city             |
|Al-Anba Mousa Church                           |Minya city             |
|Evangelical Church                             |Minya city             |
|Al-Rasuliya Apostolic Church                   |Minya city             |
|Mar Meena Coptic Church                        |Minya - Bani Mazar     |
|Mar Meena Church                               |Minya - Bani Mazar     |
|Evangelical Church                             |Minya - Bani Mazar     |
|Baptist Church                                 |Minya - Dalga          |
|Saints Mary and Ibram Coptic Church            |Minya - Malawi         |
|Al-Mashyakhiya Evangelical Church              |Minya - Malawi         |
|Good Shepherd Catholic Church and School       |Asyut city             |
|Mar Yohanna Church                             |Asyut city             |
|Adventist Church                               |Asyut city             |
|Al-Rasuliyya Church                            |Asyut city             |
|Mar Gergas Coptic Church                       |Asyut city             |
|al-Qowsiyya Bishopric and Chruch               |Asyut city             |
|Evangelical Church                             |Asyut city             |
|St. Therese Church                             |Asyut city             |
|Nahdet al-Qadasa church                        |Sohag city             |
|St. George Coptic Church and Diocesan Office   |Fayum city             |
|St. Mary Church                                |Fayum - al-Manzala     |
|St. Mary Church                                |Fayum - al-Manzala     |
|Al-Amir Tadros al-Shatbi Church                |Fayum - al-Zurbi       |
|Al-Shaheeda Damyana Church                     |Village                |
|Evangelical Church                             |Fayum - al-Zurbi       |
|Al-Amir Tadros Church                          |Village                |
|Al-Mallak Church                               |Fayum - al-Sarg,       |
|St. Mary Church                                |Ebshway                |
|Karmet al-Rosul Church                         |Giza - Kirdassa        |
|St. Mary Church                                |Giza - Deir Hakim      |
|Al-Younaniyya al-Qadeema Church                |Giza - Atfih           |
|Good Shepherd Catholic Church and School       |Giza - al-Mansouriya   |
|Saviour's Anglican Church                      |Suez city              |
|Franciscan Church and School                   |Suez city              |
|Mar Gerges Church                              |Suez city              |
|Mar Gerges Church Services Building            |Suez city              |
|Franciscan Catholic Church and School          |North Sinai - Al-Areesh|
|                                               |                       |
|Churches Attacked, Not Damaged                 |Bani Suef - al-Wasita  |
|                                               |Bani Suef city         |
|Al-Malak Church                                |                       |
|Abu Teeg Bishopric                             |                       |
|Franciscan Church and School                   |                       |
|St. George Hadayeq Church                      |Asyut city             |
|Abu Sifin Church                               |Asyut city             |
|                                               |Asyut city             |
|                                               |Helwan city            |
|                                               |Cairo - Ezbet al-Nakhl |
                                 APPENDIX D

         [MASPERO YOUTH UNION] SUMMARY [of Attacks since 14 August 2013]


         38 Churches completely destroyed, burned and looted
         23 Churches attacked and partially damaged


         In addition to the following:


         -  58 Houses owned by  Copts  in  different  locations  burned  and
             looted
         -  85 Shops owned by Copts
         -  16 Pharmacies
         -  3 Hotels (Horus, Susana & Akhnaton)
         -  75 Cars, buses owned by churches
         -  6 People killed based on their religious Christian identity
         -  7 Coptic people kidnapped in upper Egypt governorates




         I - Churches completely destroyed, burned and looted:


         1 - Mary & Saint Ebram Coptic Orthodox Church,  services  building,
             children daycare, the Bishop resting house - Delga  village  -
             Menya
         2 - Saint Mina church - Abu Hilal area - Menya
         3 - Baptist church - Bani Mazar - Menya
         4 - Prince Toadros - Sidnawy circle - Menya
         5 - Third Evangelical church - Menya
         6 - The Evangelical church - Gad ElSayed area - Menya
         7 - Saint Moses - Abu Hilal area - Menya
         8 - Khalas AlNefous - Palace circle - Menya
         9 - Saint Mina - Markaz st., Bani Mazar - Menya
         10 - The Evangelical church - Malawy - Menya
         11 - Saint Georges Coptic Orthodox church - Sohaj
         12 - Saint Marc - Kahraba st, Suhaj
         13 - Saint Mary Coptic church - Suhaj
         14 - Saint Tadros monastery - Nazla village - AlFayoum
         15 - Saint Mary Coptic church - Nazla village - AlFayoum
         16 - Saint Demyana church - Zerby village - AlFayoum
         17 - The evangelical church - Zerby village - AlFayoum
         18 - Prince Tadros Coptic church - Dessya village - AlFayoum
         19 - The Franciscan church & school - st, 23, Suez
         20 - The Old Greek church - Bradis st., Suez
         21 - The Evangelical church - AlGeish st, Suez
         22 - Saint Georges Coptic church - Qulta st., Assuit
         23 - Apostolic church - Namess church, Assuit
         24 - Saint John Coptic church - Abnob district, Assuit
         25 - The Adventist church - Youssry Ragheb st., Assuit
         26 - Al Esslah church - Assuit
         27 - Saint Theresa - Assuit
         28 - Saint Mary Coptic church - 10thst, Kerdassa district, Giza
         29 - Saint Mary Coptic church - Kerdassa - Giza
         30 - Saint Georges Coptic church - Arish, Northern Sainai
         31 - The Good Shepard nuns monastery and school - Suez
         32 - The evangelical church - Manshyet Badeen - Menya
         33 - Saint John the baptizer Diocese, Elqussia center, Assiut
         34 - The Holy Family church for  Coptic  catholics,  beside  Malawi
             police station, Malawi center, Menya
         35 - The Evangelical  church  beside  the  police  station,  Malawi
             center, Menya
         36 - Saint George and Abu-seifin, Lahassa village, Maghagha center,
             Menya
         37 - The apostolic church and  its  medical  center,  Omar  street,
             Ezbet iskandar abu hilal, Menya
         38 - Marimina church, Bani Mazar center, Menya


         II - Churches attacked and partially damaged:


         (Molotov Cocktails, rock throwing, shootings)
         1 - Saint Marc Catholic church, Abu helal area - Menya
         2 - The Jesuit fathers church, Abu helal area, Menya
         3 - Virgin Mary church, El gazagreen street, Abu helal area, Menya
         4 - Maryouhanna the Baptist Diocese, El-qussia, Assiut
         5 - Virgin Mary church, Houd 10, Quena
         6 - Atfih Diocese, Giza
         7 - The Two Saints church of Sol village, Atfih, Giza
         8 - Saint March Church, El-saff - Giza
         9 - The Jesuit school, Menia
         10 - Saint George church, Bakous, Alexandria
         11 - Saint Maximus 45th st. - Alexandria
         12 - Malawi Diocese, Malawi center, Menya
         13 - Coptic Orthodox Diocese, Deir Mawas, Menya
         14 - El-MALAK Church, Nemis st., Assuit
         15 - Coptic Orthodox Diocese, Abu Teeg center, Assiut
         16 - The Holy Virgin Church, Kafr Abdo, 6th of October City
         17 - Saint George Church, El-WASTA Center, Beni suef
         18 - Abu-sefein Church, El rashah, Ezbet el nakhl, el Marg, Cairo
         19 - The Holy Virgin Church, El-Mansoureya
         20 - Abu-Fana Monastery, Malawi, Menya
         21 - Saint George Church, Cotsica, Maadi
         22 - Marimina Church, Bani Mazar, Menya
         23 - Saint George Church, Hadayek Helwan, Giza


         III - Coptic Schools completely burned and looted:


         1 - Coptic School for boys, EL Husseini st., Menya
         2 - Saint Joseph School and monastery, Menya
         3 - The Good Shepard school - Menya
         4 - The Franciscan nuns school - Beni Suef
         5 - The Franciscan nuns school - Suez
         6 - The Good Shepherd Coptic Catholic school, Malawi, Menya


         IV - Coptic Buildings - completely burned and looted:


         1 - Friends of the Holy Book - Al Fayoum
         2 - Coptic Youth club - Menya
         3 - Soldiers of Christ orphanage - Menya
         4 - The Bible library - Menya
         5 - Jesuit community - Menya
         6 - Aidahbya boat owned by the evangelical church - Menya
         7 - The Bible library - Assuit


         V - In addition to the following:


         58 Houses owned by Copts in different locations burned and looted
         85 Shops owned by Copts attacked
         16 Pharmacies
         3 Hotels (Horus, Susana, Akhnaton)
         58 Cars, buses owned by churches
         6 People killed based on their religious Christian identity
         7 Coptic people kidnapped in upper Egypt governorates.





