
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Nasim and others (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT 00610(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 October 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between
                            (1) Mr Muhammad Nasim
                            (2) Mr Tahir Mahmood
                        (3) MR Muhammad Taimoor Ahmad
                             (4) Mr Ahsan Khalid
                             (5) Mr Ahsan Naeem
                            (6) Mr Rizwan Bashir
                         (7) Mr Muhammad Arif Mughal
                       (8) Mr Muhammad Zulgarnain Arif
                      (9) Miss Noor Ul Huda Arif Mughal
                            (10) Miss Maham Arif
                             (11) Mr Safia Arif
                         (12) Mr Muhammad Afif Arif
                        (13) Mr Danisha Ejaz Qureshi
                         (14) Mr Ja'afar Dori Gambo
                             (15) Mr Rehan Anwar
                            (16) Mr Asif Rasheed
                       (17) Mr Kazi MOsharrof HOssain
                         (18) Mr Androo Haji Rafeek
                             (19) Mr Qummer Aziz
                       (20) Mr Abhilash Mukundhakshan
                           (21) Miss Sandeep Kaur
                             (22) Mr Sajid Abdul
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellants (1), (3), (13), (15), (21), (22): Mr M Iqbal, Counsel,
                                 instructed by Law Wise Solicitor / Farani
                                 Javid Taylor Solicitors LLP
Appellant (2):         Mr A Baddar, Solicitor, Farani Javid Taylor
                                 Solicitors LLP
Appellant (4):         Mr A Mehta, Solicitor, Kingswood Solicitors
Appellant (5):         Mr C Timson, Counsel, instructed by Primax
                                 Solicitors
Appellants (6) to (12):         Ms J Heybroek, Solicitor, Morgan Mark
                                 Solicitors
Appellants (14) and (16):  Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Coventry Law
                                 Centre / Malik Law Chambers Solicitors
Appellant (17):        Mr M Jamali, Solicitor, Farani Javid Taylor
                                 Solicitors LLP
Appellant (18):        Ms D Qureshi, Counsel, instructed by Legend
                                 Solicitors
Appellant (19):        Mr A Jafar, Counsel, instructed by Lee Valley
                                 Solicitors
Appellant (20):        Appeared in person (for part of the hearing)
For the Respondent:        Mr M Gullick, Counsel, and Mr I Jarvis, Senior
                                 Home Office Presenting Officer

(1)  It is not legally possible for the First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  Upper
Tribunal to decline to follow the judgment in Raju and  others  v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 754 on the basis  that  the
Secretary  of  State's  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  policy  of  July   2010
(concerning the approach  to  be  taken  to  "late"  submission  of  certain
educational awards) continued to apply in respect of decisions taken by  the
Secretary of State on or after 6 April  2012,  when  the  Immigration  Rules
were changed by abolishing the Tier 1 PSW route.

(2) The Secretary of State was under no duty to determine  Post  Study  Work
applications made  before  that  date  by  reference  to  that  policy,  the
rationale for which disappeared on 6 April. In particular:

      (a)  a person making such  an  application  had  no  vested  right  or
      legitimate expectation to have his or her application so determined;


      (b) it was not legally unfair of the Secretary of State to proceed  as
      she did;


      (c) the de minimis principle cannot be invoked to counter the  failure
      of  applications  that  were  unaccompanied  by   requisite   evidence
      regarding the award;


      (d)  the Secretary of State's May 2012 Casework  Instruction  did  not
      gloss or modify the Immigration Rules but merely told  caseworkers  to
      apply those Rules;


      (e)  evidential flexibility has no bearing on the matter;


      (f)  an application was not varied by the submission  of  evidence  of
      the conferring of an award on or after 6 April 2012; but  even  if  it
      were, the application would fail on the basis that it  would  have  to
      have been decided under  the  Rules  in  force  at  the  date  of  the
      variation; and


      (g) an application under the Immigration Rules falls to be  determined
      by reference to policies in force at the date of decision,  not  those
      in force at the date of application.



(3)  The date of "obtaining the relevant qualification" for the purposes  of
Table 10 of Appendix A to the Immigration  Rules  as  in  force  immediately
before  6  April  2012  is  the  date  on  which  the  University  or  other
institution responsible for conferring the award (not the institution  where
the applicant physically studied,  if  different)  actually  conferred  that
award, whether in person or in absentia.

(4)  As held in Khatel and others (s85A; effect of  continuing  application)
[2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC), section 85A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002  precludes  a  tribunal,  in  a  points-based  appeal,  from
considering evidence as to compliance with points-based  Rules,  where  that
evidence was not before the Secretary of State when she took  her  decision;
but the section does not prevent a tribunal from considering  evidence  that
was before the Secretary of State when she took  the  decision,  whether  or
not that evidence reached her only after the date  of  application  for  the
purposes of paragraph 34F of the Immigration Rules.


                                  DECISION

A. Introduction

1.   With one exception, all  of  the  immigrants  listed  above,  whom  for
    convenience we will call the appellants,  secured  decisions  in  their
    favour in the Upper Tribunal   in  respect  of  their  appeals  against
    decisions of the Secretary of State ("the  respondent")  to  refuse  to
    vary leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom,  because  that  Tribunal
    followed the approach adopted by Blake J, President and Upper  Tribunal
    Judge  Coker  in  Khatel  and  Others  (s85A;  effect   of   continuing
    application) [2013]  UKUT  00044  (IAC).   In  the  case  of  Mr  Nasim
    (appellant  (1))  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal, applying Khatel.

2.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal
    against the determinations of the Upper Tribunal.  At the time she  did
    so, permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal had been granted by the
    Upper Tribunal in respect  of  Khatel.   The  respondent's  grounds  of
    application in the cases with which we  are  concerned  in  most  cases
    reiterated  the  critique  of  Khatel  contained  in  the  grounds   of
    application submitted in that case.  The same is true of Mr  Nasim,  in
    whose case the respondent sought and obtained permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

3.   Around 200 applications for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal were made by the respondent in respect of determinations of  the
    Upper Tribunal,  allowing   appeals  (or  dismissing  the  respondent's
    appeals) on the basis of Khatel.  It appears that a significant  number
    of applications for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    made by the respondent against decisions of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    applying Khatel.

4.   Since it was known  that  permission  to  appeal  in  Khatel  had  been
    granted (with arrangements made for the Court of Appeal to expedite the
    hearing in that court), it was considered appropriate to  consider  the
    respondent's permission applications once the judgments of the Court of
    Appeal became known.  On 25 June 2013, the Court of Appeal allowed  the
    respondent's appeal against  the  Upper  Tribunal's  determinations  in
    Khatel and the cases of three other immigrants: Raju and Others v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 754.

5.   As a result, the Tribunal gave directions in the cases before it  where
    the respondent had applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The Tribunal did so pursuant to rule 45(1)(b) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008:-

         "45.-(1)      On receiving an application for permission to appeal
                  the Upper Tribunal may review the decision in accordance
                  with rule 46 (review of a decision), but may only do so if-




                             ...


                  (b)  since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made
                      a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and
                      which, had it been made before the Upper Tribunal's
                      decision, could have had a material effect on the
                      decision."

6.   The Upper Tribunal's directions indicated  that  it  proposed,  in  the
    light of Raju, to review the determinations of the Upper Tribunal,  set
    them aside and re-make the decisions in the appeals by dismissing them.
     The directions made plain that the appellants would be (or continue to
    be) successful in their  appeals  against  removal  decisions  made  in
    respect  of  them,  in  purported  pursuance  of  section  47  of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  This was  because  those
    decisions were unlawful (Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
    Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512).

7.   In a  large  number  of  cases,  including  those  with  which  we  are
    concerned, the appellants  objected.   Various  different  reasons  for
    doing so were advanced; but the common theme was  that  the  appellants
    contended they should, in whatever manner, still be entitled to succeed
    in their appeals  against  the  decisions  to  refuse  to  vary  leave,
    notwithstanding the judgment in Raju.

8.   The present cases have been selected on the basis that they  provide  a
    suitable vehicle for considering the arguments advanced  regarding  the
    effect of the judgments in Raju.  Further directions were issued to the
    appellants and the respondent on 15 August 2013 and a  case  management
    hearing was held on 30 August.  The Tribunal would like to commend  the
    parties, their solicitors/representatives and Counsel for their efforts
    in ensuring that the Tribunal was able on 8  October  2013  to  receive
    comprehensive submissions on the relevant issues.


B.  Closing the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) route

9.   The cases before us concern the legal consequences of the  respondent's
    decision in 2011 to close the Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  route,  which
    allowed graduates from abroad  who  had  also  studied  in  the  United
    Kingdom two years in  which  to  seek  employment  after  their  United
    Kingdom courses ended.  The Government's concern about this route  had,
    in fact, been articulated by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department in Parliament on 23 November 2010 when she said:-

         "The old Tier One - supposedly the route for the best and brightest
         - has not attracted highly-skilled workers.  At least 30%  of  Tier
         One migrants work  in  low-skilled  occupations  such  as  stacking
         shelves, driving taxis or working  as  security  guards,  and  some
         don't have a job at all.  So we will close  the  Tier  One  general
         route.


         Instead, I  want  to  use  Tier  One  to  attract  more  investors,
         entrepreneurs and people of exceptional talent."

10.  A public announcement on 22 March 2011 confirmed the  "closure  of  the
    Post-Study Work  route,  which  allowed  students  two  years  to  seek
    employment after their course ended.  Only those graduates who have  an
    offer of a skilled job from a sponsoring employer, in  Tier  2  of  the
    points-based system, will be able to stay to work".  The  changes  were
    described as being due "from  April  2012".   Also  on  22  March,  the
    Secretary of State told Parliament:-

         "We want the best international graduates to stay and contribute to
         the UK economy.  However, the arrangements that we have  been  left
         with for students who graduate in the  UK  are  far  too  generous.
         They are able to stay for two years, whether or not they find a job
         and regardless of the skill level of that job.  In 2010,  when  one
         in ten UK graduates were unemployed, 39,000  non-EU  students  with
         8,000 dependents took advantage of that generosity.


         We will therefore close the  current  Post-Study  Work  route  from
         April next year."



C.  The relevant rules as in force immediately before 6 April 2012

11.  The relevant rule was paragraph 245FD:-

         "To qualify for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
         Migrant, an Applicant must  meet  the  requirements  listed  below.
         Subject to paragraph 245FE(a)(i),  if  the  Applicant  meets  these
         requirements, leave to remain will be granted.   If  the  Applicant
         does not meet these requirements, the application will be refused.






         Requirements:


         (a)  The Applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  the  general
             grounds of refusal, and must not be an illegal entrant.


         (b)  The Applicant must not  previously  have  been  granted  entry
             clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
             Migrant.


         (c)  The Applicant must have a minimum of 75 points under paragraph
             66-72 of Appendix A."


12.  Paragraphs 66 to 72 of Appendix A were as follows:-

         "ATTRIBUTES FOR TIER 1 (POST-STUDY WORK) MIGRANTS


         66.  An Applicant for entry clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier
             1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  must  score  75   points   for
             attributes.


         67.  Available points are shown in Table 10.


         68.  Notes to accompany the table appear below the table.


         Table 10


         |Qualifications                                      |Points      |
|The Applicant has been awarded:                     |20          |
|                                                    |            |
|(a) a UK recognised bachelor or postgraduate degree,|            |
|or                                                  |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(b) a UK postgraduate certificate in education or   |            |
|Professional Graduate Diploma of Education, or      |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(c) a Higher National Diploma ('HND') from a        |            |
|Scottish institution                                |            |
|(a) The Applicant studied for his award at a UK     |20          |
|institution that is a UK recognised or listed body, |            |
|or which holds a sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the|            |
|Points Based System, or                             |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(b) If the Applicant is claiming points for having  |            |
|been awarded a Higher National diploma from a       |            |
|Scottish Institution, he studied for that diploma at|            |
|a Scottish publicly funded institution of further or|            |
|higher education, or a Scottish bona fide private   |            |
|education institution which maintains satisfactory  |            |
|records of enrolment and attendance.                |            |
|                                                    |            |
|The Scottish institution must:                      |            |
|                                                    |            |
|(i) be on the list of Education and Training        |            |
|Providers list on the Department of Business,       |            |
|Innovation and Skills website, or                   |            |
|(ii) hold a Sponsor licence under Tier 4 of the     |            |
|Points Based System.                                |            |
|The Applicant's period of UK study and/or research  |20          |
|towards his eligible award were undertaken whilst he|            |
|had entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to     |            |
|remain in the UK that was not subject to a          |            |
|restriction preventing him from undertaking a course|            |
|of study and/or research.                           |            |
|The Applicant made the application for entry        |15          |
|clearance or leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study|            |
|Work) Migrant within 12 months of obtaining the     |            |
|relevant qualification or within 12 months of       |            |
|completing a United Kingdom Foundation Programme    |            |
|Office affiliated Foundation Programme as a         |            |
|postgraduate doctor or dentist.                     |            |
|The Applicant is applying for leave to remain and   |75          |
|has, or was last granted, leave as a Participant in |            |
|the International Graduates Scheme (or its          |            |
|predecessor, the Science and engineering Graduates  |            |
|Scheme) or as a Participant in the Fresh Talent:    |            |
|Working in Scotland Scheme.                         |            |






         QUALIFICATION: NOTES


         69.  Specified documents  must  be  provided  as  evidence  of  the
             qualification and, where relevant, completion  of  the  United
             Kingdom  Foundation  Programme  Office  affiliated  Foundation
             Programme as a postgraduate doctor or dentist.


         70.  A qualification will have been deemed to have been  'obtained'
             on the date on which  the  Applicant  was  first  notified  in
             writing, by the awarding institution, that  the  qualification
             had been awarded."



D.  The July 2010 policy

13.  Crucial to the appellants' case is  the  policy,  communicated  to  the
    respondent's caseworkers by an email of 15 July 2010, but not published
    more widely.  The  email  began  by  stating  that  "we  have  recently
    received queries about  how  to  handle  Post-Study  Work  applications
    submitted before the  date  of  award;  apparently  a  number  of  such
    applications have been submitted".  The email continued as follows:-

         "The following advice addresses this issue:


         1.   The Applicants should not be  submitting  applications  before
             they have confirmation of their award.  If they are not  going
             to obtain this until after their extant  leave  expires,  they
             should be making their applications  from  overseas.   Neither
             should  caseworkers  be  putting  cases  on  hold  where   the
             application has been submitted prior to the date of award.


         2.   If, by the time we come to make a decision  on  a  Post  Study
             Work  application,  we  have  received  confirmation,  on  the
             appropriate specified document,  that  the  qualification  has
             been awarded, but the date of award post-dates  the  date  the
             application was originally made,  we  should  follow  policy's
             advice (attached below) and,  on  the  basis  of  common-sense
             decision making, should not refuse simply because the date  of
             award is after the date of application.  (So, if the  date  of
             award is after the date of application but before the date  of
             decision,  this  will  be  acceptable  provided  we  have  the
             specified documents to confirm).


         3.   If however, by the time we come to  make  a  decision  on  the
             application we do not have confirmation of the award, included
             on an appropriate specified document,  caseworkers  should  do
             the following:


             .    Indication that the date of award  is  pending.   If  the
                  documentation provided makes it clear  that  the  date  of
                  award (as defined in the Post Study Work policy  guidance)
                  will be some time in the future (i.e. The  date  of  award
                  will be after we are due to make the decision),  then  the
                  application should be refused as normal.  We should not be
                  putting such cases  on  hold.   The  applicant  cannot  be
                  considered in such cases to have an eligible award and  no
                  points can therefore be awarded for the Qualification.  As
                  specified in the published guidance,  where  an  applicant
                  under Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) is not awarded  points  for
                  an eligible qualification, we are  also  unable  to  award
                  points for any other point scoring area for Attributes;


             .    No indication of the date of award or that it is pending.
                   If all other required documentation and  information  has
                  been  provided,  but  there  is  no  indication,  in   the
                  specified documentation provided,  of  what  the  date  of
                  award is, then caseworkers may adopt the  usual  approach,
                  accommodated by the Evidential  Flexibility  arrangements,
                  towards seeking this additional information.  Once we have
                  confirmation of the  date  of  award,  caseworkers  should
                  continue as normal, and follow the advice above, depending
                  on whether the date we are due to  make  the  decision  is
                  before or after the date of award."


14.  In essence, it is the appellants' case that  their  applications,  made
    before 6 April 2012 but not decided until after that date,  should  not
    only  have  been  decided  in  accordance  with  the  Rules  applicable
    immediately before 6 April (which the transitional provisions  for  the
    new Rules required) but also fell to be decided in line with  the  July
    2010 policy.  The result of such  an  approach  would  have  been  (the
    appellants contend) that because in their cases the  qualifications  in
    question  had  been  awarded  before  the  date  of   decision,   their
    applications should have been successful, notwithstanding that the date
    of award was after the date of application.   The  appellants  advanced
    various arguments for why the July 2010 policy  governed  their  cases,
    including "vested rights" and "legitimate expectation".  We shall  deal
    with these arguments in due course.  Mr Iqbal categorised the July 2010
    policy as the "pragmatic approach", as opposed to the "strict approach"
    of the post 5 April Casework Instruction, to which we will shortly make
    reference (see [16] below).

E.  The respondent's Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) policy guidance (April 2012)

15.   In  his  submissions,  Mr  Jafar  laid  emphasis  upon  the  following
    paragraphs of the  respondent's  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  published
    policy guidance, as in force immediately before 6 April 2012:-

         "Qualification


         53.  An applicant can claim 20 points if he/she  has  been  awarded
             one of the following qualifications:


             .    A United Kingdom recognised degree at Bachelor, Master or
                  PhD level; or


         ...


         Documents required


         61.  Paragraph 245 AA (and 54 of Appendix  A)  of  the  Immigration
             Rules state that we will only award points when  an  applicant
             provides  the  specified  evidence  that  he/she   meets   the
             requirements for this category.


         62.  In order to score 20 points for this attribute, the  specified
             evidence the applicant must provide is:


             i)   the original certificate of  award.   This  must  be  the
                  applicant's original certificate (not  a  copy)  and  must
                  clearly show the:


                  .    applicant's name;


                  .    title of the qualification; and


                  .    name of awarding body


                  We will not accept provisional certificates.


                  If the certificate has yet to  be  issued,  the  applicant
                  will be unable to  provide  the  original  certificate  of
                  award.   In  these  circumstances,  the   applicant   must
                  provide:

             ii)  an original letter from  the  institution  at  which  the
                  applicant studied towards his/her eligible  qualification.
                  The letter must be an original letter (not a copy), on the
                  official  letter-headed  paper  of  the   United   Kingdom
                  institution at which the applicant studied. It  must  have
                  been issued by an authorised  official  and  must  confirm
                  the:

                  .    applicant's name;

                  .    title of the qualification;

                  .    Date of the award (as  defined  in  paragraph  79  of
                      these guidance notes);

                  .    the body awarding the qualification;

                  .    explain the reason why the  applicant  is  unable  to
                      provide their original certificate of award; and

                  .    confirm that the certificate will be issued.


             ...

         Date of eligible qualification/Completion date  of  United  Kingdom
         Foundation Programme.

         78.  An applicant can claim 15 points if the eligible qualification
             was obtained within the 12 months immediately  before  his/her
             application for entry clearance or leave to remain under  Tier
             1 (Post-Study  Work)  or  if  his/her  application  for  entry
             clearance or leave to remain is being made within 12 months of
             completing  a  United  Kingdom  Foundation  Programme   Office
             affiliated Foundation Programme as a  postgraduate  doctor  or
             dentist.

         79.  The date of award is taken as the date on which the  applicant
             was first notified, in writing, by the  awarding  institution,
             that the qualification has been awarded. This notification may
             have been made in writing, directly to the  applicant,  or  by
             the institution publishing details of  the  award,  either  in
             writing (for example, via  an  institution  notice  board)  or
             electronically (for example, on  the  institution's  website).
             Where  the  notification  was  not  in  the  form  of   direct
             correspondence  to  the  applicant,  we  will  require  direct
             confirmation of the date of  award  from  the  institution  in
             writing.


         80.  We do not accept the date of award as the date of graduation.

         81.  Providing the date of award of the eligible  qualification  is
             no more than 12 months before  the  date  of  application,  15
             points will be awarded for this attribute.

         82.  Applicants may submit  an  application  for  leave  to  remain
             before the completion of his/her Foundation Programme provided
             that he/she will complete the Foundation  Programme,  no  more
             than 30 days after submitting this application

         Documents required

         83.  In order to score 15 points for this attribute, the  specified
             evidence the applicant must provide is:

             a)   original document  from  the  institution  at  which  the
                  applicant studied towards his/ her eligible  qualification
                  or  Foundation  Programme  as  a  postgraduate  doctor  of
                  dentist (where the applicant is applying within 12  months
                  of this period).

             The letter must be an original letter (not  a  copy),  on  the
             official  letter-  headed  paper   of   the   United   Kingdom
             institution at which the applicant studied. It must have  been
             issued by an authorised official and must confirm the:

                  .    applicant's name;

                  .    title of the qualification;

                  .    start and end dates of the  applicant's  period/s  of
                      study and/or research for this qualification  at  the
                      United Kingdom institution; and  date  of  award  (as
                      defined in paragraph 79 of these guidance notes).

         84.  If the applicant has already provided an  original  letter  in
             support of points claimed for the other attributes,  then  the
             same letter is acceptable  as  evidence  in  support  of  this
             attribute,   providing   it   contains   all   the    required
             information."



F.  The respondent's Casework Instruction ("CI") of 23  May  2012:-  Tier  1
(Post-Study Work) closure: applicants applying before  6  April  2012  prior
[to] their qualification being awarded

16.  On 23 May 2012 the respondent produced a  casework  instruction  which,
    unlike the July 2010 email, was published.  The relevant provisions for
    our purposes are as follows:-

         "1.   This  instruction  outlines  how  caseworkers  should  handle
             applications where the applicant has submitted a Tier 1 (Post-
             study Work) application prior to 6 April  2012  without  final
             confirmation  that  they  have  been   awarded   an   eligible
             qualification.  More  specific  refusal  wording  is  provided
             along with a document for caseworker to add to bundles on  any
             full right of appeal case.


         Background


         2.   Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) closed to new applicants on  6  April
             2012.  An announcement detailing the intention  to  close  the
             scheme was published in March  2011  and  the  exact  date  of
             closure was formally announced  in  the  Statement  of  Change
             published on 15 March 2012.


         3.   No formal transitional arrangements have been included in  the
             Immigration Rules, as Tier 4 students have alternative methods
             of taking up employment within the UK, i.e. under Tier 2, Tier
             5  (Government  Authorised  Exchange)  for  those  undertaking
             professional qualifications,  or  the  new  Tier  1  (Graduate
             Entrepreneur) scheme for those  who  have  developed  a  world
             class business idea.


         4.   You were previously advised that if  applicants  were  awarded
             their   eligible   qualification   after   submitting    their
             application, but before you had made a decision on  the  case,
             you were able to accept the evidence allowing the case  to  be
             approved.   This  was  a  pragmatic  interpretation   of   the
             Immigration Rules, as any migrant refused on  this  basis  was
             able to reapply immediately using identical evidence  and  the
             case could be approved.


         5.   However, as the route is now closed and the Immigration  rules
             are now being applied strictly (sic).


         Case Consideration


         6.   Applicants may still apply for Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) before
             completing or being given final notification of their eligible
             award.  The date of award is defined as the date  the  migrant
             was first given notification in writing that they  had  passed
             their qualification.


         7.   You should consider any application where the date of award is
             on or after 6 April 2012 strictly in line with  the  published
             Immigration Rules.  In practice this means you  should  refuse
             applications  as  the  migrant  has  not  been  awarded  their
             qualification within the 12 months directly prior to  date  of
             application.


         8.   The  relevant  refusal  paragraph  appeared  in  Table  10  of
             Appendix  A  but  is  now  archived  in  Appendix  F  of   the
             Immigration Rules.


         9.   The following scenarios explain the action you should take  on
             Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) applications:


         No evidence of qualification provided


         10.  Where an applicant has not provided evidence to show that they
             have been awarded a qualification,  you  should  only  request
             evidence of this award under the Evidential Flexibility policy
             in the following circumstances:


             a.    the  applicant  has  given  an   indication   in   their
                  application that they should have received confirmation of
                  their award on or before 5 April 2012;


             b.   the applicant has not given any indication of  when  they
                  are likely to obtain their qualification.


         11.   If  you   are   requesting   information   under   Evidential
             Flexibility, you would also be able to request  other  missing
             information at that time (e.g. maintenance).


         12.  When requesting further information, you should make it  clear
             to the applicant that the qualification must have been awarded
             prior to the closure of the  scheme  otherwise  it  cannot  be
             accepted.


         13.  You should not request further evidence of a qualification  if
             the migrant has indicated that it would be awarded on or after
             6 April 2012, even if that date has passed when you are assess
             the case (sic).


         Evidence of qualification provided after application submitted


         14.  Where  an  applicant  has  submitted  an  application  without
             evidence of an eligible  award,  but  subsequently  sent  this
             evidence into the UK Border Agency, you must check the date of
             award to determine whether it can be accepted.


         15.  Where the date of award is on or before 5 April 2012, you  can
             use  this  evidence  to  award  points  for  'date  of  award'
             (assuming other Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  requirements  are
             met).


         16.  Where the date of award is on or after 6  April  2012,  points
             will not be awarded for date of award, as we  will  apply  the
             Immigration Rules as written; therefore the applicant did  not
             obtain their qualification in the 12 months directly prior  to
             date of application."

17.  As we have said, Mr Iqbal characterised the  2012  CI  as  the  "strict
    approach".  The appellants contend that this approach, adopted  by  the
    respondent in their cases, was unlawful.  Again, we will deal with  the
    detailed arguments in due course.


G.  Khatel and others (s85A; effect of continuing  the  application)  [2013]
    UKUT 00044 (IAC)

18.  In Khatel the Upper Tribunal, considering the position  of  appellants,
    whose applications for Tier 1  Post-Study  Work  leave  had  been  made
    shortly before 6 April 2012, but whose notifications of award had  been
    made only after that date, relied upon the judgments in AQ (Pakistan) v
    SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 833 for the proposition (based on a concession  by
    Counsel for the Secretary of State  in  AQ)  that  an  application  "is
    treated as continuing until the date of  decision"  [22].   Before  the
    Upper Tribunal, the respondent's stance  was  that  that  position  had
    changed on the coming into force of section  85A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the relevant provisions of  which  are
    as follows:-

         "...


         (3)  Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if -
             (a)  the appeal is against an immigration decision of  a  kind
                  specified in section 82(2)(a) or (d),


             (b)  the immigration decision concerned an  application  of  a
                  kind identified in Immigration Rules as  requiring  to  be
                  considered under a "Points Based System", and


             (c)  the appeal relies wholly or partly on  grounds  specified
                  in section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).


         (4)  Where Exception 2 applies the Tribunal may  consider  evidence
             adduced by the appellant only if it -


             (a)  was submitted in support of, and at the time  of  making,
                  the application to which the immigration decision  related
                  ..."

19.  On the basis of AQ (Pakistan), the Upper Tribunal held that, since  the
    application must be treated as continuing until the date  of  decision,
    the appellants before them were entitled to succeed, since notification
    of their awards, as required by the respondent, had been  submitted  to
    her before she decided their applications.


H. Secretary of State for the Home Department v Raju and Others [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 754

20.  Before the Court of Appeal, the Secretary of State (represented  by  Mr
    Gullick, who appears for her in the present cases) adopted  a  markedly
    different stance.   Instead  of  relying  on  section  85A,  which  she
    conceded did not preclude consideration by  the  Tribunal  of  evidence
    adduced  after  the  date  of  application  (but  before  the  date  of
    decision), the Secretary of State rested her  case  on  the  submission
    that the Immigration Rules required the  applicant  to  have  made  the
    application for leave to remain "within twelve months of obtaining  the
    relevant qualification" (Appendix A, Table  10,  fourth  section);  and
    that paragraph 34G of the Rules provided:-

         "For the purposes of these rules, the date on which an  application
         or claim (or a variation in accordance with paragraph 34E) is  made
         is as follows:


         (i)  when the application  form  is  sent  by  post,  the  date  of
             posting,


         (ii) when the application form is submitted in person, the date  on
             which it is accepted by a public enquiry office of the  United
             Kingdom Border Agency of the Home Office,


         (iii)    where the application form is sent by courier, the date on
             which it is delivered to the United Kingdom Border  Agency  of
             the Home Officer, or


         (iv) where the application  is  made  via  the  online  application
             process, on the  date  on  which  the  online  application  is
             submitted."

21.  Thus, the fourth section of  Table  10  (see  [12]  above),  read  with
    paragraph 34G,  created  a  substantive  requirement,  with  which  the
    appellants in Khatel could not comply.  Accordingly, the fact that they
    had adduced evidence, prior to the date of decision, that they  had  by
    then been notified of their awards, was of no avail.


I.  The appellants' submissions on why rule 45  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (if available) should not be  applied;  or  why,
if it is applied, the appellants should succeed  on  the  re-making  of  the
decisions in their appeals against refusal to vary leave to remain

(a)  General

22.  As we have already seen, it is  a  central  theme  of  the  appellants'
    submissions that the respondent had a legal  duty  to  determine  their
    applications  for  variation  of  leave  to  remain,  by  applying  the
    "pragmatic" approach of the July 2010 policy, as set out in  the  email
    to caseworkers.  We believe it is helpful to state at  this  stage  the
    basic reason why we consider those submissions to be misconceived.   As
    the Parliamentary history set out above makes plain, by March 2011  the
    respondent had publicly declared her conclusion, that the Tier 1 (Post-
    Study Work) route had, in policy terms, been a failure.  It had not, in
    the government's view, led to the best international graduates  staying
    and contributing to the United Kingdom economy.  The Tier 1 (Post-Study
    Work) arrangements were, according to the Secretary of State,  far  too
    generous:  "[Students] are able to stay for two years, whether  or  not
    they find a job and regardless of the skill  level  of  that  job.   In
    2010, when 1 in 10 UK graduates were unemployed, 39,000 non-EU students
    with 8,000 dependents took advantage of that generosity"  (Hansard,  22
    March 2012, column 857).

23.  The appellants have not begun to show why the Secretary  of  State  was
    not entitled, as a matter of government policy, to so conclude and,  as
    a result, to close the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) route with effect  from
    April 2012.  As Mr Gullick states: "No students  who  were  already  in
    their final year at the  time  of  the  announcement  would  have  been
    affected, and those who had not yet started or were in an earlier stage
    of their courses would have time in which to make alternative plans."

24.  So long as the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) route continued, the July  2010
    policy was justified by the fact that, as explained in the May 2012 CI,
    "any migrant refused on this basis [i.e., that he or  she  was  awarded
    the relevant qualification after submitting the application]  was  able
    to reapply immediately using identical evidence and the case  could  be
    approved".  But that rationale disappeared on 6 April  2012,  with  the
    closure of the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) route.  There was, accordingly,
    an entirely legitimate policy reason for the respondent's decision,  as
    expressed  in  the  2012  CI,  to  enforce  the  pre-6  April  relevant
    Immigration Rules.

25.  We therefore accept Mr Gullick's submission that  what  the  respondent
    was doing  in the May 2012 CI was to avoid speculative applications for
    leave to remain by students who did not have the relevant awards and so
    ensure the closure of the route in an orderly manner.


(b)  Vested rights

 26.  The appellants' argument under this heading is founded on  remarks  by
    Lord Neuberger at [52] and [53] of Odelola v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2009] UKHL 25, giving the example  of  a  hypothetical
    applicant  in  circumstances  where,  at  the  time  they  made   their
    application, the Rules said that "where an application  was  not  heard
    within a period of six months of its  being  made,  it  could  only  be
    refused on grounds of  national  security;  and  the  rules  were  then
    amended so that the period  was  extended  to  one  year"  [52].   Lord
    Neuberger considered that in such a case, where an application was made
    more than six months before the period was extended by  amendment,  the
    applicant would have a vested right at the time of the amendment.

27.  For the present appellants, it  is  argued  that  the  changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules "laid  before  Parliament  on  the  15th  March  2012
    created for these appellants a presumption that the change - not in the
    Immigration Rules but in Casework  Instructions  -  was  not  meant  to
    apply"  to  them.   The  respondent   argues   that   this   submission
    demonstrates  a  failure  to  understand  the  terms  of  the  Casework
    Instructions, and makes the point that the Immigration  Rules  as  they
    were at 5 April 2012 were applied in these cases,  and  the  appellants
    were unable to meet the terms of those Rules.  Mr Gullick also made the
    point that Lord Neuberger's opinion in Odelola was agreed with by  only
    one of his colleagues (Lord Hope) and therefore did not  form  part  of
    the ratio of the judgment in any event.

28.  We agree with the respondent on this issue. It is difficult to  extract
    a meaningful proposition from the submission, just quoted.  Nothing  in
    the rule changes that came into force on 5  April  2012  says  anything
    about the July 2010 policy, which  might  rationally  be  construed  as
    preserving that policy. On the contrary, as we have already noted,  the
    April 2012 rule changes destroyed the rationale for that policy,  since
    there would no longer be any point in waiting for  confirmation  of  an
    award: once in possession of the award, an applicant  could  no  longer
    make an application that could succeed under the Immigration Rules.

29.  As was said by Lord Brown (with whom Lord Hope and Lord  Scott  agreed)
    in Odelola, at [38]:

         "The ... analogy is with planning law and practice  which  requires
         that all applications are determined in  accordance  with  whatever
         policies are in force at the time the decisions are taken."


30.   The instant appeals are, in any event, not cases where, in  the  words
    of Lord Neuberger at [54] of Odelola: "...  a  right  given  under  the
    rules had actually come into existence by the time of  the  amendment".
    As we have seen, the change in the Immigration Rules was heralded  well
    in advance and the appellants were unable to satisfy  the  requirements
    of the Rules by the date on which they changed.


(c)  Legitimate expectation/proportionality

31.  Mr Iqbal sought to rely on the judgment of Sir George  Newman  in  HSMP
    Forum Limited v SSHD [2008] EWHC 664 (Admin) for  the  submission  that
    the appellants had a legitimate  expectation  that  their  applications
    would be determined in accordance with the July 2010 policy.  At  [49],
    the Judge found that the:-

         "... conflict to which this case gives rise requires the  Court  to
         establish a  balance  between  the  importance  of  preserving  the
         defendant's right to exercise her discretionary powers in the field
         of immigration control and the desirability  of  requiring  her  to
         adhere to the statements or practice announced in  connection  with
         the original HSMP."

32.  As the Tribunal held in Ferrer (limited  appeal  ground;  Alvi)  [2012]
    UKUT 304 (IAC), in finding against  the  Secretary  of  State  on  that
    issue, Sir George Newman:-

         "regarded it as particularly important that the Secretary of  State
         had publicly stated that the requirements or conditions to  be  met
         by an HSMP in order to achieve settlement in  the  United  Kingdom,
         would not be changed to that person's disadvantage, once he or  she
         had arrived here pursuant to the scheme."


    Thus, although


         "it would not have been  inconsistent  with  nor  inimical  to  the
         scheme for it to be expressly stated that admission to it  gave  no
         guarantee that the criteria  at  the  extension  stages  would  not
         change during the migrant's participation in the scheme",


    Sir George Newman held that the Secretary of State  could  not  "escape
    from the consequences of having failed to make that clear" [47].

33.  In the present cases, the appellants have been unable to  identify  any
    statement of the respondent (or her predecessor) which  comes  anywhere
    near the statements made in connection with participants  in  the  HSMP
    scheme.  In particular, we have not been shown  any  statement  to  the
    effect that those coming to the United  Kingdom  as  graduate  students
    would have an entitlement to work here after the  completion  of  their
    United  Kingdom  studies.   Participants  in  the  HSMP   scheme   were
    specifically encouraged to sever links with their  home  countries,  on
    the basis that their future lay in the United Kingdom.  The position of
    a person coming to study in the United Kingdom can immediately be  seen
    to be quite different. We say this, having regard to paragraph 245V  of
    the Rules, revoked on 5 April 2012, which described the purpose of  the
    Tier 1 (Post Study Work) route as  being  "to  encourage  international
    graduates who have studied in the U.K to stay on and do skilled  work".
    There is no explicit or implicit promise in the phrase "stay  on"  that
    those  concerned  were  on  an  officially  recognised  avenue  towards
    settlement in the United Kingdom. Contrast the  Government's  published
    2003 Guidance to highly skilled potential migrants:

        "It is important to note that  once  you  have  entered  under  the
        Programme you are in a category that has an avenue  to  settlement"
        (HSMP Forum Ltd at [13]).


    The other matter to notice is, of course, that many Tier 1 (Post  Study
    Work) migrants were not, in fact, staying on to do  highly  skilled  or
    even skilled work.

34.  At this point, it is necessary to address a further  submission  of  Mr
    Iqbal, concerning the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) application form,  which
    the appellants completed.  At G5 of the form, we find the  words  "Tick
    the  box  to  show  that  the  applicant  has  sent  his/her   original
    certificate of award to prove his/her qualification (the applicant  can
    only claim for one qualification)".  There are then two boxes.  One  is
    set against the words "Original certificate of award".  The  other  box
    is set against the following words:-

         "If  the  applicant  has  been  unable  to  submit  their  original
         certificate of award because it has not yet been issued,  tick  the
         box to show that the applicant has sent an original letter from the
         institution giving details of the awarding body,  and  confirmation
         that the certificate of award will be issued."

35.  Mr Iqbal submitted that this indicates applicants were led  to  believe
    they would be dealt with in line with the July 2010 policy.  We  reject
    that submission.  Part G of the application  form  relates  to  the  20
    points available for having a relevant qualification.   The  appellants
    were, in fact, awarded those 20 points.  It is the  15  points  in  the
    "fourth section" of the box in Table 10 which they did not obtain,  and
    which led to  the  refusal  of  their  applications.   Part  K  of  the
    application form deals with this aspect.  The boxes in  this  Part  lie
    beneath the following rubric:-

         "K1.     The applicant must have made  the  application  for  entry
             clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
             Migrant  within  twelve  months  of  obtaining  the   relevant
             qualification or within twelve months of completing  a  United
             Kingdom Foundation Programme."


    The appellants cannot, therefore, rely on the box  in  Part  G  of  the
    application  form,  in  order  to  advance  their  arguments  based  on
    legitimate expectation.


36.  Before us, there was some discussion about the status of the July  2010
    policy, being contained, as we have indicated, in an  email  which  was
    not made public.  Mr Iqbal referred to the  judgments  of  the  Supreme
    Court in Lumba (WL) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]
    UKSC 12 in support of  the  submission  that  the  respondent  was  not
    entitled to operate  a  "secret"  policy,  which  ran  counter  to  her
    published policies.  We  have  difficulty  with  this  submission.   It
    amounts to an attack on the very policy upon which the appellants  seek
    to rely.  Whether or not the actual email was made  public,  we  accept
    that, over time, immigration practitioners would have become  aware  of
    its effects; namely, that during the currency of the Tier 1 (Post-Study
    Work) route, applicants were not being refused variations of  leave  to
    remain, provided that they had submitted confirmation of awards  before
    the respondent made her decisions on their applications.  The issue is,
    therefore, whether the appellants, and others in  their  position,  can
    demonstrate an  entitlement  to  have  their  applications  decided  by
    reference to the July 2010 policy.

37.   Allied  to  legitimate  expectation  is  the   submission   that   the
    respondent's treatment of the appellants is disproportionate.  We  find
    that it is not.  To require the  respondent  to  apply  the  July  2010
    policy to all Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) applications made before 6 April
    2012 would be to legitimise entirely speculative applications (see [25]
    above).   Whilst  it  would  be  possible  to  construct   hypothetical
    alternative policies, which might have  benefited  the  appellants  and
    others in a similar position, without casting the net more widely, as a
    matter of public law the respondent was entitled  to  decide  that  the
    July 2010 policy should end on 5 April 2012.  To find otherwise  would,
    we consider, be for this Tribunal to  trespass  upon  the  respondent's
    statutory functions.


(d)  Fairness

38.  The  issue  of  fairness  is  closely  allied  to  that  of  legitimate
    expectation and proportionality.  The argument was advanced before  the
    Court of Appeal in Raju, that there was no rationale for,  on  the  one
    hand, awarding someone 20 points in  respect  of  their  qualification,
    whilst refusing to award that person 15 points because the date of  the
    award was after 5 April 2012.  This argument did not find  favour  with
    Moses LJ:-

         "[12]    Whilst I acknowledge  that  to  allow  applications  which
             anticipate the award of the necessary qualification  does  not
             undermine the purpose of the policy, the wording of the fourth
             section [of Table 10 in Appendix A] seems to  me  plain.   The
             fact that an Applicant will achieve a score of 60  points,  by
             obtaining a recognised  degree  at  a  qualifying  institution
             during a lawful stay, achieves nothing.  Only a  score  of  75
             points attracts the right  to  be  granted  leave  to  remain.
             There is no room in the points-based scheme for a  near  miss.
             Viewed as a  whole,  qualification  under  Table  10  requires
             strict compliance with the requirement to make the application
             within the period of one to twelve months from the  time  when
             the qualification was obtained.


         [13] Read in that way, the  Rules  are  analogous  to  those  which
             require an applicant to satisfy a requirement at the  date  of
             his application, such as to require him to  have  a  specified
             minimum level of personal savings at least three months  prior
             to the date of the application (para 245AA) and to  the  Rules
             as to level of funds under the applicant's control on the date
             of the application under App C  -  maintenance  (para  1A(g)).
             ..."

39.  An alternative "fairness" submission was advanced, to the  effect  that
    it  was  not  in  the  appellants'  control  to   provide   appropriate
    notification of the relevant awards at any particular time:  they  were
    effectively at the mercy of the awarding institution.  A  corresponding
    argument was advanced before Holman J in R (on the application of Syed)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  984  (Admin).
    The argument there was that it was unfair for the  Secretary  of  State
    not to treat a professional level qualification of the  Association  of
    Chartered  Certified  Accountants  as  a  qualification  entitling   an
    applicant to leave to remain.  At [29] Holman J said:-

         "Finally, and with  the  utmost  eloquence,  Mr  Al  Mustakim  made
         submissions as to the 'fairness' and 'proportionality' of the Rules
         in their relevant form.  He submitted that it is unfair to migrants
         who obtained the ACCA Qualification and/or not proportionate,  that
         they cannot obtain  points.   That  cannot,  however,  be  used  to
         support an alternative construction of rules or rules and/or Policy
         Guidance, which are clear.  It is  not  permissible  to  read  into
         Rules and/or Policy Guidance words which are not there, simply on a
         submission that it would have been more fair if they had been."


    The same is true of the present cases.


40.   The appellants sought to rely upon what the Tribunal said at  [55]  of
    Ferrer, where it held that:-

         "If, on proper analysis, the respondent's contention  is  supported
         by the plain and ordinary meaning of the Rules, then considerations
         of fairness  cannot  produce  a  different  interpretative  result.
         However, where the provisions in question are ambiguous or obscure,
         which is regrettably often the case where  the  Rules  comprise  or
         have an interaction with points-based rules, then it is  legitimate
         to interpret the provisions by assuming that Parliament is unlikely
         to have sanctioned Rules which (a) treat a limited class of persons
         unfairly; and (b) disclose no policy reason for that unfairness."

41.  However, as Moses LJ held in Raju, there is no  ambiguity  or  lack  of
    clarity regarding the "temporal" requirement in the fourth  section  of
    Table 10.  In any event, there is, as we have held, an  entirely  valid
    policy reason for the respondent's decision to treat the appellants  in
    the way she has.


(e)  De minimis

42.  On behalf of the appellants it is argued that the fact  that  the  date
    of award was not before the date of application should  essentially  be
    disregarded, on the basis of the maxim de minimis non curat lex.[1]  It
    is argued that  on  the  basis  of  a  purposive  construction  of  the
    Immigration Rules in these cases the purpose of the Tier 1  (Post-Study
    Work) category can be  met,  the  appellants  are  graduates  who  have
    studied in the United Kingdom and who are willing to stay to gain  work
    experience and  there  is  no  "magic"  in  the  date  of  award.   The
    appellants, accordingly, contend that, given the trifling nature of the
    requirement of the date of award, the decision not to award  15  points
    falls within the de minimis principle.  As a consequence,  they  submit
    that, in the light of Miah v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2012] EWCA Civ 261, the decision is not otherwise in  accordance  with
    the law.

43.  On behalf of the respondent, Mr Gullick says that there is no room  for
    the application of  the  de  minimis  principle;  the  wording  of  the
    relevant rule is clear; the appellants' submissions are,  in  truth,  a
    "near miss" argument wrapped up in the term  de  minimis;  the  points-
    based system Immigration Rules were recognised by the Court  of  Appeal
    in Alam v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    960 at [45] as necessarily involving a lack of flexibility as the price
    of securing consistency, which may well result in "hard"  decisions  in
    individual cases; and the Secretary of State's  answers  to  Parliament
    recorded in Hansard in 2011 demonstrate why the then current post-study
    work route was to be closed from April 2012.  In particular, the  point
    is made that the arrangements  that  currently  existed  were  far  too
    generous.   As  a  consequence,  the  respondent  says  it  is  clearly
    inaccurate for the appellants to claim there was  no  policy  rationale
    for ending that route.  The appellants chose to  make  applications  to
    remain under a route that was closing.

44.  Miah was concerned with an appellant whose appeal  had  been  dismissed
    in circumstances where he sought further leave to remain in the country
    as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  The essential issue in  that  case  was
    consideration of the so-called "near-miss" argument, as it is  referred
    to at [2] of the judgments.  The argument was in essence that where  an
    appellant missed satisfying the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    by a small margin and  contended  that  his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would breach his rights under Article 8, the weight to be given
    to the maintenance of immigration control should be diminished for  the
    purpose of the assessing whether his removal from the United Kingdom is
    permitted under Article 8(2).  The Court's conclusion, as  set  out  in
    the judgment of Stanley Burnton LJ, with whom Lewison and  Maurice  Kay
    LJJ agreed, was that there was no "near-miss" principle  applicable  to
    the Immigration Rules.  At [12] Stanley Burnton LJ pointed out that the
    "near-miss" principle contended for was not the same as the de  minimis
    principle.  He went on to say that if a departure from a rule was truly
    de minimis, the rule was considered to have  been  complied  with.   By
    contrast, the starting point with a near-miss  argument  was  that  the
    relevant rule had not been complied with; and in the instant  case  the
    failure to satisfy the requirement of five years' lawful residence as a
    work permit holder, by a period of some two months, was not de minimis.



45.  The same point was also touched  on  in  MD  (Jamaica)  and  another  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 213, a  case
    concerning the interpretation and application  of  the  long  residence
    provisions contained in paragraph 276 of the Immigration Rules (as then
    in force).  In that case both appellants had been continuously resident
    in the United Kingdom for a period in excess of  ten  years  but  their
    applications were refused by the Secretary of State on the  basis  that
    they had not been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  throughout
    the period and that there had been a period  or  periods  during  which
    they had been overstayers after their leave to remain had  expired  and
    before they had sought and been granted further leave to  remain.   The
    Court of Appeal endorsed giving paragraph 276 its  plain  and  ordinary
    meaning.  In argument it had been  suggested  that  the  interpretation
    adopted by the judges below led to absurd and unfair results in that an
    applicant who was a day late in submitting his application would become
    an overstayer and lose the benefit of the continuous  lawful  residence
    rule, even if he had been in continuous residence in the United Kingdom
    for a period well in excess of ten years and had been a model resident.
     The Court of Appeal said that such  a  case  was  catered  for  by  an
    application of the de minimis principle.  In the cases before the Court
    the intervals between the expiry of the existing leave  to  remain  and
    the date on which the first appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain were two and  seven  weeks  respectively  (there  had  been  two
    interruptions), and in the case of  the  second  appellant  the  period
    without leave was 38 days.

46.  We agree with the respondent that  the  de  minimis  principle  is  not
    applicable in the circumstances of these appeals. Indeed, Mr  Gullick's
    submissions  now  find  confirmation  in   what   Lord   Carnwath   has
    subsequently held at [45] to [57] of Patel and others  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72.  As made clear  in  Miah,
    and reinforced at [12] of Raju, there is no  room  in  the  cases  with
    which we are concerned for a "near- miss".  The wording of the relevant
    rule is clear and it is a far stretch from the situation referred to in
    MD, where an application  was  one  day  late  in  the  context  of  an
    application on the basis of ten years' residence in the United Kingdom.
     Effectively, it is an attempt to argue near-miss in the context  of  a
    de minimis argument.  It was made clear in March 2011 that the route in
    question would close in April 2012, which further supports the argument
    that there was sufficient opportunity to make the relevant applications
    within this timescale.  But in the end that is a  point  of  relatively
    little relevance to the de minimis argument.  The present cases involve
    failures to meet a requirement of a rule in respect of which we do  not
    see any room for a purposive argument, given the  clear  terms  of  the
    rule and the context in which it operated.  The argument adds little if
    anything to the fairness issue which  we  consider  elsewhere  in  this
    determination.


(f)  Retrospectivity and the Alvi principle (Queen (on  the  application  of
    Alvi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 33)

47.  Mr Iqbal submitted,  in  effect,  that  the  2012  casework  instructed
    effected a retrospective change to the Immigration  Rules  and/or  that
    the May 2012 CI fell foul of the principle articulated by  the  Supreme
    Court in Alvi, that a "substantive" requirement  was  determinative  of
    the success  or  failure  of  an  application,  must  be  contained  in
    Immigration Rules made under section 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.

48.  We do not find merit in  these  submissions.  Taking  them  in  reverse
    order, the May 2012 CI is not a policy that "glosses" or modifies  what
    would otherwise be the operation of the Immigration Rules.  It  is,  as
    is plain, an instruction to caseworkers to apply the  letter  of  those
    Rules, as in force on 5 April 2012.  In  no  sense  does  it  impose  a
    requirement, which is not found in the Rules themselves.   Accordingly,
    it does not fall foul of the principle in Alvi.

49.  We can see no element of retrospectivity in the May 2012  CI.   On  the
    contrary, it seems plain that  the  appellants'  complaint  under  this
    heading is not that the changes which took effect on 6 April 2012  were
    retrospective but, rather, that the  respondent  did  not  see  fit  to
    afford the appellants and others in  their  position  any  transitional
    relief from those changes.  Viewed in that light, the  complaint  under
    this heading collapses back into the  challenges  based  on  legitimate
    expectation, proportionality and fairness.


(g)  Evidential flexibility

50.    It is argued in Mr Iqbal's skeleton and  developed  by  him  in  oral
    submissions that the decisions in this case are not in accordance  with
    the law on the basis that the respondent has not applied her evidential
    flexibility policy.  Reference is made  to  the  determination  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Rodriguez  (Flexibility  Policy)  [2013]  UKUT  00042
    (IAC).  It is argued that the policy  was  brought  into  play  by  the
    respondent  contacting  the  appellant's  respective  universities  and
    asking for the date of award.  It is  said  that  the  respondent  then
    failed properly to apply the policy on the basis that, having activated
    the policy and having obtained the relevant information, the policy was
    inconsistently  applied,  in  that   20   points   were   awarded   for
    qualifications but the respondent refused to award 15  points  for  the
    date of award.

51.  These arguments are addressed in  the  respondent's  skeleton  argument
    and as developed in Mr Gullick's oral  submissions.   The  argument  is
    made first that  the  respondent  did  consider  the  evidence  of  the
    qualifications but found them not to meet the Rules and  therefore  any
    evidential flexibility policy arguments are irrelevant to these  cases.
    It is further argued that the casework instruction  (CI)  of  May  2012
    expressly  prevented   caseworkers   from   applying   the   evidential
    flexibility policy to Tier 1 (PSW) applications.  Third,  reference  is
    made to the evidential flexibility policy  itself,  which  it  is  said
    makes it plain that it would not  be  applied  to  cases  such  as  the
    instant ones, in that it can be seen from page 3 of the policy that  if
    the application would fall for refusal even if the missing  information
    were provided or minor error corrected, evidence  cannot  be  requested
    and the application should be refused.  The point is made that in these
    cases even if the award were requested and received it would  still  be
    dated after the application was made and therefore would not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

52.  We see force in these arguments.  Bearing in  mind  the  conclusion  in
    Raju at [24]: "these applicants could not score 75 points because  they
    had  made  their  applications   before   they   had   obtained   their
    qualifications", no application of the  evidential  flexibility  policy
    could assist the appellants on the facts of these cases.   Even  if  it
    could apply, the 2012 CI made it clear at paragraph  10  that  in  such
    cases evidence of the award under  the  evidential  flexibility  policy
    should not be requested, and the point is made also that  in  fact  the
    evidence was considered by the respondent but was found not to meet the
    requirements of the Rules.  In this regard [22] of  Raju  is  of  clear
    relevance.  Accordingly we see no merit to this ground of appeal.


(h)  Variation

53.  Mr Iqbal and Mr Malik advanced somewhat different submissions,  leading
    to the same asserted result; namely, that the appellants should succeed
    in their appeals, by reference  to  the  concept  of  variation  of  an
    application.  We shall deal with those submissions in turn.

54.  In order to appreciate them,  it  is  necessary  to  set  out  relevant
    provisions of section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971:-

         "3C.     Continuation of leave pending variation decision


         (1)  This section applies if-
             (a)  a person who has limited leave to enter or remain in  the
                  United Kingdom applies  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
                  variation of the leave,
             (b)  the application for variation is made  before  the  leave
                  expires, and
             (c)  the leave expires without the application  for  variation
                  having been decided.


         (2)  The leave is extended by virtue of  this  section  during  any
         period when-
             (a)  the application for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
                  withdrawn,
             (b)  an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Asylum
                  and Immigration Act  2002  could  be  brought,  while  the
                  appellant is in the United Kingdom against the decision on
                  the application for variation (ignoring any possibility of
                  an appeal out of time with permission), or
             (c)  an appeal  under  that  section  against  that  decision,
                  brought while the appellant is in the United  Kingdom,  is
                  pending (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act).


         (3)  Leave extended by virtue of this section shall  lapse  if  the
             applicant leaves the United Kingdom.
         (4)  A person may not make an  application  for  variation  of  his
             leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  while  that
             leave is extended by virtue of this section.


         (5)  But subsection (4) does  not  prevent  the  variation  of  the
             application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).


         ..."

55.  Also relevant are paragraphs 34E and 34F of the Immigration Rules:-

         "Variation of applications or claims for leave to remain


         34E.     If a person wishes to vary the purpose of  an  application
             or claim for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  an
             application  form  is  specified  for  such  new  purpose   or
             paragraph A34 applies, the  variation  must  comply  with  the
             requirements of paragraph 34A or paragraph A34 (as they  apply
             at the date the variation is made) as if the variation were  a
             new application or claim, or the variation will be invalid and
             will not be considered.


         34F.     Any valid variation of a leave to remain application  will
             be decided in accordance with the immigration rules  in  force
             at the date such variation is made."


56.  Mr Iqbal contended that the applicant's submission to  the  respondent,
    before she made her decision,  of  the  requisite  notification  of  an
    award, which had not been supplied on making the original  application,
    constituted a variation of  that  application.   This  meant  that  the
    respondent was wrong to refuse the application on the  basis  that  the
    award had not been made prior to the application.

57.  Reliance was placed on the  determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Qureshi (Tier 4 - effect of variation - App C) [2011] UKUT 00412 (IAC).
     That case concerned a student,  who  was  found  effectively  to  have
    varied her application by relying on a new  sponsoring  college,  after
    her existing college lost its licence.  The Upper Tribunal held that it
    was possible to effect a variation of an  application  by  changing  an
    element of an application for leave to  remain  as  a  student  (in  Ms
    Qureshi's case, a change from Empire College London to Birmingham  City
    University).  It was unnecessary for the variation to change the actual
    purpose of the application, such as had happened  in  JH  (Zimbabwe)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA  Civ  78.   The
    Upper Tribunal held that "the date the respondent is required  to  take
    into account for the purposes of determining the points to  be  awarded
    under Appendix C, where there has been a variation substituting  a  new
    college ... is the date of the most recent variation ..." [38].

58.  Thus, on the authority of Qureshi, one may  vary  an  application  made
    for a specified purpose by changing details, whilst not  altering  that
    purpose.  JH (Zimbabwe) is authority for the proposition  that  section
    3C of the 1971 Act authorises a variation which changes the  nature  of
    the  application.   But  neither  of  those  propositions  assists  the
    appellants, for the  simple  reason  that  the  belated  submission  of
    notification of the award cannot in  any  sense  be  categorised  as  a
    "variation" of their applications.  A "variation" requires there to  be
    some change or difference, as  compared  with  the  original  state  of
    affairs.  This did not happen in the case of the appellants (other than
    Mr Rasheed (appellant (16)) - see below).  In Khatel the Upper Tribunal
    was in no doubt that the post-5 April 2012 submission of  material  was
    not a variation:-

         "...     manifestly this was not a wholly fresh application  for  a
             wholly different purpose which was the striking feature of  JH
             (Zimbabwe) but further information  in  the  same  application
             that was received before the decision was taken.  There was no
             attempt to vary the application after the date of decision ...
             [45]


         48.  In this case there was  a  single  application  for  a  single
             purpose made before 6 April  2012  but  supplemented  by  data
             supplied before the decision was made."

59.  Nothing in the judgments in Raju calls  those  findings  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal into question.  We agree with them.

60.  Mr Malik's client, Mr Rasheed, originally applied on the basis of  ACCA
    qualifications.  Following the  case  of  Sayed  (see  [39]  above)  Mr
    Rasheed's  application  could  not  succeed  by  reference   to   those
    qualifications.  On 25 May 2012, before  receipt  of  the  respondent's
    decision, Mr Rasheed informed the respondent that he now wished to rely
    on his Master of Science degree certificate, awarded that  day,  rather
    than on his ACCA qualifications.

61.  It would seem strange that Mr Rasheed should be in  a  better  position
    than the other appellants who, after all, had not  sought  to  rely  on
    inherently invalid qualifications.  In fact, we do  not  consider  that
    such a result follows because we  accept  the  respondent's  submission
    that paragraph 34F of the Immigration Rules  applies  to  Mr  Rasheed's
    variation.  Paragraph 34F is also destructive of the other  appellants'
    cases, were  the  view  to  be  taken  that  their  post-5  April  2012
    notifications constituted variations of their applications.

62.  We reject the appellants' submissions that paragraph 34F  applies  only
    to variations of the purpose of an application etc; that is to say,  an
    application falling within paragraph 34E.  By referring to variation of
    the purpose of an application, the drafter at  paragraph  34E  must  be
    taken to acknowledge that there may be variations that do not amount to
    changes of purpose.  Furthermore and in any event, it would  have  been
    open to the drafter of paragraph 34F to refer expressly to the  purpose
    of an application, had the intention been to restrict that paragraph to
    variations of purpose.

63.  Accordingly, even if  we  accepted  that  there  were  variations,  the
    appellants' "varied" applications would, by reason  of  paragraph  34F,
    fall to be decided "in accordance with the immigration rules  in  force
    at the date such variation is made".  Since this would be after 5 April
    2013, none of the appellants could  succeed.   Their  cases  depend  on
    bringing themselves within the Rules as in force at 5 April.

64.  Mr Malik submitted that "a variation need not  be  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 34E of the Immigration  Rules  for  it  to  be  an  effective
    variation of the purpose of section 3C(5) of the 1971 Act".  We  agree;
    but, for the reasons we have given, this does not  assist  Mr  Rasheed.
    There is, in short, no conflict between what  section  3C  has  to  say
    about the variation of an application to vary leave to remain and  what
    paragraph 34F of the Immigration Rules says about the process by  which
    a variation application is to be decided.


(i)  Ms Heybroek's submissions; UG (Nepal) v Entry Clearance Officer  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 58

65.   Ms  Heybroek's  submissions  require  separate   consideration.    She
    contended that the judgments of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Pankina  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 719  and  AQ
    (Pakistan) meant that evidence regarding the notification of  an  award
    was evidence relevant to the substance of the decision;  and  that  the
    relevant date for assessment of that evidence was, in fact, the date of
    decision.

66.    We  reject  that  contention.   It  seeks  to  erase  the   important
    distinction, emphasised by Moses LJ in Raju, between  the  requirements
    of the Rules and the  evidence  that  may  be  adduced  to  demonstrate
    compliance with those requirements.  The Court of Appeal has found that
    the requirement as to notification had to be satisfied at the  date  of
    application, construed in  accordance  with  paragraph  34G.   Evidence
    which shows that notification occurred after that date, although it may
    be admissible, cannot prove compliance with that requirement.

67.  Ms Heybroek pointed out  that  it  took  until  27  May  2012  for  the
    respondent to issue the casework instruction,  which  was  said  to  be
    valid from 6 April 2012.  However, even if it could be  said  that  the
    July 2010 policy survived until 27 May 2012, this would not assist  any
    of the appellants, since the respondent's decisions in their cases were
    not taken until September, October and December 2012.   In  any  event,
    the basic point remains that the Immigration Rules changed on  6  April
    2012 in a fundamental respect;  that  that  change  had  been  publicly
    announced in  advance;  and  that  the  rationale  for  the  July  2010
    "pragmatic" policy disappeared with that change.

68.  Whilst on this topic, it is convenient to mention  that  Mr  Iqbal,  in
    his submissions, indicated that he could have no complaint with the May
    2012 CI, had it come into force on 5 April 2012.  We confess to  having
    difficulty understanding Mr Iqbal at this point.  The May 2012  CI,  in
    our view, correctly identifies the demarcation line  between  5  and  6
    April 2012.

69.  Ms Heybroek sought to rely on the judgments of the Court of  Appeal  in
    UG (Nepal) v Entry Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ  58.   UG  (Nepal)
    concerned the application of policies relating to the settlement of the
    adult dependents of Ghurkhas granted indefinite leave to enter the  UK,
    following service in the British army.  Ms Heybroek  relied  upon  this
    passage from [28] of the judgment of Tomlinson LJ:-

         "Accordingly, I am satisfied that in each case considerations  both
         of fairness and  of  coherent  decision  making  require  that  the
         applications be remitted for reconsideration by the ECO.   The  ECO
         should in each case apply the policy which was in force as  at  the
         date of the respective applications, but he should apply it to  the
         facts as he finds them to be at the date of his decision."

70.  We are in no doubt that, in the passage just cited,  Tomlinson  LJ  was
    not seeking to lay down a general legal principle, to the effect that a
    decision maker in the immigration context must always apply the  policy
    (if any) which was in force at the date of the application.  Were  this
    not  so,  an  anomaly  would  arise  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the
    application of policies and, on  the  other,  the  application  of  the
    Immigration Rules themselves.  In Odelola, the House of Lords held that
    (absent  transitional  provisions  requiring  a  contrary  result),   a
    decision maker must  determine  an  application  by  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules in force at the date of his or her  decision,  rather
    than the Rules in force when the application was made. In doing so, the
    majority drew on the fact that the  Immigration  Rules  are  themselves
    "essentially statements of policy"  [34]  and  drew  the  analogy  with
    planning law, where applications fall to be  determined  in  accordance
    with whatever policies are in force at the date of decision:  [38]  and
    see [29] above.  In the present cases, the respondent was  entitled  to
    proceed on the basis that  the  rationale  for  the  July  2010  policy
    disappeared on 6 April 2012 and advise her decision makers accordingly.
     We also observe that, if Ms Heybroek's submission were right, then the
    judgments in Raju must be wrong.  We are, of  course,  bound  by  those
    judgments; but,  in  any  event,  we  reject  the  submission  made  by
    reference to UG (Nepal).

71.  Relying on paragraph 9 of Messrs Morgan Marks's response to  the  Upper
    Tribunal's "rule 45" directions, Ms Heybroek submitted that  there  was
    an inconsistency between the approach of the respondent in the cases of
    the appellants, and her  attitude  towards  documentation  required  by
    those applying  under  the  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  route,  where  the
    respondent's  "evidential  flexibility"  policy  extended  to   seeking
    "missing information from the required letters/documents". We reiterate
    what we have said at [50] to [52]  above  regarding  the  inability  of
    evidential flexibility to assist the  appellants.  In  any  event,  the
    position of entrepreneurs is markedly different  from  that  of  former
    students, seeking to follow the Post-Study  Work  route.   As  we  have
    seen, the respondent decided that the policy in respect of  the  latter
    had proved to be unsuccessful.   No  simultaneous  view  was  taken  of
    entrepreneurs.  The appellants have not demonstrated any  irrationality
    on the part of the respondent, as regards her treatment  of  these  two
    classes.


J.  Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

72.  At [18] and [19] above, we have recorded how  the  respondent's  stance
    before the Upper Tribunal in Khatel relied upon section 85A of the 2002
    Act, in which Exception 2 was said to have the  effect  of  restricting
    the Tribunal to the consideration of evidence, which was  submitted  in
    support of, and at the time of making, the application  concerned.   We
    have also seen that, before the Court of Appeal in Raju, the respondent
    put her case on the substantive requirements  of  the  Rules.   In  the
    present cases, much of Mr Iqbal's skeleton argument was taken  up  with
    an analysis of section 85A.  In the event, like the Court of Appeal, we
    have resolved the issues before us without reference to the meaning  or
    effect of section 85A.  Nevertheless, we agree  with  Counsel  for  the
    appellants that, in the circumstances, it would be helpful  to  explain
    why this is so, and in  particular,  to  set  out  the  stance  of  the
    respondent, both in Raju and before us.

73.  Paragraph 29 of Mr Gullick's skeleton argument for  the  respondent  in
    Raju reads as follows:-

         "29.  Whilst  the  SSHD  accepts,  having  further  considered  the
             position in the light of the Upper Tribunal's  judgment,  that
             following the coming into force of section  85A  of  the  2002
             Act, an  application  is  to  be  treated  as  continuing  for
             evidential purposes after it is  initially  submitted  to  the
             SSHD (and so an applicant can  provide  further  evidence,  in
             addition to that initially  submitted,  prior  to  the  SSHD's
             decision), the question of where  the  cut-off  point  in  the
             'fixed historic timeline' for the award of points should  fall
             is a somewhat different one." (original emphases)

74.    Mr  Gullick's  skeleton  argument  in  the  present   contains   this
    paragraph:-

         "41. It is clear ... that the SSHD  has  never  suggested  in  this
             appeal that  the  SSHD  is  not  entitled  to  consider  post-
             submission but pre-decision evidence.  The SSHD has also  made
             it clear that, in any  event,  the  Tribunal  is  entitled  to
             consider the evidence  that  the  decision  maker  considered.
             Such evidence was considered in these cases (and in  the  Raju
             cases), but did not result in the award of 15 points  for  the
             reasons given in Raju." (original emphasis)

75.  In the light of the respondent's  position,  there  is  a  considerable
    amount of agreement between Mr Gullick and Mr  Iqbal.   In  particular,
    they agree on what is meant by  the  expression  "the  application"  in
    section 85A.  They disagree, however, about whether section 85A imposes
    any substantive  restriction  on  the  ability  of  the  respondent  to
    consider evidence submitted after the date on which the application  is
    made for the purposes of the Rules (pursuant  to  paragraph  34G).   We
    agree with the respondent that section 85A imposes no such restriction.

76.  Accordingly, the respondent's position, in cases such as  the  present,
    is that (as held in Khatel) section 85A  precludes  a  Tribunal,  in  a
    points-based appeal, from considering evidence as  to  compliance  with
    points-based Rules, where that evidence was not before  the  respondent
    when she took her decision; but the section does not prevent a tribunal
    from considering evidence that was before the respondent when she  took
    the decision, whether or not that evidence reached the respondent  only
    after the date of  application  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  34F.
    Although our view of the matter is obiter, we concur.


K.  What constitutes notification of  an  award  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Rules?

77.  Mr Jafar raised  an  argument  concerning  the  meaning  of  the  terms
    "award" and "institution" in the Immigration Rules  and  the  Guidance.
    In particular, he relied upon paragraphs of the Guidance, which we have
    set out at paragraph [15] above.


78.  It is important to be clear that two separate substantive  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules are in play. See Table 10 following  paragraph
    68 of Appendix A, set out at [12] above:  20 points can be awarded  for
    the relevant  qualification  and  15  points  can  be  awarded  if  the
    qualification was obtained within the twelve months immediately  before
    the applicant's application for entry clearance or leave to remain etc.



79.  With regard to Mr  Jafar's  argument  that  the  meaning  of  the  word
    "award" is unclear, we consider that this is  sufficiently  established
    at paragraph 79 of the Guidance.  The date of award is as set out:  the
    date on which the applicant was first  notified,  in  writing,  by  the
    awarding institution, that the qualification has  been  awarded.   This
    has to be seen together with paragraph 80, which makes  it  clear  that
    the date of graduation is not accepted as the date of award.   Although
    these matters are concerned with dates of award rather than  definition
    of the term "award", it seems to us sufficiently  clear  that  what  is
    referred to here is the conferring of the degree, whether in person  or
    in absentia, on the person who has fulfilled the requirements  of  that
    degree.  We do not accept that the terminology employed in the May 2012
    CI at paragraph 6 (see [16]  above)  is  other  than  a  paraphrase  of
    paragraph 79 of the  Policy  Guidance  set  out  above.   It  would  be
    surprising if a Casework Instruction issued on 23 May  2012  concerning
    applicants  who  had  applied  before  6  April  2012  prior  to  their
    qualification being awarded would be intended to differ materially from
    the terms of Guidance which was in force  immediately  before  6  April
    2012.

80.  As regards the meaning of the term  "institution"  it  is  clearly  the
    case that it is the awarding institution rather than, as  is  the  case
    for many of these appellants, the institution at which  the  particular
    applicant studied.  Notification therefore by the college at which  the
    applicant studied if it  is  not  the  awarding  institution  will  not
    suffice for the purposes of the obtaining of 15 points.  A degree which
    is awarded under the aegis of an institution such as the University  of
    London or the University of Wales is a degree which is awarded by  that
    institution and matters such as the certificate of award and  the  date
    of award are as a consequence of significance.  By  contrast,  one  can
    see from paragraph  83  of  the  Guidance,  as  regards  the  documents
    required, that an original document from the institution at  which  the
    applicant studied is a prerequisite, and that is to be contrasted  with
    the need to prove notification from the awarding institution  in  order
    to establish the date of award.

81.   It is the case that paragraph 83(a), which speaks of "the  institution
    at which the applicant studied towards his/her eligible qualification",
    suggests that the institution there referred to is the  institution  at
    which the applicant worked towards his or her University degree: eg the
    London College of Business, as opposed to the University of  Wales,  in
    the case of Mr Nasim (appellant (1)). But we do not consider that  such
    an interpretation of the expression "institution" in paragraph 83(a) is
    right. All that provision is doing is to specify what documentation  is
    required in order to demonstrate notification under paragraph  79;  and
    that notification, as we have seen, is notification  by  "the  awarding
    institution". In any event, paragraph 83(a) cannot, we find, alter  the
    plain meaning of those words in paragraph 79.


L. Rule 45

82.  Mr Malik has argued in his skeleton argument that it  is  not  open  to
    the Tribunal to review its decision in these cases under rule  45(1)(b)
    of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  since  the
    criteria in that sub-paragraph are not met.  Review is only permissible
    under the sub-paragraph if:

         "since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made  a  decision
         which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and which, had it been  made
         before the Upper Tribunal's decision, could  have  had  a  material
         effect on the decision."


83.  Mr Malik's first  argument  is  that  Raju  does  not  bind  the  Upper
    Tribunal since it is in conflict with JH (Zimbabwe) and  QI  (Pakistan)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 614, in light  of  the  guidance  in  Young  v  Bristol
    Aeroplane Co Ltd [1944] KB 718.

84.  Mr Malik's further argument is that Raju, had it  been  decided  before
    the Upper Tribunal's decisions, could not have had  a  material  effect
    because, unlike the cases of Mr Gambo (appellant (14)) and  Mr  Rasheed
    (appellant (16)), both of whom  Mr  Malik  represents,  there  were  no
    variations in Raju.  He makes the further point that in any event  Raju
    purely concerned Table 10 of Appendix A, which set out the  substantive
    requirements for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.
     Mr Gambo's case, as Mr Malik  points  out,  has  nothing  to  do  with
    Appendix A but was concerned with Appendix C.   Accordingly,  the  only
    power available to the Tribunal is to grant the  respondent  permission
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

85.   Young v Bristol Aeroplane established, among other  things,  that  the
    Court of Appeal is entitled and, indeed, required to  decide  which  of
    two conflicting decisions of its own it will  follow.   Certainly,  the
    Upper Tribunal is bound by decisions of the Court of Appeal (including,
    of course, Young v Bristol Aeroplane), and we think it must follow that
    if we are faced with conflicting decisions of that Court, we, like  it,
    are required to decide which one we will follow.

86.  The next question, of course, is whether Raju is in  conflict  with  JH
    (Zimbabwe) and QI (Pakistan).  As regards the former, we take the ratio
    to be as set out at [40], in the judgment of Richards LJ, that a  later
    application is capable of being treated as a  variation  of  the  first
    application, even if it is for a different purpose and on  a  different
    form.

87.  The Court, at  [35],  clarified  the  meaning  of  section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971:

         "The  section  applies,  by  subs.(1),  where  an  application  for
         variation of an existing leave is made before  that  leave  expires
         (and provided that there has been no decision on  that  application
         before the leave expires).  In that event there is, by subs.(2),  a
         statutory extension of the original leave until (a) the application
         is decided or withdrawn, or (b) if the application has been decided
         and there is a right of appeal against that decision, the time  for
         appealing has expired, or (c) if an appeal has been  brought,  that
         appeal is pending ... During the period of the statutory  extension
         of the original leave,  by  subs.(4)  no  further  application  for
         variation of that leave can be made.  Thus, there can be  only  one
         application for variation of the original leave, and there  can  be
         only  one  decision  (and,  where  applicable,  one  appeal).   The
         possibility of a series  of  further  applications  leading  to  an
         indefinite extension of the original leave is  excluded.   However,
         by subs.(5) it is possible to vary the one  permitted  application.
         If it is varied, any decision (and any further appeal) will  relate
         to the application as varied.  But once a decision has  been  made,
         no variation of the application is possible since there is  nothing
         left to vary."

88.  This interpretation was endorsed by the Court in QI (Pakistan).  As  we
    explained at [53] to [64] above, the belated submission of notification
    of the  degree  award  in  these  cases  cannot  be  categorised  as  a
    "variation" of the appellants' applications.  There is no  disagreement
    in Raju with the view expressed by the Upper Tribunal at [45] of Khatel
    that the post-5 April 2012 submission of material was not a  variation.
    Hence we see no conflict between either JH (Zimbabwe) or QI  (Pakistan)
    and Raju, and consequently we are free to follow Raju, which we do.


M. The individual cases

89.  We set out below the salient aspects of the cases of each appellant.

(1)  Muhammad Nasim

90.  Mr Nasim applied by reference to a Master  of  Business  Administration
    degree from the University of Wales.  A letter of 20  March  2012  from
    the London College of Business described him as  being  "enrolled  into
    our Advanced Entry MBA programme as a part-time student commencing from
    05/09/2011.  The student has submitted his dissertation on  1  February
    2012, for which the results are still  awaited".   A  "confirmation  of
    course completion" from the London College of  Business  dated  29  May
    2012 described the appellant as having successfully completed  the  MBA
    programme, and that he had "completed all requirements for the award of
    Master of Business Administration.  The University of Wales will  award
    the degree certificate to Mr Nasim in July 2012".  A copy of the degree
    certificate shows,  in  fact,  that  the  degree  was  awarded  by  the
    University of Wales  on  30  May  2012.   The  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application on 28 December 2012.  In his grounds of appeal,
    the appellant asserted that the  immigration  decision  "infringes  the
    appellant's rights arising under the Human Rights Act".

(2)  Tahir Mahmood

91.  Mr Tahir made his application by reference  to  a  Master  of  Business
    Administration degree from the University of Wales. A letter from  City
    of London College dated 23 September  2011 confirmed that the appellant
    would be studying for that degree over  "7  months",  beginning  on  12
    September 2011 and ending on 9 March 2012 (sic), with a  "result  date"
    of 30 March 2012. A document from the  University  of  Wales  dated  16
    August 2012 indicates that the appellant studied for the degree at City
    of London College, commencing there on 12 September 2012 and completing
    the course on 16 April 2012.  He was awarded the qualification on 2 May
    2012.   The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application  on  18
    September 2012.  In his grounds of appeal the appellant raised  Article
    8 of the ECHR.  In his grounds of appeal, the appellant  asserted  that
    the immigration decision  "infringes  the  appellant's  rights  arising
    under the Human Rights Act".

(3)  Muhammad Taimoor Ahmad

92.  Mr Ahmad's application was made  by  reference  to  a  Master  of  Arts
    degree in "Marketing and Innovation (Top-Up)" awarded by Anglia  Ruskin
    University.  A letter dated 2 April 2012 from LS Business School stated
    that the appellant "has successfully submitted all required assignments
    for the above qualification ... first assignment  marks  indicate  that
    the student has passed these modules ... please be aware that the final
    transcript will be made available by Anglia  Ruskin  University  on  20
    July 2012".  A "student results  view"  in  respect  of  the  appellant
    appears to have been enclosed with the letter of 2 April.  This student
    results view was issued by Anglia Ruskin University and stated that the
    appellant had passed the modules in question.  On 17 September 2012  an
    email from Anglia Ruskin University to  the  UKBA  confirmed  that  the
    appellant "was awarded a Master of Arts in Marketing and Innovation  on
    6 July 2012.  According to our records, the student  studied  with  LSM
    from  13  February  2012  to  6  July."   The  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application on 19 September 2012.  The appellant's  grounds
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal do not refer to human rights.

(4)  Ahsan Khalid

93.  Mr Khalid made his application by reference to  a  Masters  of  Science
    degree  in  Management  Information   Systems   awarded   by   Coventry
    University. The documentation submitted with the application  makes  it
    plain that the appellant did not pass his dissertation  module  at  the
    first attempt.  A letter from Coventry University dated 22  March  2012
    indicated that the appellant would have to resubmit his dissertation on
    27 April 2012.  The appellant was awarded his MSc degree in July  2012,
    producing a certificate to that effect.   The  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application on 17 September 2012.  The  appellant  did  not
    raise human rights in grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  but
    his new solicitors, Messrs Malik & Malik, did so  in  response  to  the
    Upper Tribunal's directions given at the  hearing  on  8  October  (see
    below).

(5)  Ahsan Naeem

94.  Mr Naeem made his application by reference to  a  Masters  of  Business
    Administration degree awarded by the University  of  Wales.   A  letter
    from City of London College  dated  29  March  2012  records  that  the
    appellant "has successfully  completed  the  required  modules  of  the
    programme and has also been successful in the internal results  of  the
    dissertation.   External  examiner   has   confirmed   students   (sic)
    successful  completion  of  a  dissertation  which  now  awaits  formal
    recording at the university within the next few days".  A document from
    the University of Wales dated 20 June 2012 records what appears  to  be
    the successful completion by the appellant of nine courses.   There  is
    also a "diploma supplement" issued by the University  of  Wales.   This
    discloses that its purpose is "to  provide  sufficient  recognition  of
    qualification (diplomas, degrees, certificates etc).  It is designed to
    provide a description of the nature, level, context, content and status
    of the studies that were pursued  and  successfully  completed  by  the
    individual named on the original qualification to which this supplement
    is appended".  The document describes the "date of award" of the degree
    as 2 May 2012.  A further document from the  University  dated  10  May
    2012 describes the course as running from 7 November 2011 to  27  April
    2012 and that the appellant achieved a  pass  in  respect  of  the  MBA
    degree.

95.  The appellant's bundle includes this from the UKBA:-

         "On 22 March 2011, following a public  student  immigration  system
         consultation, the government announced that the Tier 1  (Post-Study
         Work) route would close in April 2012.  A formal closure date of  5
         April was published in the Statement of Changes on 15  March  2012.
         Further notice was subsequently placed on the UK Border Agency on 3
         April which advised applications:


             'Any application submitted on or before 5 April 2012, will  be
             considered under the Rules and Guidance in force  on  5  April
             2012.  You must ensure that you can  meet  the  full  criteria
             before applying.  These criteria are set out  in  the  Tier  1
             (Post-Study Work) policy guidance.


             If you have not completed your studies, or have  not  received
             confirmation that you have been awarded a  qualification,  you
             do not meet the criteria and any application for Tier 1 (Post-
             Study Work) will be refused.'"

96.  The footnote for the last quotation is:

         "www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/newsarticles/2012/april/16-
         tier1-psw-route-closing"

97.  The respondent refused the  appellant's  application  on  25  September
    2012.  In his grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant  asserted  that  the
    decision was unlawful because it was incompatible "with the appellant's
    Article 8 under the ECHR" (sic).

(6)  Rizwan Bashir

98.  Mr Bashir made his application by reference to a  Masters  of  Business
    Administration Top-Up, awarded by the University of  Wales.   A  letter
    dated 20 February 2012 from Birmingham Graduate School confirms that he
    "has completed his full-time MBA top-up programme.   He  has  completed
    all his academic requirements.  His course began on 10 October 2011 and
    ended on 20 February 2012.   The  student  is  expected  to  receive  a
    certificate from the University of  Wales  shortly".   The  certificate
    from the University of Wales is dated  30  May  2012  and  the  diploma
    supplement (see above) also gives the date of award  as  30  May  2012,
    although the certification appears to  be  dated  20  July  2012.   The
    respondent refused the appellant's application on  24  September  2012.
    The appellant did not raise human rights in his grounds  of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal but has done so in response to  the  directions
    given by the Tribunal on 8 October.

(7)  Muhammad Arif Mughal

99.  Mr Mughal made his application by reference to a  Masters  of  Arts  in
    Marketing and Innovation, awarded by  Anglia  Ruskin  University.   The
    course was said to commence on 13 February 2012 and to last six months.
     The degree was not awarded until 6 July 2012.   A  letter,  which  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  assumed  had  been  submitted  as  part  of   the
    application, from the London School of Marketing  dated  2  April  2012
    stated that "first assignment marks" indicated that the  appellant  had
    passed his modules; but went on to state that the results were  subject
    to University validation.

100. The respondent refused the  appellant's  application  on  20  September
    2012.  The appellant raised human rights in his grounds of appeal.

(8) to (12) The family members of Muhammad Arif Mughal

101. These linked appeals, from dependants of Mr Mughal, fall to be  decided
    under the Rules in line with  his  application.   It  is  contended  by
    Messrs Morgan Mark that the children of Mr Mughal, born in  the  United
    Kingdom, are both profoundly deaf and that, if necessary, permission is
    sought  to  adduce  evidence  regarding  this  matter.  We  grant  that
    permission, pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

(13) Danisha Ejaz Qureshi

102. Mr Qureshi made his application by reference to a Masters  of  Business
    Administration Top-Up degree from the University of  Wales.   A  letter
    from Birmingham Graduate School dated 18 May 2012  confirmed  that  the
    appellant  "has  successfully  completed  his  MBA   in   International
    Management which is awarded by University of Wales."   The  "end  date"
    was said to be "01/02/2012" and the "date of award"  was  "30/05/2012".
    The letter stated that the appellant "will be issued with  an  official
    certificate and transcript in due course from the University of Wales".
     In fact, the actual grant of the award was  20  September  2012.   The
    respondent refused the appellant's application on  21  September  2012.
    In his grounds of appeal, the appellant asserted that the decision  was
    "contrary to the provisions of the European Convention on Human  Rights
    Act" (sic).

(14) Ja'Afar Dori Gambo

103. It is unnecessary to say more about Mr Gambo's  appeal  than  that,  at
    the hearing on 8 October 2013, Mr Gullick accepted that  the  requisite
    notification of award had been supplied  to  the  respondent  with  the
    application prior to 6 April 2012.   It  was  accepted  that  Mr  Gambo
    satisfied the relevant requirements of  the  Rules.   Accordingly,  the
    judgments in Raju  can  have  no  effect  on  the  correctness  of  the
    determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy,  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal following a hearing on 19 February 2013.  We decline
    to review that determination, pursuant to rule 45.   We  hereby  refuse
    the respondent's application for permission to appeal to the  Court  of
    Appeal against the determination of the Deputy Judge.



(15) Rehan Anwar

104. Mr Anwar made  his  application  by  reference  to  a  Higher  National
    Diploma in Business Administration awarded by  Heriot-Watt  University.
    He was studying for this at West London College.   A  letter  dated  13
    March 2012 from Heriot-Watt University  confirmed  that  the  appellant
    "registered on the programme  in  June  2010  and  has  since  met  the
    requirements to be awarded a Diploma of Higher Education".  The diploma
    submitted to the respondent is  dated  31  May  2012.   The  respondent
    refused  the  appellant's  application  on  28  September  2012.    The
    appellant did not raise human rights in his grounds of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

(16) Asif Rasheed

105. As we have already noted, Mr Rasheed originally based  his  application
    on an ACCA qualification but subsequently varied that application so as
    to rely, instead, on  a  Master  of  Science  degree  in  International
    Accounting from Anglia Ruskin University, and  a  Bachelor  of  Science
    degree in Applied Accounting from Oxford Brookes University.  A  letter
    from Anglia Ruskin University  dated  1  June  2012  congratulates  the
    appellant "on completing your pathway.  At its meeting held  on  Friday
    25 May 2012 the Anglia Ruskin Awards Board confirmed your  final  award
    as: Master of Science International Accounting Pass".  A  letter  dated
    26  September  2012  from  Oxford  Brookes  University   records   that
    "following the decision of the Oxford Brookes University BSc (Hons)  in
    Applied Accounting examination board held on 24 Sep 2012, I am  pleased
    to inform you that your research project has achieved a grade C and you
    have subsequently been awarded the BSc  (Hons)  in  Applied  Accounting
    degree with LOWER SECOND CLASS HONOURS.  Oxford Brookes will send  your
    BSc degree certificate to you by post within the next 3  months".   The
    respondent refused the appellant's application on  27  September  2012.
    In his grounds of appeal,  the  appellant  contended  that  his  appeal
    should be allowed "on the basis of Article 8"; but at the hearing on  8
    October, Mr Malik informed us that his client was not  now  relying  on
    Article 8.

(17) Kazi Mosharrof Hossain

106. Mr Hossain made his application by reference to a Masters  of  Business
    Administration degree awarded by the University  of  Wales.   A  letter
    dated 29 March  2012  from  City  of  London  College  (with  whom  the
    appellant was studying) stated that he "has successfully completed  the
    required modules of the programme and has also been successful  in  the
    internal  results  with  the  dissertation.   External   examiner   has
    confirmed students (sic)  successful  completion  of  the  dissertation
    which now awaits formal recording at the University within the next few
    days".  An email from the University of Wales  to  the  UKBA  dated  13
    September 2012 records  the  date  of  completion  of  the  studies  as
    "16/04/2012" and the "date of award" as "02/05/2012".   The  respondent
    refused the appellant's application  on  27  September  2012.   In  his
    grounds of appeal, the  appellant  submitted  that  "his  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR were not considered adequately by the respondent.
     The appellant has already established private  life  here  in  the  UK
    within the meaning of Article 8 of the ECHR through the course  of  his
    studies in the UK".

(18) Androo Haji Rafeek

107. Mr Rafeek made his application by reference to a  Masters  of  Business
    Administration degree awarded by  the  University  of  Northampton.   A
    "certificate of introduction to UK banking facilities 2010/2011"  dated
    22 February 2011 from the University confirmed that the  appellant  was
    enrolled as a student on the MBA course, said to be due to finish on  6
    January 2012.  A letter from the University dated "July 2012"  informed
    the appellant that "on 23 July 2012 the Senate  of  the  University  of
    Northampton awarded you  a  Masters  of  Business  Administration  Pass
    Congratulations!"  A "transcript of studies" from the University  dated
    August 2012 gave details of the grades  achieved  in  the  ten  courses
    relevant  to  the  degree.   The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's
    application on 27 September  2012.   In  his  grounds  of  appeal,  the
    appellant contended that his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR  should
    have been considered.  He had built up social ties and a  private  life
    in the UK.

(19) Qummer Aziz

108. Mr Aziz made his application by reference  to  a  Masters  of  Business
    Administration degree awarded by the University  of  Wales.   A  letter
    from that University dated 16 April 2012 informed the appellant that he
    had been successful in his candidature and would  be  admitted  to  his
    degree in absentia.  An  email  from  the  University  to  UKBA  on  13
    September confirmed the appellant being awarded the MBA.  The "date  of
    award" was said to be "02/05/2012" and the  "date  of  completion"  was
    "16/04/2012".  The respondent refused the appellant's application on 27
    September 2012.  The appellant did not raise human  rights  grounds  in
    his grounds of appeal but the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    deals with human rights, suggesting that such grounds had  been  raised
    at the hearing.

(20) Abhilash Mukundhakshan

109. Mr Mukundhakshan made his application by  reference  to  a  Masters  of
    Business Administration degree in Information  Technology,  awarded  by
    Coventry University.  A letter dated 2 April 2012 from that  University
    recorded that the appellant had enrolled on his one year  course  on  3
    October 2011,  with  a  finish  date  of  8  June  2012  and  "expected
    graduation date" of  July  2012.   A  further  document  from  Coventry
    University dated 26 June 2012 informing the appellant that he had  been
    awarded an MBA degree.  The degree certificate is  dated  "July  2012".
    There was also a letter from Coventry University  dated  29  June  2012
    stating that the appellant "has  been  awarded  a  Master  of  Business
    Administration  in  Information  Technology".   This  letter,  however,
    although referring to the course as one year in duration, gives a start
    date of 25 January 2010 and a  "finish  date"  of  8  June  2012.   The
    respondent refused the appellant's application on  26  September  2012.
    The appellant raised Article 8 in his  grounds  of  appeal,  contending
    that the decision constituted a disproportionate interference with  his
    private life and that of his  dependant.   In  its  determination,  the
    First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction  in  respect  of  the
    appellant. We can discern  no  reason  for  this  direction,  which  we
    accordingly rescind.

(21) Sandeep Kaur

110. Ms Kaur made her application by reference to a Master  of  Arts  degree
    in Marketing  and  Innovation  awarded  by  Anglia  Ruskin  University.
    According to [3] of the First-tier Tribunal's determination,  with  her
    application the appellant submitted a letter from the London School  of
    Management  "confirming  that  he  (sic)  had  submitted  all  required
    assignments for her qualification".  An email from  the  University  to
    the UKBA dated 17 September  2012  confirms  that  the  appellant  "was
    awarded a Master of Arts in Marketing and Innovation on 6  July  2012".
    The studies and exam took place at London School of Marketing (LSM) and
    the degree was accredited by Anglia Ruskin  University.   According  to
    our records, the student studied with LSM from 12 September 2011  to  6
    July 2012".  The respondent refused the appellant's application  on  27
    September 2012.  In her grounds of appeal, the appellant asserted  that
    the decision violated her rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

(22) Sajid Abdul

111. Mr Abdul made his application by reference to a Master of  Arts  degree
    in  Marketing  and  Innovation  (Top-up)  awarded  by   Anglia   Ruskin
    University.  A letter from LS Business School dated 4 April 2012 stated
    that the appellant "has submitted  all  required  assignments  for  the
    above qualification on 23 March 2012".  The start date for  the  course
    was said to be 16  January  2012.   It  appears  that  the  only  other
    relevant date is 6 July  2012,  when  the  appellant  was  awarded  his
    qualification ([5] of the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination).   The
    respondent refused the appellant's application on 1 October  2012.   In
    his grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant  asserted  that  the  decision
    violated his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.


N. Applying our findings to the appellants' individual cases

112.    Applying our findings in Parts I, K and L above  to  the  individual
    facts as set out in Part  M  above,  we  hereby  find  that,  with  the
    exception of Mr Gambo (appellant (14)), they have all  failed  to  show
    that the variation decisions against which they appealed  were  not  in
    accordance with the law, including the Immigration Rules,  for  any  of
    the reasons advanced by them and recorded in  those  Parts.  They  have
    also failed to show why, in the light of this, rule 45  should  not  be
    invoked so as to set aside the determinations of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    against which the respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Court
    of Appeal. We do so. In the case  of  Mr  Nasim  (appellant  (1)),  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal allowing his  appeal  contains
    an error of law and we have decided to set the determination aside.

113.    The stage is, accordingly, reached in all the cases before us  where
    the Upper  Tribunal  must  decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determinations involved the making of an error on a point  of  law.  In
    all but two cases, the findings we have made in Parts I, K and  L  make
    it plain that the determinations did involve such  errors,  whether  by
    allowing the appeal against the decision to refuse to  vary  leave;  by
    dismissing the appeal against the section 47 removal  decision;  or  by
    not engaging with the section 47 appeal at all. In all of these  cases,
    the First-tier Tribunal's determinations fall to be set aside, with the
    result that the decisions  in  the  appeals  against  the  respondent's
    immigration decisions need to be re-made.

114.    In  two  cases  (Mr  Aziz  (appellant  (19))  and  Mr  Mukundhakshan
    (appellant (20))) the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal  against
    the variation decision but allowed the appeal against  the  section  47
    decision. In the light of our findings, that result is legally correct,
    so far as concerns all issues other than (possibly) Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

115.   As can be seen, all the appellants  except  three  wish  to  rely  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR, either having done so in the previous course  of
    proceedings in their appeals or by responding to the  directions  given
    by the Upper Tribunal at the hearing on 8 October. We indicated at that
    hearing that we would not in  this  decision  deal  with  any  discrete
    Article 8 matter, by which we mean a submission  to  the  effect  that,
    even though the immigration decision may  otherwise  be  in  accordance
    with the law, including immigration rules,  the  appellant  and/or  his
    family have a protected private or family life in the  United  Kingdom,
    such that the hypothetical removal of the appellant in  consequence  of
    the  immigration   decision   would   constitute   a   disproportionate
    interference with that private or family life.

116.   It therefore follows that, in the case of the  three  appellants  who
    are not relying on Article 8 (namely,  Mr  Ahmad  (appellant  (3)),  Mr
    Anwar (appellant (15)) and Mr Rasheed (appellant (16))), the  decisions
    in their appeals fall to be re-made by, in each  case,  dismissing  the
    appeals brought against the decisions of the respondent  to  refuse  to
    vary leave to remain but allowing the  appeals  against  the  decisions
    purportedly made under section 47 of the 2006 Act  to  give  directions
    for their removal from the United Kingdom. In each case, the  appellant
    awaits a lawful removal decision from the respondent (see paragraph [6]
    above).

117.   In the other remaining cases, we  shall  reconvene  to  complete  the
    proceedings by reference to the appellants' Article 8 submissions.  The
    appellants are hereby directed to serve on the Upper Tribunal  and  the
    respondent, not later than 14 days from the date this decision is sent,
    all  written  submissions  and  written  evidence  (including   witness
    statements) on the issue of Article 8, upon which  they  will  seek  to
    rely at the reconvened hearing (where necessary,  complying  with  rule
    15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Each
    case will be set down for hearing with a time estimate  of  30  minutes
    (with appellants (7) to (12) being treated as a single  case  for  this
    purpose). In the case of appellants  (19)  and  (20),  the  forthcoming
    hearing will concern whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    involved making an error of law as regards Article 8 and,  if  so,  how
    the appeal should be re-made in respect of that issue.

118.  For ease of reference, therefore:

Appellant (1) (Mr Nasim)

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error
    of law. We set the determination aside. We re-make the decision in  the
    appeal against the respondent's immigration decisions by  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal against the  section  47  removal  decision  and  by
    dismissing the appeal against the variation decision, so  far  as  that
    decision was asserted to be not in  accordance  with  the  law  on  any
    ground other than Article 8 of the ECHR. Whether the appeal against the
    variation decision should be allowed or dismissed on Article 8  grounds
    will be decided following the forthcoming hearing.




Appellants (2), (4) to (13), (17), (18),  (21)  and  (22)  (Messrs  Mahmood,
Khalid, Naeem, Bashir, Mughal (and family),  Qureshi,  Hossain,  Rafeek,  Ms
Kaur and Mr Abdul)

    The determinations of the  Upper  Tribunal,  allowing  the  appellants'
    appeals, are set aside pursuant to rule 45 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


    The determinations of the First-tier Tribunal are set aside  for  error
    of law.


    We re-make the  decisions  in  the  appeals  against  the  respondent's
    immigration decisions,  in  each  case,  by  allowing  the  appellants'
    appeals against the section 47 removal decisions and by dismissing  the
    appeals against the variation decisions, so far as those decisions were
    asserted to be not in accordance with the law on any ground other  than
    Article 8 of the  ECHR.  Whether  the  appeals  against  the  variation
    decisions should be allowed or dismissed on Article 8 grounds  will  be
    decided following the forthcoming hearing.




Appellants (19) and (20) (Messrs Aziz and Mukundhakshan)

    The determinations of the  Upper  Tribunal,  allowing  the  appellants'
    appeals, are set aside pursuant to rule 45 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


    The determinations of the First-tier Tribunal, dismissing  the  appeals
    against the variation decisions but allowing them against  the  section
    47 removal decisions, do not involve an error of law, so far  as  those
    determinations are asserted be wrong in law on any  ground  other  than
    Article 8 of the ECHR. Whether those determinations are  wrong  in  law
    and should be set aside on Article 8 grounds will be decided  following
    the forthcoming hearing, as will any  consequential  re-making  of  the
    decision in the appeal against the variation decisions.




Appellants (3), (15) and (16) (Messrs Ahmad, Anwar and Rasheed)


    The determinations of the  Upper  Tribunal,  allowing  the  appellants'
    appeals, are set aside pursuant to rule 45 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


    The determinations of the First-tier Tribunal are set aside  for  error
    of law.


    We re-make the  decisions  in  the  appeals  against  the  respondent's
    immigration decisions  by,  in  each  case,  allowing  the  appellants'
    appeals against the section 47 removal decisions and by dismissing  the
    appeals against the variation decisions.




Appellant (14) (Mr Gambo)

    We refuse the respondent's application under rule 44  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 for permission to appeal  against
    the determination of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal.

119.   Both of us have contributed to the preparation of this decision.

                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
-----------------------
[1] The law does not concern itself with trifles.

