
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Clarke ("Section 117C - limited to deportation") [2015] UKUT 00628 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 6 October 2015                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            michael evans clarke
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Anyene, instructed by Calices Solicitors


That section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  is
applicable only in deportation  cases  is  made  clear  in  section  117A(2)
which, in directing the court or tribunal  to  the  considerations  involved
when looking at the public interest question, clearly distinguishes  between
those cases that  involve  deportation  from  those  that  do  not.  Section
117A(2)(b) provides for a distinct category of  cases,  providing  that,  in
considering the public interest question, the court or  tribunal  must  have
regard to the considerations listed in section  117C  "in  cases  concerning
the deportation of foreign criminals".

Accordingly, irrespective of whether or not an  appellant  may  fall  within
the definition of a "foreign criminal" in section  117D(2),  the  provisions
of section 117C of the 2002 Act only apply in cases involving deportation.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Clarke's appeal  against
the respondent's decision to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom  under
section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, following the refusal  of
his human rights claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as  the  respondent  and  Mr  Clarke  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 10 March 1981. He arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 20 June 2001 without leave  to  enter  and  was  given
temporary admission and served with a notice to  report  to  an  immigration
officer which he failed to do. He was listed as an  absconder.  He  did  not
seek to  regularise  his  stay  until  27  October  2004  when  he  made  an
application for a residence permit as the spouse of an EEA national whom  he
had married on 28 July 2004. He was granted a residence permit on 10  August
2005. He was divorced from his EEA national spouse on  27  May  2009.  On  9
October 2009 he made an application for  a  permanent  residence  card,  but
that was refused on 26 March 2010. He unsuccessfully appealed  against  that
decision and became appeals rights exhausted on 23 September 2010.

On 25 February 2011 the appellant made an application for  leave  to  remain
on form FLR(O) which was refused  on  15  October  2012  with  no  right  of
appeal. He sought to challenge the decision by way of  judicial  review  and
the matter was resolved through a Consent Order in  which  the  Home  Office
agreed to withdraw the original decision and issue a new decision.

In response to the respondent's enquiries, the appellant submitted a  family
questionnaire giving details of his family  in  the  United  Kingdom,  which
included his wife, BB, a British citizen, with whom he had lived since  2009
and whom he married on 17 November 2011 and his three British children:  his
son from a previous relationship with
GB, JMC (born 2005) and his sons from his marriage to BB,  LMC  (born  2008)
and DEC (born 2013).

The appellant's application was refused by the respondent on 25  March  2014
and a decision was made the  same  day  for  his  removal  from  the  United
Kingdom.

Basis for Respondent's Decision

In refusing the  appellant's  application,  the  respondent  considered  and
relied upon the suitability requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  under
Section S-LTR and considered that he fell within S-LTR.1.5 and S-LTR.1.6  by
reason of his criminal offending.

    "S-LTR.1.5. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
    offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender  who
    shows a particular disregard for the law.


    S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to
    the public good because their conduct (including  convictions  which  do
    not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character, associations,
    or other reasons, make it undesirable to allow them  to  remain  in  the
    UK."

In  so  doing,  the  respondent  referred  to   the   appellant's   criminal
convictions  and  relied  upon  a  witness   statement   (MG11)   from   the
Metropolitan Police  Service  (MPS),  provided  by  an  officer  working  on
Operation Nexus, an operation conducted in partnership with the Home  Office
aimed at tackling high-harm foreign nationals and immigration offenders.

The respondent listed the appellant's criminal convictions, as follows:

 . On 11 March 2007 he was  cautioned  by  the  police  for  common  assault
   against a female who was pregnant at the time.

 . On 2 September 2008 at Wood Green Crown Court he  was  convicted  of  two
   counts of possession of class A drugs (cocaine and heroin) and  sentenced
   to a 12 month Community Order with a supervision requirement.

 . On 21 March 2011 at Portsmouth Crown Court he was convicted of two counts
   of possession of class A drugs (cocaine and heroin) and sentenced to four
   months' imprisonment.

The respondent considered that  the  witness  statement  (MG11)  showed  the
appellant to be an individual who was funding his lifestyle through  dealing
class A drugs and who was well-known in the Portsmouth area and  noted  that
the statement listed numerous occasions when the police had been  called  to
deal with the aftermath of domestic  abuse  the  appellant  had  perpetrated
against his partners.

The respondent noted  that  the  appellant  had  been  convicted  twice  for
possession of class A drugs with intent to supply (in fact  the  convictions
were for possessing class A controlled drugs) and considered that he  had  a
propensity to reoffend. Since he fell within  S-LTR.1.5  and  S-LTR.1.6  the
respondent considered that the appellant could not be awarded leave  on  the
basis of his relationships with his wife and children or  on  the  basis  of
his private life in the United Kingdom. The respondent went on  to  consider
whether there were any  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of
leave outside the immigration rules and took account of the  best  interests
of the appellant's children, but concluded that their best interests lay  in
remaining with their mother in the United Kingdom and that  the  appellant's
removal would not breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

Appellant's Grounds of Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant appealed against that decision. In his grounds  of  appeal  he
stated, in regard to his criminal convictions that he was in  possession  of
drugs because he was addicted to them and not because he had  any  intention
of supplying them. He claimed to be reformed and  to  be  no  longer  taking
drugs.

The appellant asserted that he was in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
with  his  wife,  a  British  citizen.  He  stated  that   he   shared   the
responsibility for the upbringing of their two children. He also shared  the
responsibility of his eldest child with that child's mother. He stated  that
he had a close bond  with  his  children  and  that  his  removal  would  be
disproportionate as it would break up the family unit and separate him  from
his children. He claimed also to have established  a  private  life  in  the
United Kingdom, having resided here for 13 years.

Appeal in the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant's appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 30  September
2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig.

At [17] to [24], Judge Pullig recorded the documentary evidence before  him.


For the respondent,  the  evidence  included:  a  Police  National  Computer
Printout (PNC) dated 6 November 2013 listing the appellant's convictions  as
at that date; a further updated PNC dated 29  September  2014;  the  witness
statement MG11 together with supporting evidence and details of  the  police
investigations  into  the  appellant's  activities;  and   the   appellant's
completed family questionnaire including  evidence  about  his  relationship
with his children.

For the appellant,  the  evidence  included:  witness  statements  from  the
appellant, his wife, his former  partner,  his  mother-in-law;  evidence  of
cohabitation with his wife; evidence relating to the  appellant's  children;
photographs of the appellant with  his  children;  various  certificates  of
awards;  probation  reports;  letters  of  support;  and  evidence  of   the
appellant's involvement in drug rehabilitation programmes.

Judge Pullig noted that the appellant  had  recently  been  convicted  of  a
further offence, the supply of a controlled drug class A crack cocaine,  for
which he was sentenced on 14 August 2014  to  a  two  year  prison  sentence
suspended for two years with twelve months' supervision order and  a  victim
surcharge of �120.

The  author  of  the  witness  statement  (MG11),  an   officer   with   the
Metropolitan Police Nexus team, gave  evidence  at  the  hearing  and  Judge
Pullig recorded his evidence.  He  recorded  the  evidence  in  the  witness
statement,  which  set  out  details  of  further  incidents  in  which  the
appellant was involved but which did not  result  in  conviction,  including
matters relating to drugs, allegations of assault  involving  BB  and  other
allegations or suspicions of wrongdoing. With regard to the  allegations  of
assault it was noted that there were three incidents involving  BB,  but  on
each occasion no further action was taken. The other areas of  concern  were
mainly domestic incidents involving the appellant's ex-wife,  his  wife  and
the mother of his  other  child,  but  where  no  allegations  were  pursued
against the appellant and where no  action  was  taken.  Judge  Pullig  also
referred to the list, in the officer's statement (MG11), of the  appellant's
associates, each of whom had numerous convictions for drugs  offences.  With
regard to the officer's oral evidence, the judge recorded that  he  believed
that most of the domestic incidents involved no further action  because  the
appellant  was  controlling  his  partners  who  were  unwilling  to  pursue
prosecution. The officer could not understand why the  appellant's  sentence
for the  last  conviction,  on  14  August  2014,  was  so  lenient  and  he
considered that the appellant was an active drug dealer.

The appellant himself gave evidence before the judge about his  relationship
with his children and his past drug  addiction,  claiming  to  be  currently
totally abstinent. His wife gave oral evidence, as did GB.

Judge Pullig viewed BB's claim, that the appellant had  never  been  violent
towards her, with considerable scepticism, but he accepted  that  they  were
married and that there was a  relationship  between  them,  albeit  one  not
without its problems. He accepted the  police  officer's  conclusions  about
the appellant being a drug dealer and did not accept the  appellant's  claim
that he had no intent to supply. The judge,  however,  considered  that  the
evidence pointed to the appellant having a positive relationship  with  each
of his three children and found that he played a really significant role  in
LMC's upbringing in particular. He found that the children's interests,  and
particularly those of LMC, were best served  by  the  appellant's  continued
presence in the United Kingdom.

Having made those findings, the judge went on  to  consider  Article  8.  He
found that the appellant could  not  succeed  under  the  immigration  rules
because he failed to meet the suitability requirements. He  found  that  the
appellant failed under S-LTR.1.5 and S-LTR.1.6: as regards S-LTR.1.5 on  the
basis that it was the Secretary of State's view that  his  offending  caused
serious harm and that it was debateable whether he could be considered as  a
persistent  offender;  and  as  regards  S-LTR.1.6  on  the  basis  of   his
character, associations and conduct.

The judge then went on to consider Article 8 in its  wider  context  outside
the  rules.  In  so  doing,  he  took  account  of   the   public   interest
considerations in section 117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002, which had come into effect since  the  respondent's  decision  but
which, in accordance with the guidance in YM (Uganda) v Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292, nevertheless  applied  in  the
appeal before him and which he  was  bound  to  consider.  With  respect  to
section 117B(6)(a) he accepted that each of the appellant's children  was  a
"qualifying child" and that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship with each child. He found that it would be unjustifiably  harsh
for the children to go to Jamaica and that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
expect any one of the children to leave the United Kingdom. He  noted  that,
in accordance with section 117B(6), the public interest did not,  therefore,
require  the  appellant's   removal.   He   then   went   on   to   consider
proportionality and addressed each  of  the  factors  in  section  117B.  He
considered the appellant's criminal  offending  and  the  evidence  in  that
regard.

The judge then concluded that "it is therefore with considerable  reluctance
that I find the strength of the factors weighing in favour  of  his  removal
are outweighed  by  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  children,  in
particular [LMC], taking account of their best interests and the  provisions
of Section 117B(6)." Accordingly he allowed the appeal under Article 8.



The Secretary of State's appeal

The respondent sought permission to appeal Judge Pullig's  decision  on  the
grounds that he had failed to consider that the appellant was  a  persistent
offender and thus a foreign criminal, in accordance  with  section  117D  of
the 2002 Act, and that section 117C  therefore  applied.  No  challenge  was
made to the judge's decision on any other basis.

Permission was granted on 7 July 2015.

Appeal in the Upper Tribunal

At the hearing before me I put it to Mr  Norton  that  my  understanding  of
section 117C was that it applied only in  deportation  cases,  whereas  this
was a removal case. Mr Norton agreed that he was  in  some  difficulty  with
the wording of section 117C.  His  submission  was,  however,  that  it  was
implicit within section 117C that it could apply in  circumstances  such  as
those of the appellant, although he agreed that there was  no  authority  to
that effect.

Mr Anyene submitted that section 117C did not apply  and  that  the  judge's
determination should stand.

Legislative framework

Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as inserted  by
s19 of the Immigration Act 2014, states as follows:

         117A Application of this Part


                  (1)  This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                      required to determine whether a decision  made  under
                      the Immigration Acts-

                       (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private
                           and family life under Article 8, and
                       (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of
                           the Human Rights Act 1998.

                  (2) In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                       court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                      (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in
                      section 117B, and
                      (b)  in cases concerning the deportation  of  foreign
                           criminals,  to  the  considerations   listed   in
                           section 117C.

                  (3) In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                       means the question of whether an interference with  a
                       person's right to respect for private and family life
                       is justified under Article 8(2).




             117B  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in
             all cases

                  (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                       in the public interest.


                  (2)  It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                      the interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the
                      United Kingdom, that persons who  seek  to  enter  or
                      remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
                      English, because persons who can speak English-
              [pic] [pic]  [pic]
                      (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
                      (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


                  (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular
                      in the interests of the economic  well-being  of  the
                      United Kingdom, that persons who  seek  to  enter  or
                      remain  in  the  United   Kingdom   are   financially
                      independent, because such persons-
                      (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
                      (b) are better able to integrate into society.


                  (4)      Little weight should be given to-
                      (a) a private life, or
                      (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,
                      that is established by a person at a  time  when  the
                      person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


                  (5)  Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                      established by a person at a time when  the  person's
                      immigration status is precarious.


                  (6)      In the case of a person  who  is  not  liable  to
                      deportation, the public interest does not require the
                      person's removal where-
                      (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and
                      (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                      to leave the United Kingdom.



             117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals




                  (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                  interest.


                  (2)  The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                      criminal, the  greater  is  the  public  interest  in
                      deportation of the criminal.


                  (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who  has  not
                      been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  four
                      years or  more,  the  public  interest  requires  C's
                      deportation  unless  Exception  1  or   Exception   2
                      applies.


                  (4)  Exception 1 applies where-
                           (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United
                              Kingdom for most of C's life,
                           (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in
                              the United Kingdom, and
                           (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to
                              C's integration into the country to which C is
                              proposed to be deported.


                  (5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                      subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or
                      a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
                      qualifying child, and the effect of  C's  deportation
                      on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


                  (6)  In the case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                      sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at  least
                      four years, the public interest requires  deportation
                      unless there are very compelling circumstances,  over
                      and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.


                  (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to
                      be taken into account where a court  or  tribunal  is
                      considering a decision to deport a  foreign  criminal
                      only to the extent that the reason for  the  decision
                      was the offence or offences for  which  the  criminal
                      has been convicted.



             117D Interpretation of this Part


                  (1)      In this Part-"Article 8" means Article 8  of  the
                      European Convention on Human Rights;

                      "qualifying child" means a person who  is  under  the
                      age of 18 and who-

                           (a)  is a British citizen, or
                           (b)  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
                               continuous period of  seven  years  or  more;
                               "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
                               (a)  is a British citizen, or
                               (b)  who is settled  in  the  United  Kingdom
                                   (within the meaning of  the  Immigration
                                   Act 1971 - see section  33(2A)  of  that
                                   Act).

                   (2)     In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-



                           (a)  who is not a British citizen,
                           (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom
                               of an offence, and
                           (c)  who-
                                (i) has  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
                                   imprisonment of at least 12 months,
                                (ii)    has been convicted  of  an  offence
                                   that has caused serious harm, or
                                (iii)   is a persistent offender.

                  (3)    For the purposes of  subsection  (2)(b),  a  person
                        subject to an order under-

                           (a)   section  5  of   the   Criminal   Procedure
                               (Insanity) Act 1964 (insanity etc),
                           (b)   section  57  of  the   Criminal   Procedure
                               (Scotland) Act 1995 (insanity etc), or
                           (c)  Article 50A of the Mental  Health  (Northern
                               Ireland) Order 1986 (insanity etc),  has  not
                               been convicted of an offence.

                  (4)  In this Part, references to a  person  who  has  been
                      sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a    certain
                      length of time-

                           (a)  do not include a person who has  received  a
                               suspended   sentence    (unless    a    court
                               subsequently orders that the sentence or  any
                               part of it (of whatever length)  is  to  take
                               effect);
                           (b)   do  not  include  a  person  who  has  been
                               sentenced to a period of imprisonment of that
                               length  of  time  only  by  virtue  of  being
                               sentenced to consecutive sentences  amounting
                               in aggregate to that length of time;
                           (c)   include  a  person  who  is  sentenced   to
                               detention,  or  ordered  or  directed  to  be
                               detained, in  an  institution  other  than  a
                               prison (including, in particular, a  hospital
                               or an institution for  young  offenders)  for
                               that length of time; and (d) include a person
                               who   is   sentenced   to   imprisonment   or
                               detention,  or  ordered  or  directed  to  be
                               detained,  for   an   indeterminate   period,
                               provided that it may last for at  least  that
                               length of time.

                  (5)      If any question arises for the purposes  of  this
                      Part as to whether a person is a British  citizen,  it
                      is for the person asserting that fact to prove it."


Consideration and findings.

It is of particular note that the respondent does not seek to challenge  the
judge's findings under  section  117B(6):  there  is  no  challenge  to  the
finding  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
relationship with his children and neither is there  any  challenge  to  the
finding that it would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave  the
United Kingdom. There has never  been  any  suggestion  by  the  respondent,
either in the grounds seeking permission or by Mr  Norton  before  me,  that
Judge Pullig erred in his understanding or application of section 117B(6).

The sole challenge made by the respondent  to  Judge  Pullig's  decision  is
that he did not go on to apply the provisions of section 117C  of  the  2002
Act, on the basis that the appellant was a foreign criminal.

The first point to be made in that respect is that that was not an  argument
pursued by the respondent at the hearing before Judge Pullig.  It  is  clear
from the judge's summary of the submissions at [112] to [118] and  from  his
detailed record of proceedings that the  respondent  relied  only  upon  the
provisions in section 117B and made no reference  to  section  117C  at  the
hearing. It is therefore somewhat disingenuous for the  Secretary  of  State
to now criticise the judge for having failed to  consider  the  respondent's
case on a different basis to that upon which it was presented before him.

It is nevertheless now the respondent's case that the  judge,  having  found
at [160] that paragraph S-LTR.1.5 of the immigration rules  applied  to  the
appellant, ought to have made findings on (a) whether or not  the  appellant
was a persistent offender  and  (b)  whether  he  was  therefore  a  foreign
criminal as defined in section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act and that, if he  was,
he ought to have then gone on (c) to consider s117C.  The  rationale  behind
this is,  no  doubt,  that  the  relevant  test  under  section  117C,  when
considering the weight to be attached to the appellant's  relationship  with
his children, would not be that within the more generous section  117B(6)(b)
"it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
Kingdom", as applied by Judge Pullig, but rather  the  "unduly  harsh  test"
within section 117C(5) which did not  necessarily  require  that  the  child
leave the United Kingdom and was thus a more stringent test,  as  considered
in the recent case of KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria  [2015]  UKUT
00543. That was indeed a distinction noted and relied upon by  Judge  Pullig
at [168].

However (a) and (b) are only of relevance if section 117C applies, since  if
it does not, nothing material arises, in this case, from a finding that  the
appellant falls within the definition  at  section  117D(2)  of  a  "foreign
criminal".

I turn, therefore, to the respondent's assertion in the grounds that if  the
appellant is a "foreign  criminal"  as  defined  in  section  117D(2),  then
section 117C applies. As I pointed out  to  Mr  Norton,  I  have  difficulty
following  such  a  proposition,  given  the  wording  of  section  117  and
considering  that  the  appellant  is  not  the   subject   of   deportation
proceedings.

It is indeed the case  that  the  heading  for  section  117C,  "Article  8:
additional considerations in cases involving  foreign  criminals",  suggests
that the ensuing  considerations  apply  in  all  cases  involving  "foreign
criminals", as defined in section 117D(2),  and  to  that  extent  there  is
arguably some force in the respondent's assertion. However it  seems  to  me
that the actual provisions within the body of section 117C do not, in  fact,
permit of such an interpretation, given  that  they  specifically  refer  to
deportation, commencing at section 117C(1)  with  the  statement  that  "The
deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest"  and  continuing
in sections 117C(2) to (7) thereafter.

That section 117C is applicable only in deportation cases is made  clear  in
section  117A(2)  which,  in  directing  the  court  or  tribunal   to   the
considerations involved  when  looking  at  the  public  interest  question,
clearly distinguishes between those  cases  that  involve  deportation  from
those that do not. Section 117A(2)(b) provides for a  distinct  category  of
cases, providing that, in considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
court or tribunal must have regard to the considerations listed  in  section
117C "in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals".

Accordingly, irrespective of whether or not an  appellant  may  fall  within
the definition of a "foreign criminal" in section  117D(2),  the  provisions
of section 117C of the 2002 Act only apply in cases  involving  deportation.


In the case of the appellant, he is not subject to  deportation  proceedings
and is to be removed under section 10 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
1999. He does not, given the length and  nature  of  his  current  and  past
sentences[1],  fall  within  the  definition  of  "foreign  criminal"  under
section 32(1) of the UK Borders Act 2007 (as opposed to  the  definition  in
section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act), and could  not  therefore  be  subject  to
automatic deportation. Nevertheless it was always open to the respondent  to
make a decision to deport him on conducive grounds  under  section  3(5)  of
the Immigration Act 1971. Indeed it is relevant  to  note  that  the  police
officer, in his witness statement (MG11), concluded with a  submission  that
the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom  was  not  conducive  to  the
public good. However, for whatever reason she had, the respondent chose  not
to exercise her powers to make a decision on that basis  and  chose  instead
to issue a removal decision under section 10.

It is relevant to mention at this point that, whilst Mr Norton's  submission
was that it was  implicit  within  section  117C  that  it  could  apply  in
circumstances such as those of the appellant, it has  never  been  suggested
that the definition of "deportation" includes administrative  removal.  That
the two terms and their effect are entirely distinct is made  clear  in  the
provisions of  Part 13 of the immigration  rules,  in  particular  paragraph
363A, which states that

    "363A. Prior to 2 October 2000, a person would have been liable to
    deportation in certain circumstances in which he is now liable to
    administrative removal. However, such a person remains liable to
    deportation, rather than administrative removal where: (02.10.2000 Cm
    4851)
    (i) a decision to make a deportation order against him was taken before
    2 October 2000; or (02.10.2000 Cm 4851)
    (ii) the person has made a  valid  application  under  the  Immigration
    (Regularisation Period for Overstayers) Regulations  2000.  (02.10.2000
    Cm 4851)"

Accordingly, as  a  result  of  the  respondent's  decision  not  to  pursue
deportation proceedings, section 117C could not  and  cannot  apply  to  the
appellant. It was on that basis that Judge Pullig, taking account  at  [167]
of  section  117A(2),  properly  conducted  his  assessment  of  the  public
interest by reference only  to  section  117B  and,  in  so  doing,  clearly
recognised the limitations imposed therein, as  seen  at  [168],  [175]  and
[176] when considering the weight to be attached to the public interest  and
the interests of the appellant's children. It is  very  likely,  considering
the judge's findings and  in  particular  those  at  [175]  and  [176],  and
considering the reluctance he expressed in allowing  the  appeal,  that  had
this been a deportation case, the outcome of  the  appeal  would  have  been
different. It is also very likely that without  the  provisions  in  section
117B(6), the outcome would have been different.

However the judge was only able to determine the appeal on the basis of  the
decision made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  in  accordance  with  the
statutory provisions approved by Parliament. Accordingly he  determined  the
appeal on the only basis that  he  could  and  the  challenge  made  by  the
respondent to his decision in that respect is therefore  simply  unarguable.
Furthermore,  on  the  basis  upon  which  the  challenge  was  put  by  the
respondent, the fact that the judge made no specific finding as  to  whether
the appellant was a foreign  criminal  as  defined  in  section  117D(2)  is
immaterial.

Mr Norton accepted before me that the challenge was only put on  the  narrow
and limited basis of the applicability of  section  117C.  Accordingly  that
has to be the end of the matter. Judge Pullig,  having  properly  considered
the limited basis upon which he was able to determine the appeal, reached  a
decision that he considered to be inevitable, but was in any event  entirely
open to him on the evidence before him. In the absence of any  challenge  to
his assessment under section 117B, the respondent's  case,  as  put  in  the
grounds and before me by Mr Norton, has no merit.

The only question for me to determine is whether or not  Judge  Pullig  made
any errors of law in his decision. It is not for me to consider  the  merits
of the case. For the reasons given  above,  and  in  particular  considering
that the judge was only able to determine the appeal on  the  basis  of  the
decision made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  in  accordance  with  the
statutory provisions approved by Parliament, I find that the respondent  has
failed to establish that Judge Pullig erred in law in  allowing  the  appeal
on the basis that he did.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
allow the appellant's appeal stands.









                                Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
-----------------------
[1] In accordance with Section 38(1) of the UK Borders Act  2007,  a  person
who is sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months does  not
include a reference to a person who receives a suspended sentence.


