
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Lokombe (DRC: FNOs - Airport monitoring) [2015] UKUT 00627(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 5 August 2015                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               LOKOLA LOKOMBE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance, by or on behalf of the respondent

The fact that there was an August 2013 report providing  the  answers  given
by 8 EU/Western countries documenting the return of a significant number  of
FNOs to the DRC without there having been any  allegations  of  problems  on
return  (except  ones  from  Belgium,  none  substantiated)   was   a   very
significant piece of evidence that was not  negated  by  the  fact  that  in
Kinshasa there is no airport monitoring carried out by  outside  governments
or NGOs.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is  a  national  of  Democratic
    Republic of Congo (DRC).  His appeal against  a  decision  refusing  to
    revoke a deportation order  against  him  as  a  foreign  criminal  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles on Article 3  grounds  in  a
    decision sent on 19  September  2014.   The  appellant  (hereafter  the
    Secretary of State or SSHD) was granted permission to appeal.   Despite
    being notified of the hearing of  this  appeal  the  claimant  did  not
    attend.  Over an hour after the  time  fixed  for  the  hearing  (14.00
    hours) Customer Services received a  call  saying  the  claimant  would
    arrive in 20 minutes.  He failed to arrive either within that  time  or
    later (a subsequent check revealed he had made no  further  contact  or
    effort to explain his failure to  attend).  In  such  circumstances  we
    decided to exercise our discretion to proceed with the hearing. We took
    into account that the claimant's representatives had submitted a  "Rule
    24 Response" so we were apprised of both sides of the  argument.  There
    is no challenge in this case to the dismissal by the FtT judge  of  his
    case based on his particular history and political profile. These  were
    resoundingly rejected by the judge at [31] and [55] - [56].   The  only
    basis on which the judge allowed the appeal was that he considered  the
    claimant to be at risk on return  simply  because  he  was  a  criminal
    deportee: see [31] and [54].

2.   The reasons the judge gave for allowing the appeal on  Article  3  ECHR
    grounds were essentially (1) that in R (on the  application   of  P)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin), Phillips J had concluded  that  criminal
    deportees would be at risk on return to the DRC and had done so after a
    comprehensive assessment of the evidence before him; (2) that  Phillips
    J found that the evidence before him made clear that criminal deportees
    would be interrogated upon arrival and it would come to light that they
    had criminal convictions which would in turn lead on to ill  treatment;
    (3) the SSHD had not appealed against Phillips J's  judgment;  (4)  the
    further evidence available  (which  included  the  February  2014  Home
    Office DRC Policy Bulletin 1/2014), although not identifying that there
    had been any problems for returned deportees  known  to  have  criminal
    convictions outside the  DRC, continued to show that there was  a  real
    risk to such persons in practice; (5) there was no  evidence  that  the
    statements made by the  Congolese Ambassador to the UK in his letter to
    Mary Glindon MP in August 2013 had been  withdrawn and  they  disclosed
    there would be a real risk on return for Foreign National  Offenders  (
    FNOs).

3.   In her written grounds of appeal the SSHD  maintained  that  the  judge
    had incorrectly interpreted  the  case  of  P  and  the  February  2014
    Bulletin.  In relation to the  judge's  purported  reliance  on  P,  he
    failed to note that it was a judicial review decision about whether P's
    further representations could be accepted  as  a  fresh  claim,  not  a
    decision on the merits and that it should have been known to the  judge
    that the Upper Tribunal had a pending country guidance case to seek  to
    resolve the issues raised by P.

4.   In relation to the February 2014  Bulletin,  it  was  argued  that  the
    judge was wrong to place excessive or determinative weight on the  fact
    that none of the  countries  that  had  replied  to  the  questionnaire
    monitored returnees at the airport.

5.   In the claimant's Rule 24 Response the point is made that  even  though
    P was not  country  guidance  that  did  not  prevent  the  judge  from
    attaching weight to its  findings  and  the  judge  had  in  any  event
    evaluated the further evidence to hand. The fact that there was pending
    country guidance did not disqualify the judge from proceeding to decide
    the appeal on the evidence before him. As regards the judge's treatment
    of the February 2014 Bulletin, the quote at paragraph  4.13  which  the
    SSHD herself set out  in  her  grounds  of  appeal  ("With  regards  to
    returnees with criminal records and/or outstanding warrants of  arrest,
    if the authorities are aware that the person is returning they will  be
    detained") demonstrated that the Bulletin was not at variance with  the
    judge's assessment.

6.   In written submissions produced for the hearing  Mr  Melvin  relied  on
    the original grounds and drew attention to  the  fact  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had now promulgated country guidance on this issue in  BM  and
    Others (Returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00293
    (IAC).

Analysis

7.   As we pointed out to  Mr  Melvin,  our  initial  task  is  confined  to
    deciding whether the First-tier Judge materially erred in  law  and  in
    that context we cannot have regard to  the  post-decision  findings  of
    fact made by the UT in BM & Others.

8.   As regards the SSHD's first ground, we consider it may have  had  force
    if the judge had simply sought to rely on the findings made by Phillips
    J or had treated those findings as authoritative in the same way  as  a
    country guidance case, especially since Phillips J  himself  emphasised
    that his judgment was not country guidance.  However, the judge did not
    treat P in that way.  The  judge's  reason  for  attaching  significant
    weight to Phillips J's findings  -  namely  that  they  were  based  on
    comprehensive evidence relating to the general issue of risk on  return
    to FNO deportees - was an entirely rational one.

9.   The SSHD avows that to have attached significant weight  to  P  was  to
    overlook that it was a decision  on  a  further  representations  being
    examined on public law  grounds  only.  There  is  of  course  a  clear
    distinction between findings of fact  in  a  statutory  appeal  on  the
    merits and findings of fact in a judicial review case  dealing  with  a
    challenge to the legality of a  decision  where  all  that  has  to  be
    established is that there is a  realistic  prospect  of  success  of  a
    hypothetical tribunal judge, taking the new materials together with the
    old, finding in the applicant's favour.  There  is  also  higher  court
    authority for the view that in  addressing  matters  relating  to  risk
    factors or categories facing  returnees  to  other  countries  a  judge
    hearing a judicial review application should proceed with caution: In R
    (Madan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    770, [2007] 1 WLR 2891. Buxton LJ, giving the judgment  of  the  Court,
    stated at paragraph 12:

         "The Administrative Court is really a  wholly  unsuitable  tribunal
         for that purpose. Country guidance cases  have  a  special  status,
         failure to attend properly to them being recognised by  this  court
         as an error of law even though country  guidance  cases  deal  only
         with fact:  see  R  (Iran)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2005] Imm AR 535,  para  27.  They  have  that  special
         status because they are produced by a specialist court, after  what
         at least should be a review of all of the available  material.  And
         that in particular involves a judicial input from a  background  of
         experience,  not  least  experience  in  assessing  evidence  about
         country conditions, that is not available to such judges as sit  in
         the Administrative Court and in  this  court.  A  judge  hearing  a
         judicial review application will therefore wish to tread  carefully
         before finding that a country guidance case is unreliable  just  on
         the basis of one or two subsequent reports. The  parties  appearing
         before him will in particular wish to ensure that he  is  aware  of
         any decisions in the AIT subsequent to the country guidance case in
         which that case has been considered."

10.  Nevertheless, in P Phillips J expressly considered the  guidance  given
    in  Madan  ([30]-[31])  and  took  great  care  to  emphasise  that  he
    understood his findings as  being  of  an  interim  nature,  until  the
    Tribunal produced a new country guidance case ([55]). He took  care  to
    note (only as one factor) that the previous country guidance case was 6
    years old ([31]) and that it did not  address  the  issue  of  criminal
    deportees ([44]). He also attached particular importance  to  the  fact
    that the respondent in her decision letter on the other case dealt with
    in the same proceedings (that of R) had stated that  persons  who  were
    criminal deportees "may" be at risk  on  return  ([44]-[45]).  Further,
    notwithstanding his cautious approach, he took particular care  to  set
    out what his findings of fact were and the body of  evidence  on  which
    they were based. These findings were not obiter, they were the  central
    basis for his decision granting judicial review.

11.  Viewed in this context we consider that it was entirely  justified  for
    the  First  tier  Tribunal  judge,  albeit  a  judge  in  a  specialist
    jurisdiction assessing a decision by a non-specialist judge dealing not
    with legality but with the merits, to attach significant weight to such
    findings. Whilst relatively rare, and always to be essayed with caution
    (see Mahad), judicial review cases which  incorporate  fact-finding  on
    country conditions and risk factors or categories are not unknown. That
    is true not just  of  judicial  review  cases  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) which is a specialist court (see  e.g.
    the recent case of  Naziri & Ors, R (on the application of) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department (JR - scope -  evidence  (IJR)  [2015]
    UKUT 437 (IAC) (27 July 2015)), but also of those  that  arise  in  the
    Administrative Court, and occasionally in the Court of Appeal: see e.g.
    cases dealing with Dublin  returns,  such  as  EM  (Eritrea)  &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ  1336;  and
    Tabrizagh & Ors, R (On the Application Of) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2014] EWHC 1914 (Admin).  As  a  general  rule,  other
    courts or tribunals will value judicial fact-finding made on the  basis
    of a careful and comprehensive examination of  the  relevant  evidence,
    even if it is done in a different jurisdiction.

12.  We also discern no error in the judge's treatment of  the  evidence  of
    the Directeure, Centrale de la Chancellerie at the DGM in  Kinshasa  on
    15 January 2014.  In his statement the Directeur had  contradicted  the
    statement made by the  DRC  Ambassador  in  2012.   Whilst  it  is  not
    entirely clear why the judge should give precedence to a 2012 statement
    of a government official to one made in January 2014, we take  judicial
    notice of the fact that  the  Directeur  is  closely  involved  in  law
    enforcement in the DRC and as such his evidence cannot be  regarded  as
    an objective and independent source as to what happens to returnees  on
    his watch.  We consider the judge's dismissive approach to his evidence
    as being within the range of reasonable responses.

13.  What was not reasonable, however,  was  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    February 2014 Bulletin and the evidence it appended  entitled  "Request
    for Information: Return of  Rejected  Asylum  Seekers  to  DRC,  August
    2013".  This documented replies from eight countries to nine  questions
    which included 4, 5 and 6 which asked:


         "4.  Have you received any allegations of returnees  being  subject
             to problems on return?


         5.   If so, what problems (in particular incidents  of  harassment,
             ill-treatment, harassment and detention)?


         6.   Have any of these allegations been substantiated?"


14.  In reply to these questions none of the eight respondent  States  noted
    allegations except for Belgium and it noted that after investigation by
    an immigration liaison officer none was found to be substantiated.

15.  In addition the  Bulletin  noted  that  from  information  supplied  by
    Germany, that country  alone  returned  79  Foreign  National  Officers
    (FNOs) since the beginning of 2012, 69 of them enforced.

16.  The Bulletin also referred to a DRC Fact Finding  Mission  of  November
    2012 which unearthed no substantive evidence  of  mistreatment  of  FNO
    returns.

17.  Against this background the judge's  dismissal  of  this  evidence  was
    extremely  problematic.  The  only  reason  proffered  was  that   "the
    responses do not identify  bases  upon  which  the  knowledge  used  to
    provide these answers had been obtained because all accepted that  they
    do not have a representative at the airport  to  oversee  FNOs  at  the
    airport from Canada ..." [47].  That reason is in  the  first  instance
    factually incorrect: we have already noted that the Belgians  confirmed
    that  an  immigration  liaison  officer  of  theirs  had   investigated
    allegations  and  found  them  untrue.  In  the  second   instance   it
    erroneously treats lack of monitoring at the airport  as  determinative
    of the state of the evidence as regards risk on return.  Several of the
    respondent States, relying on their own embassy information  and  other
    sources, testified that they had no allegations of mistreatment at  the
    airport.  In our judgement, it is reasonable to assume that most if not
    all FNO offenders who  are  being  returned  to  the  DRC  will  notify
    friends, family or sources in the host country and in the DRC to inform
    them when they are being deported and when they will be arriving. It is
    further reasonable to assume that if there had been any  problems,  one
    or more of these contact points would have notified  the  host  country
    authorities  or  the  deportee's  representatives  or   relevant   NGOs
    expressing concern. Thus the fact that there was an August 2013  report
    providing the answers given by 8 EU/Western countries  documenting  the
    return of a significant number of FNOs to the DRC without there  having
    been any allegations of problems on return (except ones  from  Belgium,
    none substantiated) was a very significant piece of evidence  that  was
    not negated by the fact that in Kinshasa there is no airport monitoring
    carried out by outside governments or NGOs. We find the key  importance
    attached by the judge to the lack of monitoring  was  a  serious  legal
    error on the part of the judge.

18.   Although  we  cannot  have  regard  to  BM  as  evidence  (because   a
    significant amount of the evidence analysed by the Tribunal in BM  post-
    dated  the  hearing  before  the  FtT),  we  are   fortified   in   our
    characterisation of the judge's error in respect of the  February  2014
    Bulletin evidence by the analysis set out at [80] -  [81]  of  BM.  The
    Upper Tribunal's reference in BM to the "consistency of experience"  of
    the respondent states and the lack of allegations raised in the context
    of a country which produces an active diaspora, is very pertinent.   At
    [80]-[82] the UT states:
         "80. We juxtapose this evidence, which we accept, with that of  the
             eleven IGC states who participated in the survey and  provided
             "returns" data in respect of the years  2012,  2013  and  2014
             which we also consider persuasive. Making  due  allowance  for
             the manner in which the data has been compiled  and  provided,
             it seems uncontroversial to find that in excess of 700 persons
             have been returned from the states in question to DRC during a
             period of just under three years, up to late 2014. We have  no
             reason to find that the states in  question  were  other  than
             assiduous in providing the figures and, indeed,  the  contrary
             was not suggested. The significance of this  discrete  segment
             of evidence is that only one complaint was made  out  of  this
             cohort of returning nationals. The recipient state was Belgium
             and, upon investigation, no substantiation was established. We
             consider it compelling that there is no substantiated evidence
             that any member of this large group has been persecuted or ill
             treated or arbitrarily detained. The consistency of experience
             of the eleven IGC states concerned  is  a  matter  of  obvious
             moment and, further, entirely harmonious  with  the  data  and
             other information provided by the United Kingdom.
         81.      In our evaluation of this body of evidence, we  take  into
             account also that the two  states  who  returned  the  highest
             number of DRC nationals, Belgium and France,  both  contain  a
             substantial DRC diaspora, for historical and other reasons. We
             find nothing in the evidence to counter  the  suggestion  that
             the members of these groups in particular would be expected to
             communicate relevant complaints to the  communities  to  which
             they belonged in the returning states and/or the Embassies  of
             those states  in  Kinshasa.  While  we  note  that  Dr  Kennes
             disagrees with this assessment,  it  appears  to  us  logical,
             realistic and consistent with the evidence of high  levels  of
             activity, much of it organised and concerted, among members of
             the DRC diaspora.
         82.  In their critique of the evidence emanating from the  IOM  and
             the IGC states highlighted immediately above,  the  Appellants
             draw  particular  attention  to  the  limited  monitoring   of
             returned nationals which is  carried  out  and  the  intrinsic
             limitations thereof. This submission is  well  made.  However,
             there is no counter punch. We consider  that  this  submission
             neither mitigates the frailties in the  Appellants'  preferred
             evidence  which  we  have  identified   nor   undermines   our
             assessment of the  Respondent's  body  of  evidence  which  we
             prefer. While we accept the evidence that the IOM is  involved
             only in the cases of voluntarily returning DRC  nationals,  we
             find nothing in the evidence to support  the  submission  that
             the DRC authorities pay attention to the  distinction  between
             those nationals who return voluntarily and  those  who  do  so
             under compulsion, subject to the limited exceptions  of  those
             who have an  unexecuted  prison  sentence  or  an  outstanding
             arrest warrant in DRC or who  committed  an  offence  such  as
             document fraud when leaving  DRC:  see  our  finding  in  [74]
             above."
19.  We find that the judge's dismissive and reductionist  approach  to  the
    February 2014 Country Bulletin evidence was vitiated  by  legal  error.
    This error was material because he made clear that if he  had  taken  a
    different view of this evidence he would not have allowed  the  appeal.
    Accordingly we set aside his determination.

Our Decision

20.  Apart from the Rule 24 Reply the claimant has not sought to adduce  any
    further evidence. The SSHD, by contrast, relies heavily on BM.  In  the
    context of re-making of the decision, we can have  direct  recourse  to
    BM, both to the further background country materials documented in that
    decision and its evaluation thereof.  We find no reason to depart  from
    BM.  Since the claimant has not sought to challenge any aspect  of  the
    FtT's findings on his circumstances except in relation to  the  generic
    issues of whether he is at risk as an FNO returnee, we see no  rational
    basis for distinguishing his situation on return  from  any  other  FNO
    returnees.

21.  Accordingly we dismiss his appeal.

22.  For the above reasons we conclude:

     The FtT judge materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.

     The decision we re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey







