
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber


         MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2013                            |                             |
|Ex tempore judgment                           |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                 THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     Mk
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Sinker (of counsel), instructed by Andrew
Jackson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) It is axiomatic that a determination discloses clearly the  reasons  for
a tribunal's decision.

(2)  If a tribunal finds oral evidence  to  be  implausible,  incredible  or
unreliable or a document to be worth no weight whatsoever, it  is  necessary
to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to  be  supported  by
reasons.  A bare statement that  a  witness  was  not  believed  or  that  a
document was afforded no weight is unlikely to satisfy  the  requirement  to
give reasons.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

          Introduction

[1]  By letter dated 4th June 2013, the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  ("the  Secretary  of  State")   refused   the   Appellant's
    application for asylum.  The Secretary of State made a further decision
    which recorded that the Appellant had not sought entry under any  other
    provision of the Immigration Rules and refused him leave to  enter  the
    United Kingdom,  proposing  to  give  directions  for  his  removal  to
    Pakistan.  The  Appellant  exercised  his  right  of  appeal,  invoking
    grounds which included his rights under the Refugee Convention and  the
    ECHR.  His appeal  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("the
    Tribunal").

     This Appeal

[2]  This appeal proceeds on two grounds. The first  is  that  the  Tribunal
    erred in law by failing to give reasons for determining that no  weight
    should be attributed to a letter from the Ahmadiyya Muslim  Association
    ("AMA").  The second is that the Tribunal failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for its assessment  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  credible
    witness.  In short, it is contended that the  Tribunal's  determination
    is inadequately reasoned.


[3]  The Appellant's grounds of appeal to the Tribunal put his case  clearly
    and coherently:

         "The Appellant  contends  that  he  has  a  well  founded  fear  of
         persecution under the 1951 Geneva Convention.  This is a real  risk
         of serious harm to the Appellant  and  a  threat  to  his  life  or
         freedom on the basis of his membership of a particular social group
         if he is returned to Pakistan ......


         The  Appellant  submits  that  he  would  face   mistreatment   and
         harassment and that he will be kidnapped .....   He  would  face  a
         real risk of unlawful killing and torture or inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment ......


         The Appellant contends that he is a practising Ahmadi .....  He  is
         genuinely involved in the Ahmadi  faith  to  the  extent  that  his
         marriage was conducted in accordance with the Ahmadi rites in  1984
         ....


         There  is  a  continuous  attack  on  members  of   the   Ahmadiyya
         community."


    From these passages one can readily gauge the framework of  the  appeal
    at first instance.










          First Ground of Appeal

[4]  In considering  the  first  ground  of  appeal,  there  are  two  basic
    considerations which combine to provide the starting point.  First, the
    Tribunal determined to give no weight to the AMA letter.  In  paragraph
    [46], the Judge stated:

         "Taking into account the complete lack of  credibility  shown  from
         the evidence before me I attach no weight whatsoever to the  letter
         from the [AMA]."

     The second is that the Judge provided no reasons for  this  aspect  of
    his decision.


[5]  It is timely to recall what the AIT said in Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  Imm
    AR 318, paragraph [38]:


         "1.  In asylum and human rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
             claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely can
             be relied on.


          2. The decision maker should consider whether a document is one on
             which reliance should properly be placed after looking  at  all
             the evidence in the round.


          3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make  an  allegation
             of forgery, or evidence  strong  enough  to  support  it.   The
             allegation should not be made without such  evidence.   Failure
             to establish the allegation on the balance of probabilities  to
             the higher civil standard does not  show  that  a  document  is
             reliable.  The decision maker still needs to apply principles 1
             and 2."


    Given the context of the present appeal,  it  is  appropriate  to  draw
    attention to the further principle that evidence is relevant if it goes
    to proving or disproving a  matter  in  issue.   Furthermore,  what  is
    relevant in any given case is decided  by  the  application  of  logic,
    common  sense,  fairness  and  human  experience  (Halsbury's  Laws  of
    England, 4th Edition Re-Issue, Vol 17  (1),  para  409).   It  is  also
    useful to recall another basic principle:


         "The weight to be given to a  particular  item  of  evidence  is  a
         matter of fact which will be  decided,  largely  on  the  basis  of
         common sense, in the light of the circumstances of the case and  of
         the  views  formed  by  the  [tribunal]  on  the  reliability   and
         credibility of the witnesses and exhibits."

         [Halsbury, para 417]



[6]  There is a related duty to explain the  tribunal's  assessment  of  the
    more important pieces of evidence and to provide reasons  for  choosing
    to give (as the case may be) no, little, moderate or substantial weight
    thereto. Properly analysed,  this  discrete  duty  and  the  principles
    highlighted in paragraph [5]  above  are  aspects  of  two  overarching
    duties of hallowed importance.  The first is the duty of every court or
    tribunal to afford the parties a fair hearing, within the parameters of
    the governing legal rules and  principles.   The  second  is  the  long
    established judicial duty to provide a reasoned  decision.  It  matters
    not whether these are separate duties or two sides of  the  same  coin,
    forged together by the common law principle of fairness.  Each of these
    duties is properly described as elementary in nature.

          The Duty to Provide a Reasoned Judgement

[7]  Given that an asserted failure to provide any or adequate  reasons  for
    decisions of the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  important  aspects  thereof
    features with some frequency in applications for permission  to  appeal
    to this Tribunal,  it  may  be  timely  to  reflect  on  the  doctrinal
    considerations and principles in play.  In an immigration case  decided
    some 30 years ago, R - v - Immigration Appeal Tribunal  ex  parte  Khan
    [1983] QB 790, Lord Lane CJ said (at page 794):

         "The important matter which must be borne in mind by  Tribunals  in
         the present type of circumstances is that it must be apparent  from
         what they state by way of reasons  first  of  all  that  they  have
         considered the point which is at issue between the parties and they
         should indicate the evidence on  which  they  have  come  to  their
         conclusions.  Where one gets a decision of a Tribunal which  either
         fails to set out the issue which the Tribunal is determining either
         directly or by inference, or fails either directly or by  inference
         to set out the basis on which it has reached its  determination  on
         that issue, then that is  a  matter  which  will  be  very  closely
         regarded by this Court and in normal circumstances would result  in
         the decision of the Tribunal being quashed.  The reason is this.  A
         party appearing before a  Tribunal  is  entitled  to  know,  either
         expressly stated by it or inferentially stated, what it is to which
         the Tribunal is addressing its mind.   In  some  cases  it  may  be
         perfectly obvious without  any  express  reference  to  it  by  the
         Tribunal; in other cases it may  not.   Second,  the  Appellant  is
         entitled to know the basis of fact on which the conclusion has been
         reached.  Once again in many cases it may be quite obvious  without
         the necessity of expressly stating it, in others it may not."

         [Emphasis added]

    In a slightly different context, Buckley LJ stated:

         "Litigants are entitled to know on what  grounds  their  cases  are
         decided.  It is of importance that the legal profession should know
         on what grounds cases are decided, particularly when  questions  of
         law are involved.  And this Court is entitled to the assistance  of
         the Judge at first instance by an explicit statement of his reasons
         for deciding as he did."


     [Capital & Suburban Properties v Switcher [1976] Ch 319, p 326]

    In R - v - Crown Court at Harrow, ex parte Dave [1994] 1  All  ER  315,
    this passage was considered by the Divisional Court to be  "of  general
    application" (at page 322).  In Eagil Trust - v - Piggott-Brown  [1985]
    3 All  ER  119,  Griffiths  LJ  formulated  the  general  rule  that  a
    professional  Judge  should  give  reasons  for  his  decision,   while
    simultaneously  acknowledging  that  the  particularity  required  must
    depend on the circumstances of the individual case and  the  nature  of
    the decision being made (at page 122).

[8]  More recently, in Flannery - v - Halifax Estate Agencies [2000]  1  All
    ER 373, one finds a comprehensive exposition of  the  duty  imposed  on
    today's professional Judge.  The Court of Appeal  observed,  first  (at
    page 377):


         "It is not a useful task to attempt to make absolute  rules  as  to
         the requirement for the Judge to  give  reasons.  This  is  because
         issues are so infinitely various."



    The following passages in the judgment of Henry  LJ  are  deserving  of
    full reproduction:


             "(1) The duty [to give reasons] is a function of  due  process
                  and therefore of justice.  Its rationale has two principal
                  aspects.  The first is that fairness surely requires  that
                  the parties - especially the losing party - should be left
                  in no doubt why they have won or lost.  This is especially
                  so since without reasons the losing party  will  not  know
                  ....  whether the Court has misdirected  itself  and  thus
                  whether he may have an available appeal on  the  substance
                  of the case.  The second is that  a  requirement  to  give
                  reasons concentrates the mind; if  it  is  fulfilled,  the
                  resulting decision is much more likely to be soundly based
                  on the evidence than if it is not.


             2)  The first of these aspects implies that  want  of  reasons
                may be a good self    standing  ground  of  appeal.   Where
                because no reasons are  given  it  is  impossible  to  tell
                whether the Judge has gone wrong on the law or  the  facts,
                the losing party would be altogether deprived of his chance
                of an appeal unless the Court entertains an appeal based on
                the lack of reasons itself.


             3) The extent of the duty, or rather  the  reach  of  what  is
                required to fulfil  it,  depends  on  the  subject  matter.
                Where there is  a  straightforward  factual  dispute  whose
                resolution depends simply on which witness is  telling  the
                truth about the events which he claims  to  recall,  it  is
                likely to be  enough  for  the  Judge  (having,  no  doubt,
                summarised  the  evidence)  to  indicate  simply  that   he
                believes X rather than Y; indeed there may be nothing  else
                to say.  But where the dispute involves  something  in  the
                nature  of  an  intellectual  exchange,  with  reasons  and
                analysis advanced on either side, the Judge must enter into
                the issues canvassed before him and explain why he  prefers
                one  case  over  the  other.   This  is  likely  to   apply
                particularly in litigation where as here there is  disputed
                expert evidence; but it is not necessarily limited to  such
                cases.

             4) This is not to suggest that there is  one  rule  for  cases
                concerning the witness's truthfulness or recall  of  events
                and another for cases where the issue depends on  reasoning
                or analysis (with experts or otherwise).  The rule  is  the
                same: the  Judge  must  explain  why  he  has  reached  his
                decision. The question is always what is  required  of  the
                Judge to do so; and that will differ  from  case  to  case.
                Transparency should be the watch word."

         [Emphasis added.]


[9]    In modern jurisprudence, the Privy Council has also  made  a  notable
    contribution to this subject.  In Stefan - v - General Medical  Council
    [1999] 1 WLR 1293, Lord Clyde said the  following:


         "The advantages  of  the  provision  of  reasons  have  often  been
         rehearsed.   They  relate  to  the  decision  making  process,   in
         strengthening  that  process  itself,  in  increasing  the   public
         confidence in it and in the desirability of the disclosure of error
         where error exists.  They relate also to  the  parties  immediately
         affected by the decision, in enabling them to  know  the  strengths
         and weaknesses of their respective cases and to  facilitate  appeal
         where that course is appropriate."


    Such is the exalted nature of the judicial duty to provide  a  reasoned
    judgment that, in another case, belonging to the  specific  immigration
    law context, the Court of Appeal was prompted to observe that this duty
    would apply even in  circumstances  where  a  statutory  duty  to  give
    reasons did not apply: R (Tofik) -  v  -  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    [2003] EWCA Civ 1138, paragraph [17]. This serves as a reminder of  the
    dominance of  common  law  fairness  in  this  field.   In  short,  the
    venerable authority of Re Poyser and Mills Arbitration [1964] 2 QB  467
    has not merely withstood the test of  time  but  applies  with  greater
    force today than ever before. We would add only that the  duty  imposed
    on the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal to provide a reasoned
    judgment in every case is a discipline  adherence  to  which  can  only
    serve to enhance the quality of the product in  every  respect  and  to
    promote excellence.



[10] Furthermore, the increasing European influence on  the  United  Kingdom
    legal system has  placed  the  judicial  duty  to  provide  a  reasoned
    decision into sharper focus.  Article 6 ECHR requires, inter  alia,  an
    independent  and  impartial  Tribunal  established  by  law   and   the
    pronouncement of judgment in public.  The Strasbourg Court has  spelled
    out of these provisions an obligation on courts and tribunals  to  give
    reasons for their decisions, see, for  example,  Van  de  Hurk  -  v  -
    Netherlands [1994] 18 EHRR 481, paragraph [61].  In its  pronouncements
    on this subject, the Court has consistently recognised that the  extent
    to which a Court's duty to give reasons applies may vary according  to,
    inter alia, the nature of the decision.  Further, the duty is intensely
    contextual in nature, its performance depending on the circumstances of
    the individual case.  In Ruiz Toriga - v - Spain [1994]  19  EHRR  553,
    the Court stated, at paragraph [29]:

         "The Court reiterates that Article 6(1) obliges the Courts to  give
         reasons for their judgments, but cannot be understood as  requiring
         a detailed answer to every argument.  The extent to which this duty
         to give reasons applies may vary according to  the  nature  of  the
         decision. It is moreover necessary  to  take  into  account,  inter
         alia, the diversity of the submissions that a  litigant  may  bring
         before the Courts and the differences existing in  the  Contracting
         States with regard to statutory provisions, customary rules,  legal
         opinion and the presentation and drafting of  judgments.   That  is
         why  the  question  whether  a  Court  has  failed  to  fulfil  the
         obligation to  state  reasons,  deriving  from  Article  6  of  the
         Convention,  can  only  be  determined  in   the   light   of   the
         circumstances of the case."


    As the  brief  survey  above  of  the  relevant  English  jurisprudence
    demonstrates, the expectations of the Strasbourg Court are likely to be
    relatively elevated  in  cases  involving  United  Kingdom  courts  and
    tribunals, in cases where Article 6 ECHR applies. This observation does
    not, of course, detract from the decision in MNM (Surendran  Guidelines
    For Adjudicators) [2000] UKIAT 005 that Article 6  does  not  apply  to
    immigration and asylum cases.


    [11] The depth and extent of the duty to give reasons  will  inevitably
    vary from one case to another.  The  duty  is  contextually  sensitive.
    Thus, as the Upper Tribunal observed in Shizad [2013] UKUT 35 (IAC),  a
    tribunal's reasons need not be extensive if its decision  makes  sense.
    See also R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.


    [12] It is appropriate to reflect finally on one  intensely  pragmatic-
    and  frequently  occurring-  scenario,  namely  that  of  believing  or
    disbelieving the evidence, in full or in part, of a party or a witness.
     In Allport v Wilboram [2004] EWCA Civ 1668, Neuberger LJ stated:


         "It is frequently difficult to explain  wholly  satisfactorily  why
         one rejects or accepts one particular piece of  evidence  given  by
         one particular witness.  Sometimes there is no real alternative  to
         decide which is inherently more believable. "

     In every court's findings,  issues  of  this  kind  must  be  squarely
    addressed.  Where the court finds  the  evidence  of  one  person  more
    believable than that of another, it  should  normally  be  possible  to
    state, briefly and clearly, why.   The reason might,  for  example,  be
    based on a demonstrated inconsistency or inconsistencies on an issue or
    issues of significance.  Alternatively it might relate to the demeanour
    of a witness or party.  If, for instance, it appears to the court  that
    one person was clearly and conscientiously striving to tell the  truth,
    while another was hesitant and evasive in response to  questions,  this
    should be stated.   Likewise, where a court finds a  person's  evidence
    unimpressive or unpersuasive on account of matters such  as  hesitancy,
    lengthy pauses, frequent requests  to  repeat  simple  questions  or  a
    reluctance to engage with  the  court  generally.    If  any  of  these
    considerations or anything comparable constitutes  the  basis  for  the
    court's credibility assessment and findings, care should  be  taken  to
    say so in the judgement:  neither the parties nor the  appellate  court
    can be left or expected to guess.  The final word on this subject  goes
    to Lord Neuberger:


          "Decisions without reasons are certainly not justice:  indeed they
         are scarcely decisions at all"

        [The Bailii Annual Lecture, 20 November 2012]





          First Ground of Appeal: Resolution

[13] We turn to apply these principles to the instant case. The  cornerstone
    of the Appellant's case before the Tribunal was his  asserted  lifelong
    adherence to and association with the Ahmadi faith  in  Pakistan.   The
    AMA letter was, on any showing, an important part  of  the  Appellant's
    case.  On  its  face,  it   provided   independent   verification   and
    confirmation. It was preceded by an earlier, shorter  letter  from  the
    same source indicating that enquiries were going to be  pursued.    The
    longer letter was  clearly  the  product  of  such  enquiries.  It  was
    rejected brusquely by the Tribunal, without explanation.   We  consider
    that it was incumbent on the Tribunal to explain why the  document  was
    afforded no weight at all. One does not know, for example, whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal found that the document was a  forgery  or  was  in
    some way suspect or unreliable.  The Tribunal's stark statement that it
    was attributing no weight to this significant piece of evidence  lacked
    the  necessary  underpinning  of  duly  articulated  findings  and   an
    associated explanation.   It is clear from the Determination - and  was
    agreed by the parties before  this  Tribunal  -  that  the  AMA  letter
    featured prominently during the first instance hearing. It was a matter
    of some moment. The weight to be attached  to  it  was,  of  course,  a
    matter for the Tribunal.  However, in the particular  context  of  this
    case, we consider that it was incumbent on the  judge  to  explain  his
    reasons for his robust and outright rejection of this  important  piece
    of evidence. It was not sufficient for the Judge to  refer  vaguely  to
    "the complete lack of credibility shown from the evidence before me" in
    the context of his rejection of the letter: see  paragraph  [4]  supra.
    Within these words the Judge was clearly referring to his finding  that
    the Appellant's evidence was not worthy of belief.   However,  the  AMA
    letter was entirely free standing  of  the  Appellant's  evidence.  The
    importance of addressing this type  of  evidence  and  making  relevant
    associated  findings  is  underlined  by  the  recent  decision  in  AB
    (Ahmadiyya Association United Kingdom: letters)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT
    511 (IAC). It had to be addressed separately and directly.  There was a
    failure to do so.


[14]  We find, accordingly, that there was a failure  on  the  part  of  the
    Tribunal to explain why it was rejecting the AMA letter.  As there  was
    a legal duty on the Tribunal to provide a reasoned explanation for this
    rejection, we consider that this failure constitutes an error  of  law.
    Given the important  nature  of  the  evidence  concerned,  we  further
    consider that this error of law  was  material.  Furthermore,  we  have
    identified a related error of law.  It is common case that the Tribunal
    was invited to receive and consider the original of the AMA letter.  It
    refused to do so, without proffering any rational explanation for  such
    refusal.  We consider that this  refusal,  unexplained,  infringed  the
    sacred  principle  that  justice  must  not  only  be  done,  but  must
    manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done. In  simple  terms,  this
    refusal rendered the hearing unfair.

[15]  Thus, duly analysed, the first ground of appeal has two aspects.   The
    first concerns the Judge's  failure  to  provide  any  reason  for  his
    rejection of  a  key  piece  of  evidence  adduced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  The second concerns the fairness of the hearing.   For  the
    reasons elaborated above, we conclude that this  ground  of  appeal  is
    established.



           Second Ground of Appeal: Resolution

[16] As regards the second ground of appeal, it is clear from a  reading  of
    the  Determination  as  a  whole  that  the  Tribunal  considered   the
    Appellant's case to be unworthy  of  belief.   This  was  expressed  in
    various ways:

         "What  I  noted  in  the  Appellant's  oral  testimony  ......   is
         prevarication  by  the  Appellant  and  his   failure   to   answer
         straightforward questions on a large number of occasions ...


         Taking into account the complete lack of credibility shown from the
         evidence before me .....


         What  little  information  he  was  able  to  give  was  vague  and
         imprecise.  The Appellant's conduct during  both  his  evidence  in
         chief and cross  examination  is  a  further  indication  that  the
         Appellant has not told the truth ......  The Appellant has  falsely
         claimed  that  misinterpretation  took  place  [during  the  asylum
         screening interview] ....


         He prevaricated and failed to answer questions  that  were  put  to
         him.  That is because he is not an honest witness.   Such  was  his
         manner in cross examination that it was necessary for me to  repeat
         the preliminary advice I had given to him on two occasions ....


         I do not accept that he was or is a follower of the Ahmadi faith."



    As we have made clear in paragraph [12] hereof, vagueness, imprecision,
     hesitancy - or a host of other  factors  -   might  lead  a  judge  to
    disbelieve a party or witness on  one  or  more  material  issues.  The
    requirement that the judge explain why is an indispensable one. In  the
    passages set out above there are swingeing and  repeated  denunciations
    of the Appellant's honesty and credibility. However their most striking
    feature is that they are  unreasoned,  unexplained  and  unillustrated.
    While the Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's case out of hand, robustly
    and unambiguously, it did not explain why it  did  so.   The  necessary
    illumination, illustration and exposition are lacking.  We accept that,
    in certain contexts, reasons for findings of this kind can properly  be
    inferred.  However, this is not possible in the present case. Appellate
    courts cannot have resort to conjecture.


[17] The second ground of appeal succeeds accordingly.   The  error  of  law
    which we have identified was plainly material, since the credibility of
    the Appellant's case was an issue of pivotal importance, as  the  first
    of the Tribunal's omnibus conclusions confirms. This error  is  neither
    extinguished nor remedied by the  Tribunal's  second  main  conclusion,
    which was couched thus:

         "If I was wrong in that conclusion, at best the Appellant would  be
         regarded as a low level supporter of the Ahmadi faith.  There is no
         evidence that he would be of any particular interest  to  opponents
         of that faith in Pakistan.  He never proselytised and  if  he  were
         truthful his activities were insignificant.


    We cannot be confident that this further,  alternative  conclusion  was
    unaffected or uninfluenced by the first. Moreover,  the  nexus  between
    this secondary conclusion and the Judge's primary conclusion, which  we
    have found erroneous in law, is apparent. The  former  is  contaminated
    accordingly. Finally, this secondary conclusion  does  not  redeem  the
    unfairness which we have identified in paragraph [13] above.


Decision

[18] We allow the appeal and set aside the decision of First-tier  Tribunal.
     Following careful deliberation  and  having  considered  the  parties'
    respective submissions, we decline to re-make the  decision,  since  we
    have misgivings about the course and conduct of the  hearing  at  first
    instance and consider that the Appellant should not be denied his right
    to a fair and proper hearing at both  first  instance  and  on  appeal.
    Accordingly, we remit the case to a differently constituted  First-tier
    Tribunal.  We do not consider any specific procedural directions  under
    section  12(3)(b)  of  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act   2007
    necessary.




                           Signed:

                                    Mr Justice McCloskey,
                                               President   of   the    Upper
     Tribunal
