

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Terrelonge (para 399(b)) [2015] UKUT 00653 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 19 October 2015                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

                                   Between

|           |Keron George Mcleod Terrelonge                    |Appellant    |
|           |(Anonymity Order Not Made)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |




Representation:


For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, of Counsel, instructed by Victory@Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(i)   The requirements in para  399(b)  are  conjunctive.  Accordingly,  the
    correct approach is to consider para 399(b)(i) before the  requirements
    in para 399(b)(ii) and (iii). If para 399(b)(i) is not satisfied, there
    is no need to consider the issues of undue hardship in para  399(b)(ii)
    and (iii). The offender would then have  to  rely  upon  showing  other
    factors that show very compelling circumstances over and  beyond  those
    described in paras 399 and 399A.

(ii)  Para 399(b)(i) will only be satisfied if the relationship relied  upon
    was entered into at a time when: (a) the offender  had  settled  status
    which he had not obtained by deception or other means that imperils his
    settled status; and (b) he did  not  fall  within  the  definitions  of
    "foreign criminal" in  s.32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 or s.117D of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; and (c) he had  not  been
    notified of his liability to deportation.

(iii) The automatic deportation provisions in s.32 of the 2007 Act apply  to
    persons convicted in the period between the  passing  of  the  Act  (30
    October 2007) and its implementation (1 August 2008).


                            DECISION AND REASONS



      Introduction

 1. The appellant, a national of  Jamaica,  has  appealed  with  permission
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on 15 May 2015 against the decision of  a
    panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
    ("FtT") (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal B A Morris and  Mrs.  R  Bray
    JP) (hereafter the "second panel" or the "panel" to distinguish it from
    the "first panel", see [20] below). The decision of  the  second  panel
    was promulgated on 24 October 2014, following a hearing on  14  October
    2014, by which the panel dismissed his  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules (hereafter the "IRs" in plural and "Rule" in the singular) and on
    human rights grounds (Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the
    Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("ECHR")) against a
    decision of the respondent of  21  May  2013  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order made on 27 July 2011 on the basis that the respondent
    deemed his deportation to be conducive to the public good  pursuant  to
    s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  Reasons  for  the  refusal  are
    given in a letter that is also dated 21 May 2013 (the "RFRL").

 2. Deportation proceedings (the chronology of which  is  described  below)
    were commenced following the appellant's conviction on 21 November 2001
    at Inner London Crown Court of an offence of  causing  grievous  bodily
    harm with intent to do grievous bodily harm in respect of which he  was
    sentenced to  a  3-year  custodial  sentence.  The  appellant  appealed
    against his sentence. On 30 April 2002, the appeal court increased  his
    sentence to 3 years 9 months.

 3. There is no  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  since  committed  any
    criminal offences.

 4. The appellant has a rare condition of the spinal cord known  as  HTLV-I
    associated Myelopathy (HAM). This is a condition associated  with  long
    term inflammation of the spinal cord. The long  term  diagnosis  is  to
    become wheelchair dependent. There is  a  summary  of  the  appellant's
    condition at [47] of the second panel's decision, quoted at [30] below.



 5. Before the second panel, the appellant's Article 8 claim was  based  on
    his relationship with  a  Ms  Walker  said  to  have  started  in  2002
    (according to the appellant's evidence before the second panel) or 2004
    (according to her evidence before the second panel). Before the  second
    panel, it was not argued that the appellant's  case  fell  within  para
    399(a) or 399A of the IRs (second panel's decision, at  [53]).  It  was
    argued that his Article 8  claim  fell  to  be  considered  under  para
    399(b).

    Immigration history and background facts

 6. The appellant arrived in the UK on 26 January 1997 as a visitor for six
    months. He obtained further leave to remain  as  a  student  which  was
    subsequently extended to 18 January 1999.

 7. On 19 March 1999, the appellant married a British citizen, Ms E Daniel.
     He then applied for leave to remain as  a  spouse  which  was  granted
    until 18 January 2001.  Upon  a  further  application  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain ("ILTR") on 11 October 2001 on the basis  of
    his subsisting marriage.

 8. On 21  November  2001  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  the  offence
    described at [2] above. As stated above, the appeal court increased his
    sentence to three years nine months.

 9. In the light of his criminal conviction, the appellant was notified  on
    4 December 2002 of his liability to deportation on  conducive  grounds.
    A decision was made to pursue his deportation to Jamaica and a decision
    notice and reasons for deportation letter were issued  on  20  November
    2003 and served on him together with an ICD.0343 reporting  restriction
    letter requiring him to report at Becket House within 24 hours  of  his
    release on completion of his sentence on 21  November  2003  and  every
    Thursday.  The appellant was, in fact, released from prison in  January
    2003.

10. The appellant lodged an  appeal  dated  5  December  2003  against  the
    reasons given by the respondent in the letter dated 20 November 2003 to
    deport the appellant.  The appeal was heard by Adjudicator F R  C  Such
    on 18 June 2004. In a determination promulgated on  8  July  2004,  the
    appeal was dismissed.

11. The appellant's wife did  not  attend  the  hearing  on  18  June  2004
    notwithstanding that an earlier  hearing  on  18  June  2004  had  been
    adjourned because it was said  that  her  daughter  had  chickenpox.  A
    direction was issued that a letter from the GP be produced  to  support
    the explanation given for her absence from the hearing on 18 June 2004.
    No such GP's letter was submitted to Adjudicator Such.

12. The appellant's  application  for  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    determination of Adjudicator Such was refused by Mr N H Goldstein, Vice
    President of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, on 14 September 2004.  An
    application for Statutory Review was dismissed on 14 October  2004  and
    the appellant became appeal rights exhausted on the same day.

13. The respondent alleged that the appellant failed  to  comply  with  the
    requirements to report at Becket House and he also failed to advise the
    Home Office of his change of address.

14. On 23 May 2006, the appellant made an application for naturalisation as
    a British Citizen which was refused on 11 October 2006 on the basis  of
    character.

15. On 19 October 2010,  the  appellant  made  a  further  application  for
    naturalisation as a British citizen which was refused  on  26  November
    2010 due to his criminal conviction.

16. The appellant was subsequently brought to  the  attention  of  Criminal
    Casework  through  the  representations  of  his  son  (Keron   Anthony
    Terrelonge, date of birth: 7 August 1987). Keron Anthony Terrelonge had
    arrived in the UK on 27 July 1998 and was deported on 1 July 2012.

17. A Deportation Order was signed against the appellant on  27  July  2011
    and was served on him when he reported at  Becket  House  on  4  August
    2011.

18. The appellant's  then  solicitor,  Messrs  Chartwell  &  Sadlers,  made
    representations  on  21  October  2011  and  9  November  2011.    Such
    representations  were  treated  as  an  application   to   revoke   the
    Deportation Order.

19. The respondent then made  attempts  to  obtain  information  about  the
    appellant's relationship  with  his  wife,  daughter  and  stepson,  as
    detailed  at  [24]-[27]  of  the  RFRL.  Eventually,  the   appellant's
    representatives said in a  letter  dated  20  February  2013  that  the
    appellant was no longer in a relationship with his  wife  and  had  not
    been with her since about 2004. By letter  dated  11  April  2013,  the
    respondent then requested information about his relationship  with  his
    daughter and stepson.

20. The skeleton argument before the second panel said that  the  appellant
    and his wife were divorced in 2008 (second panel's decision  at  [48]).
    The respondent did not receive a reply to her request by letter  of  11
    April 2013 for details of the appellant's involvement with his daughter
    born on 5 March 2000 and his step-son born on 12 March 1995.

21. The decision to refuse to revoke the Deportation Order was then made on
    21 May 2013.

22. The appellant's appeal against this decision was heard on 10 March 2014
    before a panel of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge K W Brown and Mr  G  F
    Sandall) (hereafter the "first panel"). The appeal  was  allowed  under
    the IRs and Article 8 of the ECHR.

23. On 22 May 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Keki? granted permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal against the decision  of  the  first  panel.  The
    appeal was heard on 21 July 2014 before Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul
    who concluded that the first panel had materially erred in law and  set
    aside its decision with none of its findings preserved.  Judge  Rintoul
    remitted the case to the FtT for fresh decision.

24. Thus the appeal came before the second panel on 14 October 2014.

    Relevant legal provisions

25. The  relevant  legal  provisions  are  ss.117B-D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") and paras 398 and  399
    of the IRs.

26. Ss.117A-D of the 2002 Act, which came into  effect  on  28  July  2014,
    provide as follows:


        117A Application of this Part


        (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
              determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


           (a)   breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
              family life under Article 8, and
           (b)   as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
              Rights Act 1998.


        (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
              tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
           (a)   in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
              117B, and
           (b)   in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
                   to the considerations listed in section 117C.
        (3)      In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
              the question of whether an interference with a person's right
              to respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under
              Article 8(2).


        117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
              cases


        (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
              the public interest.


        (2)      ...


        (3)      ...


        (4)      Little weight should be given to-


           (a)   a private life, or
           (b)   a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
                   established by a person at a time when the person  is  in
                   the United Kingdom unlawfully.


        (5)      ...


        (6)      ...


        117C Article 8 additional considerations in cases involving foreign
              criminals.


        (1)      The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
              interest.


        (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
              criminal, the greater is the public interest  in  deportation
              of the criminal.


        (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
              sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or  more,
              the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
              1 or Exception 2 applies.


        (4)      Exception 1 applies where-


           (a)   C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
              most of C's life,
           (b)   C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
              Kingdom, and
            (c)    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                   integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                   deported.


        (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
              relationship with a qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
              subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
              the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child  would
              be unduly harsh.


        (6)      ...


        (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
              taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering a
              decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that
              the reason for the decision was the offence or  offences  for
              which the criminal has been convicted.


        117D Interpretation of this Part
        (1)      In this Part-


        "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
        Rights;


        "qualifying child" means ...


        "qualifying partner" means a partner who-


           (a)   is a British citizen, or
            (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom  (within  the  meaning
                   of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of  that
                   Act).


        (2)      In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


           (a)   who is not a British citizen,
           (b)   who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
        offence, and
           (c)   who -
                 (i)   has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
        least 12 months,
                 (ii)  has been convicted of an  offence  that  has  caused
        serious harm,  or
                 (iii) is a persistent offender.

27. Paras 398 and 399(b) of the IRs provide:


        A.398.  These rules apply where:


      (a)   a  foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
              deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the  United   Kingdom's
              obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

      (b)   a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made  against
        him to be revoked.


        398.     Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
              contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
              Rights Convention, and


            (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to
                   the public good and in the public interest  because  they
                   have been convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have
                   been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least
                   four years;

      (b)   the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to  the
              public good and in the public interest because they have been
              convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to
              a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
              months; or

      (c)   the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive  to  the
              public good and in the public interest because,  in the  view
              of the  Secretary  of  State,   their  offending  has  caused
              serious harm or they are a persistent offender  who  shows  a
              particular disregard for the law,


      the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will  consider  whether
        paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the  public
        interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors
        where there are very compelling circumstances over and above  those
        described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


        Revocation of deportation order
        390.     An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
              be considered in the light of all the circumstances including
              the following:
           (i)   the grounds on which the order was made;
            (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
           (iii) the interests of the community, including the  maintenance
                   of an effective immigration control;
            (iv)   the  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
        compassionate circumstances.


        390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
              consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,  if  it
              does not, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
              the public interest in maintaining the deportation order will
              be outweighed by other factors.

        399.     This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
        applies if -

      (a)   ...

      or

      (b)   the person has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
              partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, or settled
              in the UK,  and

            (i)  the relationship was formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
                   (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their  immigration
                   status was not precarious;  and

            (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  live  in  the
                   country to which the person is to be deported because  of
                   compelling circumstances over and above  those  described
                   in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM;  and

            (iii)      it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                   in the UK without the person who is to be deported.




    The decision of the second panel

28. The panel heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  Ms  Walker,
    summarising their evidence at [33]-[41].

29. Although  its  decision  was  set  aside  with  none  of  its  findings
    preserved, the first panel's record of the evidence it received stands.
    To the extent relevant to the issues that were argued before  me,  this
    may be summarised as follows:

    i)      The appellant was divorced from his wife  who  lives  with  his
        daughter ([5]).

    ii)     The appellant was in a relationship with someone who had an 11-
        year-old daughter. He said that the partner was not at the  hearing
        because he had not told the partner about his case  or  the  appeal
        ([18]). He said he was not living with his partner and that she was
        unaware of his predicament ([33]).

      iii)  In cross-examination, Ms Walker said, inter alia, that when the
        appellant's appeal was heard in April 2014, he did not want her  to
        become involved as she was the carer for her son  ([37]).  She  was
        then referred to her witness statement where, at [3] and  [5],  she
        said that in 2004 the appellant mentioned to  her  that,  after  he
        left prison, the Home Office wanted to  deport  him,  that  nothing
        further was heard and that she assumed everything was okay [37].

    iii)    His aunt, Mrs. Norma Dubison,  who  gave  evidence  before  the
        first panel, said she did not know if he was in a  relationship  in
        the UK ([20]).

      iv)   Pastor Jennifer Moore, ordained by the Pentecostal Church,  gave
        written and oral evidence. She said she had known the appellant for
        about 3 years; that he was a valuable member  of  the  congregation
        who participates in most church activities; that the  church  tries
        to give him support for his daily living  because  of  his  medical
        condition; and that he  helped  immensely  with  the  church  youth
        programme and has helped young church members to change their ways.
        She  was  unable  to  provide  information  as   to   his   current
        relationship.

30. The second panel gave its reasons for its findings  at  [44]-[66].  Its
    findings may be summarised as follows:

    i)      It rejected the appellant's evidence that  he  was  not  served
        with the deportation order in 2011 and that the first  he  came  to
        know about the deportation order was when he attended the  Tribunal
        in 2013 or 2014 ([50]).

    ii)     It found that the appellant was aware that he  was  subject  to
        reporting conditions after his release from prison in 2003 ([51]).

    iii)    It  accepted  Ms  Walker's  evidence  that  their  relationship
        started in 2004 and that it ended in 2011 when there was a  dispute
        about the appellant's son (Keron Anthony Terrelonge) coming to live
        with them. It accepted that the appellant moved  to  live  with  Ms
        Walker in 2012 when she became aware  of  his  physical  condition.
        However, the panel did not accept  that  they  had  a  genuine  and
        subsisting relationship, stating that it had "taken  note"  of  the
        fact that the appellant did not mention the  relationship  with  Ms
        Walker at his  hearing  in  March  2014  but  said  he  had  a  new
        relationship with someone who had an 11-year-old daughter  (whereas
        Ms Walker then had an 11-year old son).

      iv)   It found that the appellant had not  shown  that  treatment  or
        medication for his condition would  not  be  available  to  him  in
        Jamaica ([56]).

    v)      There was no evidence that he had committed any offences  since
        being released from prison in 2003 ([49]). Although  there  was  no
        evidence put  before  it  that  he  was  addressing  his  offending
        behaviour, it said that it found that there was no evidence that he
        was a risk to the public ([57].

      vi)   The appellant had not shown that it would be unduly  harsh  for
        Ms Walker to live in Jamaica if she chose to do so or that it would
        be unduly harsh for her to remain in the UK without him [58]).

    vii)    Any delay in bringing deportation proceedings did not amount to
        an exceptional circumstance ([59]).

    viii)   The appellant had  minimal  contact  with  his  daughter.  Such
        contact as he had was by phone.

31. I will now quote [44]-[66] of the second panel's decision:


        Conclusions


        44. We have considered all the evidence in this case whether or not
             we specifically refer to it.  We have not  considered  evidence
             in isolation but by reason of the format of this  determination
             matters are considered in separate paragraphs.


        45. We have considered Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002 and paragraphs 390, 390A,  396,  397,  398,
             399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.  We have borne  in  mind
             the decision in McLarty (Deportation - proportionality balance)
             [2014] UKUT 00315 (IAC).


        46.  We do not have any  sentencing  remarks  in  relation  to  the
             Appellant's conviction in 2001 although we note that it was  an
             offence involving serious violence and that the original  three
             year sentence was increased by the Court  of  Appeal  to  three
             years nine months.


        47. The Appellant has been diagnosed with a rare condition  of  the
             spinal cord known as HTLV-1 associated Myelopathy  (HAM).   The
             documents before us show that this is  a  condition  associated
             with long term inflammation of the  spinal  cord.   The  letter
             from Professor Taylor dated 19 September 2013 at page 3 of  the
             Appellant's bundle states that the natural history of HAM is of
             gradual worsening of walking, bladder, bowel  function  and  of
             chronic pain.  The long term prognosis is to become  wheelchair
             dependent.  Patients' independence therefore becomes  dependent
             on the degree of care that they can receive in  the  community.
             Treatment for  the  condition  is  not  widely  available  and,
             indeed, the only treatments that Professor Taylor has  evidence
             for previously have essentially been short  term  measures  and
             symptomatic treatment.  The Appellant presented in August  2007
             early in the disease with symptoms of six months' duration.  He
             consented to participate in a research trial to test whether  a
             new approach to  treating  the  condition  would  be  safe  and
             effective.  The treatment was for twelve months and  the  study
             lasted a total of eighteen months.  The experimental  treatment
             appeared to stabilise the Appellant's condition.  The most  up-
             to-date medical documents  are  at  pages  14  and  16  of  the
             Appellant's bundle.  On 16 April 2014 Dr Kagdi  was  requesting
             that the Appellant be seen for skin lesions over his back.  The
             document also records that his HAM  has  been  managed  largely
             with symptomatic treatment including muscle relaxant.   However
             he did receive 48 weeks of Ciclosporin therapy  from  September
             2007 to September 2008  as  part  of  a  clinical  study.   The
             document at page 16 of the Appellant's bundle  is  also  by  Dr
             Kagdi and  is  dated  20  May  2014.   This  records  that  the
             Appellant's skin rash is much better but leg stiffness is still
             persistent.  His CSF showed mildly raised protein and CSF HTLV-
             1 PVL of  45  percent.   Following  discussion  with  Professor
             Taylor  they  initiated  the  Appellant  on  Disease  Modifying
             Medication for his Myelopathy.  He was started on  Methotrexate
             7.5 mg  weekly  with  Folic  Acid  supplements.   The  document
             concludes with the comment that they would review the Appellant
             again in three weeks but there is no further  medical  evidence
             available to us.


        48. When the Appellant was granted ILR on 11 October 2001 it was on
             the basis of his subsisting marriage to Ms Daniel.  He has  not
             been in a relationship with her since 2004 and we are informed,
             in the Skeleton Argument, that they were divorced in 2008.


        49. We find that there is no evidence before us to  show  that  the
             Appellant has committed any further offences since his  release
             from prison in 2003.


        50. We reject the Appellant's evidence that he was not served  with
             the Deportation Order in 2011 and we reject his  evidence  that
             he first came to know  about  the  Deportation  Order  when  he
             attended the Tribunal in 2013 or  2014.   At  the  hearing  the
             Appellant confirmed the contents of his witness statement which
             he had signed prior to the hearing on 14 October 2014 but which
             was undated.  He, consequently, dated it on 14/10/14 but he had
             signed it before the date of the hearing.  At  paragraph  3  of
             that witness statement he states as follows:


                       "In 2001, I received a  conviction  for  GBH  and  a
                  custodial sentence.  The Home Office wrote in 2003  saying
                  that they wanted to deport me.   I  appealed  against  the
                  decision and although I lost my appeal, I understood  from
                  my solicitors at the time that  they  would  make  further
                  representations on my behalf to the  Home  Office.   Since
                  2004 I have heard nothing further  from  the  Home  Office
                  until July 2011  when  they  suddenly  served  me  with  a
                  deportation order.  This order I  believe  was  served  or
                  issued because of my son's  situation  as  he  was  facing
                  deportation himself at the time."


                  In  addition  to  the  Appellant's  acceptance  in   that
             paragraph that he was served with the Deportation order in 2011
             we have also seen the letter from his solicitors,  Chartwell  &
             Sadlers, dated 21 September 2012 which is in  the  Respondent's
             bundle.  This letter contains the following sentence:


                       "We maintain that our client is not a danger to  the
                  public and therefore his deportation cannot be said to  be
                  conducive."


                 We find  that  such  sentence  clearly  indicates  that  a
             Deportation Order had been  served.   In  the  light  of  these
             matters we further find that the Appellant's oral evidence that
             he was not aware of the Deportation Order until he appeared  at
             court in 2013 or 2014 undermined his credibility.


        51. We find, on the balance of probabilities,  that  the  Appellant
             was aware that he was subject to reporting conditions after his
             release from prison in 2003.  The determination by  Adjudicator
             Such states, at paragraph 4, that on completion of his sentence
             the Appellant was  allowed  to  live  at  his  current  address
             subject to reporting conditions.  We also note the entry on the
             Respondent's case notes that on 4  August  2011  the  Appellant
             phoned the Respondent and claimed that his  representative  had
             written in 2003  in  respect  of  his  absence  from  reporting
             restrictions.   This  telephone  call   followed   an   earlier
             conversation between the Respondent and the  Probation  Officer
             for the Appellant's son in which the Probation Officer  queried
             the nature  of  the  Appellant's  reporting  restriction.   The
             Probation Officer was advised that the Appellant was subject to
             restrictions imposed in January 2003 when he was released  from
             prison to report at Becket House which he  had  never  complied
             with.  The Appellant  does  not  dispute  that  he  phoned  the
             Respondent on 4 August 2011 but he disputes that  he  had  ever
             received an earlier letter.  We reject  his  evidence  in  that
             regard.  We find, on the balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
             Appellant was informing the Respondent of a letter  written  by
             his representatives in 2003 which was  explaining  his  absence
             from the reporting requirements and that he was aware  of  such
             reporting requirements.  We find that the  Appellant  has  been
             aware since November 2002 that he was  liable  for  deportation
             and that he has known since November 2003 that  the  Respondent
             deemed his deportation to be conducive to the public good.   We
             take note that in paragraph  5  of  her  witness  statement  Ms
             Walker states that when they started  going  out  in  2004  the
             Appellant told her that the Home Office wanted to deport him.


        52. The Appellant was sentenced to three  years  nine  months  and,
             consequently, paragraph 398(b) is applicable and paragraphs 399
             and 399A would fall to be considered.


        53. It is  not  argued  that  the  Appellant's  case  falls  to  be
             considered under paragraph 399(a) or 399A.  It is  argued  that
             it falls to be considered  under  paragraph  399(b).   This  is
             relevant in that when considering the  best  interests  of  the
             Appellant's daughter it is  not  argued  that  his  deportation
             would have an effect upon her and it is  not  argued  that  the
             Appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  Ms
             Walker's son.  It is clearly  in  the  best  interests  of  the
             Appellant's daughter that she continue to live with her mother.


        54. The  relationship  upon  which  the  Appellant  relies  is  his
             relationship with Ms Walker.  The date  when  the  relationship
             started is given as 2002  by  the  Appellant  and  2004  by  Ms
             Walker.  We accept the date given by Ms Walker as the Appellant
             was in prison in 2002.  We note that she has  been  aware  from
             the commencement of  the  relationship  that  the  Home  Office
             wanted to deport the Appellant.  We accept the  evidence  given
             by Ms Walker that their relationship ended in 2011  when  there
             was a dispute about the Appellant's son  coming  to  live  with
             them and that the Appellant moved to live with her in 2012 when
             she became aware of his physical condition.  We  take  note  of
             the fact that the Appellant did not mention a relationship with
             Ms Walker at the hearing in March 2014 but said he  had  a  new
             relationship with someone who had  an  11  year  old  daughter.
             That description does not describe Ms Walker.  We find that the
             Appellant has not shown, on the balance of  probabilities  that
             he is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms  Walker.
             We further find this matter relevant to  the  issue  of  family
             life


        55. We reject the submission made by Mr Slatter in paragraph  4  of
             his Skeleton Argument that  the  Appellant  has  lived  in  the
             United Kingdom with valid leave  for  at  least  fifteen  years
             immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision.  We
             have already found that  the  Appellant  was  served  with  the
             Deportation Order in 2011 which nullifies the basis upon  which
             the fifteen year period was calculated.


        56. We have set out above the details of  the  Appellant's  medical
             condition.  That was considered by the Respondent in the letter
             dated 21 May 2013.  The Respondent considered a letter from  Dr
             Graham  Taylor,  dated  4  September  2012,  which  listed  the
             medication  prescribed  to  the  Appellant.   The  Respondent's
             letter states that all medications listed in the letter dated 4
             September 2012 are available in  Jamaica.   We  find  that  the
             Appellant has not shown, on the balance of probabilities,  that
             treatment or medication  would  not  be  available  to  him  in
             Jamaica.


        57. Although we have had no  evidence  put  before  us  as  to  the
             Appellant addressing his offending behaviour we find that there
             is no evidence before us to show that  he  is  a  risk  to  the
             public.


        58. We find that the Appellant has not shown,  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities, that it would be unduly harsh for Ms  Walker  to
             live in Jamaica if she chose to do so nor has he shown, on  the
             balance of probabilities, that it would be unduly harsh for her
             to remain in the United Kingdom without the Appellant.  We make
             this finding when considering both  paragraph  117C(5)  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  paragraph
             399(b) of the Immigration Rules.


        59. We have considered the factor of delay in this case.  There  is
             no explanation from the Respondent as to  why  the  Appellant's
             two applications for Naturalisation did not alert them  to  his
             presence   However,  as  we  have  already  found  above,   the
             Appellant has been aware for many  years  of  the  respondent's
             view that his deportation would  be  conducive  to  the  public
             good.  We have considered the case of EB (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL
             41 which is set out at paragraph 9 of  the  Skeleton  Argument.
             As  set  out  above,  the  current  relationship  between   the
             Appellant and Ms Walker commenced in 2012 which  is  after  the
             Deportation Order was served on the Appellant.   We  have  also
             set out above the fact that the Appellant's  relationship  with
             his wife ended in 2004 and we find that any delay on  the  part
             of the Respondent could not have  affected  that  relationship.
             It is also to be noted that the Appellant did not  mention  his
             relationship with Ms Walker at the hearing in March  2014.   We
             do not find that any delay in this case  on  the  part  of  the
             Respondent amounts to an exceptional circumstance.


        60. By reason of all the matters set out above  we  find  that  the
             Appellant has not shown, on the balance of probabilities,  that
             pursuant to paragraph 390A of the Immigration Rules  there  are
             exceptional circumstances which outweigh the public interest in
             maintaining the Deportation Order.


        61. We have considered the step-by-step process set out  in  Razgar
             [2004] UKHL 27.  We accept that  the  Appellant  would  have  a
             private life by virtue of the number of years he has  lived  in
             the United Kingdom.  We do not find that he has a  family  life
             with Ms Walker but, if we are  wrong  in  this,  we  go  on  to
             consider it below.  We find that he has  minimal  contact  with
             his daughter and  that  such  contact  is  by  telephone.   His
             daughter's mother does not want them to be in  contact  and  we
             find that it is in the child's best interest that she remain in
             the care of her mother.  His private  life  also  involves  his
             involvement with the church.


        62.  Removal  of  the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
             interfere  with  any  family  and   private   life   and   have
             consequences of such  gravity  as  potentially  to  engage  the
             operation of Article 8.  We remind ourselves that Lord  Justice
             Sedley said in the case of VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ  5  that
             the phrase poses no  especially  high  threshold  in  terms  of
             Article 8.  It was not argued that such interference would  not
             be in accordance with the law and would have a legitimate  aim.
             That, therefore, leaves the question of proportionality.


        63. We bear in mind the decision in the case of Beoku-Betts  [2008]
             UKHL 39.


        64. We remind  ourselves  of  the  public  interest  in  favour  of
             deporting foreign criminals.  We  also  remind  ourselves  that
             when considering the balancing exercise, Parliament has  tilted
             the scales strongly in favour of deportation.


        65. The Appellant has been present  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
             January 1997 but was sentenced to a  term  of  imprisonment  in
             November 2001, a period of four  years  ten  months  after  his
             arrival.  He was released from custody in January 2003 by which
             time he had been notified of his liability  to  deportation  on
             conducive grounds.  We repeat here all the matters and findings
             set out above in relation to this factor. The Appellant  has  a
             medical condition which is being treated by the NHS. We set out
             here all the matters and findings made  above  in  relation  to
             that medical condition. There is no evidence that the Appellant
             has committed any  further  offences  since  his  release  from
             prison but we remind ourselves  of  the  decision  in  Nasim  &
             Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT  00025  (IAC)  that  a  person's
             human rights  are  not  enhanced  by  not  committing  criminal
             offences or not relying on public funds.  We repeat our finding
             in relation to no risk to  the  public.   We  repeat  here  our
             finding  that  the  Appellant  has  minimal  contact  with  his
             daughter and that such contact is, in any event, by  telephone.
             We  note  the  evidence  of  Pastor  Jennifer  Moore  that  the
             Appellant's  involvement  with  the   church   has   been   for
             approximately three years.  Such involvement would,  therefore,
             have commenced at about the same time that we  have  found  the
             Deportation  Order  was  served  upon  the  Appellant  and  his
             involvement with that church would have continued when  he  was
             fully aware that he was subject to  a  Deportation  Order.   We
             take account of his relationship with Ms Walker and  we  repeat
             here all the matters and findings set out above in  respect  of
             that relationship.  We have considered the issue  of  delay  by
             the Respondent but we repeat here the matters and findings made
             above in relation to that  issue.   His  relationship  with  Ms
             Walker commenced when she and the Appellant were aware  of  his
             liability  to  deportation  and  their   current   relationship
             commenced after the Deportation Order had been  served  on  the
             Appellant.  This Appellant is a 47 year old male who has  spent
             the majority of his life outside the United Kingdom and on  his
             own evidence has made two visits back to Jamaica in 2000 and in
             2001.


        66. Taking into account all the  matters  set  out  above  and  the
             evidence as a whole, as we  do,  we  find  that  there  are  no
             factors  either  singly  or  cumulatively   which   amount   to
             compelling  or  exceptional  reasons  to  outweigh  the  public
             interest in removal.  The appeal in relation to paragraph  390A
             and Article 8 is dismissed.

      The grounds

32. There are three grounds. Ground 1 advances two arguments as follows:

    i)     The panel's finding that the appellant had  not  shown  that  he
        enjoyed family life with Ms Walker was inconsistent with  the  fact
        that it also considered whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  Ms
        Walker to live in Jamaica and that it considered  the  guidance  in
        Beoku-Betts.

    ii)    The panel gave inadequate reasons for finding that the appellant
        did not enjoy family life with Ms Walker  and  failed  to  properly
        engage with her evidence as well as the evidence  of  Pastor  Moore
        who said that she knew of the relationship.

33. Ground 2 is that the panel  failed  to  consider  or  engage  with  the
    evidence that the appellant is receiving support with coping  with  his
    illness from members of his church and his aunt and  niece.  The  panel
    failed to address the significance of the care  and  community  support
    that the appellant is receiving.  The appellant has no  community  ties
    in Jamaica and no family.

34. Ground 3 is that the panel  failed  to  identify  the  public  interest
    factors given that appellant has not committed an offence  in  the  13-
    year period since his conviction on 21 November 2001.

    Submissions

35.  In  opening,  Mr  Jaisri   submitted   that,   as   the   respondent's
    representative had not challenged the evidence  that  the  relationship
    between the appellant and Ms Walker was  genuine  and  subsisting,  the
    second panel should have proceeded on the basis that it was genuine and
    subsisting.

36. This issue had not been raised in the  grounds.  I  refused  Mr  Jaisri
    permission to argue it. My reasons are given at [45]-[48] below.

37. In relation to ground 1, Mr Jaisri said that he is instructed that  the
    appellant's evidence at the hearing in March 2014 was that he was in  a
    relationship with someone who had an 11-year old son and that this  was
    a reference to Ms Walker.  Mr Jaisri was instructed  to  say  that  the
    appellant had not said at the hearing in March 2014  that  his  partner
    had an 11-year daughter.

38. I pointed out that it had not been raised before Judge Rintoul that the
    first panel had incorrectly recorded the evidence of the appellant, nor
    had it been raised at any stage before the second panel.

39. Mr Jaisri submitted that the second panel had not given any reasons for
    rejecting the evidence that the appellant and Ms Walker had  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship. They had merely said: "We take note of the
    fact that the appellant did not mention a relationship with  Ms  Walker
    at the hearing in March 2014 but said he had a  new  relationship  with
    someone who had an 11 year old daughter".   Mr  Jaisri  submitted  that
    this was not a reason. The panel merely  noted  this  evidence.  Having
    noted the fact, the panel did not  explain  the  significance  of  this
    fact.

40. Even if this amounted to a reason, Mr  Jaisri  submitted  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the panel to put the point to the appellant. Its failure
    to do so  was  unfair.  There  was  an  obvious  inconsistency  in  the
    evidence,  the  significance  of  which  may  have  been  lost  to  the
    appellant's representative. The second panel was therefore  obliged  to
    put the point to the appellant if it intended to attach weight  to  the
    inconsistency.

41. In relation to ground 2, Mr Jaisri accepted that, if I decided ground 1
    against the appellant, ground 2 could not succeed on its own, given the
    guidance in the Court of Appeal's judgment in GS (India) and  others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40  and,
    that, in any event, medical treatment for the appellant's condition  is
    available in Jamaica.

42. However, Mr Jaisri  submitted  that,  if  the  second  panel  erred  as
    contended in ground 1, the appellant's Article 8 claim  is  capable  of
    succeeding pursuant to the guidance in GS (India) when his family  life
    is considered in conjunction with the  assistance  that  the  appellant
    receives from members of his church and also from his aunt and niece.

43. Mr Jaisri submitted that the error of law contended in ground 3  was  a
    process error. The second panel  had  failed  to  set  out  the  public
    interest factors in favour of deportation. It also failed  to  consider
    the positive factor in his  favour,  that  he  had  not  committed  any
    offence in the 13-year period since November 2001.

44. I heard Mr Avery briefly in response, following by  Mr  Jaisri's  brief
    submissions in reply. I then reserved my decision.

      Assessment

45. I shall first give my reasons for refusing to permit Mr Jaisri to argue
    that, as the respondent's representative had not challenged before  the
    second panel the evidence of the appellant and Ms Walker that they  had
    a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship,  the  panel  ought  to  have
    proceeded on the basis that they did  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

46. In the first place, the submission ignores the fact that the burden  of
    proof is upon the  appellant  to  establish  the  facts  of  his  case.
    Furthermore, even if the respondent's representative does not challenge
    in terms the evidence given (which is not the case in the instant case,
    as explained below), this does not mean that the point is conceded.

47. The argument that Mr Jaisri sought to raise had not been raised in  the
    grounds and therefore Mr Avery did not have prior notice of it.  Having
    had the opportunity to consider  the  material  before  me  in  greater
    detail, I am fortified in my decision not to allow Mr Jaisri  to  argue
    this point. The hearing that took place before the second panel  on  14
    October 2014  does  not  stand  in  isolation.   I  have  set  out  the
    chronology in this case in some detail. It will be apparent  from  [19]
    above  and  [24]-[27]  of  the  RFRL  that  the   appellant   and   his
    representatives  did  not  reply  to  the  respondent's  requests   for
    information about his relationship with his wife, daughter and  stepson
    on a timely basis. It was only after a second request  for  information
    had been made that a reply was sent, stating that the appellant was  no
    longer in a relationship with his wife and had not been with her  since
    2004.  No reply was received in  response  to  a  further  request  for
    information about his relationship with his daughter and stepson.

48. In my judgment, it was clear from  [23]-[27]  of  the  RFRL,  that,  in
    setting out the chronology of this correspondence, the  respondent  put
    the appellant strictly to proof on any claim that he might have to form
    the basis of an Article 8 family life claim.

49. In any event, it is plain from the second panel's  decision,  that  the
    appellant's credibility was challenged at the hearing before the second
    panel in relation to his evidence that he had not been served with  the
    deportation order in 2011 and that he was not aware that he was subject
    to reporting conditions after his release from prison in  2003.  It  is
    therefore plain that the respondent took issue with his credibility  in
    material respects. It would (and should) have been obvious to  him  and
    his representative that he was not entitled to assume that any material
    aspect of his evidence was accepted. In addition, and importantly,  the
    explanation that Ms Walker gave for not giving evidence  to  the  first
    panel was specifically challenged in cross-examination, as  the  second
    panel's summary of the evidence at [37] of its decision demonstrates.

50. I  therefore  do  not  accept  the  submission  that  the  respondent's
    representative had not challenged the evidence of the appellant and  Ms
    Walker that their relationship was a genuine and subsisting one.

51. I turn to the fact that, in relation to ground 1, Mr Jaisri informed me
    that his instructions were that the  appellant  had  not  said  at  the
    hearing before the first panel that he was a relationship with  someone
    who had an 11-year-old daughter, that he had in fact said  his  partner
    had an 11-year-old son and that he was referring to Ms Walker.

52. The fact is that there  is  no  evidence  to  that  effect  before  me.
    Counsel's instructions are not evidence. In any event, this should have
    been raised at the hearing before Judge Rintoul who had before him  the
    issue as to the future conduct of the case. It should  have  been  made
    clear to him that the appellant  took  issue  with  the  first  panel's
    record of his evidence. This was not done.

53. Furthermore, and importantly, it was open  to  the  appellant  to  have
    given evidence to this effect to the second panel. He did not do so.  I
    do not accept that fairness required the second panel  to  put  to  the
    appellant the fact that his evidence before the first panel was that he
    had said that he was in a relationship with someone who had an 11-year-
    old daughter.

54. What fairness requires will vary from case to  case.  In  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA  Civ  173,  the
    Court of Appeal said (at [3]-[6]):


        3. Those who make a claim  for  asylum  must  show  that  they  are
             refugees. The burden of proof is on them.  Whether  or  not  a
             claimant is to be believed is frequently  very  important.  He
             will assert very many facts in relation  to  events  far  away
             most of which no one before the adjudicator is in  a  position
             to corroborate or refute. Material is  often  adduced  at  the
             last minute without warning. From time to time the claimant or
             the Home Secretary are neither there nor represented  and  yet
             the adjudicator carries on with his task.  He  frequently  has
             several cases listed in front of him on the same day. For  one
             reason  or  another  not  every  hearing  will  be  effective.
             Adjudicators can not be expected to be alive to every possible
             nuance of a case before the oral hearing,  if  there  is  one,
             starts.   Adjudicators   in   general   will   reserve   their
             determinations for later delivery. They will ponder  what  has
             been said and what has not been said, both before the  hearing
             and at the hearing. They will look carefully at the  documents
             which have been  produced.  Points  will  sometimes  assume  a
             greater importance than  they  appeared  to  have  before  the
             hearing began or in its earlier stages. Adjudicators  will  in
             general rightly be cautious about intervening lest it be  said
             that they have leaped into the  forensic  arena  and  lest  an
             appearance of bias is given.


        4. Undoubtedly a failure to put to a party to  litigation  a  point
             which is decided against him can be grossly unfair and lead to
             injustice. He must have a proper opportunity to deal with  the
             point. Adjudicators must bear this in mind. Where a  point  is
             expressly conceded by one party it will usually be  unfair  to
             decide the case against the other party on the basis that  the
             concession was wrongly made,  unless  the  tribunal  indicates
             that it is minded to take that course. Cases  can  occur  when
             fairness will require the reopening of an appeal because  some
             point of significance - perhaps arising out of a post  hearing
             decision of the higher courts -  requires  it.  However,  such
             cases will be rare.


        5. Where much depends on the credibility of a party and  when  that
             party makes several inconsistent statements which  are  before
             the decision maker,  that  party  manifestly  has  a  forensic
             problem. Some will  choose  to  confront  the  inconsistencies
             straight on and make evidential  or  forensic  submissions  on
             them. Others will  hope that 'least said, soonest mended'  and
             consider that forensic concentration on the  point  will  only
             make matters worse and that it would  be  better  to  try  and
             switch the tribunal's attention to some other  aspect  of  the
             case. Undoubtedly it is open to the tribunal expressly to  put
             a particular inconsistency to a witness because  it  considers
             that the witness may not be alerted to the point or because it
             fears that it may have  perceived  something  as  inconsistent
             with an earlier answer which in  truth  is  not  inconsistent.
             Fairness may in some circumstances require this to be done but
             this will  not  be  the  usual  case.  Usually  the  tribunal,
             particularly if the party is represented, will  remain  silent
             and see how the case unfolds.


        6. The requirements of fairness are very much  conditioned  by  the
             facts of each case.  This has  been  stressed  in  innumerable
             decisions - see the many citations to this effect  in  Rees  v
             Crane [1994] 2 A.C.173.  We have no doubt that the  claimant's
             submission is framed in terms which are far too  wide  and  in
             words which are not to be rigidly applied to every  situation.
             Whether a particular course is  consistent  with  fairness  is
             essentially an intuitive Judgment which is to be made  in  the
             light of all the circumstances of a particular case - see R  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department,  ex  parte  Doody
             [1994] 1 A.C. 531 per Lord Mustill at p.560D....

55. When one considers the background in this case, it is evident that  the
    appellant was slow to admit to the respondent in reply to her enquiries
    that his relationship with his wife had ended as long ago as  2004.  He
    did not reply to the respondent's request  for  information  about  his
    relationship with his daughter and stepson. It was not until the appeal
    before the first panel that he said that he had  minimal  contact  with
    his  daughter  and  that  such  contact  was  by  telephone.  This   is
    undoubtedly the  behaviour  of  someone  who  does  not  wish  to  draw
    attention to weaknesses in his case.

56. Furthermore, as Mr Jaisri himself appeared to accept,  the  discrepancy
    was an obvious one although, at the same time, he also  submitted  that
    the significance of  the  discrepancy  might  have  been  lost  on  the
    appellant's representative. I do not accept that  the  significance  of
    the discrepancy  might  have  been  lost  to  the  appellant  and/or  a
    reasonably competent representative. His Article  8  claim  before  the
    second panel was based on his  relationship  with  Ms  Walker  and  his
    medical condition. Accordingly, it is elementary that the evidence that
    was before the first panel about the  relationship  would  continue  to
    feature in the appeal before the second panel.

57. I do not accept Mr Jaisri's submission that the second  panel  had  not
    given reasons for rejecting the appellant's and Ms Walker's evidence of
    the genuineness of their relationship. In submitting  that  the  second
    panel had merely noted the evidence at the  hearing  before  the  first
    panel and that this did not amount to a  reason,  Mr  Jaisri  seeks  to
    place an overly technical interpretation on the sentence:

            We take note of the fact that the appellant did  not  mention  a
             relationship with Ms Walker at the hearing in  March  2014  but
             said he had a new relationship with someone who had an 11  year
             old daughter.

58. In my judgement, it is plain that the second panel was relying upon the
    evidence at the previous hearing as a reason for its rejection  of  the
    evidence of the appellant and Ms Walker.

59. I do not accept that the  second  panel  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence of the  appellant  and  Ms  Walker  about  their
    alleged relationship. The fact that the appellant had not mentioned his
    alleged relationship with Ms Walker at the hearing in  March  2014  and
    that he said he had a relationship with someone  with  an  11-year  old
    daughter was adequate in my view.

60. In any event, there were other  reasons  in  the  evidence  before  the
    second panel that supported their rejection  of  the  evidence  of  the
    alleged relationship, as follows:

    i)      Ms Walker's explanation for her absence  from  the  hearing  in
        March 2014 is not one that stands up to any scrutiny,  given  that,
        as [3] and [5] of her witness statement showed, she was aware  that
        there was deportation action against  him  in  2004  and  that,  as
        nothing further was heard, she assumed everything was "okay".

    ii)     Ms Walker's explanation at the hearing before the second  panel
        conflicts with the explanation the appellant gave  at  the  hearing
        before the first panel, that he had not told his partner about  his
        case.

    iii)    The evidence of  the  appellant's  aunt,  Ms  Dubison,  at  the
        hearing before the first panel was that she did not know if he  was
        in a relationship in the UK.

    iv)     At the hearing before the first panel, Pastor  Moore  said  she
        was unable to give  information  as  to  his  current  relationship
        notwithstanding that she gave evidence about his activities in  her
        church, saying, amongst other things, that he participated in  most
        church activities.

    v)      The appellant said at the hearing before the first  panel  that
        he was not living with his partner, whereas Ms Walker said  at  the
        hearing before the second panel that he moved in to live  with  her
        in 2012.

61. Indeed, if the second panel had rejected the entirety of  the  evidence
    of Ms Walker and the appellant, this would have been open to it. As  it
    is, its decision to accept some aspects of the evidence  of  Ms  Walker
    was generous.

62. For all of these reasons,  I  do  not  accept  that  the  second  panel
    materially erred in law by giving inadequate reasons  for  its  finding
    that the appellant  had  not  shown  that  he  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with Ms Walker.

63. There is no substance in the remainder  of  ground  1,  i.e.  that  the
    second panel failed to properly engage with the evidence of  Ms  Walker
    and Pastor Moore. Judges are not obliged to deal with every  aspect  of
    the evidence that is before them. However,  if  the  second  panel  had
    given further reasons for rejecting the evidence of Ms Walker, no doubt
    this would have included the matters to which I have drawn attention at
    [60] above. Likewise, the  evidence  that  Pastor  Moore  gave  at  the
    hearing before the second panel did not  stand  alone.  The  panel  had
    before it all of the matters to which I  have  drawn  attention  above.
    Importantly, Pastor Moore was unable to provide information  about  his
    alleged relationship at  the  hearing  before  the  first  panel.  This
    notwithstanding the fact that it is alleged by  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Walker that they were already in a relationship then and Pastor Moore's
    evidence at the hearing before the first panel that the appellant  took
    part in most church activities, in which case it is reasonable to think
    that she would have been able to provide  some  information  about  his
    alleged relationship at the hearing before the first panel.

64. I do not accept that there is any inconsistency in the  second  panel's
    findings. When its decision is read as a whole and whilst I accept that
    the second panel may have expressed itself better, it  is  nevertheless
    clear that it considered the issue of undue hardship and Beoku-Betts on
    an alternative basis, that  is,  if  they  were  wrong  to  reject  the
    evidence of the appellant and Ms Walker that they  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.

65. I have therefore concluded that ground 1 is not established.

66. Nevertheless, I conclude that any error in the second panel's rejection
    of the evidence that the appellant and Ms Walker did not have a genuine
    and subsisting relationship is not material. My reasons  are  given  at
    [67]-[82].

67. The  next  question  concerns  the  meaning  of  "precarious"  in  para
    399(b)(i).  In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) (a decision of
    Mr CMG Ockelton,  Vice  President,  and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Holmes), the Upper Tribunal considered the meaning of  "precarious"  in
    s.117B(5) of the 2002 Act. Although the Upper Tribunal in  AM  (Malawi)
    considered s.117B(5) and not para 399(b)(i), it is nevertheless helpful
    to note what the Upper Tribunal said about the meaning of  "precarious"
    in s.117B, head note (5) of which reads:

            (5)  In some circumstances it may also be  that  even  a  person
             with indefinite leave to remain, or a person who  has  obtained
             citizenship,  enjoys  a  status  that  is  "precarious"  either
             because that status is revocable by the Secretary of State as a
             result  of  their  deception,  or  because  of  their  criminal
             conduct. In such circumstances the person will  be  well  aware
             that he has imperilled  his  status  and  cannot  viably  claim
             thereafter that his status is other than precarious.

68.  Paragraph  4.4(b)  of  Chapter  13  of  the  Immigration   Directorate
    Instructions (IDIs) (version 5.0 dated 28 July 2014) states:


           4.4(b)      Was the relationship  formed  at  a  time  when  the
                foreign criminal was in the UK lawfully and his  immigration
                status was not precarious?


           4.4.4 This rule is partially underpinned by section  117B(4)  of
                the 2002 Act which provides that  little  weight  should  be
                given to a relationship formed  with  a  qualifying  partner
                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
                in the UK unlawfully. For the purposes of paragraph  399(b),
                a foreign criminal was in the UK unlawfully if  he  required
                leave to enter or remain but did not have it.


           4.4.5 The Immigration Rules also require that a relationship not
                be formed at a time when the foreign criminal has precarious
                immigration status because a claim  to  respect  for  family
                life formed when there was no  guarantee  that  family  life
                could continue indefinitely in the UK, or when there was  no
                guarantee that if the person was  convicted  of  an  offence
                while he had limited leave  he  would  qualify  for  further
                leave, will  be  less  capable  of  outweighing  the  public
                interest. For the purposes  of  this  guidance,  a  person's
                immigration status is precarious if he is  in  the  UK  with
                limited leave to enter or remain, or he has  settled  status
                which was obtained  fraudulently,  or  he  has  committed  a
                criminal offence which he should have been aware would  make
                him liable to removal or deportation.


           4.4.6 If a relationship was formed when a foreign  criminal  had
                limited leave to enter or remain or was exempt from  control
                for a  limited  period,  then  his  immigration  status  was
                precarious. This is because he will, or  should,  have  been
                aware that:


                . he will not be able to qualify  for  indefinite  leave  to
                  remain, e.g. because he is in the UK  with  limited  leave
                  that does not provide a route to settlement; or
                . he may not qualify for indefinite leave to remain if there
                  is a change in his circumstances, e.g.  if  he  commits  a
                  criminal offence; or
                . a temporary exemption from immigration  control  does  not
                  provide a legitimate expectation that he will be  able  to
                  remain permanently in the UK.


           4.4.7 In order to meet this limb of the exception, the  onus  is
                on  the  foreign  criminal  to  provide  evidence  that  the
                relationship with his partner was formed when he was in  the
                UK with indefinite leave to enter or remain and  before  the
                criminality which he should have been aware would  make  him
                liable to removal or deportation.


           4.4.8 If a foreign criminal formed a relationship with a partner
                at a time when he had indefinite leave to  enter  or  remain
                which was obtained by means of  deception,  then  that  will
                provide a basis for saying that his immigration status  does
                not benefit him under this provision because he should  have
                been aware that he was not entitled to that status  and  the
                need to maintain effective  immigration  controls  outweighs
                his immigration status.

69. The leading authorities on the  interpretation  of  IRs  include  Mahad
    (Ethiopia) v Entry Clearance Officer [2010] 1 WLR 48,  [2009]  UKSC  16
    and Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  1  WLR
    1230. Para 25 of Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f))  [2013]  UKUT  00088
    (IAC) sets out the relevant passages from Mahad and Odelola, as follows
    (the emphasis is mine):


           25.   The law is settled  as  to  the  proper  approach  to  the
                 construction of the Rules.  As observed by  Lord  Brown  in
                 Ahmed Mahad v ECO [2009] UKSC 16 at paragraph [10]:
                 "There is really no dispute about the proper  approach  to
                       the construction of the Rules.  As Lord Hoffman  said
                       in  Odelola  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
                       Department [2009] 1 WLR 1230, 1233 (paragraph 4):


                            'Further,   like   any   other   question    of
                            construction,  this  [whether  a  Rule   change
                            applies to  all  undetermined  applications  or
                            only to subsequent applications]  depends  upon
                            the language of the Rule, construed against the
                            relevant   background.    That    involves    a
                            consideration of the  Immigration  Rules  as  a
                            whole and the function which they serve in  the
                            administration of immigration policy.'


                       That is  entirely  consistent  with  what  Buxton  LJ
                       (collecting together a  number  of  dicta  from  past
                       cases concerning the status of the Rules) had said in
                       Odelola in the Court of Appeal [2009]  1WLR  126  and
                       indeed, with what Laws LJ said (before the  House  of
                       Lords decision  in  Odelola)  in  the  present  case.
                       Essentially it comes to this.  The Rules are  not  to
                       be construed with all the  strictness  applicable  to
                       the construction of a statute or statutory instrument
                       but, instead sensibly according to  the  natural  and
                       ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising  that
                       they are  statements  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
                       administrative  policy.   The  respondent's   Counsel
                       readily accepted that what she meant in  her  written
                       case   by   the   proposition   'the   question    of
                       interpretation is ... what  the  Secretary  of  State
                       intended his policy to be' was that the court's  task
                       is to discover from the words used in the Rules  what
                       the  Secretary  of  State  must  be  taken  to   have
                       intended.  After all, under s.3(2) of the Immigration
                       Act 1971, the Secretary of State has to lay the Rules
                       before Parliament, which then has the opportunity  to
                       disapprove them.  True,  as  I  observed  in  Odelola
                       (paragraph 33): 'The question is what  the  Secretary
                       of State intended.  The Rules are  her  Rules'.   But
                       that intention is to be  discerned  objectively  from
                       the  language  used,  not  divined  by  reference  to
                       supposed policy considerations.  Still  less  is  the
                       Secretary of State's intention to be discovered  from
                       the  Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions  (IDIs)
                       issued intermittently to guide  immigration  officers
                       in their application of the  rules.  IDIs  are  given
                       pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the  1971
                       Act which provides that:


                 'In  the  exercise  of  their  functions  under  this  Act
                            immigration officers shall  act  in  accordance
                            with such instructions (not  inconsistent  with
                            the immigration rules) as may be given them  by
                            the Secretary of State ...' (emphasis added)."

70. Mahad and Odelola were considered by the Upper Tribunal in Sultana  and
    Others (rules: waiver /further enquiry; discretion) [2014]  UKUT  00540
    (IAC) (the President and Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson) where,  at  [30],
    the Upper Tribunal said:


             30.  Thus  IDIs,  in  common  with  comparable  instruments  of
                 Secretary of State's guidance or policy, are subservient in
                 nature,  the  handmaidens   of   the   Immigration   Rules.
                 Instruments  of  this  kind,  notwithstanding  their  legal
                 status, can, nonetheless, feature in a Tribunal's review of
                 whether a decision was in accordance with  the  law.   This
                 follows from a correct understanding of their  status.   In
                 public law terms, policies, or guides, of  this  kind  have
                 the status of a material consideration in cases where  they
                 are engaged.  Accordingly, a decision  maker's  failure  to
                 have regard to this  kind  of  instrument  may  operate  to
                 vitiate the decision under challenge.  Similarly,  where  a
                 decision maker purports to have regard to the guidance  but
                 misconstrues or misapplies it. This kind of instrument  can
                 also,  in  principle,  engender  a  substantive  legitimate
                 expectation to which the law will give effect.   Our  final
                 observation concerning IDIs is that  provided  their  terms
                 are consistent with the provisions of the Immigration Rules
                 to which they  relate,  they  may,  potentially,  fulfil  a
                 further role, namely that of illuminating the rationale and
                 policy underpinning the relevant Rules. This is illustrated
                  in the statement in paragraph 3.4.2 of  the  IDI  appended
                 hereto that:

                       "Decision  makers  are  also   able   to   grant   an
                       application despite minor evidential problems ....."

71. Sultana and others concerned  the  discretion  on  decision  makers  of
    waiver and/or further enquiry in  cases  where  evidence  submitted  in
    support of an application under the Points Based  System  falls  short.
    The Rule that was considered in Sultana and Others did  not  involve  a
    rule the interpretation of which must take  place  in  the  context  of
    primary legislation.

72. In my view, any proper  interpretation  of  para  399(b)(i)  must  take
    account of relevant  primary  legislation.  There  are  two  pieces  of
    primary legislation that are relevant. The first  is  s.32  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 (the "2007 Act") and the second is s.117D of the  2002
    Act.

73. The relevant provisions of s.117D  are  set  out  at  [26]  above.  The
    relevant provisions of s.32 of the 2007 Act are:


             32 Automatic deportation


             (1) In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-
                 (a)   who is not a British citizen,
                 (b)   who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
             and
                 (c)   to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.


             (2)       Condition 1 is that the person  is  sentenced  to  a
                 period of imprisonment of at least 12 months.


             (3) Condition 2 is that-


                 (a)   the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of
                       State under  section  72(4)(a)  of  the  Nationality,
                       Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (c.  41)  (serious
                       criminal), and


                 (b)   the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.


             (4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act
                 1971 (c. 77), the deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  is
                 conducive to the public good.


             (5) The Secretary of State must make a  deportation  order  in
                 respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).

74. It follows that a person's settled status is imperilled from the moment
    he satisfies the definition of  "foreign  criminal"  in  the  automatic
    deportation provisions.

75. As a  minimum,  therefore,  one  can  draw  the  conclusion  that  para
    399(b)(i) will only be satisfied if the relationship  relied  upon  was
    entered into at a time when: (a) the offender had settled status  which
    he had not obtained by deception  or  other  means  that  imperils  his
    settled status; and (b) he did  not  fall  within  the  definitions  of
    "foreign criminal" in s.32 of the 2007 Act or s.117D of the  2002  Act;
    and (c) he had not been notified of his liability to deportation.

76. The 2007 Act received Royal Assent on 30 October 2007. Section 32  came
    into force on 1 August 2008. In AT and another v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 567, the Court of Appeal held  that
    s.32 applied to persons convicted in the period between the passing  of
    the Act and its implementation. It follows that the  occurrence  of  an
    event  from  30  October  2007  onwards  that  triggers  the  automatic
    deportation provisions in s.32 of the UK Borders Act 2007  will  always
    imperil a person's settled status, with effect from  the  date  of  the
    event.

77. The definition of "foreign criminal" in s.117D is  different  from  the
    definition  of  "foreign  criminal"  in  s.32  of  the  2007  Act.  The
    definition in s.117D applies to someone who has  been  convicted  of  a
    period of imprisonment of at least 12 months and also someone  who  has
    been convicted of an offence that has caused "serious  harm"  or  is  a
    "persistent offender". The commission of an  offence  that  has  caused
    serious harm may result in the Secretary of State issuing a certificate
    under s.72(4)(a) of the 2002 Act, thus bringing the person  within  the
    automatic deportation provisions of s.32 of the 2007 Act in addition to
    s.117D. However, the definition of s.117D also applies to  someone  who
    is a persistent offender. Thus, in this respect, s.117D is wider.

78. It follows that, pursuant to s.117D, criminal conduct of an  individual
    can imperil his/her settled status even if  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions in s.32 of the 2007 Act are not triggered.

79. Para 4.4.5 appears to imply (although the first sentence  is  difficult
    to follow) that the fact that an  individual's  immigration  status  is
    precarious when the relationship was entered  into  is  something  that
    "will be less capable of outweighing the public interest" as opposed to
    it being a bar to success  under  para  399(b)(i)  whereas  under  para
    399(b)(i) it is an absolute bar. Plainly, this  part  of  the  IDIs  is
    inconsistent with the clear words of para 399(b)(i)  which  must  apply
    pursuant to Mahad and Odelola, in particular, the words in bold in  the
    quote at [69] above.

80. Para 4.4(b) of the IDIs appears  to  envisage  the  possibility  of  an
    individual with settled status imperilling that status so as to  render
    it precarious for the  purposes  of  para  399(b)(i)  in  circumstances
    beyond those that make  the  person  fall  within  the  definitions  of
    "foreign criminal" in s.32 of the 2007 Act and perhaps even  s.117D  of
    the 2002 Act. This may be suggested, for example, by the words: "if the
    person was convicted of an offence" and the words: "or he has committed
    a criminal offence which he should  have  been  aware  would  make  him
    liable to removal or deportation" in para 4.4.5.

81. The question whether convictions for criminal offences falling short of
    those that would make a person fall within the definitions of  "foreign
    criminal" in s.32 of the 2007 Act and s.117D of the 2002  Act  imperils
    their settled status does not arise in this  case.  This  will  require
    further consideration in another case. Similarly, the question  whether
    the commission prior to s.32 of the 2007 Act being passed of an offence
    that would  have  brought  the  individual  within  the  definition  of
    "foreign criminal" in that section but for the fact that s.32  was  not
    in existence then, imperils his/her settled status is  not  a  material
    issue in this case.

82. The requirements in  para  399(b)  are  conjunctive.  Accordingly,  the
    correct approach is to consider para 399(b)(i) before the  requirements
    in para 399(b)(ii) and (iii). If this  requirement  is  not  satisfied,
    there is no need to consider the  issues  of  undue  hardship  in  para
    399(b)(ii) and (iii). The offender would then have to rely upon showing
    other factors that show very compelling circumstances over  and  beyond
    those described in paras 399 and 399A.

83. In the instant case, the appellant was convicted on 21 November 2001 of
    an offence for which he received a sentence of three  years  9  months.
    This was before s.32 of the 2007 Act being passed  and  s.117D  of  the
    2002 Act coming into force. However, he was notified of  his  liability
    to deportation on 4 December 2002. His status  became  precarious  from
    this point. The second panel found that the  appellant  and  Ms  Walker
    first started their relationship in 2004 but it ended in 2011 and  that
    he later moved in to live with Ms Walker in 2012. Accordingly,  on  any
    legitimate view, their relationship was  formed  at  a  time  when  his
    immigration status was precarious.

84. It follows that the appellant could not satisfy para 399(b)(i)  of  the
    IRs.  Accordingly, in order to succeed in his appeal before the  second
    panel, he would have had to  show  that  the  public  interest  in  his
    deportation was outweighed by "other factors" which amounted  to  "very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paras  399
    and 399A". No such "other factors" were put before  the  second  panel.
    The assistance that he receives from members of his church and his aunt
    and niece was not sufficient in itself, as Mr Jaisri accepted.

85. Mr Jaisri accepted that, if I decide ground 1  against  the  appellant,
    ground 2 cannot succeed. Accordingly, it is not  necessary  for  me  to
    deal with ground 2.

86. As for ground  3,  there  is  an  assumption  that  the  fact  that  an
    individual has not committed  any  further  criminal  offences  somehow
    reduces the public interest in deportation.  As Judge Rintoul  said  in
    his decision, the fact that the appellant  has  not  committed  further
    offences is not something that  can  properly  attract  weight  in  his
    favour. Not committing crimes is something  that  is  expected  of  all
    members of society.

87. The second panel referred to s.117C of the NIAA 2002 and  the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal in McLarty. At [64], it said that it had reminded
    itself of the  public  interest  in  favour  of  deportation  and  that
    Parliament had tilted the scales strongly in favour of  deportation.  I
    accept that it would have been preferable if the panel  had  elaborated
    on the public interest considerations. However, I make two  points,  as
    follows.

88. In the first place, the fact is that the appellant was convicted  of  a
    serious crime of violence, an offence  of  grievous  bodily  harm  with
    intent to do grievous bodily harm for which, on  appeal,  his  sentence
    was increased to 3 years 9  months.  The  nature  of  the  offence  and
    sentence together immediately raise the public interest  of  prevention
    of crime through the deterrence of others, the expression of  society's
    revulsion at such crimes and the maintenance of  public  confidence  in
    the system. This is not a case where the crime committed was of a  less
    serious order so that there is some room for saying that not all of the
    public interest considerations that may come into play apply.  This  is
    undoubtedly a case in which all of the public interest considerations I
    have described apply in addition to  the  obvious  one  of  immigration
    control.

89. Secondly, and in any event, the panel noted that Parliament had  tilted
    the scales strongly in favour of deportation. In  others  words,  there
    was a presumption in favour of deportation. Given the panel's findings,
    in particular, that the appellant had not demonstrated that he  and  Ms
    Walker had a genuine and subsisting  relationship,  there  was  nothing
    presented by him in his case even at a  basic  level  to  outweigh  the
    public interest. Accordingly, any failure by the second  panel  to  set
    out in terms the public interest considerations in  this  case  is  not
    material.

90. Ground 3 is therefore not established.

91. For all of the above reasons, I have concluded that  the  second  panel
    did not materially err in law.

      Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law. Accordingly, the  appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                                  Date: 30 October 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
