








R (on the application of Huang & others) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department ("No Time Limit" Transfer: Fraud) IJR [2015] UKUT 00662 (IAC)

IN THE Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                                     Royal Courts of Justice
                                                    Strand, London, WC2A 2LL

                                                            Date: 11/11/2015


                                   Before:

                             MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                  Between:

|             |(1) Meilin Huang                           |             |
|             |(2) Shumel Zhun                            |             |
|             |(3) Xian Fa Pan                            |             |
|             |(4) Meiying Yu                             |             |
|             |(5) Aiqing Lin                             |             |
|             |                                           |Applicants   |
|             |                                           |             |
|             |and -                                      |             |
|             |Secretary of State for the Home Department |Respondent   |

                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Mr Danny Bazini (instructed by David Tang & Co) for the 1st applicant
 Mr Ramby de Mello (instructed by David Tang & Co) for the other applicants
  Miss Julie Anderson (instructed by Treasury Solicitor) for the respondent

1. The Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine a  claim  challenging  a
decision not to transfer a "No Time Limit" (NTL) vignette to a person's  new
travel document.
2. In cases where a decision of that sort is  said  to  be  motivated  by  a
perception that the person obtained leave by  deception,  the  Secretary  of
State should rely on the process available to her for cancelling leave.




                      Hearing dates: 14th October 2015
                  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                              Approved Judgment

Mr Justice Collins:



   1. These claims were lodged in the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum
      Chamber) (UT(IAC)). Upper Tribunal Judge Andrew Jordan  directed  that
      the case of Huang should be transferred to the Administrative Court on
      the ground that it did not fall within the direction of the Lord Chief
      Justice made pursuant to Part 1 of Schedule 2  to  the  Constitutional
      Reform  Act  2005  and  section  18  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts   and
      Enforcement Act 2007. The other claims  were  transferred  since  they
      dealt with the same matter. They have no direct connection  but  since
      each challenges an identical decision made by the respondent they have
      been heard together.


   2. Each claim challenges the refusal of the respondent to  transfer  what
      is labelled a  "No  Time  Limit"  (NTL)  stamp  from  the  applicants'
      immigration status documents, to his or her passport and  to  issue  a
      Biometric Residence Permit. Each applicant is a Chinese  national  who
      came to this country and claimed asylum. Zhou made her claim in  2006.
      The other applicants made their claims, in the case of Pan in 1998 and
      the other three in 2000 or 2001. In each case asylum was  refused  and
      any appeal was unsuccessful but  the  applicants  did  not  leave  the
      country. In due course they made requests to be considered pursuant to
      the legacy arrangements and in these  cases  were  granted  indefinite
      leave to remain (ILR).


   3. Each applicant failed to give correct details when seeking asylum  and
      in their requests for leave pursuant to the  legacy  policy.  In  each
      case dates of birth were inaccurate and  in  one  (Lin)  an  incorrect
      identity was used. In some there were also  differences  in  that  the
      forenames were split into two separate words. But that in my  view  is
      probably of no importance, since the Chinese characters can when given
      their equivalent Western letters be put down as one or two words,  and
      it cannot sensibly be said that that on its own was a deliberate error
      made to mislead. The Chinese authorities will have the correct details
      of an individual and so will not accept the return of one who does not
      have those details. Thus the giving of false dates of birth  or  other
      details will mean that it is impossible to return that  individual  if
      asylum is refused. There are of course other important  concerns  that
      false details must not be given since such conduct  undermines  proper
      immigration control and ensuring that  those  seeking  entry  have  no
      criminal records or might otherwise be a danger to the state  so  that
      there is a public interest in excluding them.


   4. In order  to  decide  whether  the  UT(IAC)  has  jurisdiction  it  is
      necessary to set out the statutory  provisions  which  deal  with  the
      provision of a NTL stamp. Section 5 of the UK Borders Act 2007 enables
      regulations to be made by the respondent 'requiring a  person  subject
      to immigration control to apply for the issue of a document  recording
      biometric  information'.  This  is  called  a  biometric   information
      document. Such document may by the regulations be required to be  used
      (s.5(2)(b)):-


         "(i) for specified immigration purposes


         (ii) in connection with specified immigration procedures, or


         (iii) in specified circumstances, where a question arises  about  a
         persons status in relation to nationality or immigration".


   5. The relevant regulations are the Immigration (Biometric  Registration)
      Regulations 2008 (SI 2008/3048) as amended. The requirement  to  apply
      for a biometric immigration document (BID) is imposed by regulation 3.
      Paragraph 3(1)(a) covers a person subject to immigration  control.  He
      or she must apply for a BID if he or she satisfies a  condition  which
      includes (regulation 3(2)(c) or (d)) - an application:-


         "(c) to replace a stamp, sticker or other attachment to a  passport
         or other document which indicated that he had been granted  limited
         or indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom


         (d) to replace a letter which indicated that he  had  been  granted
         limited or indefinite leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom".


      Regulation 21 requires the holder of the document to produce it to  an
      immigration officer inter alia on seeking entry to the U.K.


   6. Each of the applicants in these cases applied for the transfer of  the
      NTL stamp from the document given on grant of  ILR.  This  was  needed
      because their passports recorded details which were not  the  same  as
      had been used to obtain ILR. This meant that they would not be able to
      travel since they would be likely not to be allowed into  the  country
      since their passports would apparently show a  different  identity  to
      the one given ILR.


   7. Section 31A of the Senior Courts  Act  1981,  which  was  inserted  by
      s.19(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, provides so
      far as material that an application for judicial review  made  to  the
      High Court  must  be  transferred  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  if  three
      conditions are met. The first two, which are  met,  are  that  nothing
      more than usual relief granted to a successful applicant for  judicial
      review including damages is applied for and that the  claim  does  not
      call into question anything done by the Crown Court.  Condition  3  is
      material in these cases. Section 31A(6) provides:-


         "Condition 3 is that the application falls within a class specified
         under section 18(6) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
         2007".


      If conditions 1 and 2 are fulfilled but condition 3  is  not  transfer
      may be ordered by the Administrative Court if it appears  to  be  just
      and convenient to do so.


   8. The relevant direction was made by Lord Judge, CJ on 21  August  2013.
      So far as material it provides:-


         "1......[T]he Lord Chief Justice  hereby  specifies  the  following
         classes of cases for the purposes of section  18(6)  of  the  [2007
         Act]


         Any application for permission to apply for judicial review and any
         application for judicial  review  (including  any  application  for
         ancillary relief and costs in such applications)  that  calls  into
         question:


    . a decision made under the immigration acts (as referred to in schedule
      1 to the Interpretation Act 1978)  or  any  instrument  having  effect
      (whether wholly or partly) under an enactment within  the  Immigration
      Acts, or otherwise relating to leave to enter or remain in the  United
      Kingdom outside the immigration rules....


         4.  In  paragraph  1....above  references  to  a  decision  include
         references to any omission or failure to make a decision".


   9. Section 61(2) of the Borders Act 2007 sets out  a  list  of  the  Acts
      which are to be regarded as  "the  Immigration  Acts"  which  includes
      "this Act" and  Schedule  1  to  the  Interpretation  Act  is  amended
      accordingly  (s.61(4)).  While  the  replacement  applied  for  is   a
      mechanical exercise, as these claims show a decision is  made  whether
      the replacement should be made. That decision, which is challenged, is
      made under the Regulations which are an instrument having effect under
      the Borders Act 2007 which is an  Immigration  Act.  Accordingly,  the
      UT(IAC) not only has jurisdiction  but,  since  all  three  conditions
      referred to in s.31A are met, transfer to the UT(IAC) must take place.


  10. Those relevant statutory provisions were not drawn to the attention of
      Judge Jordan or me. Judge Jordan considered that  the  decision  under
      attack,  which  was  an  administrative  decision,  arose   from   the
      repercussions from the applicant's original assertion of his  date  of
      birth, which did not accord with that in his passport, but any  issues
      relating to his leave to enter or remain in  the  UK  were  no  longer
      material. Assuming that the decision is not one made as I have  stated
      in paragraph 9 above, that in my view is too narrow an approach. It is
      clear that the transfer of an NTL has and indeed is  clearly  intended
      to have immigration consequences and will affect the  right  to  enter
      the UK. If the ILR does not appear to have been granted  to  the  same
      person who seeks to enter,  he  will  be  liable  to  have  his  entry
      refused. Equally questions may arise about whether he  is  the  person
      who has leave to remain if in any circumstances his identity has to be
      checked. Thus the decision does relate to leave to enter or remain.


  11. It follows that in my view the UT(IAC) had  jurisdiction  and  that  a
      mandatory transfer would be appropriate. I will accordingly deal  with
      these cases sitting as a judge of the  UT(IAC)  since  any  rights  of
      appeal are identical and to order a transfer would be an unjustifiable
      waste of time and money. I would only add that I was told a number  of
      identical applications  have  been  dealt  with  and  refused  by  the
      UT(IAC). If Judge Jordan was correct all would arguably  be  nullities
      and fresh consideration would have to be given by  the  Administrative
      Court. No doubt, consideration could be given  to  an  ex  post  facto
      direction by the Administrative Court that  transfer  to  the  UT(IAC)
      should be made since it would be just and convenient to do so. But for
      reasons  which  will  become  apparent  I  doubt  that   any   further
      applications of this nature will be needed.


  12. The material background to each claim can be dealt with shortly.


         (1) Huang.


         The applicant entered the country clandestinely in 2000 and claimed
         asylum on 8 May 2000. He gave his name as Mei  Lin  Huang  and  his
         date of birth as 7 April 1983. He says that  he  gave  those  false
         details on the advice of the criminal gang  whom  he  had  paid  to
         facilitate his illegal entry. His true identity is,  he  now  says,
         Meilin Huang born on 2 October 1978. His claim was refused and  his
         appeals dismissed, but he remained here and on 4  January  2011  he
         was granted ILR using the same false details. His  application  for
         the NTL stamp disclosed the  falsity  of  his  identity  since  his
         Chinese passport issued to him in 2009 contained what he  now  says
         are his correct name and date of birth. His application for the NTL
         was refused on 10 June 2011. Fresh consideration has been given and
         the refusal has been maintained in a letter of 5 October 2015.


         (2) Zhou.


         The applicant entered the county illegally and claimed asylum on 15
         November 2006 giving her name as Shu Mei Zhou and her date of birth
         to be 15 March 1976. Following refusal of  her  asylum  claim,  she
         remained here and on 22 March 2011 was granted ILR under  the  same
         identity. On 30 October 2013 she applied for an NTL using the  name
         Shumei Zhou with a date of birth of 18 March  1976.  She  now  says
         that she had always believed her date of  birth  to  have  been  15
         March 1976 and had celebrated her birthday on that day and  so  she
         was surprised to discover that, as her passport  showed,  her  true
         date of birth was 18 March 1976. Her application was refused  on  1
         May 2014. The refusal was upheld in a letter of 5 October 2015.


         (3) Pan.


         The applicant applied for asylum following his  unlawful  entry  in
         1998 on 28 November 2001 giving his name as Xian Fa Pang born on  3
         September 1972. His application was refused on 3 April 2003.  There
         was much correspondence between representatives  of  the  applicant
         and the Home Office, but in all the false identity was  maintained.
         Eventually on 17 August 2010 ILR was granted. On 12  November  2010
         he applied for a NTL giving his name as  Xian  Fa  Pan  born  on  3
         September 1970, which agreed with his passport save that  his  name
         was given as Xianfa Pan. That application was withdrawn and a fresh
         one made giving the same details on 25 June 2012. This was  refused
         on 27  September  2012.  Following  a  judicial  review  claim  the
         respondent agreed to reconsider the case but refused  again  on  15
         August 2014. The refusal was maintained  by  letter  of  7  October
         2015. His excuse for giving the false date of birth  was  that  his
         peers had advised him that it was common practice and safer for him
         to provide such false details.


         (4) Yu.


         The applicant entered the country and claimed  asylum  on  23  June
         2001. She produced a landing card giving her name  as  Iu  Mai  Ing
         with a date of birth 26 April 1978. She says that she  was  advised
         by her peers to  give  a  false  date  of  birth  because  she  was
         frightened of being returned to China. Her asylum claim was refused
         on 29 June 2001 by which time her name was recorded as Mei Ying  Yu
         with the false date of birth. She did not leave the UK  and  on  10
         September  2009  was  granted  ILR  under  the   so-called   legacy
         arrangements having given the same  false  date  of  birth.  On  13
         October 2010 she submitted a NTL application in which  her  correct
         details were said to be Meiying Yu born on 26 April 1974. This  was
         refused on 6 June 2011. The refusal was maintained by letter  of  6
         October 2015.


         (5) Lin.


         The applicant applied for asylum on entry to the UK on 14  December
         2001. He called himself Jian Lin Zheng. On 11 June 2003 his  asylum
         claim was refused and his appeal was dismissed on 15 December 2003.
         On  24  September  2010  he  was  granted  ILR  under  the   legacy
         arrangements. His name was given then as Jian Len Zheng (aka)  Jian
         Lin Zheng. On 24 April 2011 he made his NTL application in the name
         of Aiqing Lin. He produced a deed which showed change of name on 15
         March 2011, but his passport issued on 31 January 2011  showed  the
         name Aiqing Lin. His application was refused and  the  refusal  was
         maintained by letter of 25 September 2015.


  13. There is no doubt that each applicant provided false details and it is
      clear that in all save perhaps Zhou there  was  deliberate  deception.
      The purpose of the false details was  to  avoid  return  to  China  if
      asylum was refused (as in most cases was probable) since  the  Chinese
      authorities would not accept  the  return  of  someone  whose  details
      provided by the UK authorities did not match their records.


  14. I have been concerned to see that a number  of  applicants  have  said
      that they informed their representatives of their true identities when
      giving instructions for their applications for ILR. They say they were
      told that that was not material and need not be put to the respondent.
      It may be  that  these  allegations  should  be  followed  up,  but  I
      recognise that any investigations would be unlikely to  get  very  far
      since I do not doubt that the representatives would simply  deny  that
      they had been given the information.


  15. The initial refusals in each case simply stated  that  the  respondent
      was not satisfied that the identity in the passport was  the  same  as
      the person who had been  granted  ILR.  This  approach  followed  from
      casework instructions then in force given to caseworkers.  Unless  the
      caseworker was satisfied that the change of identity was  genuine  and
      supported by appropriate documentation (for example a change  of  name
      or marriage or by deed poll), the application should be  refused.  The
      refusal should be in a standard form, namely that the  respondent  was
      not satisfied that the identity in the passport was the  same  as  the
      person granted ILR.


  16. That direction has since been changed and so I need  not,  subject  to
      one point, go into it in any further detail. Suffice it to say  it  is
      obviously unsatisfactory when the real concern is,  as  in  all  these
      cases, not that the identity differs but that  the  false  information
      was given when the ILR was sought. It is accepted  by  the  respondent
      that there is no concern that there is a different identity  but  that
      deception was practised.


  17. The respondent's detailed defence was filed well out of time. This was
      because it was believed that a case raising the same issues was due to
      be determined by the UT(IAC) and so it was decided that  it  would  be
      sensible  to  await  the  outcome  of  that  case.  Unfortunately  the
      applicant in that case decided not to pursue it. The  applicants  have
      sought to persuade me not to permit the  respondent  to  rely  on  her
      defence  and  in  particular  on  the  subsequent  decisions  made  in
      September and October 2015. I have  no  doubt  that  that  was  not  a
      sensible course since the most that could have  been  obtained  had  I
      been persuaded that the original refusals could not be upheld  was  an
      order that fresh consideration  be  given.  Thus,  since  it  was  not
      suggested that the applicants were prejudiced in the sense  that  they
      could not deal with the claims on the basis of the recent decisions, I
      rejected that submission. Equally  the  applicants  were  entitled  to
      amend their claims to deal with the fresh decisions.


  18. The respondent has lodged a statement from Mr Mark Roberts,  a  policy
      advisor within the Home Office who  has  responsibility  for  the  NTL
      policy. Since 29 February 2012 the application for a foreign  national
      granted ILR would be for a NTL or Biometric  Residence  Permit  (BRP).
      Prior to that, the application would be  for  a  NTL  vignette  to  be
      placed in their passport. The Home Office will not issue any  official
      document unless satisfied of the person's true identity.  Equally,  it
      is of fundamental importance that  applicants  should  always  provide
      true,  reliable  and   comprehensive   information   in   making   any
      application. The current guidance as updated on 1 July 2015 provides:-


         "The Home Office will not  normally  issue  a  document  in  a  new
         identity  where  a  person  has  either  directly,  or  indirectly,
         obtained the document using a fraudulent identity: NTL applications
         that have been submitted under an identity which  differs  to  that
         under which an applicant was granted ILR will usually  be  refused,
         unless the change is in relation  to  an  accepted  legitimate  and
         documented change".


      That is an entirely reasonable and understandable approach. Equally it
      is obviously important that where deception has been practised it will
      be clear that that will create difficulties for  the  applicant  which
      may result in him losing the benefit of the status obtained  following
      use of deception. Mr Roberts relies on this  as  justification  for  a
      refusal to grant an NTL application where  fraud  has  been  practised
      because that would, he says,  effectively  be  to  condone  or  reward
      deception.


  19. Following application of this policy and the need to ensure that those
      who practised deception should not gain from that deception, the fresh
      decisions in each case  stated  that  the  applications  were  refused
      because of the false information relied  on  to  obtain  ILR.  In  two
      (Huang and Pan) it was suggested that the way ahead would be to  agree
      that the ILR be revoked so that a fresh consideration could  be  given
      to whether ILR should be granted. It is not suggested in  any  of  the
      cases that ILR would be revoked by the  respondent.  Accordingly,  ILR
      would remain but the applicants would be unable to  travel  and  might
      incur problems if immigration checks were made having  regard  to  the
      differences between the identities set out in their ILRs and those  in
      their passports.


  20. It seemed to me that this was a wholly  unsatisfactory  situation.  It
      meant accepting that the ILR which was tainted by the deception should
      remain in being but that the NTL or BRP which should result  from  ILR
      would not be granted. Accordingly, I  suggested  that  the  respondent
      should notify an applicant for an NTL where it was believed  that  ILR
      was tainted by fraud that she required the applicant to show cause why
      she should not revoke the ILR. This would require the applicant to put
      forward any excuse for having given the false information and to  show
      why despite any deception ILR should  continue.  This  would  make  it
      clear that such fraudulent practices would not be  endorsed  and  even
      though ILR had been  enjoyed  for  some  time  it  might  properly  be
      revoked. This would in my view meet all Mr Robert's concerns.


  21.  I  was,  I  confess,  surprised  to  hear  from  Miss  Anderson  that
      consideration was  being  given  to  revocation.  There  is  certainly
      nothing in the guidance or any documentation which indicated that. But
      both she and counsel for the applicants agreed that that approach  was
      reasonable and could not properly be criticised.


  22. In these circumstances, it is not in my view necessary for  me  to  go
      into further detail of the individual circumstances of these cases. In
      each the respondent should notify the applicant of the  need  to  show
      cause why the ILR should not be revoked and that approach should apply
      to all cases where NTL is applied for following incorrect  information
      which led to leave to remain. I am aware that this issue has arisen in
      a significant number of  cases  involving  Chinese  nationals  and  in
      addition Albanians who asserted that they were from Kosovo. I  do  not
      doubt that there may be others.


  23. I am satisfied that simply to leave the ILR in being but to refuse the
      NTL is not justifiable. To that extent, the decisions under attack may
      be considered to have been erroneous. I shall  hear  counsel  on  what
      orders I should make in these cases. But if, as I understand from Miss
      Anderson, it will be the policy in future to act as I have  indicated,
      no further claims would be likely to be entertained. No doubt, if  ILR
      is revoked, action may be taken. If it is not, an NTL  or  BRP  should
      normally follow.

