
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 28 October 2015                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   SOOREEADO TREEBHAWON, KJUL TREEBHAWON,
                   ATISH TREEBHAWON, AKASH TREEBHAWON AND
                              ADESH TREEBHAWON

                                                                 Respondents





Representation:

Appellant:             Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Office Home Presenting Officer
Respondents:  Mrs H Arrif, Solicitor, of Arden Solicitors Advocates

   i)     Section  117B  (6)  is  a  reflection  of  the  distinction  which
      Parliament has chosen to make between persons who  are,  and  who  are
      not, liable to deportation. In any case where the conditions enshrined
      in section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
      are satisfied, the section 117B(6) public interest prevails  over  the
      public interests identified in section 117B (1)-(3).

  ii)     Section 117B (4) and (5) are not  parliamentary  prescriptions  of
      the public interest. Rather, they operate as  instructions  to  courts
      and tribunals to be applied in cases where the balancing  exercise  is
      being conducted in order to determine proportionality under Article  8
      ECHR, in cases where either of the factors which they identify arises.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These conjoined appeals raise interesting  questions  relating  to  the
    construction and application of section 117B (6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") which, so far  as  the
    panel is aware, have not previously been the subject of adjudication by
    the Upper Tribunal.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a family unit consisting of father, one daughter and
    three sons.  All are nationals of Mauritius. The father is aged 44  and
    the children's ages range from 11 to 17.  Their immigration history  is
    as follows:

    (i)  The father claims to have entered the United Kingdom, via  Dublin,
    in 2003.

    ii) In November 2007 the oldest child was  given  leave  to  enter  the
        United Kingdom and remain for a period of six  months.  It  appears
        that both she and the children's mother entered around this time.


   iii) In February 2008, in response to formal overstaying  measures,  the
        father confirmed that his wife and oldest child were in the  United
        Kingdom, representing that they would  be  returning  to  Mauritius
        where their other three children resided.

    iv) On 04 August 2010 the second and third of the four children entered
        the United Kingdom.

     v) On 26 December 2011 the youngest of the four children  entered  the
        United Kingdom as a visitor.


        [There is no mention in the papers of  the  mother  of  the  family
        postdating this event.]

    vi) On 01 February 2013 the Appellants' human  rights  application  was
        refused.

   vii)  On  03  April  2013  further  representations  were  made  on  the
        Appellants' behalf.

  viii) On 10 June 2014, in response to a request  for  clarification,  the
        Appellants' representatives furnished further submissions.

    ix) By a decision dated 24 October 2014 on behalf of the  Secretary  of
        State for the Home  Department  (the  "Secretary  of  State"),  the
        Appellants' further human rights application was refused.

Appeal Proceedings

 3. The latter decision was challenged by the Appellants by appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT").  By its  decision  promulgated  on  17
    July 2015, the FtT allowed the appeals "under the Immigration Rules and
    under Article 8".  Upon scrutiny, the FtT decided that  the  appeal  of
    the oldest of the four children succeeded under paragraph 276 ADE(1) of
    the Rules, while the appeals of the other four family members succeeded
    under Article 8 ECHR outwith the Rules.

 4. The Secretary  of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    following two grounds:

    (i)  The second Appellant could not satisfy paragraph 276  ADE  of  the
         Rules, given the date of  the  decision,  giving  rise  to  a  free
         standing error of law.  This is allied to a further contention that
         this error infected the FtT's Article 8 decision in respect of  the
         other four family members.

    (ii) The FtT further erred in law in treating section  117B(6)  of  the
         2002 Act as determinative of the public interest  question,  namely
         the issue of proportionality under Article 8(2) ECHR and failing to
         apply the other public interest provisions of the section.

     The latter formulation is ours. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on
both grounds.

First ground of appeal: the Immigration Rules issue

 5. At the material time,  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    provided:

         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:


             (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and


             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and


             (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously
             in the UK for at least seven years (discounting any period of
             imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
             applicant to leave the UK; or


             (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
             at least half of his life living continuously in the UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


             (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,
             has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to leave
             the UK.

         276ADE (2). Sub-paragraph (1)(vi) does not apply, and  may  not  be
         relied upon, in circumstances in which it is proposed to  return  a
         person to a third country pursuant to Schedule 3 to the Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004."

    The history, in brief, is that on 09 July 2012, pursuant to HC 194, the
    Immigration Rules were revised in respect of applications for leave  to
    remain on the  ground  of  private  life  under  Article  8  ECHR  (per
    paragraphs 276 ADE - 276 DH), applications for entry and stay based  on
    family life under Article 8 (Appendix FM) and claims based on Article 8
    in the context of deportation (paragraphs 398 - 399B).

 6. These provisions of the Rules have generated much jurisprudence  during
    the last two years. In R (Amin) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWHC 2322 (Admin) it was held that paragraphs 276 ADE
    - 276 DH and Appendix FM do not constitute a  comprehensive  Article  8
    Code.  Thus it is recognised that a claim based on Article  8  can,  in
    principle, succeed either under  the  prescriptive  Article  8  regimes
    within the Rules or outwith the Rules, residually.   In  Haleemudeen  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558,  the
    Court of Appeal espoused the  test  of  "compelling  circumstances"  in
    respect of claims  outwith  the  Rules:  see  [44]  and  [77].   In  MM
    (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ
    985 the Court of Appeal, in effect, disapproved  the  suggestion  in  R
    (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin), at [29], that there is an intermediate hurdle to  be  overcome
    prior to consideration of Article  8  claims  outwith  the  Rules:  per
    Aikens LJ at [129].

 7. In the Secretary of State's decision it was noted that the  longest  of
    the sojourns of the four children [the oldest, the second Appellant] in
    the United Kingdom was six years and  five  months.    As  the  minimum
    sojourn prescribed by the  relevant  provision  of  the  Rules,  namely
    paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) is seven years, it  was  concluded  that  the
    four childrens' Article 8 claims under the Rules must be refused.

 8. In considering the appeal of the oldest child, the FtT stated:

         "The only issue ..........  is whether it would  be  reasonable  to
         expect [this child] to leave the United Kingdom she being under the
         age of 18 years and having lived continuously in the United Kingdom
         for seven years. (It is accepted that at the  date  the  Respondent
         made her decision [this child] had not been living continuously  in
         the United Kingdom for seven years.)"

         [Emphasis added.]

    The Judge's ultimate finding was that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect this Appellant to leave the United  Kingdom.   Accordingly,  her
    appeal was allowed under the Rules.    We consider that this conclusion
    is unsustainable in law, having regard to  the  seven  years  residence
    requirement and the operative date for assessing same, namely the  date
    of the application to the Secretary of State, not the date of  the  FtT
    decision: per paragraph 276 ADE(1) of the Rules.   The  materiality  of
    this error being unmistakeable, the first limb of the first  ground  of
    appeal is established accordingly.

 9. The second limb of the first ground of appeal is that the error of  law
    which we have found above infected the  FtT's  decision  to  allow  the
    appeals of the other four family members outwith the Rules.  In the key
    section of its decision, under the rubric of  "My  Findings",  the  FtT
    devotes  most  of  its  attention  to  the  oldest  child,  the  second
    Appellant.  This is followed by a brief final section which yields  the
    following analysis:

    (i)  All five Appellants enjoy family and private life together.


    ii) Only the second Appellant can succeed under the Rules.


   iii) The removal of the other four family members would  interfere  with
        the rights to private and family life in play.


    iv)  The issue is proportionality.


     v) The public interest  engaged  is  the  maintenance  of  immigration
        control in pursuit of the economic wellbeing of the country.


    vi) To require the other four Appellants to leave  the  United  Kingdom
        would be disproportionate -

             .... because family life would be disrupted given  that  it  is
             reasonable for [the second Appellant] to remain in  the  United
             Kingdom .... [and] there would be [concerns]  and  difficulties
             for the remaining siblings should the first Appellant's  health
             deteriorate.  These  factors tip the balance in their favour."


        This latter passage may be linked to  an  earlier  section  of  the
        decision in which evidence relating to the health and employability
        of the first Appellant, the father, is recorded.

10. We consider that there is a demonstrably clear nexus between the  FtT's
    decision to allow the second Appellant's appeal on the ground that  her
    case satisfied the requirements of the Rules and the  further  decision
    to allow the other four Appellants' appeals outwith the Rules. The  two
    are inextricably linked.  We have concluded that the first decision  is
    unsustainable in  law.   Given  that  the  cornerstone  of  the  second
    decision is  the  legally  unsustainable  first  decision,  it  follows
    inexorably that the  second  decision  cannot  survive.  Its  sole  and
    exclusive rationale is  the  legally  untenable  first  decision.   The
    materiality of this further error of law brooks no argument.  Thus  all
    five decisions  must be set aside.

Second ground of appeal: the section 117B(6) issue

11.  The FtT gave consideration to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  in  the
    context of considering whether the claims of the 1st, 3rd, 4th and  5th
    Appellants could succeed outwith the Article 8  regime  of  the  Rules.
    The decision states:

         "In considering this I have had  regard  to  and  applied  [section
         117B(6)] ...  which confirms to me that there is no public interest
         in removing the first  Appellant  because  he  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child  and  it
         would not be reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom."

         This is the only reference to section 117B in the entirety  of  the
decision.

12. Section 117B of the 2002 Act provides:

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-


             (a) a private life, or


             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
             established by a person at a time when the person is in the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."

    The new Part 5A of the 2002 Act, comprising sections 117A - 117D,  came
    into operation on 28 July 2014.  This is a novel legislative  mechanism
    whereby in the exercise of determining  proportionality  in  Article  8
    cases, courts and tribunals are obliged to have regard to  Parliament's
    formulation of the public interest.  This flows from the definition  of
    the  "public  interest  question"  as  the  question  of  "whether   an
    interference with a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
    life is justified under Article 8(2) [ECHR]", per section 117A(3).

13. In the evolving jurisprudence of the Upper Tribunal, the  new  Part  5A
    regime has been considered in a series of reported decisions.  The most
    comprehensive analysis of its provisions  is found in Forman  (Sections
    117A - C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC), at  [17]  especially.
    In that case the Upper Tribunal decided, inter alia, that sections 117A
    and 177B apply in every case where a court or tribunal is  required  to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration  Acts  breaches
    any person's rights under Article 8 ECHR.   It  further  held  that  in
    considering the public interest question, the Court  or  Tribunal  must
    have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B in all  cases:
    per section 117A(1) and (2).  Other major pronouncements of  the  Upper
    Tribunal on sections 117A - 117B are found in AM (Section 117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and Deelah and Others  (section  117B  -  ambit)
    [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC).

14. None of the above decisions addresses the specific issue  which  arises
    in the present appeals.  We  formulate  this  issue  in  the  following
    terms:

         In a case where a Court or Tribunal decides that a  person  who  is
         not liable to deportation has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with a qualifying child, as defined in Part 5A of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended,  and  it
         would not be reasonable to expect such child to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom, with the result  that  the  two  conditions  enshrined  in
         section 117B(6) are satisfied, is this determinative of the "public
         interest question",  namely  the  issue  of  proportionality  under
         Article 8(2) ECHR?


         While acknowledging that this formulation  has  certain  offshoots,
         giving rise to other issues, we consider this to be the overarching
         question.

15. In Deelah  and  Others,  the  Upper  Tribunal  provided  the  following
    overview of the new Part 5A regime, at [19]-[21]:

         "19. Next, in construing the  provisions  under  scrutiny,  certain
         observations about the structure and syntax of  sections  117A  and
         117B are appropriate.  The draftsman's  mechanism  of  enjoining  a
         decision maker, whether it be a court or tribunal or other  agency,
         to "have regard to" specified matters is of some longevity.  It  is
         long  established  that  where  this  mechanism  is  employed,  the
         corresponding duty is to obey the legislature's  instruction,  that
         is to say the decision maker must have  regard  to  the  matter  in
         question.  In the typical statutory model, the legislature goes  no
         further.  Where this model is invoked this denotes the first  stage
         in the exercise to be performed by the  judge  or  decision  maker.
         The second stage is a product of the common law: it imports a  duty
         to give such rational weight to the matters specified as the  judge
         or decision maker considers appropriate.  Within  this  formulation
         lies the principle  that  in  the  generality  of  cases  involving
         decisions of this genre  the  barometer  for  judicial  review,  or
         appeal on a point of law, is the  Wednesbury  principle.  See,  for
         example, Tesco Stores v Secretary of State for the Environment  and
         Others [1995]  1  WLR  759.  Lord  Hoffmann's  formulation  of  the
         principles at [56] - [57] and [68], while devised in a planning law
         context, applies generally.


         20. The statutory model for which  the  legislature  has  opted  in
         sections 117A and 117B is not the typical one. True it is that  its
         first striking element is the familiar one of obliging the court or
         tribunal concerned to have regard to specified considerations:  per
         section 117A(2).  These obligatory considerations are  then  listed
         in sections 117B and 117C.  As section 117C does not arise in  this
         appeal, I say nothing more about  it.   As  regards  section  117B,
         there is a total of six "considerations".  Some of these  have  the
         dual identity of statutory  considerations  and  legal  principles,
         being  readily  traceable   to   both   Strasbourg   and   domestic
         jurisprudence.  The characteristic which links the "considerations"
         listed in section 117B(1), (2), (3) and (6) is that of the  "public
         interest".  These provisions reflect the reality  that  the  public
         interest is  multi-layered  and  has  multiple  dimensions.   Those
         aspects of the public interest which the legislature has identified
         as  considerations  to  be  taken  into  account  as  a  matter  of
         obligation are contained in these provisions.


         21. In contrast, the  two  "considerations"  contained  in  section
         117B(4) and (5) are somewhat different from the other four, in  the
         following respects.  First, they make  no  mention  of  the  public
         interest.  They are,  rather,  concerned  with  facts  and  factors
         which,  while  bearing  on  the  proportionality  assessment  under
         Article 8(2) ECHR, shift the focus from the  ambit  of  the  public
         interest to choices and decisions  which  have  been  made  by  the
         person or persons concerned in their lives and lifestyles.  Second,
         there is a degree of tension between a  court  or  tribunal  having
         regard to a specified factor, as a matter of obligation (on the one
         hand)  and  (on  the  other)  giving  effect  to  a   Parliamentary
         instruction about the weight to be given thereto. Indeed, in giving
         effect to section 117B(4) and (5), the court or tribunal  concerned
         is not, in truth, performing the exercise of having regard to these
         statutory provisions.   Rather,  the  Judge  is  complying  with  a
         statutory obligation, unconditional and unambiguous, to give effect
         to a parliamentary instruction that the considerations in  question
         are to receive little weight."

16. In answering the  question  formulated  in  [14]  above,  we  begin  by
    subjecting Part 5A of the 2002 Act  to the following further analysis:


          a) Part 5A is expressed to be applicable in  every  case  where  a
             court or tribunal is required to determine whether  a  decision
             made under the Immigration  Acts  breaches  a  person's  rights
             under Article 8 ECHR.


          b)  In  cases  where  an  interference   with   such   rights   is
             demonstrated,  the  court  or  tribunal  must,  in  determining
             proportionality, have regard to the  considerations  listed  in
             section 117B in all cases and to the additional  considerations
             enumerated  in  section  117C  in  all  cases   involving   the
             deportation of foreign criminals.


          c) Turning to section 117B, the first port of call  is  the  cross
             heading "Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable
             in all cases".

         [Our emphasis.]

    At this juncture of the analysis, the effect of section  117A(2)(a)  is
    that the Court or Tribunal must have regard to everything contained  in
    section 117B.


          d) Section  117B  comprises,  in  subsections  (1)  -  (3),  three
             unequivocal Parliamentary statements  of  the  content  of  the
             public  interest:  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
             controls,  the  ability  to   speak   English   and   financial
             independence.   En  passant,  a   striking   feature   of   the
             formulation of the second and third of these statements of  the
             public interest is the exposition of their rationale.


          e) The next division of section 117B, in subsections (4) and  (5),
             consists of separate statements that "little weight" should  be
             given to three specified factors.


          f) Next, and finally, there is an unequivocal  statement  of  what
             the public interest does not require in section  117B(6):  this
             is the only  public  interest  pronouncement  in  section  117B
             framed in these negative terms.

17. The two "little weight" provisions  of  section  117B  do  not  readily
    satisfy the appellation  of  Parliamentary  statements  of  the  public
    interest, in view of the terms in which they are phrased  and  compared
    with the formulation of the public interest statements  in  subsections
    (2), (3) and (6).  Furthermore,  the  two  "little  weight"  provisions
    relate to matters  which,  in  practice,  are  invoked  by  the  person
    concerned, rather than the Secretary of State, namely  a  private  life
    and/or a relationship formed with  a  qualifying  partner  during  such
    person's sojourn in the United Kingdom. As noted in  Deelah,  at  [21],
    the focus  of  these  discrete  statutory  provisions  is  choices  and
    decisions which have been made by the person or  persons  concerned  in
    their lives and lifestyles.  We consider that section 117B(4)  and  (5)
    contain a recognition that the factors therein sound on the question of
    proportionality,  where  they   arise,    but   are,   by   unambiguous
    Parliamentary direction, to be  accorded  little  weight.   We  further
    consider that, properly construed, section  117B(4)  and  (5)  are  not
    Parliamentary statements of the public  interest.   They  are,  rather,
    Parliamentary instructions to courts and tribunals, to  be  applied  in
    the balancing exercise, that little  weight  should  be  given  to  the
    matters specified where relevant.  Thus analysed, the function  of  the
    court or tribunal concerned is not  simply  to  have  regard  to  these
    factors, in cases where they arise.  Rather, they  must  be  considered
    and given little weight.  This is in contrast with the  classic  public
    law case whereby the decision maker, having discharged the primary duty
    of identifying all relevant facts and considerations, is free to accord
    to these such weight as he rationally considers appropriate.

18. The resolution of the second ground of appeal turns on how we  construe
    section  117B(6),  considered  in  its  full  statutory  context.    In
    performing this exercise, we derive no assistance from the construction
    which we have  given  to  section  117B(4)  and  (5).  We  consider  it
    instructive to juxtapose section 117B(6) with its three public interest
    siblings, namely  section  117B(1),  (2)  and  (3).   Section  117B(6),
    notionally,  follows  these  three  provisions  sequentially.  Notably,
    Parliament has not established any correlation between section  117B(6)
    and the other three sibling public interest provisions.  In particular,
    section 117B(6) is not  expressed  to  be  "without  prejudice  to"  or
    "subject to" any of the other three related  provisions.   Furthermore,
    section 117B(6) is formulated in unqualified terms: in cases where  its
    conditions are satisfied, the public  interest  does  not  require  the
    removal from the United  Kingdom  of  the  person  concerned.  In  this
    respect  also  it  different  from  its  siblings,  which  contain   no
    comparable instruction.

19. The next notable feature of the new statutory regime is that in section
    117B (6) Parliament has chosen to differentiate between those who  are,
    and who are not, liable to deportation.  It has provided a separate and
    special  dispensation  for  members  of  the  latter  class.   This  is
    harmonious with one of the overarching themes of Part 5A, which  is  to
    subject foreign criminals who are  liable  to  deportation  to  a  more
    rigorous and unyielding regime. In the case of those who are not liable
    to deportation, Parliament has chosen  to  recognise  that,  where  the
    specified conditions are satisfied, a  public  interest  which  differs
    from  those  public  interests  expressed  in  Section  117B(1)-(3)  is
    engaged.  The most striking feature of this discrete public interest is
    its focus on one of the most  vulnerable  cohorts  in  society,  namely
    children. The focus is placed on  the  needs  and  interests  of  these
    vulnerable people. Furthermore,  the content of  this  public  interest
    differs markedly from the other three, all of which are focused on  the
    interests  of  society  as  a  whole.  In  enacting  Section   117B(6),
    Parliament has given effect to  a  public  interest  of  an  altogether
    different species.  Notably,  this new statutory provision  is  closely
    related to and harmonious with what  has  been  decided  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in a number of cases, namely that there  is  a  free  standing
    public interest in children being reared within a stable  family  unit.
    The effect of Part 5A of the 2002 Act is, of course, that this discrete
    public interest must yield to more potent public interests  in  certain
    circumstances.


20.  In  section  117B(6),  Parliament  has  prescribed  three  conditions,
    namely:

    (a)  the person concerned is not liable to deportation;

     b) such person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
        a qualifying child, namely a person who is under the age of 18  and
        is a British citizen or has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
        continuous period of seven years or more; and


     c) it would not be reasonable to expect the qualifying child to  leave
        the United Kingdom.

    Within this discrete regime, the statute  proclaims  unequivocally  that
    where these three conditions are satisfied the public interest does  not
    require the removal of the parent from  the  United  Kingdom.  Ambiguity
    there is none.

21. Giving effect to the analysis above, in  our  judgment  the  underlying
    Parliamentary  intention  is  that  where  the   three   aforementioned
    conditions are satisfied the public  interests  identified  in  section
    117B(1) - (3) do not apply.


22. It would further appear that the "little weight" provisions of  section
    117B(4) - (5) are of no application.  If Parliament had  been  desirous
    of qualifying, or diluting, section  117B(6)  by  reference  to  either
    section 117B(4) or (5), it could have done so with  ease.  It  has  not
    done so.  Fundamentally, there is no indication  in  the  structure  or
    language of Part 5A that in cases where, on the facts, section  117B(4)
    and/or (5) is engaged, the unambiguous proclamation in Section  117B(6)
    is in some way weakened or demoted.  To this may be added the  analysis
    in  [18]  -  [21]  above.  Clearly,  there  is  much  to  favour   this
    construction.  However,  conscious  of  the  limits  of  the   judicial
    function, we decline to provide a definitive answer  to  this  discrete
    question, for two reasons. First, we  received  no  argument  upon  it.
    Second, it does not clearly fall within  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal.


23. Similarly, the issue of the interplay between Section 117B(6)  and  the
    Immigration Rules does not arise directly  in  this  appeal.   In  this
    context, we draw attention to the  leading  reported  decision  of  the
    Upper  Tribunal,  Bossade  (Sections  117A-D:  Inter-relationship  with
    Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC).  In that case, the  Upper  Tribunal  held
    that,  ordinarily,  a  court  or  tribunal  will  first   consider   an
    appellant's Article 8 claim by reference to the Immigration Rules,  the
    purpose  of  this  exercise  being  to  decide  whether  the   relevant
    qualifying conditions are satisfied  by  the  person  concerned.   This
    exercise is performed without reference to Part 5A.  The latter  regime
    is engaged directly only where the decision making process reaches  the
    stage of concluding that the person does not satisfy  the  requirements
    of the Rules.  Thereafter, in any consideration of the case outwith the
    framework of the Rules, and subject to the application  of  the  Razgar
    tests, Part 5A  will  fall  to  be  applied  in  the  decision  maker's
    determination of the proportionality question.  It follows that  in any
    case where the parent concerned is unable to satisfy  the  requirements
    of the Rules  section 117B(6) may conceivably apply: all will depend on
    the facts as found by the tribunal.


24. We apply the analysis and conclusions above to the decision of the  FtT
    in the following way:

    (i)  The FtT committed no error of law in giving  no  consideration  to
         Part 5A of the 2002 Act in deciding whether the case of the  second
         Appellant satisfied the requirements of the Rules.

    ii) The FtT committed no  error  of  law  in  giving  consideration  to
        section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act in deciding whether the  claims  of
        the other four Appellants  could  succeed  outwith  the  Article  8
        regime of the Rules.


   iii) The FtT's application of Section 117B(6),  which  did  not  involve
        consideration of any of the other provisions  of Section 117B,  was
        similarly free of error.

    iv) Accordingly, the second ground of appeal fails.




Decision

25. For the reasons explained in [8] - [10]  above,  the  first  ground  of
    appeal succeeds.  Accordingly, we set aside the decision  of  the  FtT.
    The decision will be re-made in this forum.

Direction

26. The Appellant's bundle of evidence,  indexed  and  paginated,  will  be
    lodged with the Upper Tribunal and served on the Secretary State by  08
    January 2016 at latest.











                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date:  07 November 2015
