
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT
              Given orally at Field House on 30th October 2015

R (on the application of J) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
IJR [2015] UKUT 00678 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                           30th October 2015


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                      J
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge PETER LANE

                               - - - - - - - -

Mr O Shibli, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by Government Legal Department appeared on behalf of
the respondent.









 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                     - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT
 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                     - -

JUDGE PETER lane:  This  is  an  application  for  judicial  review  of  the
    respondent's decision of 27th June 2013 not to  treat  the  applicant's
    submissions as a fresh asylum or human rights  claim.   Permission  was
    refused on the  papers  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  but  granted  by  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber on  5th
    January 2015.


2.   The President dealt in some detail with the nature  of  the  challenge.
    He noted that the applicant was a national of  Sierra  Leone,  aged  28
    years.  She had been in the United Kingdom since 2009 when she  entered
    without permission and made an asylum  claim.   In  November  2009  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissed her appeal on all grounds.  In  doing  so
    the First-tier Judge found that the applicant entered  fraudulently  by
    using another person's passport and that her claim for asylum  was  not
    raised until removal directions had been served on her.


3.   The President noted that fresh evidence had been submitted on a  number
    of occasions on behalf of the applicant since mid-2010.  This  evidence
    was  said  to  show  multiple  rape  and  inhuman  treatment  allegedly
    perpetrated upon the applicant when she had been  kidnapped  in  Sierra
    Leone by rebel soldiers.


4.   The President then made reference to subsequent events, culminating  in
    the decision of 27th June 2013 which is under challenge.  The President
    noted that the new material upon which the applicant  relied  consisted
    of three professional reports and medical records.   I  shall  come  to
    those in due course.


5.   The President considered that the writer of  the  decision  letter  had
    attributed what he described as scant weight to these reports,  on  the
    ground that the First-tier Tribunal had found the applicant's claim  to
    be a fabrication.  Having set out the legal test for assessing a  fresh
    claim,  namely  whether  there  is  a  reasonable   likelihood   of   a
    hypothetical judge reaching a conclusion in the applicant's favour, the
    President reminded himself that  the  test  he  had  to  apply  at  the
    permission stage was in effect relatively modest.


6.   The President held that for the purposes of  establishing  an  arguable
    case  he  was  satisfied  that  the  applicant  overcame  that   modest
    threshold.  In particular, he considered  that  the  impugned  decision
    arguably did not  apply  the  correct  tests  and  attributed  what  he
    described as disproportionate weight to the findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Further, there  were  indications  that  the  decision-maker
    failed to juxtapose the new representations  with  the  previous  ones;
    approached the decision with a closed mind, fettering her discretion in
    consequence; and failed to apply  the  requisite  standard  of  anxious
    scrutiny.  The President then gave certain  directions,  one  of  which
    related to the service of evidence, to which I shall return.


7.   At the beginning of this hearing, I heard an application by  Mr  Shibli
    on behalf of the applicant for the hearing to  be  adjourned.   I  have
    given my decision on that application.  I decided not to grant  it  and
    therefore heard submissions from Mr Shibli and Mr Malik.  I am grateful
    to both of them for their characteristically able contributions.


8.   Mr Shibli described what he regards as a  wealth  of  medical  evidence
    and sought to juxtapose that evidence, on the one hand,  with  what  he
    says is the inadequate way in which it was dealt with in  the  decision
    letter.  We see in the decision which begins at page 168 of the  bundle
    that certain submissions said to have been previously  considered  were
    dealt with in the following way:


         "You provided medical evidence to support your claim as part of the
         further submissions  you  previously  lodged.   This  evidence  was
         considered in line  with  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department's  published  policy  on  Medical  Foundation  evidence.
         However, it was considered that following the  adverse  credibility
         findings of the Immigration Judge, the evidence did  not  establish
         that your injuries had  been  caused  in  the  way  you  described.
         Therefore it is considered that  this  issue  has  previously  been
         fully considered.  However, the new evidence that you have provided
         will be considered below in section 2."


9.   The Medical Foundation evidence is a report of Dr Cheal.   We  find  it
    at page 72 of the bundle.  Mr Shibli drew my  particular  attention  to
    passages beginning at page 78.  There we find the examiner noting  that
    the applicant had multiple scars  on  her  arms  and  legs  which  were
    "highly consistent" with cigarette burns.  A large number of scars were
    noted.  The examiner said that, although these could have other causes,
    there was nothing in the applicant's history to suggest another cause.


10.   Furthermore,  whilst  each  individual   scar   could   have   another
    explanation, the fact that the scars were so many and spread  over  the
    appellant's arms and legs was compatible with the  story  she  gave  of
    being held down by one soldier to be raped while  another  was  burning
    her limbs with cigarettes.  At paragraph 19 we find  a  statement  that
    scars to the applicant's feet were also "highly  consistent"  with  the
    history she  gave.   At  paragraph  20  the  examiner  noted  that  the
    applicant did not attempt to attribute all her scars to abuse.  That is
    plainly of relevance, in that it may well be  a  factor  going  to  the
    credibility of the applicant regarding the causes of the  other  scars.
    The examiner also made a view on the age of the applicant,  effectively
    disagreeing  with  the  Immigration  Judge,  who  had  considered   the
    applicant to be older than she claimed.


11.  Mr Shibli  makes  the  point  that,  in  using  the  language  of  high
    consistency,  the  examiner  in  this  report  was  plainly  using  the
    terminology  of  the  Istanbul  Protocol,  which  is   an   established
    international instrument for assessing the relevance of scars and other
    injuries to the  issue  of  credibility  in  claims  for  international
    protection.


12.  Mr Shibli then turned to the report of Dr McKay  and  again  contrasted
    what was said about that in the decision with the nature of the  report
    itself.  We find that report set out in the bundle  beginning  at  page
    102. Dr McKay sets out his qualifications.  At page 115 paragraph 94 Dr
    McKay expressly considered the  issue  of  whether  the  applicant  was
    malingering and decided for the reasons he gave at paragraphs 95 and 96
    that she was not.  At paragraph 96 he said that whilst it was  easy  to
    feign one or two  symptoms,  it  was  less  easy  to  feign  an  entire
    syndrome.  That would require in his view a sophisticated understanding
    of psychiatric symptomatology, which he considered  to  be  "unlikely".
    This reinforced Dr McKay's diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder.
     Those aspects of Dr McKay's report,  Mr  Shibli  said,  did  not  find
    expression in the Secretary of State's decision.  If one looks at  page
    169 of the bundle, one does not see reference made to them; although it
    is the case, as Mr Malik pointed out, that other aspects of the  report
    are dealt with.


13.  There is also a report at page 126 of Ms  Massamba,  who  is  a  social
    worker. Her evidence is relevant, in that she found the applicant to be
    suffering from a pelvic inflammatory disease.


14.  There were also medical notes before  the  respondent,  emanating  from
    the medical officers at Yarl's Wood,  where  the  applicant  was  being
    confined.  Again, they  post-dated  the  decision  of  the  Immigration
    Judge.  Amongst  other  things,  they  noted  cigarette  burns  on  the
    applicant's body, as well as other scars.  That matter also, Mr  Shibli
    submitted, is inadequately dealt with in the letter.


15.  Mr Shibli drew my attention to various pieces of case law  including  R
    (AM) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  521,
    where it  was  in  effect  held  that  there  had  been  an  inadequate
    consideration of medical evidence that was similar, Mr Shibli says,  to
    the material before the Tribunal in the present proceedings.  Reference
    was also made to the case of Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469  (Admin)  where,
    Mr Shibli said, similar observations could be found.


16.  All of this, Mr Shibli submits, leads to the applicant having,  in  his
    words, no confidence in the respondent's  offer,  made  on  16th  March
    2015, after the  grant  of  permission,  to  deal  with  this  case  by
    considering all the relevant material again in the light of the further
    submissions and materials that were submitted in  February  2015.   The
    further evidence so submitted  comprises  a  supplementary  psychiatric
    report from Dr McKay, a letter from  a  Family  and  Child  Development
    Support Worker; a witness statement of Mr Sandiford of  Lawrence  Lupin
    Solicitors, regarding contact with the Sierra  Leone  High  Commission;
    and a Wikipedia article regarding a neighbourhood of Freetown.


17.   By contrast, according to Mr  Malik,  the  respondent's  offer  is  of
    extreme  significance.   In  Mr  Malik's  submission,  it  makes  these
    proceedings academic.  The offer is contained in a letter from what was
    then the Treasury Solicitor's Department.  The letter stated  that  the
    Secretary of State has agreed to reconsider  the  applicant's  case  in
    terms of an enclosed consent order.  The  applicant's  solicitors  were
    asked to approve and sign the order, which states the following:


         "Upon the applicant agreeing to submit any further  submissions  on
         which she seeks to rely within four weeks of signing  this  consent
         order and upon the respondent agreeing to  consider  those  further
         submissions together with the submissions made on 23rd January 2012
         and the further evidence submitted  on  16th  February  0215  under
         paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules within three months  of  the
         date this consent order is sealed",


    by consent it would be ordered that the applicant had leave to withdraw
    the claim on the basis that there is no order as to costs.


18.  This offer was rejected by the applicant in an email  dated  2nd  April
    2015.  In that email it was stated that it would be  a  better  use  of
    court time and public money for the issue of  the  fresh  claim  to  be
    resolved in the current proceedings,  as  allegedly  envisaged  by  the
    President in his directions following the  grant  of  permission.   The
    relevant direction is paragraph 8(a), in  which  the  President  stated
    that any further evidence upon which the applicant  relies  was  to  be
    served within four weeks of the grant of permission.  It  appears  that
    the further evidence  of  February  2015  was  submitted  in  purported
    pursuance of that direction.


19.   I  agree  with  the  respondent  that  if  that  was  the  applicant's
    interpretation of what the President had directed, she and her advisors
    were wrong to conclude that it enabled further material, not before the
    respondent at the time of the decision under challenge, to form a  part
    of these proceedings.  It is  well-known  that  challenges  by  way  of
    judicial review are to historic decisions and there would  need  to  be
    something far more detailed and explicit than the direction to which  I
    have referred in order to give rise to any reasonable supposition  that
    the President's direction was intended to displace the normal state  of
    affairs.


20.  The proceedings therefore come down to the following,  so  far  as  the
    respondent is concerned.  Mr Malik states that the case is academic and
    that following the well-known line of authorities  to  which  he  makes
    reference, the Tribunal  should  accordingly  dismiss  the  substantive
    application in the light of the offer made by the respondent.


21.  The authorities in question are as follows:


    R v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex  parte  Rathakrishnan
    [2011] EWHC 1406 (Admin);


    R (Bhatti) v Bury MBC [2013] EWHC 3093 (Admin) and


    R (Asif) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWHC  1007
    (Admin).


    These High Court decisions make it plain that in the circumstances with
    which we are concerned, a matter which has become  academic  should  be
    allowed to continue - and relief should only be granted - in  a  wholly
    exceptional state of affairs.  One such case would be where there is an
    important point of principle or other similar issue that  needs  to  be
    determined, irrespective of the academic nature of the  proceedings  so
    far as the parties are concerned. There is no such important  point  in
    the present case.


22.  Mr Shibli therefore sought to counter  Mr  Malik's  submission  in  the
    following way.  Mr Shibli said that the material that  was  before  the
    respondent at the time of the decision was of such quality  that,  when
    contrasted with the decision of  the  Immigration  Judge,  no  rational
    Secretary of State could do anything  other  than  conclude  that  this
    material gave rise to a realistic prospect of success.  Accordingly, Mr
    Shibli's submission was that the applicant should now be entitled to an
    in-country right of appeal, quite irrespective of what might  occur  in
    the proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal under rule  32  (which  were
    subject to the adjournment application).


23.  Mr Malik cited strong authority for the proposition that, as  a  matter
    of law, the decision in a fresh claim is that of the Secretary of State
    and no court or Tribunal should disturb that  important  constitutional
    principle.  He relied in particular upon the Court of  Appeal  judgment
    in Onibiyo v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1996] EWCA Civ
    13, where we find it stated that:


         "The role of the court in the immigration field  varies,  depending
         on the legislative and administrative context.  Where  an  exercise
         of administrative power is dependent on  the  establishment  of  an
         objective precedent fact the court will, if called upon to do so in
         case of dispute, itself rule whether such fact  is  established  to
         the requisite standard.  Thus, for example, where power  to  detain
         and remove is dependent on  a  finding  that  the  detainee  is  an
         illegal entrant, one who has entered clandestinely or by fraud  and
         deceit, the court will itself rule whether the evidence is such  as
         to justify that finding."


    And then this:


         "I am of opinion, although with some misgivings, that the  judgment
         whether a  fresh  'claim  for  asylum'  has  been  made  should  be
         assimilated with the latter, and not the former, class of judgment.
          If the test propounded in (1) above is correct, the answer to  the
         question whether or not a fresh 'claim for asylum'  has  been  made
         will depend not on the finding of any objective fact, nor even on a
         literal comparison of the earlier and the later claim,  but  on  an
         exercise of judgment, and this is a  field  in  which  the  initial
         judgments are very clearly entrusted to the Secretary of State.  In
         giving effect, for example, to Rule 346 of HC 395 it  must  be  for
         the Secretary of State and not for the court to  rule  whether  the
         applicant can demonstrate a  relevant  and  substantial  change  in
         circumstances since his refusal of an earlier  application.   In  a
         case such as the present the judgment is not  very  different  from
         that which the Secretary of State may make under section  21 of the
         1971 Act."


24.  In the well-known case of WM (DRC) [2006] EWCA Civ 1495, we  find  this
    at paragraph 9:


         "Commentators for a time regarded that conclusion as still open for
         debate, but in truth no other answer could have been given  to  the
         question posited by Counsel in Onibiyo.  As the Secretary of  State
         rightly submitted, his conclusion as to whether there was  a  fresh
         claim was not a fact, nor precedent to any other decision, but  was
         the decision itself.  The court could not take that decision out of
         the hands of the decision maker.  It can only do that  when  it  is
         exercising an appellate role.  With appeal excluded,  the  decision
         remains that of the Secretary of State, subject only to review  and
         not appeal.  And in any event, whatever the logic of  it  all,  the
         issue to which Bingham MR gave only a tentative answer  in  Onibiyo
         arose for decision before this court  in  Cakabay  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [1999]  Imm  AR  176.   There  is  no
         escaping from the ratio of that case that, as encapsulated  at  the
         end  of  the  judgment  of  Peter  Gibson  LJ  at  page  195,   the
         determination of the Secretary of State is only  capable  of  being
         impugned on Wednesbury grounds."


25.  In the case of MN (Tanzania) [2011] EWCA Civ 193  there  is  a  similar
    pronouncement to the effect that the court cannot  substitute  its  own
    decision for that of the Secretary of State.


26.  Mr Malik therefore submitted that, even  if  the  original  application
    had been put in terms that contemplated the kind of challenge  that  Mr
    Shibli put forward, I should decline to make  a  mandatory  order.   Mr
    Malik said further that, in any event, the decision under challenge  of
    June 2013 is in fact not unlawful.   He  submitted  that  the  starting
    point  was  correctly  identified  by  the  respondent  as  being   the
    determination of the Immigration Judge.  That determination was  wholly
    against  the  applicant  in  terms  of  credibility  and  provided  the
    appropriate  starting  point  for  considering  the  remainder  of  the
    evidence.  So far as Dr McKay is  concerned  Mr  Malik  submitted  that
    there is a sufficiently detailed engagement with the doctor's  evidence
    in the respondent's decision.


27.  I am not persuaded  that  the  respondent  can  shut  out  Mr  Shibli's
    argument regarding the  need  for  a  mandatory  order  compelling  the
    respondent to grant an in-country right of appeal, by pointing out that
    there is no reference to such an order in the grounds  which  accompany
    the application for judicial review.  A  mandatory  order  was  clearly
    sought in that application.  I have to say, however, that on the  basis
    of the authorities, I would be acting  contrary  to  established  legal
    principles if I were to decide  not  only  to  quash  the  respondent's
    decision but also to make a mandatory order, compelling the  respondent
    to grant the applicant an in-country right of appeal.  However bad  the
    respondent's decision may be, the authorities in my view make it  plain
    that it is not for a court or Tribunal to arrogate to itself a function
    which lies with the Secretary of State.


28.  In any event, even if I  am  wrong  about  that,  with  respect  to  Mr
    Shibli's able submissions, the applicant has not shown that no rational
    Secretary of State could do anything on this material except grant  (in
    effect) an in-country right of appeal.  There are deficiencies  in  the
    letter of 27th June 2013.   The  Medical  Foundation  report  is  given
    scant consideration at page 168.  The fact that  scars  from  cigarette
    burns were said to be highly consistent with the applicant's account in
    terms  of  the  Istanbul  Protocol  has  not  been  addressed  by   the
    respondent;  nor  has  the  significance  of  the   findings   of   the
    respondent's own medical staff at Yarl's Wood regarding the same issue.


29.  It is relatively easy to find  case  law  to  support  the  proposition
    that, on  the  one  hand,  great  weight  must  normally  be  given  to
    psychiatric and other medical  reports  and,  on  the  other  that,  on
    occasions at least, such reports are not  deserving  of  weight.   What
    matters, it seems to me, is the amount  of  detail  in  the  report  in
    question and what it has to say.  In the case of Dr McKay it is, in  my
    view, significant that the  doctor  considered  expressly  whether  the
    applicant might be faking the symptoms associated with a  diagnosis  of
    post traumatic stress disorder.  That consideration finds  no  response
    in the respondent's letter.


30.  The decision of 27th June 2013 was, therefore, in my view  unlawful  on
    ordinary WM (DRC) terms.  The evidence did  not,  however,  demonstrate
    that only one lawful answer is possible.   Looking  at  the  issues  to
    which I have just made reference, it is evident that the  Secretary  of
    State, properly regarding all those matters, could still  come  to  the
    conclusion that  the  Immigration  Judge's  findings  are  such  as  to
    counteract the medical evidence.  It will be for the  respondent,  when
    framing any new decision, to take account  of  the  criticisms  of  the
    letter which had been identified by Mr Shibli and which, to  a  limited
    extent, I have accepted in my conclusion that the letter  was  unlawful
    and would have fallen to be quashed; but for the  respondent's  actions
    in rendering the proceedings academic.


31.  The position therefore is that, as I say, even if I am wrong  about  my
    finding that it is not for me in any circumstances to substitute my own
    decision for that of the Secretary of  State,  the  evidence  does  not
    reveal a state of affairs where only one answer is possible.


32.  Mr Shibli's attempt to counter what would otherwise be the  consequence
    of the respondent's offer of 16 March 2015  therefore  fails  and  this
    application is dismissed.


33.  I am going to make an order that the applicant's  reasonable  costs  of
    the proceedings up to 2nd April 2015 shall be paid by  the  respondent,
    to be assessed if not agreed;  and  that  the  respondent's  reasonable
    costs of the proceedings from 3rd April shall be paid by the applicant.


34.  I refuse permission to appeal as I do  not  consider  that  anything  I
    have said in my judgment is wrong in law.  ~~~~0~~~~

