

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Muhandiramge (section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 00675 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision promulgated         |
|On 03 November 2015                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                   Between

                             SAJITH MUHANDIRAMGE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S M Khan, of SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Office

Where an application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  is  refused
under Section S-LTR.1.7 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
ground of the Applicant's failure without reasonable excuse to  comply  with
a  requirement  to  provide  information,  the  burden  of  establishing   a
reasonable excuse rests on the applicant and the standard of  proof  is  the
balance of probabilities.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal originates in a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department (the  "Secretary  of  State"),  dated  12
    September 2014, whereby the application of the Appellant, a national of
    Sri Lanka, aged 26 years, for variation of his leave to remain  as  the
    spouse of a person present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    refused.  Simultaneously,  a  decision  was  made  to  remove  him   by
    directions under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006. The ensuing appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") was
    dismissed.  In a considered grant of permission  to  appeal,  a  single
    arguable error of law has been identified, in the following terms:

         "....  The Judge found that there was no requirement for dishonesty
         in respect of a refusal under S-LTR.1.7 ....


         The Judge concluded  that,  once  the  Respondent  had  provided  a
         Memorandum of Conviction and a copy of  the  completed  application
         form, including the tick box relating to  convictions,  the  burden
         rested on the Appellant to demonstrate that he  had  a  'reasonable
         excuse'.  It is arguable that the burden of showing an  absence  of
         any reasonable excuse still rests on the Respondent."


         Permission to appeal was granted accordingly.

Relevant Immigration Rules

 2. The subject matter of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
    Rules") is "Family Members".  This embraces a regime  characterised  by
    its detailed prescription.  Within  this  regime  it  is  possible  for
    varying types of  family  member  to  secure  leave  to  remain,  under
    differing guises, in the United Kingdom.  One dedicated compartment  of
    the Appendix, Section R-LTRP, is devoted to  the  discrete  subject  of
    "Eligibility for Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  as  a  Partner".    This
    provides, inter alia, that all of the requirements  in  Section  E-LTRP
    must be satisfied.   It further provides that the  applicant  must  not
    fall for refusal under the "Suitability - Leave to  Remain"  provisions
    arranged in Section S-LTR, paragraph  1.1  whereof  provides  that  the
    applicant "will be refused  limited  leave  to  remain  on  grounds  of
    suitability" if any of paragraphs 1.2 - 1.7 applies.  Within  paragraph
    1.7 there is a specific requirement, in subparagraph (b), that -


         "The applicant has failed without reasonable excuse to comply  with
         a requirement to - .....


         (b)  provide ... information".

 3. The words "will be refused" in paragraph  S-LTR1.1  attract  attention.
    Their clear import is that of mandatory refusal.  This provision is  to
    be contrasted with paragraph S-LTR.2.1, which provides:

         "The applicant will normally be refused on grounds  of  suitability
         if any of paragraphs S-LTR.2.2 to 2.4 apply."

         [Emphasis added.]

    Within paragraphs 2.2 - 2.4 a series of  defaults  is  postulated:  the
    provision of false  information,  representations  or  documents;  non-
    disclosure of material facts; a failure to pay  relevant  NHS  charges;
    and the non-provision of  a  requested  maintenance  and  accommodation
    undertaking.  Strikingly, where any of these  situations  obtains,  the
    refusal of an application for limited leave to remain as a  partner  is
    discretionary. The contrast with paragraph 1.7 is unmistakeable.

Factual matrix

 4. The material facts are few and uncontroversial.  The Appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom lawfully as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  in  January
    2011.  His presence in the United Kingdom has been consistently lawful.
     His sponsor, the British citizen with whom he  wishes  to  settle,  is
    described as a person who is Malaysian by birth, aged  43  years,  with
    two children aged 11 and 15 years respectively.  She has  been  settled
    in the United Kingdom since July 2008.  The  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the sponsor dates  from  September  2013  and  they  were
    married on 16 June 2014.  Section 10 of the application form, under the
    rubric of "Personal History", states:

         "It is mandatory to complete section 10 ....


         This section asks about any criminal convictions ....


         If you  fail  to  answer  all  of  these  questions  as  fully  and
         accurately as possible, your application may be refused."

     This is followed by, inter alia, the question:

         "Have you  or  any  dependants  who  are  applying  with  you  been
         convicted of any criminal offence in the UK or any other country?"

    In response, the Appellant ticked the  "No"  box.  The  application  is
    signed by the Appellant and is dated 30 July 2014.

Decisions of the Secretary of State and the FtT

 5. In the Secretary of State's decision, the following is stated:

         "On 02 January 2013 you were convicted of two counts  of  fraud  at
         North Staffordshire Magistrates' Court.  On  section  10.1  of  the
         application form you stated  that  you  had  no  convictions.  Your
         application falls for refusal by virtue of paragraph  S-LTR.1.7  of
         Appendix FM ..... [and] is refused under D-LTRP1.3."

    This is the only reason proffered for refusing  the  application.   The
    decision maker also considered the Appellant's case under  the  private
    life rubric of paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration  Rules,  concluding
    that it was non-compliant with the applicable requirements.

 6. There were two grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  (the
    "FtT"), which were:

          (a)   that  the  Appellant  did  not  intentionally  conceal   his
convictions; and

         (b)  that the impugned decision was in breach of Article 8 ECHR

    Both were rejected by the FtT. The main issue for the FtT  was  whether
    the Appellant's admitted failure to  disclose  his  conviction  in  the
    application  form  could  be  forgiven  by  the   "reasonable   excuse"
    dispensation in the Rules.  The explanation proffered by the  Appellant
    was that he had  formed  an  understanding  that  the  outcome  of  the
    criminal proceedings against him was a compromise at  the  Magistrates'
    Court, involving the repayment of the  sum  in  question  (some  �400),
    together with court costs of �175, whereby, per his statement -


        "I was led to believe that so long  as  the  sum  in  question  was
        settled in full, there was no  further  liability  ...  I  believed
        that the above did not fall within the definition of a  conviction.
        The omission was therefore an honest mistake on my part as  it  was
        never my intention to be deceitful or deceptive [sic]."

    In a nutshell, the FtT found this explanation wholly  unconvincing  and
    rejected it for the reasons given.

 7. The issue of law upon which  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  is
    focused emerges from the following passages in the decision of the FtT:



         "In the present case, it is not for the Respondent  to  prove  that
         anything was done dishonestly or  with  an  intention  to  deceive.
         Insofar as there is any burden upon the Respondent, I find that  it
         has been sufficiently discharged .... [by producing] .... a copy of
         the completed FLR(M) application form ..... and, secondly,  a  copy
         of the Appellant's Memorandum of Conviction ...."

    The FtT  considered  that  there  was  a  burden  upon  the  Appellant,
    expressed in the following terms:


         ".... The Appellant  in  this  appeal  must  be  understood  to  be
         contending that he has  a  reasonable  excuse  for  his  undisputed
         failure to comply with  the  requirement  to  provide  information.
         Such being his case, I apprehend that the burden rests upon him  to
         establish the necessary facts upon the balance of probabilities."

    At the  conclusion  of  the  Judge's  consideration  of,  and  reasoned
    rejection of, the Appellant's explanation for his aberration, the Judge
    stated:


         "...  It  is  my  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  has  failed  to
         discharge the burden of showing on  the  balance  of  probabilities
         that he has a reasonable excuse."



The burden of proof issue

 8. It has been frequently observed, at  all  levels,  that  the  world  of
    immigration and asylum law is complex, challenging and populated  by  a
    seemingly ever increasing number of  legal  rules,  both  domestic  and
    international.  I apprehend that few would quibble with this  analysis.
    The complexities and potential for error have  been  increased  by  the
    intermittent emergence of burdens and standards of proof during  recent
    years.  This may be linked to another question, which to my mind is not
    yet finally settled, relating to the essential character of immigration
    and asylum appeals, resorting to the conventional taxonomy,  are  these
    adversarial? Or inquisitorial? Or a combination of  both?  Or  of  some
    other species? Furthermore, in considering all of these questions, what
    is the influence of the public law overlay in this sphere?  I  consider
    that  when  questions  of  burden  and  standard  of  proof  arise   in
    immigration and asylum  appeals  they  cannot  be  isolated  from  this
    broader context.

 9. Burdens and standard of  proof  have  progressively,  and  almost  with
    stealth, become an established feature of decision making in the  field
    of immigration  and  asylum  law.   Their  emergence  may  properly  be
    described as organic. They have featured particularly in cases where it
    is alleged by the Secretary of State that the applicant has engaged  in
    deception or  dishonesty  with  the  result  that  the  application  in
    question should be refused. This discrete  line  of  authority  is  not
    recent, being traceable to  the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal in Olufosoye [1992] IMM AR 141.   In  tribunal  jurisprudence,
    the origins of this particular lineage can be traced to the decision of
    the House of Lords in R v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,
    ex parte Khawaja [1984] AC 74, which concerned the inter-related issues
    of procuring entry to the United Kingdom  by  deception  and  precedent
    fact in the Secretary of State's ensuing decision making  process.   It
    is well established that in such cases the burden of proof rests on the
    Secretary of State and the standard of proof belongs to the higher  end
    of the balance of probabilities spectrum.

10. One of the more recent reported decisions belonging to this  stable  is
    that of Shen (Paper Appeals:  Proving  Dishonesty)  [2014]  UKUT  00236
    (IAC).   This  decision  is  illustrative  of  the  moderately  complex
    exercise required of tribunals from  time  to  time.   Here  the  Upper
    Tribunal held, in harmony with established principle, that  in  certain
    contexts the evidential  pendulum  swings  three  times  and  in  three
    different directions:

     a) First, where the Secretary of State alleges that an  applicant  has
        practised dishonesty or deception in an application  for  leave  to
        remain, there is an evidential burden on the  Secretary  of  State.
        This requires that sufficient evidence be adduced to raise an issue
        as to the existence or  non-existence  of  a  fact  in  issue:  for
        example, by producing the  completed  application  which  is  prima
        facie deceitful in some material fashion.


     b) The spotlight thereby switches to the applicant. If  he  discharges
        the burden - again, an evidential one  -  of  raising  an  innocent
        explanation, namely an account which satisfies the minimum level of
        plausibility, a further transfer of the burden of proof occurs.

     c) Where (b) is satisfied, the burden rests on the Secretary of  State
        to establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the Appellant's
        prima facie innocent explanation is to be rejected.

    A veritable burden of proof boomerang!


11. Shen is preceded by a lengthy line of Tribunal  jurisprudence  to  this
    effect: see JC (Part 9 HC 395 - Burden of  Proof)  China  [2007]  UKAIT
    00027, at [10]; MZ  (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 919, at [25];  Mumu (Paragraph 320;  Article
    8; Scope) [2012] UKUT 00143 (IAC); and Kareem  (Proxy  marriages  -  EU
    law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).   In short, in cases of  alleged  deceit,
    the legal rules are well settled.

12. The phenomenon of burden  and  standard  of  proof  features  in  other
    spheres of the general field of immigration and asylum decision making.
     For example, in Basnet (validity of application -  respondent)  [2012]
    UKUT 00113 (IAC) which concerned an application  for  leave  to  remain
    refused on the basis that the Secretary of State claimed to  have  been
    unable to obtain the requisite fee from the Appellant's bank, resulting
    in the application being returned as invalid, the Upper  Tribunal  held
    that where this gives rise to a contention that  there  is  no  ensuing
    right of appeal, the burden is on the Secretary of State to demonstrate
    that the bank authorisation specified in the completed application  was
    not sufficient to secure payment of the requisite  fee.  This  decision
    was considered recently in  Mitchell  (Basnet  Revisited)  [2015]  UKUT
    00562 (IAC), where the Vice-President stated:

         "The Appellant had submitted an apparently  good  application  form
         and the Secretary of State's response to the appeal was  to  assert
         that the fee could not be collected on the basis of  the  authority
         given.  This was a  matter  solely  within  the  knowledge  of  the
         Secretary of State, because the crucial events had  happened  after
         the submission of the form and it was therefore for  the  Secretary
         of State to show that the difficulty arose from a  default  by  the
         appellant."


         [Our emphasis.]

13. For many immigration Judges and practitioners one  of  the  best  known
    illustrations of the operation of burden and standard of proof is  that
    of  asylum  claims.   Every  asylum  claimant  bears  the   burden   of
    establishing  a  well  founded  fear,  in  the  terms  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  As regards the standard of proof, the House of Lords  held
    in R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Sivakumaran
    [1988] AC 958 that what must be demonstrated is a "real and substantial
    risk" or a "reasonable degree  of  likelihood"  of  persecution  for  a
    Refugee Convention reason.  It is clear that this  denotes  a  standard
    somewhat lower than that of the  balance  of  probabilities,  given  in
    particular their Lordships' approval of the linguistic formulae devised
    by Lord Diplock in Fernandez v Government of Singapore [1988]  AC  958,
    at 994, namely "a  reasonable  chance"  and  "a  serious  possibility".
    Thus, per Lord Keith in Sivakumaran, at page          :

         ".... If the examination shows that persecution might  indeed  take
         place then the fear is well founded."

14. One of the striking features of the many decisions  belonging  to  this
    general field is the absence  of  any  detailed  consideration  of  the
    questions mooted in [8] above. It is beyond question  that  immigration
    appeals do not partake  of  the  conventional  traits  of  inter-partes
    litigation.   There  is,  rather,  a  clearly  discernible  public  law
    framework, given that the powers and discretions  being  exercised  are
    statutory, belong to the realm of public law and give rise to  disputes
    between the individual and the state.  This is further reflected in the
    broad spectrum of errors of law which feature in the decisions  of  the
    FtT and the jurisprudence of the Upper Tribunal.    These  include  the
    quintessentially  public  law  misdemeanours  of  irrationality,  bias,
    failing to take into account all  material  facts  and  considerations,
    permitting the intrusion of immaterial facts and considerations and the
    failure to provide a procedurally fair decision making process.

15. This public law overlay also arises from time to time in appeals to the
    Upper Tribunal raising questions about the  fairness  of  the  decision
    making process adopted by the FtT. This discrete issue  features  in  R
    (on the application of Maheshwaran) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2002] EWCA Civ 173. In order to do justice to  the  passage
    in question it is necessary to reproduce it in full, per Schiemann  LJ,
    at [3] - [5]:

        "3. Those who make a claim for  asylum  must  show  that  they  are
        refugees. The burden of proof is on them. Whether or not a claimant
        is to be believed is frequently very important. He will assert very
        many facts in relation to events far away  most  of  which  no  one
        before the adjudicator is in a position to corroborate  or  refute.
        Material is often adduced at the last minute without warning.  From
        time to time the claimant or the Home Secretary are  neither  there
        nor represented and yet the adjudicator carries on with  his  task.
        He frequently has several cases listed in front of him on the  same
        day. For one reason or another not every hearing will be effective.
        Adjudicators cannot be expected  to  be  alive  to  every  possible
        nuance of a case before the oral hearing, if there is one,  starts.
        Adjudicators in general will reserve their determinations for later
        delivery. They will ponder what has been said and what has not been
        said, both before the hearing and at the hearing.  They  will  look
        carefully at the documents which have been  produced.  Points  will
        sometimes assume a greater importance than they  appeared  to  have
        before the hearing began or in  its  earlier  stages.  Adjudicators
        will in general rightly be cautious about intervening  lest  it  be
        said that they have leaped into the  forensic  arena  and  lest  an
        appearance of bias is given.


        4. Undoubtedly a failure to put to a party to  litigation  a  point
        which is decided against him can be  grossly  unfair  and  lead  to
        injustice. He must have a  proper  opportunity  to  deal  with  the
        point. Adjudicators must bear  this  in  mind.  Where  a  point  is
        expressly conceded by one party it will usually be unfair to decide
        the case against the other party on the basis that  the  concession
        was wrongly made, unless the tribunal indicates that it  is  minded
        to take that course. Cases can occur when fairness will require the
        reopening of an appeal because some point of significance - perhaps
        arising out of a post - hearing decision of  the  higher  courts  -
        requires it. However, such cases will be rare.


        5. Where much depends on the credibility of a party and  when  that
        party makes several inconsistent statements which  are  before  the
        decision maker, that party manifestly has a forensic problem.  Some
        will choose to confront the inconsistencies straight  on  and  make
        evidential or forensic submissions on them. Others will  hope  that
        'least  said,  soonest   mended'   and   consider   that   forensic
        concentration on the point will only make matters worse and that it
        would be better to try and switch the tribunal's attention to  some
        other aspect of the case. Undoubtedly it is open  to  the  tribunal
        expressly to put a particular inconsistency to a witness because it
        considers that the witness may not  be  alerted  to  the  point  or
        because  it  fears  that  it  may  have  perceived   something   as
        inconsistent  with  an  earlier  answer  which  in  truth  is   not
        inconsistent. Fairness may in some circumstances require this to be
        done but this will not be the usual  case.  Usually  the  tribunal,
        particularly if the party is represented, will  remain  silent  and
        see how the case unfolds."


    It is the very essence of litigation having a public law character that
    there is no lis inter-partes. Notably, there is no express  recognition
    of this in the passage quoted above, in which the emphasis is,  rather,
    on classic adversarial inter-partes litigation.


16. Furthermore, the judgment of Schiemann LJ must  be  considered  in  the
    light of  Lord  Carnwath's  more  recent  formulation  of  the  general
    character of Tribunal proceedings (infra).  In addition, Judges  should
    be cognisant that this passage, properly, does not purport to enunciate
    a fair hearing code in either rigid or  exhaustive  terms.   The  locus
    classicus remains, I believe, the decision of the  House  of  Lords  in
    Doody v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1993] 3 All ER  92,
    at 106 D/H.  In the celebrated passage in the speech of Lord Mustill in
    which six governing principles are configured, we would  suggest  that,
    for Tribunal Judges, the sixth is the most apposite:


         "Since  the  person  affected  usually   cannot   make   worthwhile
         representations without knowing what factors may weigh against  his
         interests, fairness will very often require that he is informed  of
         the gist of the case which he has to answer."

    Particular attention must be paid to this principle  in  the  world  of
    immigration and asylum proceedings which feature, with some  frequency,
    the  phenomena  of  unrepresented  litigants,  through  the  medium  of
    interpreters, and litigants who may be classified  vulnerable  for  one
    reason or another.  As ever, the specific litigious context will be all
    important.

17. In this reflection on the interplay between burdens of  proof  and  the
    right to a fair hearing, the decision of the Court of Session in Koca v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] CSIH 41  also  repays
    careful reading.  In that  case  the  claimant  was  represented  by  a
    solicitor, while there was no representative of the Secretary of State.
     The adjudicator dismissed the appeal.  One of the two central  grounds
    of the ensuing judicial review  challenge  was  a  complaint  that  the
    claimant had been deprived of his right to a fair hearing on account of
    the adjudicator's failure to canvass with him discrepancies in his case
    which, in her subsequent decision, were held against him.  Lord  Clarke
    observed, in [19]:

         "....  This case  falls  to  be  decided  in  accordance  with  the
         overriding requirement that the reclaimer should have been given  a
         fair hearing. That requirement, of course, is not confined  to  the
         actual conduct of the hearing itself  before  the  Adjudicator  but
         applies also to the process whereby  the  Adjudicator  reaches  his
         decision."


         [My emphasis.]

    Lord Clarke then highlighted the absence of any  cross  examination  or
    judicial questioning:


         "...   whereby  any   such   inconsistencies,   contradictions   or
         discrepancies might well have been highlighted."

         The Court's conclusion on this issue was the following, at [20]:

         "....  If .....  any perceived contradiction  or  inconsistency  in
         the reclaimer's position was going to form a significant reason for
         rejecting his appeal then, in the particular circumstances of  this
         case, it appears to use that fairness required that, prior  to  the
         issue of her decision, she gave the reclaimer or his representative
         an opportunity to comment upon, or seek to explain, it."


    And, in the same, passage, Lord Clarke formulated what he  termed  "the
    narrower proposition" in these terms:


         "....  If the Adjudicator himself considers that he has  identified
         certain inconsistencies in the  applicant's  evidence  which  could
         have a very significant effect on the decision, he  should  provide
         the applicant with an opportunity to explain these."

    The concept  which  shines  brightly  in  these  passages,  though  not
    explicitly mentioned, is that of context.  Finally,  having  regard  to
    the next issue to which I shall turn, the  statement  in  [21]  of  the
    judgment is worthy of note:


         ".....  We accept entirely ......    that  an  adjudicator  has  no
         obligation to search for material of that kind  [a  Turkish  asylum
         seeker's report requested by the appellant's expert witness]  which
         is not placed before him even when it is referred to.   It  is  for
         the applicant  and  those  representing  him  to  ensure  that  any
         material which they wish the Tribunal to have regard to  is  placed
         before the Tribunal."

    This statement must, of course, be considered in the light of  Rule  24
    of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014, which requires the Secretary of State  to  provide
    specified documents  in  every  case.   Furthermore,  the  Tribunal  is
    empowered, by Rule 4, to make  further  specific  directions  regarding
    documents.

18. That  one  of  the  features  of  Tribunal  proceedings  is  a  certain
    inquisitorial dimension was acknowledged recently by Lord  Carnwath  SC
    in Secretary of State for the Home Department v MN and KY  [2014]  UKSC
    30, at [25]. Having referred to the relevant procedural  rules  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, Lord Carnwath stated:

         "Secondly,  there  is  no  presumption  that  the  procedure   will
         necessarily follow the adversarial model which (for the time  being
         at least)  is  the  hallmark  of  civil  court  procedures.   In  a
         specialist   tribunal,   particularly   where   parties   are   not
         represented, there is more scope, and  often  more  need,  for  the
         judges to adopt an inquisitorial approach."


         [Our emphasis.]

    This may be allied with the long standing recognition that  proceedings
    before tribunals do not operate within what  is  perceived  to  be  the
    rather  stricter  and  more  rigid  framework  of  proceedings   before
    conventional courts. We consider that the decision in Maheshwaran  must
    be considered in the light of the above.  What Lord Carnwath  added  is
    no throwaway line:


         "However, there is no single approach suitable for  all  tribunals.
         For example, in a major case in the tax or lands tribunals, the sum
         may be great and the issues as complex, as in any case in the  High
         Court and the procedure will be modelled accordingly."

    In [23], his Lordship, drawing on the  report  of  Sir  Andrew  Leggatt
    (infra),  having  highlighted  the  specialised  nature  of  Tribunals,
    continued:


         "These special qualities, including emphasis on the development  of
         'innovative methods of resolving disputes that are of a  type  that
         may be brought before Tribunals', are given statutory force in  the
         duties of the Senior President under  section  2  of  the  2007Act.
         They are also embodied in the overriding  objective  in  the  Rules
         ....."


19. By long established convention proceedings before tribunals  have  been
    considered to operate with a greater degree of  procedural  flexibility
    and informality.  This is reflected in, for example, rule 4(1)  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014:


         "Subject to the provisions of the 2007 Act and any other enactment,
         the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure."

    This replicates the terms of the  predecessor  rule.   Furthermore,  an
    identical provision is found in rule 5(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  It  is  also  well  established  that  a
    statutory tribunal is not normally bound  by  the  rules  of  evidence.
    Thus hearsay evidence may be received, provided that the party affected
    has a fair opportunity to consider and respond to same: see  R  v  Hull
    Prison Visitors, ex parte St Germain (No  2)  [1979]  1  WLR  1401.   A
    further feature of tribunal proceedings is that they are conducted,  or
    capable of being conducted, informally. This, historically, may explain
    why most tribunal proceedings are conducted without requiring witnesses
    to be sworn, as was noted in the Franks Report (Cmnd.  218,  1957),  at
    [91].

20. What is clear beyond peradventure is that in the field  of  immigration
    and  asylum  law  tribunals  do  not  exercise  investigatory  or  pure
    inquisitorial powers.  They  do  not  generally  conduct  "own  motion"
    enquiries.  Evidence is adduced by the parties and  not  the  Tribunal.
    These considerations serve to explain why Sir Andrew Leggatt  noted  in
    his report (Cmnd. Tribunals for Users - One System, One Service: Report
    of the Review of Tribunals (2001) at 7.3 - 7.5) that, in contrast  with
    other jurisdictions such as  Australia,  tribunal  proceedings  in  the
    United Kingdom are generally not inquisitorial in nature.  We  consider
    that this is not undermined by the assessment of Baroness  Hale,  in  a
    rather different  context,  that  the  process  of  statutory  benefits
    adjudication is "inquisitorial rather than  adversarial":  see  Kerr  v
    Department for Social Development (NI) [2004] UKHL 23,  at  [61].  That
    process is rather different  from  the  inter  -  partes  framework  of
    appeals to both the FtT and this Chamber. Lord Carnwath did not  dilate
    on the meaning to be attributed to "inquisitorial" in  the  context  in
    which he was writing.  On balance, we consider that he did  not  intend
    to signal any radical departure  from  the  assessment  of  Sir  Andrew
    Leggatt.


21. In Wade and Forsyth, Administrative Law (10th  Edition),  one  finds  a
    useful analysis of this topic, at page 784:

         ".....  Once it is recognised that a dispute  has  arisen  [between
         the State and the individual] then, in the common law tradition,  a
         relatively adversarial procedure is implied.   This  is  consistent
         with the integration of  tribunals  into  the  judicial  system  as
         ordained by the 2007 Act.  A tribunal should have both sides of the
         case presented to it and should judge between them, without  itself
         having to conduct an enquiry of its  own  motion,  enter  into  the
         controversy and call evidence for or against either party".

         This summary seems uncontroversial.  The authors continue:

         "Naturally  this  does  not  mean  that  the  Tribunal  should  not
         tactfully assist an applicant to  develop  his  case,  particularly
         when he has no representative to speak for him,  just  as  a  Judge
         will do with an unrepresented litigant.  And  this  may  require  a
         more inquisitorial role."

    Judicial conduct of this kind would, of course, be subject at all times
    to the overarching duty of impartial adjudication. The   final  comment
    of these respected commentators on this issue is:


         "....  The 2007 Act reforms also imply a less passive  Tribunal  to
         ensure that all cases are dealt with justly and fairly; and a shift
         towards a less adversarial procedure may be anticipated."

         Thus there is scope for further development  of  the  law  on  this
front.

22. Returning to the issue to be determined in this appeal, it seems to  us
    that the resolution of any question relating to burden and standard  of
    proof cannot be divorced from the nature of the  proceedings  in  which
    the issue arises. Hence  the  excursus  in  the  foregoing  paragraphs.
    Equally important, in our view, is an appreciation  of  the  underlying
    legal theory.  Writing at the end of the  19th  century,  the  American
    scholar Thayer (Preliminary Treatise on Evidence  at  the  Common  Law)
    opined that the phrase "burden of proof" had two  basic  meanings.   He
    formulated the first of these thus:

         "The peculiar duty of him who has the risk of any given proposition
         on which parties are at issue - who will lose the case if  he  does
         not make this proposition out, when all has been said and done".

    This is immediately recognisable as the persuasive (or  legal)  burden,
    the standard whereof varies from the civil to the criminal context  viz
    a preponderance of the evidence (or on the  balance  of  probabilities)
    and beyond reasonable doubt.   Thayer  coined  the  second  meaning  of
    "burden of proof" as:


         "The duty of going forward in  argument  or  introducing  evidence,
         whether at the beginning  of  a  case,   or  at  any  later  moment
         throughout the trial or discussion."

         [At page 355.]


    This corresponds approximately to  what  is  known  as  the  evidential
    burden viz the burden on a  party  in  certain  contexts  to  establish
    sufficient evidence to raise an issue before the tribunal of fact.   At
    its simplest, the  function  of  burdens  of  proof  is  to  facilitate
    judicial  decision  making  within  a  coherent,  regulated,   orderly,
    consistent,  predictable and bilaterally fair framework.  Such decision
    making is generally undertaken in a context involving a dispute between
    the parties which is resolved by the adversarial process so typical  of
    the common law.  The imposition of a burden of proof equips  the  court
    or  tribunal  concerned  with  a  vital  tool  to  be  applied  in  its
    adjudication of the dispute.

23. The general rule is that it is incumbent on the claimant to prove  what
    he alleges or contends.  Indeed, this has been described as the "golden
    rule": see Chapman v Oakleigh Animal Products [1970]  8  KIR  1063,  at
    1072.  This general rule has been helpfully  framed  in  the  following
    terms: the legal burden of proof normally rests upon the party desiring
    the court to take action, with the result that a claimant must  satisfy
    the court or tribunal that the conditions which entitle him to an award
    have been satisfied: see Dickinson v Minister of Pensions [1953]  1  QB
    228, at 232.  In very pithy terms, he who asserts must prove.

Conclusion and decision

24. Having regard to the terms of the grant of permission to appeal,  three
    conclusions are, in principle,  open to this Tribunal.   The  first  is
    that the burden of proving that the Appellant had a  reasonable  excuse
    for non-disclosure of his  criminal  conviction  rested  on  him.   The
    second possible conclusion is that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  the
    burden of proving that the Appellant did not have a  reasonable  excuse
    for the non-disclosure. The third partakes of the "boomerang" discussed
    in [10]above.

25. If the second of these conclusions is to prevail, it would  operate  as
    an exception to the general  rule  of  evidence  discussed  immediately
    above.  We are unable to identify any  basis  in  principle,  logic  or
    otherwise favouring this  conclusion.   It  finds  no  support  in  any
    authority brought  to  our  attention.  Furthermore,  it  would  be  in
    conflict  with  the  principle  that  where  the  truth  of  a  party's
    allegation lies peculiarly within the knowledge of  his  opponent,  the
    latter bears the burden of disproving  it.   This  principle  has  been
    applied in both criminal and civil cases: see in particular R v Edwards
    [1975] QB 27, General Accident Fire  and  Life  Assurance  v  Robertson
    [1909] AC 404 at 413, Magowan v Carville [1960] IR 330 at 336, 337  and
    Abrath v North Eastern Railway Company  [1883]  11  QBD  440.   In  the
    latter case, Bowen LJ stated, at 457 - 458:

        "If there is a conflict of evidence as to these  questions,  it  is
        unnecessary, except for the purpose of making plain what the  judge
        is doing, to explain to the jury about onus of proof, unless  there
        are presumptions of law, such as, for instance, the presumption  of
        consideration  for  a  bill  of  exchange,  or  a  presumption   of
        consideration for a deed. And if the jury is asked by the  judge  a
        plain  question,  as,  for  instance,  whether  they   believe   or
        disbelieve the principal witness called for the  plaintiff,  it  is
        unnecessary to explain to them about the onus of proof, because the
        only answer which they have to give is Yes  or  No,  or  else  they
        cannot tell what to say. If the jury cannot  make  up  their  minds
        upon a question of that kind, it is for  the  judge  to  say  which
        party is entitled to the verdict. I do not forget  that  there  are
        canons which are useful to a judge in commenting upon evidence  and
        rules for determining the weight of conflicting evidence; but  they
        are not the same as onus of proof. Now in an action  for  malicious
        prosecution the plaintiff has the burden throughout of establishing
        that the circumstances of the prosecution were such  that  a  judge
        can see no reasonable or probable cause for instituting it. In  one
        sense that is the assertion of a negative, and we have been pressed
        with the proposition that when a negative is to  be  made  out  the
        onus of proof shifts. That  is  not  so.  If  the  assertion  of  a
        negative is an essential part of the plaintiff's case, the proof of
        the assertion still rests upon the plaintiff. The terms "negative "
        and " affirmative" are after all  relative  and  not  absolute.  In
        dealing with a question of negligence, that term may be  considered
        either as negative  or  affirmative  according  to  the  definition
        adopted in measuring the duty which is neglected. Wherever a person
        asserts affirmatively as part of his case that a certain  state  of
        facts is present or is  absent,  or  that  a  particular  thing  is
        insufficient for a particular purpose, that is an averment which he
        is bound to prove positively. It has been said  that  an  exception
        exists in those cases where the facts  lie  peculiarly  within  the
        knowledge of the opposite party. The counsel for the plaintiff have
        not gone the length of contending that in all those cases the  onus
        shifts, and that  the  person  within  whose  knowledge  the  truth
        peculiarly lies is  bound  to  prove  or  disprove  the  matter  in
        dispute. I think a proposition of that kind cannot  be  maintained,
        and that the exceptions supposed to be found amongst cases relating
        to the game laws may be explained on special grounds come  back  to
        the question of the present trial, it is possible that the language
        of Cave, J., has been misunderstood; and must look and see  out  of
        the ways in which the question might possibly be tried,  which  way
        he has selected, because as soon as it is seen  which mode of trial
        he has selected a great advance is made  towards  seeing  that  the
        criticisms which have been made on his  direction  are  unsound.  A
        judge may leave the jury to find a general verdict,  explaining  to
        the jury what the disputed facts are, telling  them  that  if  they
        find the disputed facts in favour of one side  or  the  other,  his
        opinion  as  to  reasonable  and   probable   cause   will   differ
        accordingly, telling them what, in each alternative, his view  will
        be, and enabling them to apply that statement with reference to the
        issue as to malice; that is a way which in a very  simple  kind  of
        case may be adopted. But I think it necessary only to state as much
        as I have stated about it, to see that a very clear head and a very
        clear .tongue will be required to conduct a complicated case  to  a
        general verdict in that way. Accordingly, judges have, been in  the
        habit  of  adopting  a  different   course   whenever   there   are
        circumstances of complication. A judge may accordingly, do this; he
        may tell the jury what the issues or questions are, and at the same
        time inform them what will be the effect upon  the  verdict,  which
        they will ultimately be asked to find, of the answers they give  to
        the specific  questions,  leaving  the  jury  both  to  answer  the
        questions and then to find a verdict, after  he  has  explained  to
        them what result the answers to the questions will involve. That is
        the way in which Cave, J. really did try  this  case.  There  is  a
        third way in which a judge may conduct the  trial,  by  asking  the
        jury specific questions, and not leaving it to  them  to  find  the
        verdict, but entering the: judgment upon  their  findings  himself.
        That is a third way, and that  was  not  adopted  in  form  by  the
        learned judge,  although  it  will  be  observed  it  differs  only
        slightly in form from the second mode of procedure,  which  he,  in
        fact, did adopt. Now, if the judge  adopts  the  second  method  of
        procedure, it is obvious that he is putting specific  questions  to
        the jury with the intention, as soon  as  they  have  answered  the
        specific questions, to request them to go  still  further,  and  to
        find a general verdict one way or the other on such answers."

     [Subsequently affirmed by the House of  Lords  in  [1886]  11  App  Cas
247.]

26. In contrast, adoption of the first  of  the  two  possible  conclusions
    mooted above is indicated  by  the  general  rule,  duly  bolstered  by
    considerations of fairness, logic and common sense, all  long  standing
    traits of the common law.   This conclusion would require the Appellant
    to bear the burden of proving a reasonable excuse for the  omission  in
    question and to do so to the civil standard,  viz  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  We readily espouse this conclusion.


27. Furthermore, there is no principled reason favouring the third possible
    conclusion, namely that the Appellant had a  (mere)  evidential  burden
    which, if discharged, subjected the Secretary of  State  to  the  legal
    burden of disproving the reasonable excuse canvassed.  Given  that  the
    Appellant is the party  in  possession  of  the  material  information,
    belonging solely to his knowledge there is no  basis  in  principle  or
    otherwise for this third conclusion.

28. Accordingly, we conclude that the burden rested  on  the  Appellant  of
    proving that he had a  reasonable  excuse  for  non-disclosure  of  his
    criminal conviction in the completed application for variation  of  his
    leave to remain. This burden was to be discharged to  the  standard  of
    the balance of probabilities. It follows that the approach espoused  by
    the FtT to this issue was correct in law.  Thus we dismiss  the  appeal
    and affirm the decision of the FtT.


29. Finally, we consider it appropriate to draw attention to the  dichotomy
    of mandatory/discretionary  refusal  of  applications  made  under  the
    Appendix FM regime.  In the abstract, it seems  unsatisfactory  that  a
    case categorised as a "failure to provide information"  should  attract
    mandatory refusal, in circumstances where the closely comparable ground
    of "failure to disclose material facts",  which  entails  discretionary
    refusal,  may be apposite.  While it may be that the former  ground  is
    designed to operate in cases where there has been  some  procedural  or
    mechanical failure, we received  no  argument  on  this  issue.   There
    appears to be scope for the contention that an inappropriate invocation
    of the former ground could, in certain contexts, constitute an error of
    law. In particular, it must  not  be  capricious.   Furthermore,  if  a
    Tribunal were to conclude that, in the real world of  decision  making,
    there is slavish adherence to the former ground, to  the  exclusion  of
    the latter, this would be unsustainable in law on the basis of a series
    of interlocking and overlapping legal  errors:  fetter  of  discretion,
    inflexible policy, improper motive, misconstruction of  the  applicable
    legal rules et alia.  In the present case, while  not  germane  to  our
    decision, we consider that the more appropriate provision of the  Rules
    to have been invoked by the Secretary of State was that of  failing  to
    disclose material facts.  We apprehend that there  will  be  scope  for
    more definitive adjudication of this issue in some  appropriate  future
    case.



                                            [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                   Dated:   07 November 2015
