

                                    [pic]
           In the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of Roohi and Another) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department (2014 Act: saved appeal rights) IJR [2015] UKUT 00685 (IAC)


                                                                    Heard at
                                                                 Field House

                                                        2 and 5 October 2015


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                   Before

                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                       The Queen on the Application of

                                NAGINE ROOHI
                          NILABEN MANISHKUMAR PATEL
                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

   Mr M Biggs, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors, appeared on behalf of the
   Applicants.


   Mr W Hansen, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
   behalf of the Respondent

(1) The commencement of the Immigration Act 2014 does not remove  rights  of
appeal from those who were served with appealable decisions before  6  April
2015.

(2) This means that those with a  right  of  appeal  exercisable  only  from
outside the United Kingdom (including some  ETS  cases),  have  an  adequate
alternative remedy, and as such judicial review  will  not  lie  save  in  a
small minority of cases that are in some way exceptional.

                                  JUDGMENT

   Introduction


   1.  The  "ETS  cases"  arise  from  decisions  refusing  to  extend,   or
      effectively terminating, a  large  number  of  individuals'  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom.   Following a broadcast investigation by
      the television programme "Panorama" and internal review by Educational
      Testing Services itself, the conclusion was reached that many  English
      language certificates issued by ETS had been obtained in a  fraudulent
      manner, because thousands of tests had  been  undertaken  not  by  the
      person named on the certificate but by somebody else.  The  effect  of
      this discovery, and the Secretary of  State's  action  on  it,  varied
      between individuals.  Some had an in-country right of  appeal  against
      the decision about their leave; others had or have a right  of  appeal
      exercisable  only  from  outside  the  United  Kingdom.   Efforts   by
      substantial numbers of those in the latter class to maintain  judicial
      review proceedings have been met by the Secretary of State's  argument
      that permission  should  be  refused  because  there  is  an  adequate
      alternative  remedy  in  the  form  of  the   out-of-country   appeal,
      prescribed by Parliament in their  case.   The  Secretary  of  State's
      argument to that effect has been accepted; and it is clear  that,  for
      those who have an out-of-country right of appeal, judicial review will
      not lie save in a small  minority  of  cases  that  are  in  some  way
      exceptional.  We do not  need  to  give  any  more  detail  about  the
      background, which is set out in detail in judgments by Beatson LJ in R
      (Mehmood and Ali) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  744  and  R  (Sood)  v  SSHD
      [2015] EWCA Civ 831.


   2. The claims for judicial review fall for determination by this Tribunal
      in those cases covered by the Lord  Chief  Justice's  direction  under
      s.18(6) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007,  and
      otherwise by the High Court.  Many of the claims were stayed  awaiting
      the judgments of the Court of Appeal to which we have referred.   When
      those judgments were both available, the Tribunal's  staff  began,  on
      judicial authority, a process of writing to the  individual  claimants
      inviting them to say  whether,  in  the  light  of  the  authoritative
      statements of the law now available, they wished to proceed with their
      claim and, if they did,  requiring  them  to  submit  amended  grounds
      within a specified timescale, failing which their  applications  would
      be automatically struck out.


   3. The present applications for permission to apply for  judicial  review
      are amongst those in which amended grounds have been submitted.   They
      raise the same issue, and after setting out the  facts  we  shall  not
      need to distinguish  between  them.   The  issue  is  one  of  general
      application.  Mr Biggs submits on their behalf that, as  a  result  of
      the commencement of the relevant provisions  of  the  Immigration  Act
      2014, they do not have a  right  of  appeal  of  any  sort,  and  that
      judicial review is  accordingly  an  appropriate  remedy:  indeed,  he
      argues, it is their only remedy.




   The Facts


   4. Ms Roohi is a national of Pakistan.  She came to the United Kingdom on
      11 August 2012 as a student.   On  29  December  2013  she  sought  an
      extension of her student leave.   On 14 January 2014 she  was  granted
      further leave, expiring on 30 November 2015.  Her application had been
      supported  by  an  English  language  certificate  from  ETS.    After
      investigation the Secretary of State gave notice on 25 September  2014
      that she proposed to remove Ms Roohi from the United  Kingdom  on  the
      ground that she had used deception in seeking leave to remain.   Under
      s.10(8) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  that  notice  had  the
      effect of invalidating the leave  previously  given.   The  notice  of
      decision correctly indicated that she could appeal  against  it  after
      she had left the United Kingdom.


   5. Ms Patel is a national of India.  She came to the United Kingdom on 11
      September 2009 with leave as a student.   The  leave  was  extended  a
      number of  times.   The  most  recent  extension  was  granted  on  14
      September 2013, to expire on 12 April 2015.   Ms  Patel's  application
      was also supported by an English language certificate  from  ETS.   In
      her case after investigation the Secretary of State served notices  on
      11 August 2014, with the same content and same effect as those  served
      on Ms Roohi.


   6. Each of the Applicants has remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
      leave following service of the removal decisions.




   The Immigration Act 2014


   7. The Immigration Act 2014 makes  sweeping  changes  to  the  rights  of
      appeal in respect of immigration decisions.  The changes are in Part 2
      of the Act, and take effect for the most part by amending the  appeals
      provisions of Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002.  It is common ground that, under the provisions of the 2014 Act,
      there is no appeal against decisions such as those that the Applicants
      challenge.


   8. The relevant provisions of  the  2014  Act  have  been  introduced  by
      commencement orders.  For present purposes we need refer only  to  the
      Immigration Act  2014  (Commencement  No.3,  Transitional  and  Saving
      Provisions) Order 2014 (SI 2014/2771) as amended  by  the  Immigration
      Act 2014 (Commencement No.4, Transitional and  Saving  Provisions  and
      Amendment) Order 2015 (SI 2015/371).  So far as these applications are
      concerned, the effect of those orders is that the  appeals  provisions
      of the 2014 Act are brought into effect  with  certain  savings.   The
      appeals provisions that were in force immediately before  commencement
      continue to apply (and the 2014 provisions do not apply) in so far  as
      they relate to decisions in a number of classes  set  out  in  article
      9(1) of the No.3 Order as amended by the No.4 Order.  Four classes are
      set out in article 9(1).  The first  three  are  particular  types  of
      decision made on  or  after  6  April  2015,  which  is  the  relevant
      commencement date.  Those provisions clearly have  no  impact  on  the
      present applications.  Article 9(1)(d) is  the  only  provision  which
      saves appeal rights in relation to a  decision  made  before  6  April
      2015.  It does so in the following words:

           "(d)  a decision made before  6th  April  2015  in  relation  to
               which, immediately before 6th April 2015,  an  appeal  could
               have  been  brought  or  was   pending   under   the   saved
               provisions".

   Mr Biggs' submissions


   9. Mr Biggs' submission is in essence perfectly simple.   The  Applicants
      each had a right of appeal that could be exercised only  from  outside
      the United Kingdom.  Immediately before 6 April 2015  (and  indeed  at
      all relevant  times)  the  Applicants  were  not  outside  the  United
      Kingdom.  For that reason they could not have brought an appeal.   The
      words of article 9(1)(d) therefore do not apply to them, and no  right
      of appeal was saved.  Since 6 April 2015  they  have  been  without  a
      right of appeal.


  10. Mr Biggs  deployed  his  argument  with  his  customary  industry  and
      subtlety.  He reminded us that the statutory bar on bringing an appeal
      from within the  United  Kingdom  is  jurisdictional  and  not  merely
      procedural.  He referred to Mucelli v Government of Albania  [2009]  1
      WLR 276, R (Nirula) v First-tier Tribunal [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1436  and
      Virk v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 652.   Mindful  of  that  distinction,  Mr
      Biggs examined other uses of the word "bring" and its cognates in  the
      context of the institution of proceedings, with  the  aim  of  showing
      that the phrase "could be brought"  must  refer  to  circumstances  in
      which there is no jurisdictional bar.


  11. In what Mr Biggs described as the analogous context of the  Limitation
      Act 1980, which sets out the time limits for "bringing  actions",  the
      authorities, including Page v Hewetts Solicitors [2012] EWCA Civ  805,
      and Horton v Sadler [2006] UKHL 27 show that an  action  is  "brought"
      when the claimant has done all that he could do to  issue  the  claim,
      but the failure to  "bring"  an  action  in  time  does  not  raise  a
      jurisdictional bar.  We do not find that analogy at  all  helpful:  it
      does not assist at all in  determining  whether  an  action  could  be
      brought.


  12. Mr Biggs then drew attention to s.3C of the Immigration  Act  1971  as
      reformulated by the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and
      amended by the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006.   That
      section provides for the extension of  the  leave  of  a  person  who,
      whilst in the United Kingdom with current leave, makes an  application
      for the extension of that leave.  Sub-section (2) extends  the  leave,
      potentially for three successive periods, set out as follows:


          "(2) The leave is extended by virtue of this  section  during  any
          period when -
              (a) the application for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
              withdrawn,
              (b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Asylum
                 and Immigration  Act  2002  could  be  brought,  while  the
                 appellant is in the United Kingdom against the decision  on
                 the application for variation (ignoring any possibility  of
                 an appeal out of time with permission), or
              (c) an appeal  under  that  section  against  that  decision,
                 brought while the appellant is in the  United  Kingdom,  is
                 pending (within the meaning of section 104 of that act)."


  13. Sub-section (3) provides that leave extended by s.3C "shall  lapse  if
      the applicant leaves the United Kingdom".  The words we  have  put  in
      italics are those added by the 2006 Act.   The explanatory  note  says
      that these insertions are "minor amendments", "making clear that leave
      shall only be continued when an in-country appeal may be brought or is
      pending".   Mr  Biggs'  submission  is  that   the   amendments   were
      unnecessary  (or  practically  unnecessary),   because   leave   under
      s.3C(2)(a) could only be triggered "by virtue of  a  right  of  appeal
      which was always exercisable while the appellant remained in the  UK".
       He builds on that proposition the argument that the words "an  appeal
      could be brought" must  refer  to  the  procedural  or  circumstantial
      possibility of the actual individual bringing an appeal,  not  to  the
      right of appeal itself.  He  submits  that  this  indicates  that  the
      similar language in article 9(1)(d)  also  refers  to  the  procedural
      entitlement to bring an appeal rather than the right  of  appeal,  and
      that even unnecessary words will be inserted by Parliament in order to
      make that distinction clear.


  14. In our judgment, Mr Biggs' argument on this point is completely wrong.
       It begins from the wholly false premise that  so  far  from  being  a
      minor amendment, the words in question had no effect at all.  In order
      to appreciate their effect, it is necessary to remember that, although
      some appeals cannot be brought from within the United Kingdom,  others
      can.  An appeal brought while the appellant is in the  United  Kingdom
      is, by s.104(4), treated as abandoned  if  the  appellant  leaves  the
      United Kingdom.  Some (but by no means all) grants of leave  lapse  if
      the holder leaves the United Kingdom.  But the holder of  leave  which
      is current, and which does not lapse on his departure from the  United
      Kingdom, is at liberty to bring and pursue an appeal from outside  the
      United Kingdom.  That possibility is fully recognised  in  the  First-
      tier Tribunal's rules setting out the time  within  which  notices  of
      appeal must be given.  At the time of the amendments introduced by the
      2006 Act, the provisions were in r.7 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure Rules) 2005; they are now in r.19 of the  Tribunal
      Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules
      2014.  There are three possibilities.  If  the  appellant  is  in  the
      United Kingdom, the time limit is fourteen days.  If the person was in
      the United Kingdom when the decision was made, but  is  prohibited  by
      the 2002 Act from appealing whilst in the United Kingdom,  the  period
      is twenty-eight days after the person left the United Kingdom.  In the
      general case, if the person is outside the United Kingdom, the  period
      is twenty-eight days from the receipt of the notice of the decision.


  15. We consider that the "minor amendments" made to s.3C by the  2006  Act
      are designed to cure two possible ambiguities.   The  first,  in  sub-
      s.2(b), makes it clear that the maximum extension of time  under  that
      paragraph is the fourteen days available to  a  person  appealing  in-
      country, not the longer period that would be available to  him  if  he
      were appealing from outside the United Kingdom.  This point in  itself
      is amply sufficient to counter Mr Biggs' argument.  The  reference  to
      bringing an appeal in s.3C(2)(b) is  indeed  a  general  reference  to
      appealable decisions, not a specific reference to decisions  that  can
      be appealed from within the United Kingdom.


  16. The amendment in paragraph (c) deals with the following  by  no  means
      impossible sequence of events in the case of a person  who  has  leave
      which does not lapse on his leaving the United Kingdom, and who makes,
      during its currency, an application for its extension.   (1)  A  makes
      his application.  (2) A leaves the United Kingdom.  (3)  A's  original
      period of leave expires.  (4) A's application is  determined.   (5)  A
      gives notice of appeal  within  fourteen  days.   In  this  case,  A's
      original period of leave continues until event (3); his leave is  then
      extended by paragraph (a) until event (4).  It does not matter that he
      is not within the United Kingdom; although if he had waited for  event
      (3) before leaving the United  Kingdom,  his  s.3C  leave  would  have
      lapsed on his departure.  Following event  (3),  his  leave  continues
      under paragraph (b), but only for the period of time available to  in-
      country appellants.  If he has returned to the United  Kingdom  during
      the period limited by paragraph (b), and has brought his  appeal  from
      within the United Kingdom, then his leave  continues  under  paragraph
      (c).  If, however, his appeal is brought from abroad, then even though
      he brought it within the period of time limited by paragraph (b),  his
      leave is not extended by paragraph (c) as amended.


  17. As we have said, that series of events is by no means impossible.   In
      a more complex way it demonstrates again that the  relevant  words  in
      s.3C refer in general to the right of appeal in general,  and  not  to
      the jurisdictional, factual or procedural circumstances  in  which  an
      appeal  could  actually  be  launched.   Quite  apart  from  the  2006
      amendments, that can be seen also in the fact that, provided that  the
      person has not left the United Kingdom during the currency of his s.3C
      leave, paragraph (b) applies whether or  not  an  appeal  is  actually
      brought.


  18. For the foregoing reasons we reject entirely Mr Biggs'  argument  that
      either before or after amendment, s.3C(2) of the 1971  Act  "contained
      an implicit limitation to rights of appeal exercisable in-country".

  19. Mr Biggs' final argument is based on the  possibility  of  a  decision
      being issued so shortly  before  the  commencement  of  the  2014  Act
      provisions that the person affected has no  practical  opportunity  to
      leave the United Kingdom before 6 April 2014.  He says that in such  a
      case it would be absurd to regard that person as a person  who  "could
      have"  brought  an  appeal  immediately  before  commencement.    That
      argument, however, is ambivalent.  It only has any force if Mr  Biggs'
      principal submission that the words of  article  9(1)(d)  refer  to  a
      procedural, factual or jurisdictional entitlement to bring an  appeal.
      If, on the contrary, they refer instead to the making of what  may  be
      called an appealable decision, the difficulty does not arise.




   Mr Hansen's submissions


  20. Mr Hansen indeed adopts that very position.  He points  out  that  the
      phrase in question is not directed to the appellant: it is directed to
      the decision.  Article 9, as amended by the No.4  Commencement  Order,
      does not refer to the appellant, or the person  bringing  the  appeal:
      instead, it refers to the decision.  That is, we note,  a  distinction
      from the provisions which the No.4  Order  amended,  which  did  refer
      (albeit with different effect) to the person bringing the appeal.   Mr
      Hansen's submission is that the simple meaning of the words in article
      9(1)(d) is that any decision against which an appeal could be  brought
      is one in respect of which the old appeals provisions are saved.   The
      question is whether, as a matter of law, the decision carried a  right
      of appeal.  In the present cases, the decision did carry  a  right  of
      appeal, as the notice of decision made clear: what is  more,  each  of
      the applicants could have exercised that right of  appeal  by  leaving
      the United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State's  position  is  that  the
      appeal rights communicated to the applicants when the  decisions  were
      made were preserved by  the  saving  provisions  of  the  Commencement
      Orders.


   Discussion

  21. For the reasons we have given in setting out his submissions,  we  are
      unpersuaded by Mr Biggs' submission that analysis of the words used in
      article 9(1)(d) leads  inexorably  to  the  conclusion  for  which  he
      contends.  On the contrary, it appears to  us  that,  looking  at  the
      matter as a whole and in context, the true construction of  the  words
      is that for which the  Secretary  of  State  contends.   Five  factors
      contribute to our conclusion.


  22. The first is that to which we have already referred.   The  words  are
      capable of bearing the meaning advanced by the Secretary of State: the
      use of similar phrases in other contexts, to which Mr  Biggs  referred
      us, does not show that the meaning of the words  necessarily  excludes
      the saving of the applicants' rights of appeal.  The second reason  is
      that to which Mr Hansen  specifically  alluded.   Although  Mr  Biggs'
      submissions were largely directed to the position  of  the  applicants
      (or, generally, potential appellants) the Commencement  Order  defines
      the saved provisions primarily by reference to the decisions, and does
      not in this context mention potential appellants.


  23. Thirdly, it is necessary to consider the  status  of  individuals  who
      have been notified of a decision and of the rights of  appeal  against
      it.  The Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 require  a  notice  of
      decision to include an indication of the rights of appeal  and  as  we
      have said, the required notices were served on the applicants.  It  is
      a general principle of statutory construction that  a  provision  will
      not be regarded as depriving an individual of a  vested  right  unless
      the legislative intention to do  so  is  clear:  we  should  therefore
      strain  against  a  construction  removing  it.   That  principle  has
      statutory force in s.16(1)(c) of the Interpretation Act  1978  and  in
      the realm of vested procedural rights extends even to the  acquisition
      of immunity by the passage of time: Yew Bon Tew v Kenderaan  Bas  Mara
      [1983] AC 553.  On services of the decision and  notification  of  the
      appeal rights, those rights, acquired under the 2002 Act  as  then  in
      force, vested in the applicants: a contrary position would  be  wholly
      unarguable.  There is nothing in the  2014  Act  or  the  Commencement
      Orders that indicates an intention contrary to  the  usual  principle:
      indeed the saving of existing appeal rights suggests  that  the  usual
      principle is indeed to prevail


  24. The fourth consideration is that the reading proposed by the Secretary
      of State gives a result which is much neater and more  coherent.   The
      existence or not of the right of appeal depends on the nature  of  the
      decision and not on the movements of the person affected by  it.   The
      final reason is connected with that.  It is that in each case where  a
      right of appeal lies only from outside the United Kingdom, the  notice
      of decision is served on  a  person  who  has,  at  the  date  of  the
      decision, no right to be in the United Kingdom.  It is  overwhelmingly
      more likely that the meaning of article 9(1)(d) is to be derived  from
      an assumption that those affected will observe the law than that  they
      will break it.


  25. Apart from the linguistic arguments advanced by  Mr  Biggs,  the  only
      factor of any importance counting against the interpretation which  we
      have indicated we prefer is that it potentially requires the structure
      of appeals under  the  2002  Act  before  amendment  to  be  preserved
      indefinitely, in case a person like the applicants,  served  before  6
      April 2015 with a notice indicating a right of appeal exercisable only
      outside the United Kingdom should at some future date leave the United
      Kingdom and seek to exercise the right of appeal.  The preservation of
      old appeal rights is bound to have some effect of that sort.  It  does
      not seem to us that the potential effects  in  the  present  case  are
      sufficient to show that the interpretation  we  prefer  is  wrong.  In
      particular, no absurdity is demonstrated.


  26. The conclusions set out above  are  those  we  reached  following  the
      hearing of these applications.  We are fortified in our view by having
      read a decision of Beatson LJ refusing permission  to  appeal  to  the
      Court of Appeal  in  an  application  evidently  relying  in  part  on
      arguments similar to those put before us by Mr  Biggs,  (R  (Islam)  v
      SSHD  C2/2015/1663).   He  characterised  the  arguments  as  "utterly
      unarguable" and the application as a whole as totally without merit.



   Conclusion


  27. For the foregoing reasons we reject the arguments advanced  on  behalf
      of the applicants.  Their rights  of  appeal,  exercisable  only  from
      outside the United Kingdom, are preserved by the saving provisions  of
      the Commencement Orders.  For the reasons given in  the  decisions  of
      the Court of Appeal mentioned in [1] above, those rights of appeal are
      an adequate alternative remedy.  Their applications for permission  to
      apply for judicial review, based  on  the  amended  grounds  which  we
      hereby permit, are therefore refused.


                                                              C M G Ockelton




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 17 November 2015
