

                                    [pic]
           In the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of Pavel Prodobreyev) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department (On-line application: evidence) IJR [2015] UKUT 00699(IAC)

Field House
8 October 2015

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                       The Queen on the Application of
                              PAVEL PRODOBREYEV
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

   Mr E Nicholson, instructed by Zahra & Co Solicitors, appeared on behalf
   of the Applicant.


   Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
   behalf of the Respondent

   Screenshots of typical applications should not be relied upon as evidence
   of the actual experience of an individual making an application.

                                  JUDGMENT

   1. This is an application for judicial review.  Permission was granted by
      Judge Kebede.  The decision under challenge was made on 27 March 2014.
       It was a decision to  treat  an  application  by  the  applicant  for
      further leave to remain as invalid.  The reason  relied  upon  by  the
      Secretary of State both in that decision and in these  proceedings  is
      that the applicant  was  required  to  submit  a  Police  Registration
      Certificate with his application, but had not done so.


   2. The applicant is a national of Kazakhstan.   He  came  to  the  United
      Kingdom on 9 October 2012 with entry clearance as a Tier  4  (General)
      Student valid until 14 February 2014.   The  present  application  was
      made on 5 March 2014, after the expiry of his leave but within the 28-
      day period referred to in  paragraph  245ZX(1)  of  the  Statement  of
      Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended).  His  position  is,
      and always has been, that there was no requirement to submit a  Police
      Registration Certificate with, or as part of,  that  application.   He
      recognises that he is required  to  register  with  the  police.   His
      witness statements indicate that he has done  so,  but  has  lost  the
      Certificate and so is unable to produce it.


   3. The applicant's application was made on-line.  The on-line application
      process enables an application form to be tailored to  the  nature  of
      the application being made and the needs  of  the  person  making  it.
      Thus, responses to certain  questions  will  lead  to  the  posing  of
      further  relevant  questions;  but  matters  which  are  shown  to  be
      irrelevant to the present application by the responses  already  given
      are not the subject of further questions.


   4. The applicant's application could not be finalised on-line, but was  a
      hybrid, of the "print and send" type.  That is to say, the end of  the
      on-line part of the process was  the  completion  of  the  application
      form, with all  relevant  questions  answered,  and  the  form  itself
      tailored to the applicant's own application.  He was then required  to
      print it off and  send  it  to  the  respondent,  accompanied  by  the
      appropriate fee and any required documents.  The documents required to
      be sent with the form are listed at the end of the form  itself:  that
      is one of the consequences  of  the  tailoring  of  the  form  to  the
      applicant's individual responses.


   5. Paragraph 34A(vi)(a) of the Immigration Rules, however, may  impose  a
      greater duty on applicants.  It requires that the application


          "...be accompanied by the photographs and documents  specified  as
          mandatory in the application form and/or related guidance notes"


   6. The final words, which we have emphasised, are the subject of  special
      reliance by the Secretary of State on the facts of the  present  case.
      Mr Malik on behalf of the Secretary of State submits that it is  clear
      that the applicant may be required to submit a document  that  is  not
      mentioned in the application form but  is  required  by  the  "related
      guidance notes".


   7. At the hearing of this application we had considerable  difficulty  in
      determining precisely what it was that the applicant  had  encountered
      at each point in the on-line part of his application.   The  Secretary
      of State produced screenshots apparently  establishing  that,  at  the
      appropriate point in the process, the applicant was  informed  that  a
      Police Registration Certificate is required.  It was accepted that the
      screenshots  we  saw  were  not   screenshots   of   the   applicant's
      application, but, on instructions, Mr Malik indicated that  they  were
      typical, and therefore to be taken as the same as the applicant  would
      have encountered.  We were not persuaded; and a post-hearing note from
      Mr Malik, to which  Mr  Nicholson  on  behalf  of  the  applicant  has
      replied, shows that we were right to be sceptical.   It  appears  that
      screenshots of typical applications  should  not  be  relied  upon  as
      evidence  of  the  actual  experience  of  an  individual  making   an
      application.


   8. Investigation by the Secretary of State has now established  that  the
      architecture of the software is such that the applicant's  answers  to
      the questions posed would not have led to any indication that a Police
      Registration Certificate was required, either by notice in the on-line
      process itself or by listing that document  in  the  application  form
      when  it  was  printed.   We  are  grateful  to  Mr  Malik  and  those
      instructing him for  undertaking  that  investigation.   It  concludes
      against the  Secretary  of  State  the  question  whether  the  Police
      Registration Certificate was specified as mandatory in the application
      form.  It was not.


   9. The  question  then  is  whether  the  Certificate  was  specified  as
      mandatory in any "related guidance notes".  Here again  the  Secretary
      of State's investigations are helpful.  At the end of the  application
      form as printed, there is a heading "Documents you must provide",  and
      under that heading is the list to which we have already referred.   At
      the end of the list are the following words:


           "You may also need to provide additional documents depending  on
           your circumstances"


      And in the box below that are two web links.  One of them applies only
      to entry clearance applications and is not relevant to this case.  The
      other takes the reader to the version in  force  of  "Tier  4  of  the
      Points Based System - Policy Guidance".  That guidance  does  indicate
      the need to register with the police, but it does  not  at  any  point
      specify  the  Police   Registration   Certificate   as   a   mandatory
      accompaniment to an application for leave to remain.


  10. The only document which does appear  to  specify  the  Certificate  as
      mandatory is the guidance issued by the Secretary  of  State  for  her
      decision makers.  It is called "Guidance - Specified Application Forms
      and Procedures".  That includes, at page 8 in the version  put  before
      us, the following words:


           "The applicant must:
           Submit any supporting documents  specified  "mandatory"....  The
           mandatory documents are:
           ...
           Police Registration Certification (if applicable)".


  11. The guidance goes on to say that "if any of the above requirements are
      not met, you must reject the application as invalid".  Bearing in mind
      the facts as so far revealed, the Secretary of State is now  compelled
      to rely upon that provision as  being  the  "related  guidance"  which
      required the applicant to submit a police registration certificate.


  12. We have  the  very  greatest  difficulty  with  that.   First,  as  Mr
      Nicholson points out,  it  would  only  be  by  a  contorted  process,
      including in particular ignoring the guidance to  which  an  applicant
      was referred, that he could light on this guidance, to  which  he  was
      not referred.  Secondly, any applicant  who  did  find  this  guidance
      would immediately realise that it was not intended for applicants  but
      for the Secretary of State's decision makers.  Thirdly, this  document
      itself summarises the  rules,  including  the  reference  to  "related
      guidance notes"; it gives no hint that the document itself  is  to  be
      regarded as the related guidance notes and it is difficult to see how,
      if it is itself the "related guidance notes" it should refer  to  some
      other document under the same head.  It seems to us  that  it  is  not
      right to describe this guidance as "related guidance" at all.  For the
      purposes  of  paragraph  34A(vi)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
      guidance can only properly be regarded as "related" to the application
      process if it is guidance for applicants.  The guidance upon which the
      Secretary  of  State  relies  is  not  guidance  in  relation  to  the
      application process: it  is  guidance  in  relation  to  the  decision
      process and in relation  to  the  acts  of  individuals  who  are  not
      themselves applicants.


  13. Even if we were wrong about that, it seems to  us  that  the  guidance
      does not require the submission of a Police  Registration  Certificate
      in the applicant's  case  in  any  event.   The  requirement  for  the
      Certificate is qualified by the words "(if applicable)".   We  do  not
      see any good reason for interpreting those words as  meaning  "if  the
      applicant is required to have a police registration certificate".   On
      the contrary, given that some applicants are  apparently  required  to
      submit such a certificate, whilst others are not, the  reference  must
      be to those who are required in  or  by  the  application  process  to
      submit a Certificate.


  14. It follows that the present applicant was not  required  to  submit  a
      Police Registration Certificate: that  is  a  document  that  was  not
      specified as mandatory in the  application  form  or  in  any  related
      guidance.  The application for judicial  review  is  granted  and  the
      decision under challenge will be quashed.











                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 19 November 2015
