







                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber



R (on  the  application  of  Jakhu)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (ETS: legitimate expectations) IJR [2015] UKUT 00693 (IAC)



                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of

                            Guarav Sat Paul Jakhu
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




               The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                       Mr CMG Ockelton, Vice President




           Application for permission to apply for judicial review

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr A Swain (of Counsel),  instructed  by  Eagles
Solicitors, on behalf of the  Applicant  and  Mr  R  Harland  (of  Counsel),
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on  02 and 05 October 2015.

The demonstration of an unambiguous promise or representation devoid of  any
relevant qualification  is  an  essential  prerequisite  to  establishing  a
substantive legitimate expectation to which the tribunal will give effect.








                                  Judgment


                       delivered on  09 December  2015

      McCLOSKEY J

(1)   This case belongs to the relatively large corpus of what have come  to
      be known as "ETS/TOEIC" cases.  The broader landscape is  set  out  in
      Gazi, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department (ETS  -  Judicial  Review)  (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT  327  (IAC)
      (hereinafter "Gazi").

(2)   Following promulgation of its decision in  Gazi,  the  Upper  Tribunal
      made a general order staying all judicial review  cases  belonging  to
      this group, pending the then imminent decisions of the Court of Appeal
      in Mehmood and Ali v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 744.   Judgment having  been
      delivered in Mehmood and Ali, followed by Sood v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ
      831 ("Sood"), the  general  stay  was  terminated  by  order  of  this
      Tribunal dated 30 July 2015.  Both orders are annexed hereto. This was
      followed by a direction, made in every case, couched in the  following
      terms:

      "Your case has been reviewed following the decision of  the  Court  of
           Appeal in Sheraz Mehmood & Shahbaz Ali v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
           744 and the following directions are made:-


           (1) If the Applicant considers that his claim has merit,  he  is
           to lodge within 7 days from the date this order is sent  amended
           grounds (with application fee) presenting his claim in the light
           of the authorities binding on the Tribunal;


           (2) Failure to comply with paragraph (1) will  have  the  effect
           that this claim will be struck out automatically under Rule 8(1)
           (a);


           (3) Costs reserved.


           Please note that the Tribunal will not consider it  discourteous
           if you do not send in any reply to this direction, in  order  to
           allow paragraph (2) above to take its course."

      The response which this elicited from the  Applicant's  solicitors  in
      the present case was the provision of amended grounds of challenge.

(3)   The decision of the Secretary of State which the  Applicant  seeks  to
      challenge arose in the following way.  By letter dated  25th  November
      2013, the Applicant was informed:

            "Curtailment of leave

           You were granted leave to  enter/remain  as  a  Tier  4  General
           Student until 12 April 2015 in order to undertake  a  course  of
           study at Vista  Business  College.    On  29  October  2013  the
           sponsor licence for Vista Business College was revoked ....


           The Secretary of State has therefore  decided  to  curtail  your
           leave to enter or remain as a Tier 4 Migrant so as to expire  on
           24 January 2014.  Your leave has been curtailed under  paragraph
           323A(b)(i) of the Immigration Rules."

      This stimulated an application by  the  Applicant  for  permission  to
      remain in the United Kingdom. This application was acknowledged  in  a
      further letter on behalf of the Secretary of State  dated  31  January
      2014:


           "Thank you for your application for permission to  stay  in  the
           UK.  We will decide your application within eight weeks from the
           date you submitted it ....


           We will notify you by letter if we are not able to  decide  your
           application within eight weeks from the date  you  submitted  it
           and will advise you of  the  new  timeframe  for  deciding  your
           application."


(4)   By a further letter, also dated 31 January  2014,  the  Applicant  was
      advised that he must have his "biometric  information"  registered  as
      soon as possible. The next development was a further letter on  behalf
      of the Secretary of State,  dated  10  February  2014,  informing  the
      Applicant as follows:


           "I am writing in regard to your Tier 4 Student application.   As
           part of your application you submitted  test  evidence  for  the
           English language requirement from ETS TOEIC.  We have identified
           discrepancies with some evidence from this test provider and  so
           will not be able to process your application and have placed  it
           on hold while we investigate. Although we would normally  decide
           your application  within  eight  weeks  from  the  date  it  was
           submitted, unfortunately this is not going  to  be  possible  in
           your  case.    This   is   because   your   application   raises
           exceptionally complex issues and  we  require  further  time  to
           consider your case thoroughly and reach a decision.  As such, it
           falls outside our normal service standards for deciding leave to
           remain/settlement applications.  Please be assured that we  will
           make a decision on your case as quickly as possible.  If you are
           concerned about the delay to your application you can choose  to
           take a new English language test at one of the  other  providers
           listed  on  our  website  at  ...............  and  submit  this
           alternative test  evidence  to  us.   This  will  enable  us  to
           progress your application.  If you decide to take a new test you
           must take this letter and the endorsed  copy  of  your  passport
           enclosed to your chosen provider ....


           We will not accept new evidence from ETS; new evidence  must  be
           from a different provider.   You  must  send  your  new  English
           language evidence, along with this letter, to ................


           We will not take removal action as a result of the  contents  of
           this letter ..........


           We are working to resolve this issue and, as soon as we have  an
           update, will write to you again."

            [Emphasis added.]

      This letter was accompanied by a document entitled  "Frequently  asked
      Questions".  This contains the following salient passages:


           "Where can I get an update on this issue?  We will update you in
           writing as soon as we are able .....


           What happens if I don't want to take a new test?  You don't have
           to take a new test but this does not mean that your  application
           may not be decided quickly.  We will hold your application until
           such time that we are able to make a decision .....


           My test is genuine: why have you held my  application?   We  are
           holding all cases with ETS TOEIC and TOEFL English  tests  until
           we  have  fully  resolved  the  discrepancies  that  have   been
           identified. ....


           What if I need to travel urgently whilst my  application  is  on
           hold?   If  you  need  to  travel  urgently,  you  may  consider
           withdrawing your application and requesting that  your  passport
           be delivered to your port of departure."

   5) Subsequently, the Applicant received a further letter, dated  19  June
      2014, together with a completed Form IS151A, both dated 19 June  2014.
      The letter stated, in material part:

           "Dear Mr Jakhu


           Application to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant


           On 24 January 2014 you made [the] application .....

           We have considered your application on behalf of  the  Secretary
           of State  and  your  application  has  been  refused  under  the
           Immigration Rules ....  In your application you submitted  TOEIC
           certificates from Educational Testing Service (ETS) ......


           ETS is obligated to report test scores that  accurately  reflect
           the performance of test takers. For that reason,  ETS  routinely
           reviews  testing  irregularities  and  questions  test   results
           believed  to  be   earned   under   abnormal   or   non-standard
           circumstances ....


           During an administrative review process, ETS have confirmed that
           your test obtained was through deception.  Because the  validity
           of your test results could not  be  authenticated,  your  scores
           from the test taken on 01 May 2013 at Eden College International
           have been cancelled. As deception has been used in  relation  to
           your application, it is refused under paragraph 322(1A)  of  the
           Immigration  Rules.   Therefore   you   do   not   satisfy   the
           requirements of the Immigration Rules for this category  and  it
           has been decided to refuse your application for leave to  remain
           as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under  paragraph  245ZX(a)
           and paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules ......


           For the above reasons, I am also satisfied that  you  have  used
           deception in this application ......"

      In the accompanying Form IS151A the Applicant was notified that he was
      liable to be removed from the United Kingdom on the  grounds  that  he
      had engaged in deception in seeking leave to remain, in these terms:


           "You made an application for further leave to remain in  the  UK
           which was refused  based  on  inconsistencies  with  your  TOEIC
           test."

   6) These proceedings were initiated by the Applicant on 22  August  2014.
      In the grounds the Applicant identifies the target of his challenge as
      the Secretary of State's  decision  to  remove  him  from  the  United
      Kingdom under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  (the
      "1999 Act") on the ground of deception. The relief sought is an  order
      declaring the impugned decision unlawful. In his grounds the Applicant
      acknowledges that, given the availability of an out of country appeal,
      he would have to satisfy the test of special or  exceptional  factors.
      The key passage which follows is this:

           "....  It is strongly arguable  that  the  Respondent's  act  in
           seeking to remove the Applicant on the  basis  of  deception  is
           premised on unparticularised and general evidence  of  deception
           having been used within  an  English  test  centre  and  not  on
           evidence  of  the  Applicant  having  used  deception   himself.
           Therefore  the  Respondent's  conduct  can   be   said   to   be
           reprehensible and/or a serious abuse of its powers to  remove  a
           person with no in-country right of appeal under  the  1999  Act.
           These matters give rise to exceptional or special factors ....."

      As noted above, the Applicant has been permitted to amend his grounds.
       The effect of the amendment is to allow the inclusion  of  a  further
      ground based on the doctrine of substantive legitimate expectations.

   7) At the hearing we invited Mr Swain,  representing  the  Applicant,  to
      formulate with precision the  expectation  on  which  the  Applicant's
      challenge is founded.  He did so in the following terms.  The impugned
      decision frustrates the Applicant's substantive expectation that there
      would be no decision to remove him from  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
      basis of the discrepancies mentioned in the  first  paragraph  of  the
      Secretary of State's letter dated 10 February 2014.  When pressed,  Mr
      Swain acknowledged that the expectation advanced by the  Applicant  is
      one of indefinite duration and, further, that during the period of its
      existence, which is not susceptible of measurement, the Applicant will
      be immune from removal action.

   8) This Tribunal had occasion to summarise the main  principles  relating
      to  substantive  legitimate  expectations   in   Mehmood   (Legitimate
      Expectation) [2014] UKUT 00469 (IAC), at [13] - [16].  The fundamental
      prerequisite to a substantive legitimate expectation is  a  clear  and
      unambiguous promise,  or  representation,  devoid  of  any  ambiguity,
      conveyed directly or indirectly to the beneficiary.  We have  recorded
      in [7] above the  terms  of  the  substantive  legitimate  expectation
      advanced by  the Applicant.  This is said to have been aroused by  the
      terms of the Secretary of State's letter of 10 February 2014.  We have
      reproduced in [5] above the salient contents of this letter, including
      the passages upon which the Applicant places particular reliance.   It
      being trite that this letter must be evaluated in its full context, we
      have also outlined the surrounding correspondence and events.

   9) We are in no doubt that the letter of 10 February 2014  did  not  have
      the effect of engendering the expectation upon which  the  Applicant's
      case is based.  Evaluated fairly, as a whole and within the context to
      which it belongs, we consider that this letter  yields  the  following
      analysis.  First, it signalled  clearly  to  the  Applicant  that  his
      continued stay in the United Kingdom is in jeopardy, having regard  to
      the "discrepancies" mentioned and described.  Second, it  conveyed  to
      him that by reason of this matter a decision on his  quest  to  extend
      his sojourn in  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  delayed.   Third,  it
      highlighted that his case was anything but straightforward: it  raised
      "exceptionally complex  issues".   Fourth,  it  made  clear  that  the
      complications attendant  upon  the  Applicant's  case  had  widespread
      recriminations.  Next, it informed the Applicant  of  steps  which  he
      could take for the purpose of  securing  updated  information  on  the
      processing  of  his  application  thereafter.    One  of  the  central
      messages  conveyed  by  the  letter  and  attachment  was   that   the
      Applicant's application for further leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom was "on  hold".   The  letter  is,  fundamentally,  a  holding
      communication.  It is the antithesis of something final or conclusive.

  10) The above  analysis  provides  the  framework  within  which  the  two
      passages in the letter upon which the Applicant places  most  reliance
      fall to be considered.  The first is the paragraph which mentions  the
      possibility of the Applicant undertaking a  further  English  language
      test.  This option was clearly canvassed simply as a  mechanism  which
      might limit the delay of  which  the  Applicant  was  being  informed.
      Whether this would have been an effective mechanism is not the  point.
      The Applicant was simply being told that the overall delay in  finally
      determining his application might be mitigated if he were to take this
      course.  The second statement upon which the  Applicant  places  great
      reliance is:

           "We will not take removal action as a result of the contents  of
           this letter."

      This  short  sentence  is  not  felicitously  phrased.   Nor   is   it
      particularly    intelligible    or    coherent.     Shortcomings    in
      intelligibility or coherence  by  their  very  nature  are  likely  to
      engender ambiguity and equivocation, the very antithesis of  the  core
      characteristic of a substantive  legitimate  expectation.   Considered
      within its full context and against the framework outlined  above,  we
      consider that its import was simply to reinforce the central theme  of
      the letter, namely the delayed final determination of the  Applicant's
      application for further leave to remain.  Furthermore,  this  sentence
      was,  clearly,  also  designed  to  provide  the  Applicant  with  the
      reassurance that, during the intervening period, he had no need to  be
      concerned about possible removal action.

  11) While Mr Swain on behalf of the Applicant argued his  case  with  some
      tenacity, we find it  quite  impossible  to  construe  the  letter  in
      question as engendering the  substantive  legitimate  expectation  for
      which the Applicant contends.  To this we add that even if we had been
      persuaded about the merits of this ground of challenge, we  would  not
      have been satisfied that judicial review is the appropriate method  of
      challenge for the Applicant.  We would, rather, have given  effect  to
      the strong general rule that he should pursue the remedy of  statutory
      appeal available to him, incorporating this ground as part of his case
      that the impugned decision was not in accordance with the law.

  12) The second, and final, ground of challenge is based on the  contention
      that, having regard  to  all  the  available  information,  there  was
      insufficient evidence to warrant the assessment made by the  Secretary
      of  State  that  the  Applicant  had  secured  his  English   language
      qualification by deception.   In  Gazi,  this  Tribunal  held  that  a
      challenge to the strength and quality of the evidence underpinning the
      Secretary of State's decision in a case of this kind is best suited to
      the fact finding forum of the First-tier Tribunal  and  is  unsuitable
      for determination by an application for  judicial  review.   Gazi  was
      cited with approval by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Mehmood  and  Ali.
      Furthermore,  in  rejecting  each  of  the  Applicant's   grounds   of
      challenge, we draw attention to [71] of the Court's judgment:

           "The fact that the section 10 notices were served on Mr Ali when
           he was only about half way through his course  will  undoubtedly
           lead to great inconvenience and expense.  Assuming  that  he  is
           bona  fide  pursuing  his  course,  it  will  also  disrupt  his
           educational aspirations. The evidence of personal factors in  Mr
           Mehmood's case is similar.   But,  although  being  required  to
           leave the jurisdiction is a real detriment, notwithstanding  the
           continuing availability of a right  of  appeal  ....   the  mere
           fact that some inconvenience will result from being required  to
           leave   the   jurisdiction   is   not   itself   'special'    or
           'exceptional': it is inherent  in  the  scheme  of  the  statute
           enacted by Parliament.  I can conceive of cases in which serious
           ill health of the person affected or some other  exigency  might
           qualify as an 'exceptional' factor, although I consider that the
           threshold would be high."

            [Our emphasis.]

      Almost immediately afterwards, in Sood, Beatson LJ, having referred to
      [71] of Mehmood and Ali, stated at [44]:


           "I ....  suggested .... that serious ill health  of  the  person
           affected or  some  other  exigency  might  qualify,  although  I
           considered that the threshold would be high. I add to  that,  on
           reflection, I consider that the threshold would be very high."

            [Our emphasis.]

      Elaboration would be otiose.   The  FtT  is  plainly  the  appropriate
           forum within which  to  canvass  the  Applicant's  complaint  of
           insufficiency of evidence.

DECISION

  13) Insofar as this Applicant relies on the  contention  that  an  out  of
      country appeal is no longer available in  consequence  of  the  recent
      statutory changes, this argument must be rejected having regard to the
      related decision of this Tribunal in R (on the  application  of  Roohi
      and Another) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (2014  Act:
      saved appeal rights) IJR [2015] UKUT 00685 (IAC).

  14)   To conclude:

      (a)   The application to amend the Applicant's grounds is granted.

      (b)    The  Applicant's  case,  thus  amended,  is  defeated  by   the
           application   of   the   alternative   remedy   principle   and,
           accordingly, permission to apply for judicial review is refused.




      (c)   The Applicant will pay the Secretary of  State's  costs  of  the
           AOS, �320.00, subject to any representations in  writing  to  be
           made within 21 days of the date hereof.

      (d)   Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused.

                       [pic]
            Signed:


                 The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey
                 President of the Upper Tribunal,
                 Immigration and Asylum Chamber


        Dated:    04 December 2015


Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).








                                 APPENDICES

[1]   General stay order of the Upper Tribunal dated 22 May 2015.

[2]   Further order of the Upper Tribunal dated 30 July  2015  removing  the
      general stay.

[3]   Directions of the Lawyer of the Upper Tribunal dated 28 July 2015.
























                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                            Notice of Directions





                       The Queen on the application of
                           Muhammed Usman Binyameen
                                  Applicant
                                      V

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent





            Having considered all documents lodged by the parties




           Direction of the President, The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey

     [1]   This file has been transferred to me as part of my endeavours to
           identify and collate all of the "TOEIC/ETS" cases in the UT(IAC)
           system.


     [2]   I have noted in particular the permission order of  UTJ  Freeman
           dated 30 April 2015 and the  subsequent  exchanges  between  the
           parties' representatives.  I note the  controversy  relating  to
           the grounds upon which permission has been granted.   This  will
           be easily resolved without the need for a further hearing and  I
           shall do so.


     [3]   At this juncture, however, the most important  consideration  is
           that of progress and timetabling.  This, as the Applicant's note
           of 29 April 2015 recognises, will inevitably  be  influenced  by
           the judgment of this Chamber in the case of Gazi v SSHD.  Please
           note, in this respect, that judgment in that case will be handed
           down on 27 May 2015.


     [4]   The progressing of cases in this field is also influenced by the
           consideration that the Court of Appeal has listed two appeals in
           early July.  In one of these there will,  I  anticipate,  be  an
           opportunity to pronounce on the correctness of the Gazi decision
           and my earlier decision on R (Mahmood) v SSHD  [2014]  UKUT  439
           (IAC).

     [5]   Given the potential for authoritative Court of  Appeal  guidance
           in the very near future, I have decided to  stay  all  of  these
           cases for what I trust will be a relatively  short  period.   In
           cases (such as the present) where permission has  been  granted,
           there will be an additional order prohibiting the initiation  of
           any steps designed to  remove  the  Applicant  from  the  United
           Kingdom until further order.


     [6]   Finally, there will be liberty to apply.  This will (inter alia)
           enable any party to make representations in  writing  about  the
           terms of this order.












                            [pic]


           Signed:

                       The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey


            Dated:       22 May 2015






















Sent  to  the  Applicant,  Respondent  and  any  interested  party   /   the
Applicant's, Respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
Home Office Ref:







                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                            Notice of Directions




                       The Queen on the application of
                           Muhammed Usman Binyameen

                                  Applicant
                                      V

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                       AND All Other "ETS" / "TOEIC" Cases

           Direction of the President, The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey

     [1]   In light of the recent  Court  of  Appeal  decisions,  the  stay
           previously ordered in this case and in  all  kindred  cases  viz
           those with an "ETS"/"TOEIC" element is hereby terminated.


     [2]   The general prohibition on removal from the  United  Kingdom  is
           also terminated, with effect from 17  August  2015.  This  issue
           will thenceforth be the subject of executive and /  or  judicial
           decision on a case - by - case basis


     [3]   The Upper Tribunal is in the  process  of  transmitting  to  all
           judicial review Applicants the attached Notice.


     [4]   Liberty to apply.
                            [pic]
           Signed:
                       The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey


            Dated:       30 July 2015



Sent  to  the  Applicant,  Respondent  and  any  interested  party   /   the
Applicant's, Respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
Home Office Ref:







                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                            Notice of Directions



            The Queen on the application of Gaurav Sat Paul Jakhu

                                  Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                  Directions of the Lawyer of the Upper Tribunal


Your case has been reviewed following the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal
in Sheraz Mehmood &  Shahbaz  Ali  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  744  and  the
following directions are made:-

   (1) If the applicant considers that his claim has merit, he is  to  lodge
   within 7 days from the date this order is sealed  amended  grounds  (with
   application fee) presenting his claim in the  light  of  the  authorities
   binding on the Tribunal;


   (2) Failure to comply with paragraph (1) will have the effect  that  this
   claim will be struck out automatically under Rule 8(1) (a);


   (3) Costs reserved.


Please note that the Tribunal will not consider it discourteous  if  you  do
not send in any reply to this direction, in order  to  allow  paragraph  (2)
above to take its course.
                       [pic]
      Signed:
                       Lawyer of the Upper Tribunal


      Dated:           28 July 2015



Sent  to  the  Applicant,  Respondent  and  any  interested  party   /   the
Applicant's, Respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
Home Office Ref:

