
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Welikumburage) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00697(IAC)



                                                                Field House,


                                                  Heard on:  28 October 2015

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                   SURESH RANGANA WIJERATHNE WELIKUMBURAGE
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr B Hawkins, instructed by VMD Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Ms J Smyth, instructed by the G.L.D. appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  EXTEMPORE
                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE  COKER:   This  is  an  application  by  Suresh   Rangana   Wijerathne
    Welikumburage challenging a  decision  of  19  August  2013  which  was
    supplemented by the Secretary of State with a decision dated  23  March
    2015.  He was refused leave to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
    citizen, his wife having been in the UK for 31 years  but  having  been
    born in Sri Lanka.

2.   Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein on 23 February 2015  granted  permission
    on the grounds that there was an arguable failure on the  part  of  the
    respondent to consider relevant and  potentially  material  factors  in
    assessing whether or not there were insurmountable obstacles given  the
    spouse's history and situation.

3.   Mr Welikumbrage arrived in the UK  on  2  January  2011  as  a  Tier  4
    student with a visa valid until 5 May 2012.  On 2 May 2012 he submitted
    an application for leave to remain as an unmarried  partner  which  was
    rejected on 6 September 2012 because of non-  submission  of  biometric
    data.  He was married on 21 June 2012.  On 10 October 2012 he requested
    reconsideration of the original rejection  of  his  application  as  an
    unmarried partner. That rejection was maintained because  of  the  non-
    receipt by the Secretary of State of the biometric data.

4.   On 2 July 2013 the applicant made an application for  leave  to  remain
    as a spouse and that was refused on 19 August 2013 which led  to  these
    proceedings.  Although  a  number  of  grounds  were  raised  the  only
    relevant one before me is, as I have  said,  the  one  on  which  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Goldstein granted permission, which is  the  failure  to
    consider relevant and potentially material factors in assessing whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles.

5.   The applicant relies  on  a  very  large  bundle  of  documents,  which
    unfortunately did not have the same numbering as Counsel  who  appeared
    in front of me. But so far as I know between us  we  managed  to  track
    down which documents were actually being referred to.

6.   Mr Hawkins took me in detail to a number of the  medical  reports,  the
    medical letters and the computerised patient notes. It  is  clear  from
    this that the  applicant's  wife  suffers  from  schizophrenia  and  it
    appears to have been thought that part of this  is  contributed  to  by
    smoking cannabis.  She first sought medical treatment in November  2012
    and  the  assessors  at  that  time  observed   auditory   and   visual
    hallucination, thought insertion, she denied any suicidal or  homicidal
    ideation and  that  she  was  disorientated  in  time  and  place.  She
    continued to be seen on an almost daily basis for a week  and  then  it
    reduced to every couple of days and then every three or four days,  and
    then it seems to have reduced to every month and then every  couple  of
    months.

7.   The letter from Dr Smith  dated  17  May  2013  records  an  outpatient
    review of 22 May 2013 and gives some of the history of the wife,  which
    appears to include that when she was at Bristol  University  she  began
    smoking cannabis and continued to do so  regularly  for  about  sixteen
    years.  She is recorded in that report as saying  that  she  no  longer
    smokes cannabis. It says that until fairly recently  she  worked  as  a
    publisher for a university but was currently not working.  She  herself
    states that she believes her problems  began  at  some  point  in  2010
    following a meditation course.

8.   She is recorded as saying that her experiences have faded but have  not
    gone  away  completely.  She  still  hears  a  variety  of  sounds,  in
    particular her meditation tutors' voices. She  is  recorded  as  saying
    that she was back to normal and that she prefers not to take medication
    but she insisted that she was currently  compliant.  Dr  Smith  records
    that he has some doubts about that since  she  denied  any  significant
    weight gain from appetite increase.

9.   In summary, he says that

         "This  37  year  old  lady  continues  to   exhibit   symptoms   of
         schizophrenia which she insists are not linked to cannabis use. She
         has limited insight and fully believes her  experiences  are  real.
         She accepted my advice  to  take  medication  for  the  foreseeable
         future but I doubt at this stage that she is actually compliant."

10.  He goes on to say that there is a risk of deterioration of  her  mental
    state should she use recreational drugs and there is unlikely to be any
    improvement  unless  she  complies  with  medication.   He  says   that
    obviously risk is dynamic and  may  change.   He  states  that  she  is
    reluctant to have involvement  with  services  but  has  agreed  to  be
    reviewed in three months' time. She will continue with  her  medication
    and that she is to  have  some  low  key  contact  with  her  community
    psychiatric nurse.

11.  That report is in essence a  summary  of  the  records  throughout  the
    period that she was recorded as receiving  treatment  since  her  first
    involvement with mental health services in late  2012.  The  conditions
    when she came to the attention of health services have improved but the
    consistent thread throughout has been her lack of insight, doubt as  to
    whether she is complying with medication and her likely  continued  use
    of although, possibly not continuous use of, cannabis.

12.  The applicant submits that in the event  that  he  is  removed  to  Sri
    Lanka then the effect on her treatment  would  be  such  as  amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles.

13.   The  submission  relies  upon  the  initial  seriousness   and   heavy
    involvement of mental health services in her treatment and that  it  is
    only due to the continued involvement and support both of the applicant
    and her mother and the mental health services that she has reached  the
    stage that she is currently at, or at least was at the  date  that  the
    Secretary of State wrote the letter of 23 March 2015.

14.  Also included in that submission is that there is a lack  of  available
    facilities for the spouse if she were to go to Sri Lanka, that there is
    a scarcity of mental health services and that if she  were  to  go  the
    disruption to her care caused by her leaving the UK would be likely  to
    mean that she may have to be admitted to hospital and that  there  were
    few hospital spaces available.

15.  An additional issue relied upon by the applicant is that he is a  full-
    time carer of his wife and that if he were to be removed to Sri  Lanka,
    finding employment would mean that his wife would be alone and he would
    no longer be able to care for her on a day-to-day basis or  a  24  hour
    basis and that would itself result in a  deterioration  of  her  health
    which could then result in her having to seek  more  intensive  medical
    care.

16.  There was a submission by Mr Hawkins that although there is  no  record
    at all that she posed a risk of self-harm or harm to  others,  he  said
    that it is possible that because of her bizarre behaviour then she  may
    well come to the adverse attention of people who might cause  her  harm
    and he refers to one incident when she had gone to her ex-guru's  house
    on 11 November 2012 which had led to her arrest. It appears no  further
    action was taken in connection with that arrest.

17.  He submits that the combination of all of these factors are  such  that
    combined  with  having  to  leave  the  UK  amounts  to  insurmountable
    obstacles such that the applicant should himself  not  be  removed.  He
    submits that there has been inadequate consideration by  the  Secretary
    of State as to the effect of the removal on his wife and that for  that
    reason, given all the background information, the application should be
    granted.

18.  The Secretary of State accepts that there is a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and that the fundamental  question  to  be  considered  is
    whether there are insurmountable  obstacles  which  could  prevent  the
    relationship with his wife continuing in Sri Lanka.  The  Secretary  of
    State considers the letter from  Dr  Smith  dated  17  May  2013.   The
    Secretary of State accepts  that  the  applicant's  wife  suffers  from
    schizophrenia and that it is a serious mental health condition.

20.  The  Secretary  of  State  also  considers  the  medical  documentation
    provided and states that it has been considered fully in  carrying  out
    the exercise of the impact on her.  The Secretary of State specifically
    says that in assessing the extent to  which  that  condition  i.e.  her
    schizophrenia, would present an insurmountable obstacle to her  joining
    the applicant in Sri Lanka, the evidence has been examined in the round
    to assess her presentation and the impact which the condition has  upon
    her daily life.  It is not correct for the applicant to submit that the
    Secretary of State has failed to have adequate regard of the  potential
    impact on the wife if she were to go to Sri Lanka.

21.  It is not the case that merely because she suffers  from  schizophrenia
    that that amounts to an insurmountable obstacle and Mr Hawkins  is  not
    so  far  as  I  know  submitting  that.   He  is  submitting  that  the
    consequences of her having suffered from  schizophrenia  including  her
    bizarre behaviour etc. and the matters that I have  mentioned  earlier,
    that those combined would cause such difficulty for her  as  amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles.

22.  The medical evidence before the Secretary of  State  does  not  however
    reach that level of difficulty for the wife.  It  is  plain  from  that
    evidence that after some intensive work with  her  during  the  initial
    presentation  to  the  mental  health  services,  during   which   time
    incidentally there is no mention in the  patient  notes  of  him  being
    present, only her mother being present, that after some intensive  work
    she reaches a relatively stable position such that she can  be  treated
    as an outpatient with three monthly reviews.

23.  There is in that last month or so of reviews reference to the  presence
    of the applicant but  at  no  point  is  there  any  reference  to  her
    requiring full-time 24 hour constant daily care. There is no  reference
    to her receiving any kind of benefits that would in effect pay for such
    care which presumably, even though the applicant himself would  not  be
    entitled to that, the wife's mother would have been entitled. But there
    is just nothing in the papers that has been provided to  the  Secretary
    of State  that  indicates  that  full-time  daily  or  hourly  care  is
    required.

24.  As such there is nothing to indicate that on return to  Sri  Lanka  the
    applicant would not in fact be able to obtain employment of  some  sort
    and there is nothing to indicate  that  him  finding  employment  would
    result in her having a serious or significant relapse.

25.   Although  Mr  Hawkins  refers  to  the  limited  hospital   facilities
    available, at no point has the wife been admitted  to  hospital.  There
    are references in the patient  notes  to  a  threat  to  admit  her  to
    hospital if she does not take her medication but that is as far  as  it
    goes, and as a result of that in any  event  she  says  that  she  will
    comply and it appears that she does comply.

26.  On  that  basis  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    considered the impact on the applicant's wife of  his  removal  to  Sri
    Lanka and that the Secretary of State has taken into account all of the
    information that was before her on the date when she made not only  her
    initial decision but also the March 2015 decision.

27.  It is notable that the March 2015 decision was taken at a time when  no
    further medical evidence updating the letter from  Dr  Smith  had  been
    sent which was 17 May  2013.   It  was  perfectly  reasonable  for  the
    Secretary of State in reaching her decision to conclude that there  had
    been absolutely no deterioration in her presentation  since  that  date
    and that therefore she had, by that time, been stable for yet a further
    twenty or so months.

28.  Insofar as the facilities that are available in Sri Lanka, which is  in
    a sense the second limb of the  consideration  that  the  Secretary  of
    State has to undertake, although the facilities in Sri Lanka are not as
    extensive as they are in the UK, and although it does appear  that  the
    number of inpatient units are limited, this lady is not a lady who  has
    required inpatient treatment even  at  the  time  when  she  was  first
    diagnosed or first  came  into  contact  with  medical  services.   Her
    treatment has been under control with the support  of  her  mother  and
    husband and that would continue on his return to Sri Lanka.

29.  One of the issues that was raised was the extent  to  which  she  would
    obtain  employment  which  would  assist  the  family's  status.    The
    Secretary of State does make a comment that the  applicant's  wife  has
    remained economically active. It does appear  from  Dr  Smith's  report
    that that in fact is not correct and she does appear  to  be  receiving
    ESA, a benefit which indicates that she has limited capability to work.
    However, in my view that is not relevant  in  terms  of  this  decision
    given that there is, as I have  said,  nothing  to  indicate  that  the
    applicant is not able to obtain full-time work and there is nothing  to
    indicate that his wife requires 24 hour care.

30.  For that reason the application fails and I refuse the application.

31.  The applicant to pay the respondent's reasonable costs. In  default  of
    agreement costs to be subject to detailed assessment by a Costs  Judge.



32.  The applicant sought permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  on
    the grounds that as a  British  Citizen,  the  applicant's  spouse  was
    entitled to receive free medical treatment through the NHS and  if  she
    were to travel to Sri Lanka with the applicant she would be deprived of
    that right. Permission had not been sought on this ground and  nor  had
    it been raised during the course of proceedings  before  me.  The  case
    before me had been argued solely on  the  core  issue  of  there  being
    insurmountable obstacles to the family life between the  applicant  and
    his wife continuing if he were to be removed to Sri  Lanka.  Permission
    to appeal on that ground was not sought. Permission to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal is refused. ~~~~0~~~~





