
Ahmed (Restriction of Submissions)Pakistan * [2000] UKIAT 00002

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                       Date heard: 15/2/2000
                                      Date Determination notified:  01/03/00


                                   Before


                The Honourable Mr Justice Collins (President)
                                 Mr A F Hatt
                               Mr H J E Latter

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                               APPELLANT
                                     and

                                 AFTAB AHMED

                                                             RESPONDENT

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  determination  by
a Special Adjudicator, Mrs F C Bremner, following a hearing at Hatton  Cross
on 18 November of last year.  By that determination she allowed  the  appeal
of the Respondent, Aftab Ahmed, against the  refusal  by  the  Secretary  of
State of his asylum claim and the decision that  removal  directions  should
be given to remove him to Pakistan.

2.  The details of the claim can be stated very briefly indeed.  Suffice  it
to say for the purposes of  this  appeal  that  the  Appellant,  who  was  a
lawyer, had involved himself in activities which drew him to  the  attention
of the authorities in which he supported the aims of the JKLF.  He had  been
arrested  on  some  three  occasions  between  1992  and  1996  because   he
campaigned to end the cooperation as he saw it between  Pakistan  and  India
in relation to Kashmir and was an active campaigner for the independence  of
Kashmir.  He produced to the Secretary of State a number of documents  which
he said supported his claim, in particular a detention order which  referred
to him alleging that he had been raising armed contingents in order to  make
successful the cause of the Liberation Front.  This was  back  in  March  of
1992. Further in 1996 it was alleged that he,  having  been  arrested  at  a
demonstration, had had in his possession a loaded pistol.  As  a  result  of
all this, he went into hiding and managed to escape the  attentions  of  the
police for a period of some eighteen  months.    He  then  decided  that  he
would leave the country and seek asylum in the United Kingdom.  He  went  to
Islamabad and managed to obtain a passport. The Secretary  of  State  relied
on his deception of the Entry Clearance Officer in order to obtain  a  visa,
in that he stated to the Entry Clearance Officer that  he  was  married  and
had not been involved in politics.  We are bound to say that  in  an  asylum
claim it would not be  surprising  that  someone  in  the  position  of  the
Appellant who was seeking to leave the country might be economical with  the
truth, and that particular ground for suggesting that his claim  was  not  a
valid one seems to us to carry very little weight.

3.  Having heard the Appellant give evidence  and  in  the  course  of  that
evidence having been cross-examined for a substantial  period,  the  Special
Adjudicator formed a favourable view on  his  credibility.   Indeed  as  she
records in her determination, at the close the  evidence  she  was  able  to
indicate that she was prepared to accept his evidence in its entirety.   She
notes that the Presenting Officer at the hearing  accepted  that  there  had
been mistranslations of some of the documents and that  the  documents  that
had been produced did refer to the Appellant. Thus  a  substantial  part  of
the Secretary of State's reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's  claim  fell
away. In the light of her findings on  credibility  she  accepted  that  the
Appellant had a well-founded fear of  persecution.   She  records  that  the
matter which gave her the most difficulty was the issue of  internal  flight
because, as she put it, he seemed to have found a  place  of  safety  for  a
considerable time before he left Pakistan.  She records, however,  that  the
Appellant had gone to the mountains and could not reasonably be expected  to
remain in hiding in remote parts of Pakistan for an  unspecified  length  of
time until satisfied that the authorities were no longer interested in  him.
 In those circumstances,  as  it  seems  to  us,  it  cannot  reasonably  be
considered that this is a case which gives rise  to  internal  flight.   The
second ground of the appeal was a challenge  to  the  Special  Adjudicator's
conclusion that  the  internal  flight  option  was  not  available  to  the
Appellant and a suggestion that that finding was perverse.  In the light  of
the factual finding to which we have referred in our  judgment  that  ground
of appeal is simply unarguable and in  fairness  to  Miss  Annetts  who  has
appeared on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  she  did  not  press  the
argument very hard.

4.  That leaves the first ground of appeal. It is  we  think  convenient  to
read it.  We quote:

      "At the close of the  appellant's  evidence  the  Special  Adjudicator
      announced that  she  was  prepared  to  accept  his  evidence  in  its
      entirety.  As a  result  she  directed  that  the  Presenting  Officer
      restrict  submissions  to  matters  other   than   credibility.    The
      Presenting Officer submitted that credibility was still  an  issue  as
      far as the Respondent was concerned but the Special Adjudicator  would
      not allow the Presenting Officer to attempt to persuade  her  on  this
      issue.  It is therefore submitted that by restricting  the  Presenting
      Officer's submission in this way  the  Respondent  did  not  have  the
      opportunity to put his case in full."




We have examined the record of proceedings and have already referred to  the
sentence in the Special Adjudicator's  determination  in  which  she  states
that she indicated at the close of the evidence that  she  was  prepared  to
accept the Appellant's evidence in its entirety.  For the purposes  of  what
we are proposing to say we assume that that  ground  is  accurate.   We  say
that because we have no direct evidence before us that  that  is  indeed  so
and we should make this point very clearly.  Grounds of appeal do not  prove
themselves.  Where criticisms are made about the conduct of  an  Adjudicator
those matters must be established before the Tribunal.  That can be done  in
a number of ways.  A statement, or if need be an affidavit, can be  produced
from a representative or another person who attended  the  hearing  who  can
state what happened so far as his or her recollection is concerned.

5.  If there are criticisms of an Adjudicator it may be  that  the  Tribunal
of its own motion will ask the Adjudicator  for  comments.   Those  comments
will be put to the parties and will form  part  of  the  material  which  is
considered by  the  Tribunal.   But  some  material,  other  than  the  mere
statement in the grounds, must be placed before the Tribunal.  In this  case
what we say is based upon the  assumption  that  the  ground  of  appeal  is
correct.  If it is not, then what we  say  will   affect  any  future  cases
heard by an Adjudicator and we hope that Mrs Bremner  will  forgive  us  for
what we are assuming against her.  If she acted as  is  alleged,  she  acted
wrongly.   An  Adjudicator,  indeed  any  Judge,  must   never   prevent   a
representative  from  putting  forward  submissions   which   are   properly
available to that  representative  because  the  Adjudicator  has  formed  a
particular view on the evidence.  In this case it is  perfectly  clear  from
the cross-examination  that  the  Presenting  Officer  was  challenging  the
evidence which had been given by the Appellant.  In those  circumstances  it
was perfectly proper for the Presenting Officer  to  put,  or  seek  to  put
before the Adjudicator, matters which might  affect  her  ultimate  decision
upon credibility.  She for  her  part  would  have  been  entitled  to  have
indicated that  she  had  formed  a  preliminary  view  or  to  have  sought
assistance directed to  particular  matters  which  the  Presenting  Officer
could rely on as showing that her preliminary view was wrong.  What she  was
not entitled to do, if this is indeed what she did, was to refuse to  listen
to any submissions and we  express  the  hope  that  never  again  will  the
Tribunal be troubled with an appeal  based  upon  a  refusal  to  listen  to
representations which can properly be made.

6.  Of course there may be cases where it is plain that a representative  is
simply wasting the Tribunal's or Adjudicator's time and is  putting  forward
matters which could not reasonably be put forward on the evidence  that  has
been presented.  In those circumstances an Adjudicator would be entitled  to
bring those submissions to an end and to refuse to  listen  to  any  further
submissions based on the same matters.  Equally, an Adjudicator is  entitled
to prevent repetition and in an appropriate case to place some sort of  time
limit upon representations, provided this is done in  a  way  which  ensures
that  the  representative  has  a  fair  opportunity  to  put   before   the
Adjudicator the matters which he is entitled to put  forward.   Having  said
that, even assuming that the Adjudicator did as is  alleged  in  that  first
ground of appeal, it cannot have affected the outcome of this  appeal.   She
was clearly entitled to reach the decision that she did on  the  credibility
of this Appellant, and in the light of  the  material  before  her  and  the
concessions made by the Presenting Officer, it was a decision which was  not
only open to her but one with which this Tribunal would agree.

7.  In those circumstances the appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  must  be
dismissed.







                            MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                                PRESIDENT

