
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
 Fadil Dyli (Protection - UNMIK - Arif - IFA - Art1D) Kosovo CG * [2000]
UKIAT 00001
                                                 Date of hearing: 08/08/2000
                                     Date Determination notified: 30/08/2000
                                   Before:

                   Mr C. M. G. Ockelton (Deputy President)
                              Mr P. R. Moulden
                              Mr M. W. Rapinet








Between

                                 FADIL DYLI
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT



                         DETERMINATIONS AND REASONS
Introduction
1. The Appellant, Fadil Dyli, comes from Kosovo. He is  a  national  of  the
Federal  republic  of  Yugoslavia.  He  appeals,  with  leave,  against  the
determination of a Special Adjudicator (Mr B. Watkins  CMG)  dismissing  his
appeal against the decision of the Respondent on  14  February  2000  giving
directions for his removal as an illegal entrant, following refusal  of  his
application for asylum. Before us  he  was  represented  by  Mr  C.  Jacobs,
instructed by Gersten and Nixon, and the Respondent was  represented  by  Mr
R. Tam and Mr S. Grodzinski, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor.
2. The basis of the Appellant's case is that  he  claims  to  have  a  well-
founded fear of persecution as an  ethnic  Albanian.  His  appeal  raises  a
number  of  issues  common  to  many  similar  cases  and  not  particularly
dependent on the facts of  this  Appellant's  case.  They  are  as  follows.
First, are the United  Nations  Interim  Administration  Mission  in  Kosovo
('UNMIK') and the Kosovo Force ('KFOR') capable of  constituting  protection
within the meaning of the Convention, so that  an  appellant  who  would  be
protected by UNMIK and KFOR on  return  could  not  claim  to  have  a  well
founded fear of persecution? Secondly, given the change of circumstances  in
Kosovo in recent months, is there a burden on the  Secretary  of  State,  to
point to evidence that the Appellant is not  a  refugee,  as  identified  in
Mohammed Arif v SSHD [1999] Imm AR 271? Thirdly,  to  what  extent  may  the
rules on internal flight be applicable to a person  from  Kosovo?  Fourthly,
does Article 1D of the Convention exclude a person  such  as  the  Appellant
from the benefits of the Convention? We have heard full argument on each  of
these issues. We are very grateful  to  counsel  on  both  sides  for  their
preparation and for the clear way in which they presented their cases.
3. This is a 'starred' determination, by a Tribunal consisting of the
Deputy President and two Vice-Presidents. It will be followed by other
divisions of the Tribunal and by Adjudicators on the questions of law
raised in it. It is not intended to be binding on any question of fact, and
our references to protection from UNMIK and KFOR should not be taken as
implying a view that protection is in fact available to the Appellant or to
claimants in general.
Historical Background
4. Kosovo is a province of Serbia, situated in the southern part of  Serbia,
adjacent  to  Montenegro,  Albania  and  the  Former  Yugoslav  Republic  of
Macedonia. It is distingushed from the rest of  Serbia  principally  by  the
fact that it has historically been home to  a  large  population  of  ethnic
Albanians. The area, which has little economic wealth, is nevertheless  rich
in historical associations  for  both  Serbs  and  Albanians.  The  Albanian
population is largely Muslim, yet Kosovo has,  at  Pec,  near  its  southern
border with Albania, the most important  church  for  the  Serbian  Orthodox
Christian faith. It was at the battle of  Kosovo  Polje  in  1389  that  the
Turks gained control of the whole of  medieval  Serbia  and  retained  power
over all Serbs for five centuries. Despite the fact that it  was  a  defeat,
the event is seen as of great importance in the national identity of  Serbia
today. On the other hand, it  was  in  Kosovo  in  1878  that  the  Albanian
national revival began, resulting in the creation  of  the  modern  Albanian
state in 1912.
5. Within the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as a result  of  the
1974 Constitution, Kosovo enjoyed a considerable  measure  of  autonomy,  as
did Vojvodina, another Serbian province. That  autonomy  largely  ceased  in
1989. Following the break-up  of  the  Socialist  Republic  in  1991-2,  the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was formed. It consists of Serbia  (including
Kosovo and Vojvodina) and Montenegro. By then the Albanian population was  a
clear majority in Kosovo - probably over eighty per cent. In 1990  and  1992
there had  been  attempts  to  secede,  but  Kosovo  remained  part  of  the
Federation, although increasingly  underrepresented  in  government  and  in
number of officials, partly as a deliberate result of government policy  and
partly as a result of boycotting by ethnic Albanians. In  subsequent  years,
particularly after Slobodan  Milosevic  became  Federal  President  in  1997
after two terms as President of Serbia, there were many well-attested  human
rights abuses against ethnic Albanians in  Kosovo.  The  activities  of  the
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) date from about this time. In January 1998  the
KLA declared its intention  to  achieve  separation  from  Serbia  by  armed
resistance against the Serbian  authorities.  The  Serbian  security  forces
responded with a number of attacks against  the  KLA  and  against  civilian
targets in Kosovo. At this time many ethnic Albanians  began  to  flee.  The
exodus continued for many months.
6. For much of 1998 and the first part of 1999 there was, in  effect,  civil
war in Kosovo. There was a major  peace  initiative  during  the  autumn  of
1998. Peace talks took place  at  Rambouillet  in  February  1999,  but  the
agreement of the Serbian delegation was not  obtained.  In  the  same  month
30,000 Serbian forces were deployed in or near Kosovo.
7. On 24 March 1999 the NATO countries began aerial bombardment  of  Serbian
military posts both in Kosovo and in Serbia as a whole. There was a  meeting
of the G-8 countries in May, at which there was agreement on principles  for
a peace process. By the middle of that month it  was  estimated  that  1,200
civilians had been killed in the bombardment and  600,000  ethnic  Albanians
had fled from Kosovo. On 2 June there was a conference in Belgrade at  which
targets for resolution of the Kosovo crisis were presented.  The  government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia announced that it had accepted the  G-
8 principles and the targets, and began  to  withdraw  Serbian  troops  from
Kosovo. The aerial action then ceased on 10 June.
8. On the same day the United Nations  Security  Council  passed  resolution
SCR 1244. It notes the Federal republic of Yugoslavia's  acceptance  of  the
principles and targets, which are annexed to the Resolution.  In  paragraphs
5 and 10 of the Resolution the Security Council
    '5. Decides on the deployment in Kosovo, under United Nations auspices,
    of  international  civil  and  security  presences,  with   appropriate
    equipment and personnel as required, and welcomes the agreement of  the
    Federal republic of Yugoslavia to such presences;
    '10. Authorizes the Secretary-General, with the assistance of  relevant
    international  organizations,  to  establish  an  international   civil
    presence in Kosovo in order to provide an  interim  administration  for
    Kosovo under which the people of Kosovo can enjoy substantial  autonomy
    within the Federal Republic  of  Yugoslavia,  and  which  will  provide
    transitional  administration  while  establishing  and  overseeing  the
    development of provisional democratic  self-governing  institutions  to
    ensure conditions for a peaceful and normal life for all inhabitants of
    Kosovo.'
9. The result was the creation  of  UNMIK,  which  as  its  full  name  (see
paragraph 2) indicates, is the interim civil presence, and  KFOR,  which  is
an international military presence under the control of NATO.  KFOR  is  not
itself a United Nations organ, but is part of the means by  which  the  work
of UNMIK is achieved. That work is the subject of  regular  reports  of  the
Secretaly-General of the United Nations. It is not appropriate for  us  here
to assess the success  of  the  programmes  for  peace,  reconstruction  and
resettlement of displaced persons. In order to give a flavour of the  United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees' view, however, we cite  the  opening
words of a background note of February 2000:
    'Since  the  withdrawal  of  Yugoslav  forces  and  the  entry  of  the
    international  military   presence,   (KFOR)   and   the   UN   interim
    administration mission  (UNMIK)  into  Kosovo  in  mid-June  1999,  the
    situation for ethnic Albanians inside Kosovo has dramatically improved.
    The  systematic  persecution  described  in  earlier  UNHCR  and   OSCE
    documents no longer prevails. As a result many refugees have availed of
    the opportunity to return home. Close to 825,000 refugees have returned
    in total...'.
10. So far as the history of this appeal is concerned, it  only  remains  to
note that the Appellant came  to  the  United  Kingdom  from  Kosovo  on  31
October 1999
Protection
11. A refugee needs to establish that he is unable  or,  owing  to  a  well-
founded fear of persecution, unwilling, to avail himself of  the  protection
of his own country. The question is whether  protection  provided  by  UNMIK
and KFOR is capable of constituting the protection of the  Federal  Republic
of Yugoslavia for a person in Kosovo.
12. Unlike a castle, a country does not provide protection merely  by  one's
presence in it. A country provides  protection  by  the  way  in  which  its
citizens are treated. The authorities of the Federal republic of  Yugoslavia
have a considerable history of persecution of ethnic  Albanians  in  Kosovo;
but one of the functions of UNMIK and KFOR is to prevent  that  persecution.
As Mr Jacobs pointed out, UNMIK and KFOR are not  in  any  real  sense  'the
authorities of' the Federal  Republic  of  Yugoslavia,  although  they  have
Yugoslav consent to their presence and their work in Kosovo. That,  however,
in our view is a side-issue:  Article  1A(2)  of  the  Convention  does  not
include the word 'authorities'. The phrase is 'protection of  the  country',
and that phrase appears, in various forms, three times in Article 1A(2).  We
do not  consider  that  there  is  any  basis  for  imposing  any  legal  or
constitutional colour on it by deeming it to refer  to  the  authorities  of
the country. On the contrary:  bearing  in  mind  the  phrase  'outside  the
country' which occurs twice in Article 1A(2), it seems to us that  there  is
little reason for taking the word in other than a geographical sense.
13. The Convention is designed for the  benefit  of  persons  who  need  the
protection of the international  community  because  they  are  at  risk  of
persecution in their own countries. A person who, for whatever  reason,  has
protection in his own country has no basis  for  fear  of  persecution;  and
there is no basis for imposing international duties of surrogate  protection
in respect of a person who has adequate protection within his  own  country.
Such protection is 'the protection of the  country'.  How  it  is  achieved,
whether directly by the  authorities  of  the  country,  or  by  others,  is
irrelevant. There can be no basis for allowing a  person  to  require  other
countries to take him in as a refugee if he is not in fact at risk at  home.

14. We conclude that for the purposes of the Convention protection  provided
by or through UNMIK and KFOR is capable of amounting to  the  protection  of
his own country for a resident of  Kosovo.  We  emphasise  that  we  do  not
decide that that protection is in any particular case adequate.  That  is  a
matter of fact, to be decided on the evidence in each individual case.  But,
for an Adjudicator faced with such an issue,  we  take  the  opportunity  to
point out that it will be crucially important to bear in mind  the  speeches
of the House of Lords in Horvath v SSHD [2000] 3 WLR 379. It is  not  enough
for a claimant to establish that he has a well-founded fear of serious  harm
being inflicted on him for a Convention reason. He will still have the  task
of showing that the  protection  he  will  receive  from  the  international
organs  UNMIK  and  KFOR  (or  their  successors)  is  not   sufficient   by
international standards.

Is Kosovo a country for the purposes of the Convention?
15. In his skeleton argument, Mr Tam suggested that his submissions  on  the
last point entailed the view that Kosovo was to be  regarded  as  a  country
for the purposes of Article 1A2. The protection available to  the  Appellant
in Kosovo would thus be 'the protection of that country'. Mr  Jacobs  simply
insisted that the Appellant  is  a  national  of  the  Federal  Republic  of
Yugoslavia. Mr Tm supported the argument that Kosovo might be a  country  by
reference to a decision of the Federal Court of Australia, Tjhe Kwet  Koe  v
MIEE [1997] 912 FCA. We have to say, with respect, that we regard  Mr  Tam's
submissions on this point as weak.
16. The claimant in Koe was admittedly a  person  without  any  nationality.
The question for the court was what was the country of his  former  habitual
residence. The Refugee Review Tribunal had found that the  claimant  was  'a
Hong Kong Chinese and a permanent resident of  Hong  Kong'.  The  claimant's
appeal was partly on the basis that his refugee status  could  not  lawfully
be assessed by reference to Hong Kong, because Hong Kong is not  a  country.
It was, at all times relevant for the purpose of  Koe's  appeal,  a  British
Crown Colony. The Federal Court noted that Hong Kong  was  not  a  state  or
nation, but was under the direct control of  the  United  Kingdom.  It  did,
however,  have  a  distinct  area  with  identifiable   borders,   its   own
immigration laws, was inhabited by a permanent identifiable  community,  and
enjoyed a certain degree  of  autonomy.  For  these  reasons,  Tamberlin  J,
giving the judgement of the Federal Court, considered that Hong Kong  was  a
country and was therefore capable of being the claimant's country of  former
habitual residence.
17. It  is  important  to  note,  however,  that  Tamberlin  J  specifically
distanced himself from any interpretation of his words that  might  be  seen
as extending them to cases where the  claimant  has  a  nationality.  As  he
said,
    'The  language  of  Article  1A  of  the  Convention  itself  draws   a
    distinction between "the country of nationality" and  "the  country  of
    former habitual  residence".  The  word  "country"  in  each  of  these
    expressions is used in a different sense. In the  first  phrase  it  is
    used to designate a country capable of  granting  nationality.  In  the
    second it is used  to  denote  a  country  which  need  not  have  this
    capability  but  in  which  the  individual  resides.  The  concept  of
    "country" is broader than the concept of a State.'
18. The interpretation of the word 'country' in  Koe  is  thus  specifically
confined to cases where the claimant is stateless. The  word  'country'  may
have a wider meaning when it is by itself than when it is  confined  by  its
context. For similar reasons in Reel v Holder [1981] 3 AU ER 321, the  Court
of Appeal  found  that  Taiwan  (although  admittedly  not  a  state)  could
constitute a 'country' within the manning of the Rules of the  International
Athletics Federation.
19. In our view, however, it is clear beyond  doubt  that  where  an  asylum
applicant is not stateless, the country by reference to which his status  as
a refugee is to be determined is the country of which he is a national.  The
phrase 'the country of his nationality' is not amenable to division  in  the
way required by Mr Tam's argument. The word 'country' in that phrase  cannot
have the wider meaning adopted by Tamberlin J. It can only  mean  a  country
capable of granting nationality.  In  the  Appellant's  case,  that  is  the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
20. We do not regard that conclusion as having any effect  on  our  decision
that the protection offered by UNMIK  and  KFOR  is  capable  of  being  the
protection of the Appellant's country. The country is the  Federal  Republic
of Yugoslavia. Within Kosovo, protection may be provided by UNMIK and  KFOR.

Burden of Proof
21. It is well-established that the burden of proof in an asylum claim  lies
on the claimant. It is, however, argued that the burden is sometimes on  the
government. The arguments relating to  the  burden  of  proof  in  this  and
similar appeals are based on the  judgements  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
Mohammed Arif v SSHD [1999] 1mm AR 271. In that case the claimant based  his
claim to asylum on the fact that he had been falsely accused, and  convicted
in his absence, of serious crimes. The  convictions  had  been  obtained  by
corrupt influence by his political opponents, but nevertheless  exposed  him
to real risk of having to serve  a  considerable  prison  sentence.  In  the
circumstances that would amount to persecution for reasons of his  political
opinion. The Special Adjudicator made positive findings on all the facts  on
which his claim was based. He allowed the claimant's appeal.  The  Secretary
of State appealed to the Tribunal, submitting that the change in  government
that had by then occurred in the claimant's home state removed the  risk  of
his having to serve his sentence. The Tribunal accepted  that  argument  and
allowed the Secretary of State's appeal. The claimant then appealed  to  the
Court of Appeal.
22. Simon Brown LJ, with whom the other members of the Court agreed, said
this:
    'At the outset of the hearing I drew counsel's attention to  a  passage
    in Macdonald's Immigration  law  and  practice,  (4th  Edition),  which
    appeared to me of some relevance to this  appeal.  Paragraph  12.58  at
    page 397, so far as material, reads:
    "If the circumstances in the country of nationality ... have so changed
    that  refugees  can  no  longer  refuse  to  avail  themselves  of  the
    protection of  that  country,  Convention  refugee  status  will  cease
    [footnoted to that is article l(c)(5) of the Convention]... A cessation
    of circumstances refers  to  fundamental  changes  rather  than  merely
    transitory ones. A refugee's status should not be subject  to  frequent
    review since this would  jeopardise  a  sense  of  security  which  the
    Convention was designed to provide. Proof  that  the  circumstances  of
    persecution have ceased to exist would fall upon the  receiving  state.
    Cessation of refugee status will not automatically  mean  repatriation,
    since many refugees will  have  acquired  settlement  rights  in  their
    country of refuge- Problems can occur when the authority takes  a  long
    time to determine a claim and circumstances change in the  meantime  as
    the relevant date for the assessment of the claim is the  date  of  the
    decision."
    The sentence I would particularly emphasise there is  "Proof  that  the
    circumstances of the persecution have ceased to exist would  fall  upon
    the receiving state." It is true that because of the  notoriously  long
    delays which attend our system of asylum hearings  the  appellant  here
    was never granted refugee status,  even  though  until  the  change  of
    government in Azad Kashmir in 1996 it is now assumed on all sides  that
    he was strictly entitled to it. It nevertheless seems  to  me  that  by
    analogy, on the  particular  facts  of  this  case,  there  is  now  an
    evidential burden on the Secretary of  State  to  establish  that  this
    appellant could safely be returned home.'
23. Mr Jacobs submits that the effect of Arif is to place a burden of  proof
on the Secretary of State in any appeal in which he wishes  to  submit  that
the circumstances in the claimant's country are better than  they  were.  He
argues that the Court of Appeal adopted, in full, the  passage  quoted  from
Macdonald, and that the Secretary of State must always show that  there  has
been a 'fundamental and durable' change in the claimant's home  country.  Mr
Tam urges us to confine Arif within much narrower boundaries.
24. We think it is as well to consider first exactly what is said  in  Arif.
First, as Mr Tam pointed out, Simon Brown LJ does not  expressly  adopt  the
passage from Macdonald: on the contrary, he specifically utilises it as  the
basis for an analogy. Secondly, the analogy he propounds is  that,  'on  the
particular facts of this case there is  now  an  evidential  burden  on  the
Secretary of State'. It appears to us that there were at least two  features
that made that appeal unusual. The first was that, by the  time  the  matter
was argued before the Court of Appeal, it was  assumed  on  all  sides  that
before the change of government  in  1996  the  appellant  was  entitled  to
refugee status. The second was that, although his claim was  on  grounds  of
political opinion, it had features that justified a  provisional  assumption
that any risk might well survive a change of  political  climate.  Arif  was
not merely at risk of persecution for his political views: he  was  at  risk
of having to serve  a  sentence  of  imprisonment  that  had  been  lawfully
imposed on him.
25. In Salim v SSHD (unreported, CA 14 April 2000, IATRF  99/0993/C),  cited
to us by Mr Tam, the Court of Appeal declined to  follow  Arif  because,  in
the words of Hale LJ (with whom Kennedy LJ  and  Harrison  J  agreed),  'the
circumstances of that case were quite different and it  was  also  different
in principle'. We gratefully adopt that terminology.
26. In our view the reversed burden identified in Arif occurs only in  cases
where the principle is the same as in Arif:  that  is,  where  it  has  been
found or is accepted that at some time  in  the  past,  before  the  alleged
change of circumstances, the claimant was a refugee. To confine it  to  such
cases is correct in principle, because otherwise there would be  a  constant
encouragement to investigate the question of whether  the  claimant  had  in
the past been a refugee. Instead of applying  the  principle  enunciated  by
the Court of Appeal in Ravichandran (Sandralingam  v  SSHD,  Ravichandran  v
SSHD. Raiendrakumar v lAT and SSHD, [1996] 1mm AR 97) the Adjudicators,  the
Tribunal and the Courts would need always to consider not merely  whether  a
claimant had shown that he was a refugee at the date  of  the  hearing,  but
also whether he had shown that he was a refugee in the  past  because  there
might then be a burden on the Secretary of State. The members of  the  Court
of Appeal in Salim held that Arif did not impact on  the  case  before  them
because there had been no previous decision (or acceptance) that  Salim  was
a refugee. The Court did not suggest that  either  the  Adjudicator  or  the
Tribunal were under  any  obligation  to  make  a  finding  on  whether  the
Appellant had in the past been a refugee. The position was  clear.  In  Arif
the starting point was that the Appellant had in the past been  entitled  to
refugee status, and there was thus a burden on the Respondent. In Salim  the
starting point was that the Appellant needed to  establish  that  he  was  a
refugee, the burden of proof of which lay on him.
27. Further, the circumstances of Arif were particular. It was not in  doubt
that there had been a change of government in the  Appellant's  home  state.
But, on the facts as found, the Appellant's claim was such that evidence  of
a change of government was not of itself material in  deciding  whether  the
Appellant remained at risk. That was because his fear was not a  generalised
one, based on political climate: it was a specific one, based on the  prison
sentence that had been imposed upon  him.  The  decision  of  the  Court  of
Appeal in Arif is not a decision that where the evidential  burden  lies  on
the Secretary of State it cannot be discharged by showing a  general  change
of circumstances or of political climate: it is merely a demonstration  that
in some cases that will not be enough.
28. We pass to a third feature of the  decision  in  Arif.  In  Arif  itself
there was no evidence specifically that the risk to the Appellant  had  gone
or been diminished. Whether the burden on the Respondent was a legal  burden
or an evidential burden, it had not been discharged.  Nevertheless,  in  his
judgement Simon Brown LJ makes it clear that only an evidential  burden  lay
on the Respondent. The Respondent was, in  other  words,  required  only  to
point to evidence which, as a matter of  law,  could  properly  support  the
conclusion that the Appellant was not a refugee. We say 'point to',  because
neither an evidential nor a legal burden entails the adduction of  evidence.
The functions of the legal and evidential burdens are to regulate the  order
in which the parties are called upon for their evidence and to determine  an
issue upon which the standard of proof is  not  reached.  A  burden  may  be
discharged by any evidence before the  trier  of  fact,  regardless  of  the
source of that evidence.
29. The question whether an evidential  burden  has  been  discharged  is  a
question of law and it is proper for us  to  give  some  guidance  here.  In
cases relating  to  Kosovo,  whether  or  not  evidence  on  the  matter  is
introduced, judicial notice should be taken of the fact that, following  SCR
1244, there has been a United Nations presence in Kosovo by  the  agency  of
UNMIK and KFOR since June 1999. In our view that fact of  itself  is  enough
to discharge the Respondent's evidential burden in any case in which such  a
burden lies on  him  and  in  which  the  claimant  relies  on  the  general
political situation in Kosovo. We do  not  presume  to  decide  whether,  in
general, the change of circumstances would deprive individuals  of  a  claim
to refugee status. What it does do is  establish  that  a  person  who  left
Kosovo before June 1999 and who bases his claim  on  the  general  situation
there will need to establish his case at the date of the hearing even if  it
is accepted that he was a refugee  when  he  left:  because  the  change  of
circumstances in June 1999 discharges the evidential  burden  recognised  in
Arif.
30. To summarise: (i) Arif applies  only  where  it  is  accepted  that  the
claimant was in the past entitled to refugee status; (ii) the burden on  the
Respondent is evidential, not legal; (iii) the burden can be  discharged  by
pointing to evidence showing a  change  of  circumstances  relevant  to  the
claimants claim; (iv) in Kosovan cases, the evidential burden is  discharged
by pointing to the UN presence since June 1999, where that  is  relevant  to
the claimant's claim.
31. In the present appeal, the  Appellant  left  Kosovo  only  in  September
1999: and he has never been accepted as or found to be a refugee.  There  is
no burden on the Respondent.
Internal flight
32. It may be  assumed  that  a  person  who  fears  persecution  will  seek
protection within his own country first. The signatories to  the  Convention
expect him to, because his own country has obligations to  him  arising  out
of his citizenship or residence: it is only if his  own  country  fails  him
that the surrogate protection of  the  international  community  is  engaged
through the medium of the Convention. Thus arises the  notion  of  'internal
flight'. By the time a person's status as a refugee comes to be  considered,
however, internal flight  is  no  longer  a  possibility.  The  claimant  is
already  outside  the  country  of  his  nationality  or   former   habitual
residence. But the principle remains. He is not entitled  to  be  considered
as a refugee merely because he has a well- founded fear  of  persecution  in
some part of his own country, if there  are  other  parts  of  that  country
where he would be safe from persecution.
33. A person  cannot  be  removed  to  a  place  where  he  is  at  risk  of
persecution. But if he is at risk of persecution in his own  home  area,  he
can be expected, on return to his own country, to live in a different  area,
in order to avoid the risk. There will then be no breach of  the  Convention
in returning him to his own country, despite  the  risk  of  persecution  in
part of it. At this point two further factors enter the equation. The  first
is that, even if there is a safe area, he cannot  properly  be  returned  to
his own country if he cannot reach the safe area, or  if  he  cannot  do  so
without being at risk of persecution on the way there -  either  immediately
on arrival or on his subsequent journey within  the  country.  Secondly,  he
cannot  be  returned  if  the  safe  area  is  one  in  which  it  would  be
unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect him  to  live.  This  is  the  factor
described by Brooke LJ as tempering the definition  of  a  refugee  'with  a
small amount of humanity' (Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] 1mm AR 271 at 279).
34. Thus the expectation of internal flight is transformed into  a  rule  of
internal relocation: on return to his own country a person may have to  live
in an area that is different  from  his  own  home  area.  It  is,  however,
important to remember the origins of the  rule.  The  question  of  internal
flight only arises when a claimant has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
in his own home area. If he has no such fear there, the possibility  of  his
movement elsewhere simply does not arise. He is not a refugee.  If,  on  the
other hand, he has such a fear in his own home area, he may  be  a  refugee:
but only if he can show that there is no  other  part  of  his  own  country
where he would be safe, which he can reach in safety, and where it would  be
reasonable (that is to say, not unduly harsh)  to  expect  him  to  live.  A
person who has discharged the positive burden of showing that he is at  risk
of persecution in  his  own  area  has  still  to  establish  that  internal
relocation is not feasible in his case.
35. The concepts of reasonableness and undue harshness have to deal  with  a
person who will have to move to an area that  has  not  been  his  home.  No
questions of unreasonableness or undue harshness arise if the  claimant  has
no well-founded fear of persecution in his own area.  That  is  so  even  if
there are other areas of his country where he might have such a  fear.  Such
a person will be a refugee only if he cannot get to  his  own  area  without
being at risk of persecution on the way.
36. In his skeleton argument, Mr Tam submitted that the  first  question  to
be asked was 'Where, as a matter of fact, will he return to?', and  that  if
the claimant had no well-founded fear of persecution  there,  that  was  the
end of the matter. We do not accept that submission. The starting-point,  in
our view, is the claimant's home area. If he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution in his home area but as a matter of fact is to be returned to  a
different area, then questions of  internal  relocation  to  that  (or  some
other) area arise. If he has no well-founded fear of persecution in his  own
area and as a matter of fact is to be returned there, that  is  the  end  of
the matter. If he has no well-founded fear of persecution in  his  own  area
but as a matter of fact is to be returned elsewhere, the  only  question  is
whether he is at risk of persecution in his own country on the  way  to  his
home area.
37. It follows that a Kosovan who fails to establish a well-founded fear  of
persecution for a Convention reason in Kosovo, and who is to be returned  to
Kosovo, is not a refugee. If such a person is  to  be  returned  to  another
part of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, he is a refugee if and  only  if
he can establish that he cannot get to  Kosovo  without  being  at  risk  of
persecution for a Convention reason on the way. A  Kosovan  who  establishes
that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Kosovo is a  refugee  only
if he also establishes that he cannot without undue  harshness  be  required
to relocate within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Article ID
38. Article ID of the Convention is as follows:
     D This Convention shall not  apply  to  persons  who  are  at  present
    receiving from organs or agencies of the United Nations other than  the
    United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees protection or assistance.
     When such protection or assistance has ceased for any reason,  without
    the position of such persons being  definitely  settled  in  accordance
    with the relevant resolutions adopted by the General  Assembly  of  the
    United Nations these persons  shall  ipso  facto  be  entitled  to  the
    benefits of this Convention.
39. The Adjudicator dismissed the Appellant's appeal because  he  considered
that the protection available from UNMIK and KFOR in Kosovo made article  1D
applicable to him. If Article 1D applies to an  Appellant  his  appeal  must
indeed fail, because then the Convention 'shall  not  apply'  to  him.  But,
according again to the strict wording of  the  Article,  a  person  to  whom
Article 1D applies at the present time may in the future  become  a  refugee
within the Convention merely by the withdrawal of the  protection  envisaged
by the Article, 'ipso facto' without any reference to  a  well-founded  fear
of persecution.  For  these  reasons  Article  1D  is  unattractive,  either
immediately or in prospect, to both the Appellant  and  the  Respondent  and
neither asked us to uphold the Adjudicator's determination on this point.
40. The true construction of this Article, and its correct application,  are
matters of considerable difficulty.  Some  of  the  general  questions  that
arising are: What is the relationship  between  the  first  and  the  second
sentences? Does 'ipso facto'  mean  what  it  says,  ie  without  regard  to
whether the persons would otherwise be  entitled  to  refugee  status?  What
precisely does 'at  present'  mean?  Particularly  with  reference  to  this
appeal, the following  questions also arise: Are UNMIK and KFOR  'organs  or
agencies  of  the  United  Nations  other  than  the  United  Nations   High
Commissioner  for  Refugees'?  And  are  persons  such  as   the   Appellant
'receiving protection or assistance from them?
41. We have had the benefit of reading an  opinion  of  Professor  Greenwood
QC, which Mr Tam adopted in its entirety. Both Mr Jacobs and  Mr  Tam  dealt
with this issue in their skeleton arguments, and both made oral  submissions
on it. We have to say, with the greatest respect, that  we  have  not  found
all the material put to us on this topic to be entirely persuasive. We  have
nevertheless reached a clear view, which we shall  state.  In  deference  to
the  counsel's  submissions,  however,  we  shall  also  briefly  give   our
conclusions on a number of the questions raised.
42. We do not think there can be any real doubt that UNMIK is  a  subsidiary
organ of the United Nations within the meaning of Article 7  of  the  United
Nations Charter. KFOR is not: but KFOR is  part  of  the  process  by  which
UNMIK functions. Further, we do not think there can be any real  doubt  that
the residents of Kosovo are receiving assistance (if  not  protection)  from
UNMIK and KFOR, that is to say directly  or  indirectly  from  an  organ  or
agency of the United Nations. When UNMIK was first established its  role  in
respect of the safe return of refugees and displaced persons was  undertaken
under the supervision of the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees.
At that time it was therefore very doubtful whether  UNMIK  was,  for  these
purposes, 'an organ ... of the United Nations other than the United  Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees'. UNMIK  has  now  decided  that  a  separate
'humanitarian  affairs  component'  is  no  longer  needed  (Report  of  the
Secretary General on the United Nations Interim  Administration  Mission  in
Kosovo, Doc S/2000/538, 6 June  2000).  Although  the  United  Nations  High
Commissioner for Refugees is to name a  Humanitarian  Co-ordinator  to  work
with UNMIK, it will in our view be the case in the future that residents  of
Kosovo do receive assistance from an organ of the United Nations other  than
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
43. Most authorities appear to consider that  'at  present'  in  Article  1D
means 'at the time the Convention entered  into  force'.  See  Grahl-Madsen,
The Status of Refugees in International Law (1966) I  p  264,  pointing  out
that when the  Convention  means  another  date  it  says  so  specifically;
Hathaway, The Law of Refugee Status (1991) p 208, referring to the  view  of
the United  Kingdom  representative  at  the  drafting  of  the  Convention;
Takkenberg, The Status of Palestinian Refugees in International  Law  (1998)
p 96. Professor Greenwood QC takes the same view, noting however that  there
is a respectable contrary argument, based on the terms  and  status  of  the
1967 Protocol, which entirely changed the temporal effect of article  1A  of
the Convention. The UNHCR Handbook indeed, at paragraphs 142-3, sets  out  a
view that clearly implies that 'at present' means 'at  the  time  of  status
determination'. We have not been able to reach a conclusion on  this  point.
On the one hand, the use of the words 'at present' does suggest  that  there
is intended to be a meaning different from that imported by the  simple  use
of the present tense elsewhere in Article 1. On the  other  hand,  everybody
seems to agree that Article 1D does, and was always intended  to,  apply  to
the work of the  United  Nations  Relief  and  Works  Agency  for  Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNWRA): but everybody also seems  to  agree  that
Article 1D applies not  only  to  Palestinian  refugees  who  were  actually
receiving  assistance  when  the  Convention  came  into  affect,  but  also
includes, for example, Palestinians born since that date  (Grahl-Madsen,  op
cit I 265, Hathaway, loc cit, Takkenberg, op cit p 99;  this  interpretation
was adopted by the German Federal Administrative Court in a  decision  of  4
June 1991 (Bverwg I C 42.88) and is described as suggested by  common  sense
in Professor Greenwood's opinion.) As a  result,  'at  present'  has  to  be
interpreted so as to include an element of futurity;  and  the  construction
of the exact meaning of the words 'at present' then becomes  so  complicated
that a simple interpretation in line with that in  the  UNHCR  Handbook  may
well be preferable.
44. The relationship between the first and second sentences  of  Article  1D
is  likewise  a  matter  on  which  opinions  differ.  The  German   Federal
Administrative Court, in the decision to which we have just made  reference,
took the view that the second sentence is an inclusionary clause, so that  a
person to  whom  it  refers  becomes  a  refugee  without  needing  to  show
qualification under Article 1A. That view is endorsed by Takkenberg (op  cit
p 93), Grahl-Madsen (op cit I pp 140-2 and  263-5),  and  Goodwin-Gill,  The
Refugee  in  lnternational  Law  (1996),  p  92.  Goodwin-Gill  points  out,
however, that some states have not been ready to accept the implications  of
that  interpretation.  The  UNHCR  Handbook  takes  the  contrary  view   at
paragraph 143, and, in a note from the United Kingdom  Representative  dated
June 2000 (reference 630.Elig) states that the whole of Article  1D  applies
only to persons who would otherwise be entitled to refugee  status.  It  is,
we apprehend, particularly because of the risk that an English  court  would
hold that the second sentence of  Article  1D  operates  as  an  independent
inclusion clause, that the Respondent  submits  that  Article  1D  does  not
apply to Kosovo. In fact, however, we do not need to reach a concluded  view
on the effect of the second sentence, and we leave  that  for  determination
on another occasion.
45. Everybody appears to agree  that  although  Article  1D  does  apply  to
UNWRA, it did not apply to the United Nations Korean  Reconstruction  Agency
(UNKRA). That view is held even  by  those  who  consider  that  the  second
sentence is an inclusion clause independent of  other  parts  of  Article  1
(see,  for  example,  Takkenberg  op  cit  p  97,  citing  Grahl-Madsen  and
Hathaway). The reason is instructive. It is that those displaced from  North
Korea to South Korea (where UNKRA operated) were regarded by South Korea  as
citizens of South Korea. As a result, nobody who  was  receiving  assistance
from UNKRA was outside his country of nationality.  It  is  this  reasoning,
which is also adumbrated in the United Kingdom Representative's  note,  that
we find particularly persuasive. Article  1D  is  part  of  Article  1  and,
whatever its precise effect, must, like Articles 1C, 1E and 1F, be  intended
to limit the applicability of the general inclusion  provisions  in  Article
1A. Article 1D should be confined to persons who, but for Article 1D,  could
possibly qualify as refugees. A refugee is a person who is outside  his  own
country. Article 1D therefore can only apply to persons who  are  'receiving
from organs or agencies of the United Nations other than the United  Nations
High Commissioner for  Refugees  protection  or  assistance'  while  outside
their country of nationality  or  former  habitual  residence.  Palestinians
assisted by UNWRA  might  be  such,  because  UNWRA  operates  in  the  Arab
countries to which Palestinians have been displaced, and of which  they  are
not citizens. But North Koreans assisted by  UNKRA  could  not  be,  because
they were citizens of the country in which they found themselves: they  were
not outside their country of nationality at the  time  they  received  UNKRA
assistance.
46. UNMIK operates only within Kosovo, itself part of the  Federal  Republic
of Yugoslavia. Insofar  as  UNMIK  offers  assistance  to  citizens  of  the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, it  follows  that  that  assistance  is  not
being offered to persons who might otherwise be refugees:  they  cannot  be,
because they are not outside their country of nationality. In our  view,  as
they  could  not  in  any  event  be  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the
Convention, Article 1D does not apply to them.
47. That result follows whether one considers persons such as the  Appellant
from the point of view of his present  situation,  outside  his  country  of
nationality and (so) not at present  receiving  assistance  from  UNMIK,  or
from the point of view of his prospective  situation  on  return,  receiving
assistance from UNMIK but not being  outside  his  country  of  nationality.
Persons who have citizenship of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,  or  for
whom Kosovo is their place of present or former habitual  residence,  cannot
come within Article 1D on the basis of assistance from UNMIK.
48. Suppose, however, that (unlike this  Appellant)  a  claimant  is  not  a
person who has citizenship of the Federal Republic  of  Yugoslavia,  or  for
whom Kosovo is his place of present or former  habitual  residence.  In  our
view the same principle applies. He will not come within Article  1D  unless
he would otherwise be a refugee because he meets the terms  of  Article  1A.
If he is receiving assistance from UNMIK  he  would  have  to  be  a  person
(other than a citizen of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia) who has  sought
refuge in Kosovo because of a well-founded fear of persecution  in  his  own
country. If the status of such a person falls to be determined the  argument
of the previous few paragraphs will not apply, but it will not be  a  matter
to determination by  any  English  jurisdiction.  If  he  finds  himself  in
England, his status will be  determined  by  reference  to  his  country  of
nationality or former habitual residence, not by reference to  Kosovo  as  a
former place of refuge.
49. In reaching our conclusion  that  Article  1D  does  not  apply  to  the
Appellant  or  to  others  in  similar  circumstances  we  have  found   the
consideration set out in paragraphs 45-46 to  be  the  most  persuasive.  We
emphasise, however, that, subject to the comments we have made above, we  do
not dismiss the other arguments put before us.
 50. It follows that the  Appellant's  status  as  a  refugee  falls  to  be
decided under Article 1A(2). This the Adjudicator failed to do,  because  of
his view that the Appellant was in any event excluded from the  benefits  of
the Convention For that reason it is agreed  between  the  parties,  and  we
direct, that this appeal be heard afresh by another Special Adjudicator.


General Summary
51.    (i) Protection offered by UNMIK and  KFOR  is,  in  law,  capable  of
      being 'the protection of his country', within the meaning  of  Article
      1A(2) of the Convention, for a citizen  of  the  Federal  republic  of
      Yugoslavia who comes from Kosovo.
      (ii) Kosovo, howver, is not capable of being the country of a person's
      nationality within the meaning of that Article.
      (iii) The 'reversed burden' in Arif applies only where it is  accepted
      that the claimant was in the past a refugee, and is capable  of  being
      discharged by any evidence which could support a finding of a relevant
      change of circumstances.
      (iv) No questions of 'internal flight',  'reasonableness',  or  'undue
      hardship' arise when a person has no well-founded fear of  persecution
      in his own home area.
      (v). Article 1D of the Convention does not apply to persons  receiving
      assistance from UNMIK and KFOR.
52. For the reasons given in paragraph 50, this appeal is allowed to the
extent only that it is remitted for fresh consideration by an Adjudicator
other than Mr Watkins.

                                             C.M.G. Ockelton
                                             Deputy President

