
MNM (Surendran guidelines for Adjudicators) Kenya * [2000] UKIAT 00005
                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


|Date of Hearing:       |12/10/200|
|                       |0        |
|Date Determination     |01/11/200|
|notified:              |0        |


                                   Before


                      The Honourable Mr Justice Collins
                              Mr C M G Ockelton
                               Mr M W Rapinet


|               MNM                                       |APPELLANT      |
|              and                                        |               |
|           Secretary of State for the Home Department    |               |
|                                                         |RESPONDENT     |

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The applicant, a citizen of Kenya, appeals against the  decision  of  Mrs
  Scott Baker, special  adjudicator,  dated  10  August  2000  whereby  she
  dismissed her appeal against the refusal by the respondent to  grant  her
  leave to enter and asylum.

2. Ground 1 of the Grounds of Appeal alleges  that  the  appellant  had  not
  received  a  fair  hearing  because,  broadly   speaking,   the   special
  adjudicator took over the role of the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
  since no-one appeared to represent  the  respondent.   The  tribunal  was
  informed that the appellant proposed to argue inter alia that  Article  6
  of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) applied  and  had  been
  breached.  In the circumstances, having regard to the importance of  this
  point and the need to determine whether the argument was correct as  soon
  as possible, the parties were asked to deal with it and  to  produce  all
  relevant authorities and material.  In addition, it was decided that this
  determination should be starred.   Accordingly, it must be applied by all
  adjudicators and will be followed by all tribunal members.

3. We had the advantage of hearing arguments from  counsel  on  both  sides.
  Mr.  Williams  (who  did  not  appear  before  the  special  adjudicator)
  represented the appellant and Miss Dinah Rose represented the respondent.
   We are most grateful to both of them for the assistance we  were  given,
  particularly as we are conscious that  the  notice  was  short.   We  are
  satisfied that we have been referred to all relevant material.

4. The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  21  November  1998  and
  claimed asylum.  It is, for reasons which will become clear,  unnecessary
  to set out the account she  gave  or  the  facts  found  by  the  special
  adjudicator in any detail.  Suffice it to  say  that  in  July  1998  her
  husband, who was a member of the Democratic Party (DP), was detained  and
  she had not seen him since.  The authorities alleged that he had  had  in
  his possession and she knew the whereabouts of some documents which would
  incriminate the DP.  In August 1998, the authorities came  again  to  her
  home seeking the documents and treated her with such  violence  that  she
  ended up in hospital.  It was this that had led her to leave Kenya and to
  seek asylum.

5. In the refusal letter dated 6 March 2000, the respondent did not seek  to
  challenge the account given by the appellant in  interview  of  what  had
  happened to her.  He rejected her claim because any fear she had was  not
  well-founded since what had happened to her  resulted  from  unauthorised
  acts by individuals which contravened the law of Kenya and which would be
  investigated and dealt with by the authorities.  There was no evidence of
  persecution of members of the DP.

6.  Shortly  before  the  hearing  before  the  special   adjudicator,   the
  appellant's representatives asked for an adjournment  to  obtain  medical
  evidence.  This was refused.  At the hearing on 19 July 2000,  there  was
  no Home Office  Presenting  Officer  or  other  person  representing  the
  respondent.  The appellant was represented by Ms. Raggi Kotak of counsel.
   At the outset, she asked for an adjournment because the appellant had by
  letter dated 4 July 2000 applied to the respondent  to  be  permitted  to
  stay because her removal would constitute a breach of Article  3  of  the
  ECHR.  That letter raised matters which  went  beyond  the  circumstances
  relied on in the asylum claim.  No response  to  that  request  had  been
  received nor has it at the time  this  appeal  was  heard.   The  special
  adjudicator refused  that  request  since  she  had  no  jurisdiction  to
  consider any Article 3 claim and there was no reason not to consider  the
  asylum claim.   That decision is not attacked in this appeal.

7. The special adjudicator  then  offered  an  adjournment  because  of  the
  absence  of   a   presenting   officer.    She   told   the   appellant's
  representatives that she had problems with credibility.   No  application
  was made.  We were told by Mr. Bryant, the appellant's solicitor who  was
  present at the hearing on 19 July, that the appellant was unwell and most
  anxious, having attended, that her asylum appeal be  determined  and  was
  adamant that, since the request to await the Article 3 decision had  been
  refused, she did not want the appeal adjourned.  The special  adjudicator
  decided that she would ask  questions  of  the  appellant  based  on  the
  statement which was  before  her  and  that  at  the  conclusion  of  her
  questioning on each paragraph of the statement, Ms. Kotak would have  the
  opportunity to ask any questions to clarify  matters.   The  hearing  was
  conducted in that way.

8. In the result, the special adjudicator  concluded  that  the  appellant's
  account was not credible in certain respects.  She relied on  an  alleged
  conflict between what she had said in interview  and  what  she  said  in
  evidence to support her conclusion that the appellant's husband  had  not
  been involved to the extent she had  alleged  in  the  D.P.  and  so  the
  maltreatment she had suffered (the occurrence of which she  was,  despite
  being sceptical about it,  not  prepared  to  reject)  was  not  for  any
  Convention  reasons.   However,  the  special  adjudicator  went  on   in
  Paragraphs 34 to 36 of her determination  to  decide  that  even  if  the
  appellant's account was altogether true and she had been persecuted for a
  convention reason, she would not be at risk were she to return to Nairobi
  and so, in effect, the so-called internal flight option was open to  her.
  Against that finding there has been no appeal.

9.   Mr.  Williams  submitted  that  Article  6  of  the  ECHR  applied   to
  proceedings before the Immigration Appeal Tribunal and that the manner in
  which the  hearing  had  been  conducted  constituted  a  breach  of  it.
  Further, he submitted that we were entitled to  give the appellant relief
  and allow the appeal in consequence of that breach.

10. Article 6(1), so far as material, reads:-

      "In the determination of his civil rights and obligations  or  of  any
      criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair and public
      hearing within a reasonable  time  by  an  independent  and  impartial
      tribunal established by law".

  The key phrase for our purposes is "in the  determination  of  his  civil
  rights and obligations".  This expression means something different to  a
  continental as opposed to an English lawyer.  The  jurisprudence  of  the
  European Court and Commission has approached the application of Article 6
  on the basis that the word 'civil' incorporates the  distinction  between
  private and public law.  Thus in Uppal v  U.K.  (1979)  3  EHRR  391  the
  Commission concluded that decisions to deport were of  an  administrative
  order, were made in the exercise of discretion by immigration authorities
  and so were not covered by Article 6(1).  In P v U.K. (1987) 54 D.R. 211,
  the Commission stated that it had "constantly held  that  the  procedures
  followed by public authorities to determine whether an  alien  should  be
  allowed to stay in a country or should be expelled are of a discretionary
  administrative nature, and do not  involve  the  determination  of  civil
  rights within the meaning of Article 6(1)".

11. The reference to discretion as  a  reason  for  the  non-application  of
  Article 6(1) seems to us a little  curious.   It  is  because  it  is  an
  administrative act and so any rights found in public law that the Article
  does  not  apply.   In  asylum  cases,  discretion  is  not  a   relevant
  consideration.  If the claim falls within the Geneva  Convention,  asylum
  must be granted.  But the Commission  has  more  recently  revisited  the
  issue in Adams & Benn v U.K. (11.1.97).  One of the arguments  raised  in
  that case was that Article 8A(1) of the EC Treaty conferred  on  European
  citizens and so on the applicant Adams a right to work and reside  within
  the territory of member states.  Thus there was no question of exercising
  discretion.  The Commission stated (Transcript p 8):

      "While it appears subject to argument  in  the  English  Court  as  to
      whether this provision (sc: Article 8A(1)) is declaratory  or  confers
      directly applicable rights in domestic  law,  the  Commission  in  any
      event is of the opinion that any right involved is  of  a  public  law
      nature, having  regard  to  the  origin  and  general  nature  of  the
      provision, which lacks the personal, economic  or  individual  aspects
      which  are  characteristic  to  the   private   law   options   ......
      Consequently, the matter falls outside the scope  of  the  concept  of
      'civil rights and obligations'."

Accordingly, the application on this ground was declared inadmissible.

12. This approach has  been  raised  before  the  Court  in  a  decision  on
  admissibility, J.E.D. v U.K. (2.2.99).  This was an asylum case  and  the
  application was based on the lack of any proper appeal against a  renewed
  application for asylum following the dismissal of the  applicant's  first
  claim.  The Court did not  deal  with  the  question  since  it  regarded
  judicial review, which the applicant could and did take, was an  adequate
  remedy.  But in a more recent decision, Maaouia v France (22.3.2000)  the
  Court has decided that the issue should be argued before the Full Court.

13.  The full Court has now determined the  issue  in  a  decision  dated  5
  October 2000.  We were not referred to it in the course of  argument  but
  have since obtained a copy of the judgments.  The Court  has  upheld  the
  existing jurisprudence and decided that the  distinction  between  public
  and private law rights reflected by the use of  the  word  'civil'  means
  that administrative decisions concerning entry into  or  removal  from  a
  state are not within Article 6(1).  Since we had decided in any event  to
  reach that conclusion, at least until the decision in  Maaouia  v  France
  was known, there was in our view no need  to  put  the  decision  to  the
  parties.  It supported Miss Rose's submissions and Mr Williams could  not
  have been able to add anything to his arguments.

14. The Strasbourg jurisprudence thus establishes that the correct  approach
  is to distinguish between  private  law  rights,  which  are  covered  by
  Article 6(1), and public law rights, which are not.  There  may  be  some
  overlap so that, for example, social security issues are  within  Article
  6(1): see Salesi v Italy (1993) 26 EHRR 187.    Other  decisions  suggest
  that where there may be a pecuniary benefit involved or  the  deprivation
  or prevention of economic use of property (e.g. planning laws), Article 6
  will apply.  Mr. Williams pointed  out  that  decisions  in  relation  to
  immigration may affect the right to work or  to  obtain  benefit  and  so
  have, at least indirectly, a pecuniary impact.

15. The exclusion  of  immigration  decisions  from  Article  6(1)  and  the
  distinction drawn between public and private law rights thus  exists  and
  is, indeed, fundamental to the question whether Article 6(1) applies.  In
  our view, we  should  approach  the  question  in  accordance  with  that
  jurisprudence.  That means that Article 6(1) does  not  apply  to  either
  adjudicators or to the Tribunal.  Nor, presumably, will it apply to cases
  heard on appeal or judicial review in immigration cases.

16. However, whether Article 6(1) applies or not will  make  little  if  any
  difference.  The fact  is  that  the  IAA  provides  an  independent  and
  impartial tribunal established by law.  The hearing is in public and  the
  procedures are designed to ensure that it  is  fair.   If  there  is  any
  unfairness, the tribunal or the Court of Appeal will  correct  it.   Thus
  any complaints that the special adjudicator conducted an  unfair  hearing
  fall to be considered by us and we apply  the  same  tests  as  would  be
  applicable if Article 6(1) applied.  The  only  advantage  which  Article
  6(1) might confer is the requirement that the hearing be  held  within  a
  reasonable time.  That does not arise in this case and should not, unless
  some disaster occurs, arise in any case having regard to  the  timetables
  and procedures laid down by the adjudicators and the tribunal.

17. We are satisfied that, if  Article  6(1)  had  applied,  we  could  have
  considered whether there was a breach.  Section 65 of the Immigration and
  Asylum Act 1999 applies only to decisions of the Secretary  of  State  or
  immigration or entry clearance officers.  This led Miss  Rose  to  submit
  that no right of appeal on human rights grounds lay against a decision of
  an adjudicator where the breach alleged  was  that  of  the  adjudicator.
  That may be so, but Section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998 obliges the
  tribunal not to act in a way which  is  incompatible  with  a  Convention
  right and s.7(1)(b) enables reliance to be placed on any Convention right
  in any appeal on other grounds.  It would be a breach of s.6(1)  for  the
  tribunal not to act to cure  a  breach  of  a  Convention  right  if  one
  existed.  Thus the tribunal could not be prevented by s.22(4) from itself
  dealing with  the  issue.   Furthermore,  any  appeal  based  on  alleged
  unfairness would not need to  be  based  on  Article  6,  but  Article  6
  breaches could be raised in it.  Thus this case can be distinguished from
  Pardeepan (00/TH/2414).

18. The absence of representatives on behalf of the  Home  Office  has  been
  regularly  criticised  by  adjudicators  and  the  tribunal.   While   we
  appreciate the problem created by the increase in the number of cases and
  the consequential increase in sittings, in an  adversial  process,  which
  appeals to the IAA involve, it is very difficult for the  adjudicator  if
  the Home Office is unrepresented.  It is as if in  a  criminal  case  the
  Crown were unrepresented.  The adjudicator cannot and cannot be  expected
  to  conduct  its  case  for  the  Home  Office.   Equally,  he  will   be
  understandably and correctly reluctant to  let  what  he  regards  as  an
  improbable account lead to a wrong  decision  because  it  has  not  been
  tested or all relevant material has not been produced.

19. The tribunal in June 1999 sought to give guidance  to  adjudicators  how
  to act  if  there  was  no-one  representing  the  Home  Office.   It  is
  unfortunate that that guidance was not widely reported, although  we  are
  aware  that  it  was  circulated  by  the  Chief   Adjudicator   to   all
  adjudicators.  In Muwyinyi v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
  (Immigration Law Update Vol 3 No 3  p.13)  the  President  observed  that
  adjudicators were not bound to accept accounts at face  value  but  could
  and should  probe  apparent  improbabilities.   However,  they  must  not
  involve themselves directly in questioning appellants or  witnesses  save
  as was absolutely necessary to enable them to  ascertain  the  truth  and
  must never adopt or appear to adopt a hostile attitude.  That  is  wholly
  consistent with the  Surendran guidelines which show how the  adjudicator
  should conduct such an exercise.  We have decided  to  incorporate  those
  guidelines in this determination and append them as an annex to it.  They
  must be observed.  If they are not, there  is  a  real  danger  that  the
  hearing will be regarded as having been conducted unfairly.

20. In this case, the special adjudicator did not follow the  procedure  set
  out in Paragraph 5 of the Guidelines.  The course she  adopted  did  give
  rise to the impression that she was putting the Home Office case and  was
  conducting her own examination of the appellant.  That in  our  view  was
  not fair and is sufficient in itself to vitiate the findings she  reached
  that the  appellant's  account  was  in  certain  material  respects  not
  credible.

21. In her most helpful skeleton argument,  Miss  Rose  submitted  that  the
  appellant through her representatives had waived any irregularity.  It is
  clear that waiver can operate, but, as the Court of Appeal  has  recently
  stated in Locabail (U.K.) Ltd. v. Bayfield Properties Ltd. (2000)  2  WLR
  870 at 883E:-

"It is .....clear that any waiver must be clear and  unequivocal,  and  made
      with full knowledge of all the facts relevant to the decision  whether
      to waive or not".

We think, too, that  there must be freedom of choice in the sense  that  the
  party alleged to have waived the irregularity must not have been  subject
  to  any  improper  pressure.   We  take  the  view   that   the   special
  adjudicator's approach that an adjournment would be offered  but,  if  it
  was not accepted, she would  act  as  she  had  indicated  was  to  apply
  improper pressure because it put Ms. Kotak in an impossible  position  if
  her instructions were, as we are told they were, that there  should  then
  be no adjournment.  We are not saying that the  special  adjudicator  was
  consciously applying improper pressure;  she clearly was  not.   But  the
  course she adopted produced that result because she was  unaware  of  the
  situation faced by Ms Kotak.  The guidelines are designed to  avoid  such
  situations arising. In any event, the mere fact that she allowed the case
  to continue cannot lead to a conclusion  that  there  must  have  been  a
  waiver.  All the circumstances must be considered.  In the light  of  the
  fuller information before us, Ms. Rose did not seek to press  the  waiver
  argument and we reject it.

22.  In  addition,  we  have  no  hesitation  in   rejecting   the   special
  adjudicator's finding based on a supposed discrepancy  between  what  was
  said in interview and in  evidence.   Reference  to  her  own  record  of
  proceedings shows that the appellant had said that  her  persecutors  had
  said that the papers they wanted showed that the DP was getting help from
  outside Kenya and that it was supporting  and  promoting  tribal  strife.
  There is no discrepancy and Miss Rose  understandably  did  not  seek  to
  support the special adjudicator's reasoning in  this  regard.   This  too
  means that the credibility findings cannot stand.

23. In the circumstances, we approach this appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
  appellant's credibility is not challenged and that we accept the  account
  she has given.  That, however, does not mean we must  allow  the  appeal.
  Mr. Williams accepted that there was no criticism of the way in which the
  hearing was conducted in any other  respect  and,  in  particular,  that,
  subject to one  argument,  he  could  not  criticise  the  conclusion  on
  internal flight.  The argument was that the credibility findings may have
  tainted the special adjudicator's views on internal flight.  While we  do
  not think that argument has any validity, the absence of  any  ground  of
  appeal relating to the internal flight conclusion precludes Mr.  Williams
  from relying on it.  He submitted that he should be allowed  to  consider
  whether to seek to amend since he had, as he put it, been side-tracked by
  concentrating on the Article 6 and fairness points.  That seems to us  to
  be an impossible contention since it was only last  Thursday,  after  the
  appellant's solicitors had submitted their appeal bundle, that they  were
  told of the tribunal's wish for them to  deal  with  the  Article  6  and
  unfairness points.

24. The Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Rules  2000  enable  the
  tribunal to grant leave on specified grounds  (Rule  18(9))  and  provide
  that the notice of appeal shall be based on the grounds for  which  leave
  was given (Rule 20).  Rule 21 enables the tribunal to vary  grounds,  but
  it will only do so if proper notice is given and it is persuaded that any
  new ground is properly arguable and has a real prospect of success.   Mr.
  Williams suggested that he might find new material which showed a  change
  for the worse in Kenya as regards DP members or  sympathisers.   If  such
  existed, we would expect it to have been included in the  bundle  in  any
  event.  But we are, as we told Mr. Williams, well aware that there is  no
  such material.

25.  Accordingly,  notwithstanding  the   errors   made   by   the   special
  adjudicator, we dismiss this appeal on the internal  flight  ground.   We
  note that the appellant will suffer no injustice since, if the respondent
  rejects her Article 3 application, she will have an appeal under s.65  of
  the 1999 Act when all  matters,  if  there  is  fresh  evidence,  can  be
  considered in the context of the ECHR.






                                                                          MR
JUSTICE COLLINS



MATUA v Secretary of State for the Home Department
HX/53882/2000


                                    Annex

                          THE SURENDRAN GUIDELINES

1. Where the Home Office is not represented,  we  do  not  consider  that  a
  special adjudicator is entitled to treat a decision appealed  against  as
  having been withdrawn.   The withdrawal of a decision to refuse leave  to
  enter and asylum requires a positive act on the part of the  Home  Office
  in the form of  a  statement  in  writing  that  the  decision  has  been
  withdrawn.  In the instant case, and in similar cases, this  is  not  the
  position.  The Home Office, on the contrary, requests  that  the  special
  adjudicator deals with the appeal on the basis of  the  contents  of  the
  letter of refusal and any other written submissions which the Home Office
  makes when indicating that it would not be represented.

2. Nor do we consider that the appeal should be  allowed  simpliciter.   The
  function of the adjudicator is to review the reasons given  by  the  Home
  Office for refusing asylum within the context of the evidence before  him
  and the submissions made on behalf of the appellant, and then come to his
  own conclusions as to whether or not the  appeal  should  be  allowed  or
  dismissed.  In doing so he must, of course, observe  the  correct  burden
  and standard of proof.

3. Where an adjudicator  is  aware  that  the  Home  Office  is  not  to  be
  represented, he should take particular care to read all the papers in the
  bundle before him prior to the hearing and, if necessary,  in  particular
  in those cases where he has only been informed  on  the  morning  of  the
  hearing that the Home Office will not  appear,  he  should  consider  the
  advisability of adjourning for the purposes of  reading  the  papers  and
  therefore putting the case further back in his list for the same day.

4. Where matters of credibility are raised in the  letter  of  refusal,  the
  special adjudicator should request the representative  to  address  these
  matters, particularly in his examination of  the  appellant  or,  if  the
  appellant is not giving evidence, in his  submissions.   Whether  or  not
  these matters are addressed by the representative, and whether or not the
  special adjudicator has himself expressed any particular concern,  he  is
  entitled to form his own view as to  credibility  on  the  basis  of  the
  material before him.

5. Where no matters of credibility are raised in the letter of refusal  but,
  from a reading of the papers, the special adjudicator  himself  considers
  that there are  matters  of  credibility  arising  therefrom,  he  should
  similarly point these matters out to the representative and ask that they
  be dealt with, either in examination of the appellant or in submissions.

6. It is our view that it is not the function of a  special  adjudicator  to
  adopt an  inquisitorial  role  in  cases  of  this  nature.   The  system
  pertaining at present is essentially an adversial system and the  special
  adjudicator is an impartial judge and assessor  of  the  evidence  before
  him.  Where the Home Office does not appear the  Home  Office's  argument
  and basis of refusal, as contained in the letter of refusal, is the  Home
  Office's case purely and simply, subject  to  any  other  representations
  which the Home Office may make to the special adjudicator.  It is not the
  function of the special adjudicator to expand upon that document, nor  is
  it his function to raise matters which are not raised in it, unless these
  are matters which are apparent to him from a reading of  the  papers,  in
  which case these  matters  should  be  drawn  to  the  attention  of  the
  appellant's representative who should then be invited to make submissions
  or call evidence in relation thereto.  We would  add  that  this  is  not
  necessarily the same function which has to  be  performed  by  a  special
  adjudicator where he has refused to adjourn a case in the  absence  of  a
  representative  for  the  appellant,  and  the  appellant  is   virtually
  conducting his own appeal.  In such event, it is the duty of the  special
  adjudicator  to  give  every  assistance,  which  he  can  give,  to  the
  appellant.

7. Where, having  received  the  evidence  or  submissions  in  relation  to
  matters which he has drawn to the attention of the  representatives,  the
  special adjudicator considers clarification is necessary, then he  should
  be at liberty to ask questions for the purposes of seeking clarification.
   We would emphasise, however, that  it  is  not  his  function  to  raise
  matters which a Presenting Officer might have raised in cross-examination
  had he been present.

8. There might well be matters  which  are  not  raised  in  the  letter  of
  refusal which the special adjudicator considers to  be  relevant  and  of
  importance.  We have in mind, for example, the  question  of  whether  or
  not,  in  the  event  that  the  special  adjudicator  concludes  that  a
  Convention ground exists, internal flight is relevant, or perhaps, where,
  from the letter of refusal and  the  other  documents  in  the  file,  it
  appears to the special adjudicator that the question of  whether  or  not
  the appellant is entitled to  Convention  protection  by  reason  of  the
  existence of civil war (matters raised by the House of Lords in the  case
  of Adan).  Where these are matters which clearly the special  adjudicator
  considers he may well wish to deal with in  his  determination,  then  he
  should raise these with the representative and invite submissions  to  be
  made in relation thereto.

9. There are documents which are now available on  the  Internet  and  which
  can be considered to be in the public domain, which may not  be  included
  in the bundle before the special adjudicator.  We have  in  mind  the  US
  State Department Report, Amnesty Reports and Home Office Country Reports.
   If the special adjudicator considers that he might well wish to refer to
  these documents in his determination, then he should so indicate  to  the
  representative and invite submissions in relation thereto.

10.  We  do  not  consider  that  a  special  adjudicator  should  grant  an
  adjournment except in the most exceptional circumstances  and  where,  in
  the view of the special adjudicator, matters of concern in  the  evidence
  before him cannot be properly addressed by examination of  the  appellant
  by his representative or submissions made by  that  representative.   If,
  during the course  of  a  hearing,  it  becomes  apparent  to  a  special
  adjudicator that such circumstances have arisen, then he  should  adjourn
  the case part  heard,  require  the  Home  Office  to  make  available  a
  Presenting Officer at the adjourned hearing,  and  prepare  a  record  of
  proceedings of the case, which should be submitted to both parties up  to
  the point of the adjournment, and such record to be  submitted  prior  to
  the adjourned hearing.

