
Sepet & Bulbul (Conscientious objection: Convention reason?) Turkey *
[2000] UKIAT 00003

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                     Date of hearing: 6th and 7th April 2000
                                      Date Determination notified: 18/5/2000



                                   Before


                The Honourable Mr Justice Collins (Chairman)
                              Mr. P. R. Moulden

Between


                        YASIN SEPET and ERDEM BULBUL

                                                                  APPELLANTS
                                     and

                         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
                             THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  RESPONDENT


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants, YASIN SEPET and ERDEM BULBUL, are citizens of Turkey.
   Both are Kurds. They have been given leave to appeal against separate
   decisions of the same Special Adjudicator (Mr J. R. L. G. Varcoe CMG)
   dismissing their appeals against the decisions of the respondent.  Yasin
   Sepet was refused leave to enter and also refused asylum under paragraph
   180D of HC 725.  The respondent gave directions for the removal of Erdem
   Bulbul from the United Kingdom and also refused him asylum under
   paragraph 338 of HC 395.

2. At the hearing before us Yasin Sepet was represented by Mr R. Scannell
   of Counsel instructed by Deighton Guedalla, Solicitors.  Ms N. Finch of
   Counsel, instructed by B. N. Birnberg & Co, Solicitors, represented Erdem
   Bulbul.  Mr R. Tam of Counsel, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor,
   appeared for the respondent.

3. Although these are not starred cases because the President is sitting
   with only one legally qualified Chairman, they are intended to give
   guidance on the questions raised and should be followed in preference to
   any other Tribunal decisions which touch on these issues.  This decision
   should therefore be regarded as authoritative and should be regarded as
   binding on all Adjudicators and Tribunal Chairman.

4. Having prepared this determination we have seen the draft Tribunal
   determination of Mr J. Fox and Dr H. H. Story in the appeal of Naseradine
   Foughhall HX/87716/97.  We believe that there are no differences of
   principle between that determination and this.  The determinations are
   compatible.

5. Immigration and appeal history

6. Yasin Sepet was born on 1st February 1971.  He arrived in the United
   Kingdom on 11th October 1990 and claimed asylum immediately.  The
   respondent's decision is dated 29th September 1993.  Unfortunately, the
   appeal hearing before Mr Varcoe was the third time the appeal had come
   before a Special Adjudicator; two previous appeals having been allowed by
   the Tribunal and remitted for hearing de novo.  The appeal was heard by
   the Special Adjudicator on 3rd October and 28th November 1997 and his
   determination promulgated on 19th February 1998.  Leave to appeal was
   granted on 17th April 1998.

7. Erdem Bulbul was born on 25th August 1977.  He is said to have arrived
   in the United Kingdom on 29th April 1996.  He claimed asylum on 7th May
   1996.  The refusal letter is dated 8th July 1996 and the respondent's
   decision 11th July 1996.  The appeal was heard by the Special Adjudicator
   on 11th February 1998 and promulgated on 9th March 1998.  The Tribunal
   refused leave to appeal on 30th March 1998 but, following an application
   for judicial review, there was a consent order quashing the Tribunal
   decision and granting leave to appeal.

8. The hearings before the Special Adjudicator and his determinations
   -Yasin Sepet

9. The Special Adjudicator found that Yasin Sepet was an articulate, quick
   witted and politically conscious person with strong views.  He believed
   parts of his claim but concluded that other parts had been either
   embellished or fabricated. He was not a generally reliable witness.

10. However, the Special Adjudicator accepted Yasin Sepet's account of
   events up to and including his second arrest in 1988.  This account was
   that he was born in a village in the district of Golbasi in Adiyaman
   Province in Southeast Turkey. Whilst at school he was beaten and expelled
   for reading a leftist publication. He left school in 1985 and joined the
   leftist political youth group affiliated to the TKEP (Turkish Communist
   Service Party).  He distributed leaflets and attended meetings of the
   Youth Wing, which sought to promote Kurdish rights.  All his family and
   friends had leftist beliefs. He has a brother who came to the UK and is
   said to have been granted refugee status.  The family experienced almost
   routine harassment and discrimination from the authorities. In 1986 a
   group of villagers were about to establish a local organisation.
   Soldiers came to Yasin Sepet's house and arrested him.  They claimed that
   the group was to be a front for Communist propaganda.  Yasin Sepet was
   taken to Golbasi, held for 33 days and ill-treated.

11. In 1988, whilst working as a peddler the gendarmes stopped and checked
   him for military service eligibility.  He was 18 at the time, and not yet
   liable, but was arrested because he was found in possession of leftist
   magazines.  He was detained for 31 days at the military police station
   and ill-treated.  He claimed to have been stripped, beaten and forced to
   walk in a tub of hot water containing salt and broken glass.  The Special
   Adjudicator did not accept that he had been tortured in this way,
   although he accepted that he had been ill-treated.  Furthermore, the
   Special Adjudicator, whilst finding that Yasin Sepet had been released,
   did not accept that it was on condition that he report to a police
   station once a week.

12. Yasin Sepet then went to Antalya where he got a job in a hotel.  He
   claimed to have been detained in September 1989.  He said the TKEP had
   instructed him to contact tourists so that the boats they used when
   travelling to nearby Greek islands could be used to smuggle out political
   activists.  He also claimed to have helped potential escapers by
   harbouring them in the hotel where he worked.  He claimed to have done
   this for six or seven months before the police came and arrested four
   people.  The three others were released after 15 days but he was charged.
    After 20 days detention in Antalya he was taken to Adiyaman where he was
   held for a further 91 days at the police station. He was beaten and
   starved. He was released after his relatives bribed the prosecutor.
   Because of his vagueness and a number of important inconsistencies the
   Special Adjudicator did not accept Yasin Sepet's claims to political
   involvement, political activities, arrest or ill-treatment after he moved
   to Antalya.

13. After his release Yasin Sepet claimed to have returned to Antalya where
   he resumed the same job and his political activities.  The police in
   Adiyaman learnt that the prosecutor had been bribed and put pressure on
   his father to tell them where he was.  His father warned him and he fled
   to Ankara where he stayed for one day before leaving the country with his
   cousin.  Having concluded that Yasin Sepet was not arrested in Antalya
   the Special Adjudicator went on to conclude that his account of
   subsequent events was untrue, except for the circumstances in which he
   obtained a passport and left the country.

14. In relation to military service the Special Adjudicator found that
   Yasin Sepet would have become liable for conscription when he reached his
   20th birthday, in February 1991 and would still have been liable at the
   date of the determination.  The Special Adjudicator's conclusions in
   relation to Yasin Sepet's beliefs were that "the appellant has not
   claimed to have a conscientious objection to serving his country or to
   donning a uniform.  Rather his objections stem from his political
   opposition to the present Turkish government and from his determination
   not to be involved on behalf of the Turkish army in atrocities which he
   claims he might be required to participate in, especially against his own
   people in the Kurdish areas.  He believes, and I accept, that this belief
   is genuine, that if he refuses to obey orders, he could himself be shot.
   I find that the appellant genuinely holds these views.  Although I have
   doubts about his explanation in his additional statement that the issue
   of military service had not been pursued at his first appeal hearing
   because he had not been asked questions about it, I consider that his
   views are, from his perspective, entirely understandable in someone
   holding his political views, particularly when these are seen against the
   media reports of the violence and atrocities committed by both sides in
   the operational areas of southeast Turkey.  In reaching this position on
   military service I have, of course, considered the possibility that the
   appellant has also falsified this part of his claim as, I believe he has
   done with some other parts of his account.  However I rule this out after
   applying the lower standard of proof."

15. The Special Adjudicator reached his conclusions in the light of his
   assessment of the likelihood of Yasin Sepet facing persecution on return
   to Turkey on account of his political activities or his objections to
   military service.  He accepted that the authorities would be likely to
   check the record of any returning failed asylum seeker. Yasin Sepet had
   been arrested twice, in 1986 and 1988 on account of his low-level
   political activities on behalf of an anti-government and unlawful group
   affiliated to the TKEP.  Even taking into account the claims that he
   would be worse off because of the wider involvement of his family in
   leftist and opposition politics and the fact that he had left the country
   using an improperly obtained passport the Special Adjudicator concluded
   that there was nothing in Yasin Sepet's previous history which would be
   reasonably likely to cause the Turkish authorities to persecute him.
   When he left the country he was of no interest to the authorities.  At
   the worst leaving the country using a false passport would make him
   liable to prosecution for some comparatively minor offence.  There was no
   evidence to indicate that punishment for this would be disproportionate
   or inhumane.  It was not likely that he would be persecuted for leftist
   activities if he returned to Turkey.

16. In relation to the military service issue the Special Adjudicator found
   that Yasin Sepet might be charged with draft evasion and that further
   refusal to serve would almost certainly lead to further charges.  He did
   not have an objection to military service based on conscience because of
   moral or religious beliefs.  His objections were politically based.  He
   could not bring himself within the provisions of paragraph 170 of the
   Handbook, which applied to those who were pure conscientious objectors.
   In relation to paragraph 169 of the Handbook the Special Adjudicator
   accepted that Yasin Sepet's objections to military service stemmed from
   his political opinions.  As a result there was a Convention reason for
   his objections.  However, under this paragraph, he needed to show that he
   would suffer disproportionately severe punishment on account of these
   political opinions.  The Special Adjudicator concluded that a possible
   prison sentence of between six months and three years was not so
   excessive or disproportionate as to amount to persecution.

17. Finally, the Special Adjudicator considered the position under
   paragraph 171 the Handbook.  He concluded that there were two separate
   questions to be addressed.  Firstly, was it the nature of the whole
   conflict or simply the manner in which it was likely to be waged that was
   in issue?  Secondly, what constituted condemnation by the international
   community.  He answered the first question by concluding that he must
   decide whether the appellant's particular objections were well founded in
   the sense that there would be a reasonable likelihood of his being
   required to take part in the course of his military service in operations
   forming part of the conflict or campaign which had been and was regarded
   with such widespread opprobrium as to constitute international
   condemnation, although such condemnation did not have to have been
   expressly stated by any organ within the United Nations organisation.

18. The Special Adjudicator was prepared to assume that Yasin Sepet could
   at least be required to serve in a predominantly Kurdish area of the
   country.  After reviewing the evidence before him the Special Adjudicator
   concluded that there was no evidence that the Turkish army in particular
   engaged persistently in a pattern of oppression which would contravene
   the accepted norms of human behaviour in such a situation.  There were
   horrific incidents but these were isolated.  There was no evidence of
   clear international condemnation.  Yasin Sepet had failed to demonstrate
   that his conscription into the Turkish army would involve him in being
   required to engage in military actions, which had been condemned by the
   international community as contrary to basic rules of human contact.  His
   right to freedom of conscience was not likely to be compromised by being
   associated with acts that offended the basic rules of human conduct.  The
   documentary evidence did not support his claim that there was a
   reasonable likelihood that he would be required, without the right of
   refusal, to engage in such offensive acts against people of his own
   Kurdish race.

19. The hearings before the Special Adjudicator and his determinations -
   Erdem Bulbul

20. The Special Adjudicator concluded that Erdem Bulbul had not given a
   truthful account of the extent of his political involvement and of the
   adverse interest taken in him by the Turkish authorities.  It was
   accepted that he was an Alevi Kurd with Nationalist views and the belief
   that many of his Turkish compatriots wished to humiliate and destroy
   those of Kurdish origins.  He came from a politically conscious Alevi
   Kurd family.  None of his immediate family was particularly active but
   some of his more distant relatives were at least sympathetic to leftist
   organisations.  Erdem Bulbul was involved at a low level in distributing
   leaflets on behalf of DK. He was detained for no more than 24 hours and
   questioned briefly by the authorities on two occasions. However, he was
   never directly of interest to the Turkish police on account his
   activities or his political opinions.  Had he been of interest to the
   authorities they would have had no difficulty in arresting him at other
   times.  The fact that he was not indicated that he was not regarded as a
   serious security threat.  The Special Adjudicator did not believe that
   the authorities had tried to recruit him as an informer or that he was
   threatened with prison if he did not co-operate.  On this basis he
   concluded that Erdem Bulbul had not demonstrated a reasonable likelihood
   that he would be persecuted on account of his previous political
   activities if he returned to Turkey.

21. In relation to military service the Special Adjudicator concluded that
   Erdem Bulbul's objections related to his general antipathy towards the
   policy of the Turkish government to oppose self-determination for the
   Kurdish people.  His views were also influenced by the death of two of
   his friends during their military service.  Not surprisingly the Special
   Adjudicator's assessment of the law and country conditions in relation to
   the military service issue is similar to that contained in his earlier
   determination relating to Yasin Sepet.

22. In relation to the position under paragraph 171 the Handbook he reached
   the same conclusions.  Erdem Bulbul did not qualify for asylum under the
   guidelines contained in paragraph 171 of the Handbook.  His right to
   freedom of conscience was not likely to be compromised by being
   associated with acts that offended the basic rules of human contact.  He
   went on to say "it has to be remembered that the appellant, like anyone
   else, is always able to refuse to carry out unlawful orders.  I recognise
   that as a Kurd, this could be difficult for him, but I do not believe
   that such a right does not exist.  The documentary evidence does not
   support the appellant's claim that there is a reasonable likelihood that
   he would be required, without the right of refusal, to engage in such
   offensive acts against people of his own Kurdish race".

23. Grounds of appeal

24. There are helpful summaries of the issues in both appeals in the
   skeleton arguments submitted by Mr Tam.

25. In addition to military service Yasin Sepet's appeal raises other
   issues. These are; whether the Special Adjudicator erred in his analysis
   of the consistency of parts of his evidence, whether the Special
   Adjudicator erred in ruling out the possibility of detention and torture
   on return to Turkey arising out of his previous detention and whether
   prosecution for the use of a false passport amounted to a purely
   political offence and therefore punishment automatically amounted to
   persecution.

26. There are two military service issues in Yasin Sepet's appeal. The
   first is whether the Special Adjudicator erred in rejecting an approach
   to possible persecution by compulsory military service which focused on
   the nature of the acts which were allegedly internationally condemned and
   in adopting an approach which looked more at whether the appellant would
   be required to form part of an internationally condemned campaign.  The
   second is whether the Special Adjudicator separately erred in failing to
   follow the guidance in paragraph 170 of the United Nations High
   Commissioner for Refugees Handbook.

27. The issues in Erdem Bulbul's appeal relate only to military service.
   There are three.  The first is whether the Special Adjudicator adopted an
   erroneous approach to the involvement of the concept of "international
   condemnation" in considering possible persecution in respect of
   compulsory military service (and if so, whether the correct approach
   would or might have resulted in a different finding).  Secondly, whether
   the Special Adjudicator erred in finding that there was "no international
   condemnation".  Thirdly, whether the Special Adjudicator erred in relying
   on the appellant's ability to refuse to carry out unlawful orders.

28. This appeal

29. We have had the benefit of skeleton arguments from Ms Finch, Mr
   Scannell and Mr Tam.  At the hearing and following full and helpful
   submissions from Ms Finch and Mr Scannell and then from Mr Tam, we gave
   leave for Ms Finch and Mr Scannell to lodge written submissions in reply
   to Mr Tam's submissions and for Mr Tam to reply to any new matters which
   these might disclose.  All these submissions have been received and
   considered.  We received and considered substantial bundles of documents
   from all parties.

30. Ms Finch submits that if the military action with which Erdem Bulbul
   would be required to associate himself amounted to a type which was
   contrary to the basic rules of human conduct then any punishment for
   draft evasion would amount to persecution and entitle him to refugee
   status.  "Condemned by the international community" should not be
   construed in a narrow or technical sense and should make reference to
   international human rights charters.  There was substantial formal
   international condemnation.  Ms Finch listed a number of breaches of
   international law including the alleged use of chemical weapons, killing
   and decapitation of prisoners, treatment of non-combatants and forced
   evacuation of villages.  Other Tribunals had concluded that conscripts
   would be called upon to take part in military action, which had been
   condemned by the international community. Erdem Bulbul would be
   persecuted because of his political opinions.  There was no alternative
   service available in Turkey, which amounted to persecution.  It was
   unreasonable or perverse to conclude that he could refuse to carry out
   unlawful order.  The failure of the Turkish State to punish those who
   acted in breach of international law indicated that they did not consider
   such acts to be unlawful.  Refusal to carry out such orders would lead to
   punishment for disobedience and amount to persecution.

31. There were an estimated 140,000 to 160,000 soldiers stationed in the
   southeast of Turkey, the majority of whom were conscripts.  Kurds made up
   between 20% and 23% of the population of Turkey.  Conscripts were
   allocated at random and there was doubt that the claimed 10% ceiling on
   Kurdish soldiers was in operation.  In the alternative, the majority of
   Kurdish conscripts were being stationed in the southeast and the Army
   worked with the gendarmes, the village guards and the police in counter
   insurgency programmes.

32. Despite recent changes in Turkey following the arrest of Ocalan the
   security forces still continued to breach international law.  In any
   event the evidential burden of proof that the circumstances of the feared
   persecution had ceased to exist fell on the respondent to show that it
   would be safe to return Erdem Bulbul to Turkey.

33. Mr Scannell's submissions in relation to Yasin Sepet and the non-
   military service issues add little to the grounds of appeal.  In relation
   to the military service issue Mr Scannell submitted a skeleton argument.
   We do not propose to review these submissions in relation to "pure"
   conscientious objection because we, and the representatives for the
   parties, have reached similar conclusions.  He submitted that Yasin Sepet
   was a "pure" conscientious objector.  There was no legal right to
   conscientious objection in Turkey and substitute service was not
   available.  He was at risk of losing his Turkish citizenship.

34. In relation to what Mr Scannell described as "partial conscientious
   objection" he submitted that a person who faced a risk of prosecution on
   account of his wish to disassociate himself from military action which
   was contrary to the basic rules of human conduct came within the
   Convention.  The legitimacy of requiring the performance of military
   service which was otherwise inherent in the State's sovereignty was
   displaced by the fundamental illegitimacy of the type of action in which
   the State was involved and from which disassociation was sought.  Any
   other approach would be inconsistent with the Convention because it would
   deny refugee recognition to somebody who had been required to commit acts
   which would lead to exclusion under Article 1F.

35. Mr Scannell's submissions in relation to the question of "international
   condemnation" have helped identify substantial areas of common ground.
   In relation to the degree of association required it was submitted that
   if a claimant were required to commit or be accessory to conduct contrary
   to basic rules of human conduct then that person would be entitled to
   protection.  However, even if there was no risk of the claimant being in
   such a position, a proper interpretation of the Convention required
   protection to be given where the military was itself engaged in such
   conduct. In circumstances where the claimant sought disassociation from
   "illegal" military activity the mens rea of the claimant was either
   irrelevant or "non-exacting".  By "non-exacting" we understood him to
   mean "not difficult to establish".

36. If Yasin Sepet was not a "pure conscientious objector" then "partial
   conscientious objection would entitle him to refugee status where there
   was a reasonable likelihood that, if required to perform military
   service, he would be stationed in the south east and be required to
   commit or be accessory to grave human rights abuses.  Even if not
   required personally to commit or be an accessory to such conduct he would
   come within paragraph 171 of the Handbook as someone who, by serving, was
   associated with condemned military action.  Such association would arise
   wherever Yasin Sepet was stationed. In any event prohibited human rights
   abuses perpetrated by the military were not limited to the southeast.

37. On behalf of the respondent Mr Tam submitted that the issues in these
   appeals touched on situations in which a State might not properly enforce
   an obligation to perform military service against an individual, and the
   circumstances in which any attempt by the State to enforce that
   obligation might amount to persecution for a Convention reason.

38. One such situation was where an individual had a genuine total "moral
   objection" to any form of military service at all, in which case it was
   recognised that requiring that person to perform compulsory military
   service might in itself amount to persecution for a Convention reason.
   He suggested that the underlying theory in that situation was that, where
   such a view was genuinely held, it was impossible for the State to make
   proper allowance for such a view except by substituting some form of non-
   military service.

39. A more difficult situation was where the individual had a genuine
   political disagreement with particular military service, but the holding
   of such a view was not in itself sufficient to override the State's right
   to require military service.

40. Mr Tam suggested that the underlying theory in this situation was that
   the necessity for an individual to abide by obligations to the State
   reflecting political views to which the individual was opposed, was a
   necessary, concomitant of the individual's right to hold his own
   political views and to disagree with the State. However, there might be
   political views which were so fundamental to an individual that he should
   not be required to act contrary to them, and paragraph 171 of the
   Handbook identified one such situation, namely the political view that a
   particular type of military action should not be engaged in because it
   was contrary to the basic rules of human conduct.

41. The Handbook was not a statute and should not be construed as such.
   There was no need for formal international condemnation and the focus
   should be on whether the individual was being required to associate
   himself with actions which offended the basic rules of human conduct.  It
   would be going too far to regard any breach of any of the obligations
   imposed by the Declarations Covenants and Conventions listed in the UNHCR
   letter of 24th February 1997 as actions offending the basic rules of
   human contact.  The focus should not simply be on whether the military
   action included any impermissible conduct, but whether the type of
   military action being carried out was itself impermissible.  Mere
   membership of an armed force, parts of which had engaged in such military
   action, should not in itself be sufficient.  What was required was that
   the individual should be personally involved in such military action,
   even if he was not expected personally to commit violations of human
   rights.

42. In accordance with our directions Ms Finch and Mr Scannell have both
   submitted written replies to Mr Tam's submissions at the hearing.  These
   included points of emerging agreement, matters relating to actual
   international condemnation, the involvement of the Army in human rights
   abuses, the question of whether the situation had improved since the PKK
   cease-fire, penalties for draft evasion and further submissions directed
   to the particular circumstances of these appellants.

43. Also in accordance with our directions Mr Tam has submitted brief
   responses to the appellants' written replies.

44. Conclusions - the principles of the Military Service issue

45. In this appeal there is no substantial disagreement in relation to
   paragraphs 167,168 and 169 of the Handbook.  The effect of these is that
   the requirement to perform compulsory military service is not in itself
   objectionable, and fear of prosecution and punishment for evading such a
   requirement of general application is not in itself fear of persecution
   for a Convention reason.

46. A fear of prosecution and punishment for evading such a requirement,
   when either the requirement or the punishment are imposed in a
   discriminatory manner, may amount to a fear of persecution for a
   Convention reason.

47. A fear of prosecution and punishment for evading such a requirement,
   when the evasion occurs as a result of dislike of military service or
   fear of combat, is not a fear of persecution for a Convention reason.

48. A State normally has the right to call upon its nationals to perform
   military service, and it is the concomitant obligation of an individual
   so to serve, even when such service may result in unpleasant or even
   fatal consequences which that individual would prefer to avoid. The state
   is therefore normally permitted to enforce that obligation by prosecution
   and punishment of those who have evaded the obligation.

49. The issues in this appeal involved paragraphs 169 to 174 of the
   Handbook and in particular paragraphs 170 and 171. The guidelines
   contained in the Handbook are authoritative and helpful. However, we
   agree with Mr Tam's submission that the Handbook is not a statute and
   should not be approached or construed as such.

50. There will be individuals who can demonstrate a deeply held and genuine
   belief that any form of military service would be against their genuine
   political, religious or moral convictions, or to valid reasons of
   conscience, sufficient to bring them within paragraph 170.  We will refer
   to them as absolute conscientious objectors.

51. The main emphasis in an assessment of whether an individual is an
   absolute conscientious objector should fall on the question whether his
   beliefs are deeply held and genuine.  In this context some of the
   relevant factors will be the length of time during which the objector has
   held these beliefs, the circumstances in which they arose, where and when
   they have been expressed, and the extent to which the objector has
   persevered in these beliefs against adversity. Of the definitions which
   have been quoted to us we prefer the emphasis contained in the Resolution
   and Recommendation of the Council of Europe at pages 289 and 292 of the
   appellants' authorities bundle, which refers to "reasons of conscience or
   profound conviction arising from religious, ethical, moral, humanitarian,
   philosophical or similar motives."

52. Clearly the reason for the belief is important. It does not have to be
   a single reason. There may be an overlap and genuine reasons could
   include more than one element of political, religious or moral
   convictions, or valid reasons of conscience.  However, political
   convictions, by their nature, are more likely to result in partial rather
   than absolute objection.

53. An absolute conscientious objector may have a valid reason for avoiding
   military service even if the forces in which he would have to serve are
   not involved in military action condemned by the international community
   as contrary to basic rules of human conduct and even if there is no
   question his having to perform military service in a way that would
   involve taking or being closely involved in actions offending the basic
   rules of human conduct.

54. An example of an absolute conscientious objector can be found in Jakec
   Zaitz V Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] 28th January CA
   (unreported). It is a useful example at or close to one end of the
   spectrum. He was found to have a sincere and moral objection to military
   service. He was a pacifist who considered military service to be
   anathema. There does not appear to have been any immediate likelihood of
   his having to fight. His country, Poland, had in place a system which
   permitted the possibility of alternative service, for example working in
   a hospital.  There was a determination and appeal process involving
   several tiers. However, it was found that he had not received fair and
   unbiased hearings. His appeals failed and he was sentenced to nine months
   imprisonment.  It was accepted that he had a well-founded fear of
   persecution for a Convention reason, namely his political opinions.  In
   the circumstances of his case nine months imprisonment was held to be
   persecution.  The question of whether the sentence was disproportionate
   did not arise. However, it is clear that the penalty would have to be
   significant in order to amount to persecution. A small fine or
   conditional discharge would not suffice.

55. Jakec Zaitz demonstrates that an absolute conscientious objector who is
   denied an alternative service option can be a Convention refugee in
   circumstances where he is not likely to have to fight.  This goes further
   than one possible interpretation of paragraph 170 of the Handbook where
   the phrase "participation in military action" particularly when
   juxtaposed with the phrase "military service" could be taken to imply a
   requirement to both serve and fight.

56. The recognition of absolute conscientious objectors in this way makes
   substantial inroads into the recognition contained in paragraph 167 of
   the Handbook that a State has the right to make military service
   compulsory and the penalties for evasion of military service and
   desertion do not normally amount to persecution. This development is
   referred to in paragraph 173.  A State has the right to call upon its
   citizens to fight, even in an internal conflict.  A State may require its
   citizens to fight against insurgents or terrorists even where those
   against whom the action is directed wholly or mainly belong to one ethnic
   group.

57. Those who are not absolute conscientious objectors but nevertheless
   have some degree of objection to military service may, for convenience,
   be referred to as partial objectors, or partial objectors to military
   service.  The word "conscientious" is best avoided in this context. It
   would be inappropriate to describe some types of objection as
   conscientious.

58. There is a tension between an individual's rights and his duties to the
   State. This tension requires a different balancing exercise in the case
   of partial objectors.

59. If an individual does not satisfy the tests to which we will refer he
   cannot qualify solely on the basis of the sort of partial objection which
   states, in frequently heard examples, "I would be prepared to fight for a
   Kurdish state", I am not prepared to kill Kurdish people" or "I am not
   prepared to fight for the Turkish state against Kurdish people".  Each of
   these examples could be a genuine political religious or moral conviction
   or a valid reasons of conscience but would not be an acceptable reason
   and could not be relied on to the extent that it differentiated between
   those against whom the individual would be prepared to fight on ethnic
   grounds. A conviction which dictates that an individual would be prepared
   to kill those of different ethnicity is not an acceptable conviction. It
   is as unacceptable to say that one would not kill people of a particular
   race, party or religion as to say that one would kill people of another
   race, party or religion. However deeply held, and whatever the reasons
   for it, a conviction solely based on such discrimination cannot amount to
   a valid reason for avoiding military service.

60. Partial objections to military service that do not involve unacceptable
   discrimination may be part of valid reasons for avoiding military
   service. For example it is not difficult to imagine an objector with a
   deeply held conviction against killing children and non-combatants or an
   objector who would refuse to engage in killing prisoners or torture.
   Claimed objections to military service by those who are not absolute
   conscientious objectors must be subjected to close scrutiny, particularly
   in circumstances where the objections involve elements of discrimination,
   which could be racial, political or religious.

61. Where an individual claims to be a partial objector to military service
   the first question should be to establish exactly what type of military
   service or military action is objected to and why. It may help to find
   out whether there are any and if so what circumstances in which the
   individual would be prepared to perform military service. The objections
   must arise as a result of a deeply held and genuine belief that this type
   of military service would be against the claimants genuine political,
   religious or moral convictions, or valid reasons of conscience. The claim
   of an individual who cannot establish a reasonable likelihood of some
   deeply held conviction, which is itself non-discriminatory, will fail at
   this stage.

62. The second test should be to establish whether the armed services in
   which the individual would have to serve are engaged in a "type of
   military action condemned by the international community as contrary to
   basic rules of human conduct" (paragraph 171 of the Handbook). The
   commonly used abbreviation of "an internationally condemned conflict", or
   the like is misleading because it ignores essential elements. One area of
   broad agreement between the parties relates to the interpretation of
   these words. We find that formal international condemnation is not
   essential, although the existence of such condemnation is clearly an
   important factor.  The source, nature and extent of the condemnation will
   be relevant.  There are likely to be cases where political bias or lack
   of objectivity taints such condemnation, particularly where it comes from
   participants in the conflict or their supporters.

63. In assessing whether the type of military action is contrary to the
   basic rules of human conduct we have found helpful guidance in Hathaway's
   list of the types of military conduct which are never permissible, namely
   military action intended to violate basic human rights, ventures in
   breach of the Geneva Convention standards for the conduct of war and non-
   defensive incursions into foreign territory.  The Secretary of State has
   stated that he does not dissent from this list. If an applicant can
   establish the necessary deeply held convictions, demonstrate that the
   forces in which he would be required to serve are involved in such
   military conduct and that he would be associated with such conduct, he
   will be entitled to refugee status if he is likely to suffer a
   significant penalty on refusal to serve. He would also be entitled to
   refugee status if, with or without significant penalty, he were forced to
   perform such military service.

64. There is a proportionality between the extent to which the military
   action is condemned by the international community as contrary to the
   basic rules of human conduct and the ease with which an applicant will be
   able to establish that the requirement for him to serve contravenes his
   deeply held convictions.  For example, it will be easier for an applicant
   to succeed in circumstances where the type of military action is contrary
   to Hathaway's list of the types of military conduct which are never
   permissible, even if he is required to perform non-combatant military
   service.

65. The letter from the representative of the United Nations High
   Commissioner for Refugees to Deighton Guedalla dated 24th February 1997
   expresses the view that "generally, international criticism will be
   attracted where a State has violated fundamental human rights of
   individuals or compromised the political independence and sovereignty of
   an innocent state in contravention of article 2 (4) of the UN Charter.
   The basic standards of civilised conduct of States are to be found in
   customary international law, the UN Charter (particularly as to the
   peaceful and friendly relations between states), the Universal
   Declaration of Human Rights, and the twin Human Rights Covenants as to
   the human rights of individuals, the Geneva Convention's and Protocols
   thereto (as to the responsibilities of combatants during international
   and non-international armed conflict), and particular Conventions such as
   the Genocide Convention and Torture Convention, which have universal
   application in any circumstances." We find that these are matters which
   need to be taken into account in assessing whether the military action is
   contrary to basic rules of human conduct. It is not an exhaustive list,
   but a useful guide.

66. Every conflict will involve different and fluctuating degrees of
   violation of human rights and international condemnation. It is a sad
   fact that there are likely to be few if any conflicts in which
   fundamental human rights of individuals are not violated at some stage.
   In these circumstances the second test needs to address not only the
   nature and frequency of the violations of human rights but the extent to
   which these are directed, encouraged or condoned by the authorities
   responsible for the combatants involved and what steps they have taken to
   prevent the occurrence or reoccurrence of such violations. Once again
   there will be a proportionality between the extent to which the military
   action is contrary to basic rules of human conduct and the ease with
   which an applicant will be able to establish that the requirement for him
   to serve contravenes his deeply held convictions

67. The third test is to establish whether an individual is likely to have
   to perform military service in a way that would involve taking or being
   closely involved in actions offending the basic rules of human conduct.
   Clearly, an individual would be entitled to refuse to act in a way which
   would exclude him from protection under Article 1 F of the Convention.
   The degree of involvement has to be assessed in the light of all the
   circumstances.  These are likely to include the area in which the
   applicant will be required to serve, the type of service he will have to
   perform and the past actions of those with whom he will serve, all set
   against the nature of his convictions.  It would be more difficult, but
   not impossible, for an applicant to succeed if he were required to serve
   as a non-combatant in an area far removed from the conflict.

68. There is an example in the case of Zolfagharkhani V Canada at p. 185 of
   the appellants' authorities bundle. This involved an Iranian who served
   in that country's military for 27 months during the Iran/Iraq war and was
   subsequently requested to report for a further six months military
   service as a paramedic in the war against the Kurdish movement.  The
   issue related to the use of chemical warfare.  It was held that medical
   treatment of Iranian soldiers inadvertently caught in chemical clouds
   caused by changing winds, and treatment of Kurdish prisoners of war
   enabling them to be interrogated would both be of material assistance to
   the Iranian military in chemical weapons assaults.  The international
   community judged the probable use of chemical weapons to be contrary to
   basic rules of human conduct.  It was not necessary to show that the
   appellant would be involved in the discharge of chemical weapons. The
   appellant succeeded on the combined basis of the likely use of chemical
   weapons contrary to the basic rules of human conduct and his close
   personal involvement in the manner indicated.

69. We find that there is no absolute threshold, degree of international
   condemnation, or level of violation of the basic rules of human conduct,
   which, once established for a particular country or conflict, entitles an
   applicant to refugee status.  Every conflict will need to be assessed in
   the light of changing circumstances and the personal circumstances and
   beliefs of individual applicants.

70. We are unable to accept the submission that, in circumstances where
   there is no risk of a claimant being in a position where he is required
   to commit or be accessory to conduct contrary to basic rules of human
   conduct, a proper interpretation of the Convention requires automatic
   protection to be given where the military is itself engaged in such
   conduct. In circumstances where the claimant seeks disassociation from
   "illegal" military activity the mens rea of the claimant is not
   irrelevant or non-exacting.

71. A claimant must always establish that his objections to military
   service are the results of profound convictions arising from religious,
   ethical, moral, humanitarian, philosophical or similar motives.  The ease
   with which a claimant is able to do so will be proportional both to the
   extent to which the military action in question is contrary to the basic
   rules of human conduct and the extent to which the individual concerned
   is likely to have to perform military service in a way that would involve
   taking or being closely involved in actions offending such rules.

72. The application of these principles to these appeals

73. The Special Adjudicator's conclusions in relation to Yasin Sepet's
   beliefs were that "the appellant has not claimed to have a conscientious
   objection to serving his country or to donning a uniform.  Rather his
   objections stem from his political opposition to the present Turkish
   government and from his determination not to be involved on behalf of the
   Turkish Army in atrocities which he claims he might be required to
   participate in, especially against his own people in the Kurdish areas.
   He believes, and I accept, that this belief is genuine and that if he
   refuses to obey orders, he could himself be shot.

74. In relation to military service the Special Adjudicator concluded that
   Erdem Bulbul's objections related to his general antipathy towards the
   policy of the Turkish government to oppose self-determination for the
   Kurdish people.  He had not claimed that he would refuse to don uniform
   under all circumstances.  His views were also influenced by the death of
   two of his friends during their military service.  He was afraid that he
   might be sent to the operational area and be required to take military
   action, possibly involving atrocities and abuse of human rights, against
   his own people.

75. We find that neither appellant is a total conscientious objector.  It
   is clear that neither of them objects to all forms of military service.
   Most aspects of their objections to military service are similar.  Both
   oppose the policies of the Turkish government. Both wish to avoid
   military action against Kurdish people, which might involve atrocities.

76. For the reasons we have already given we discount that part of the
   appellants' objections in which they say that they have no objection to
   military service as such but would not be prepared to take military
   action against Kurdish people.  It cannot be a valid deeply held
   convictions if it is based on discrimination for a Convention reason.

77. What is left, leaving aside the identity of the possible victims, is a
   wish not to be involved in atrocities or other abuses of human rights.
   Such a situation, frequently encountered, reinforces our view that a
   conclusion cannot be reached without resort to all three of the tests to
   which we have referred.  If the appellants' wish is not to be involved in
   atrocities or other abuses of human rights then it is essential to
   examine whether such occur and whether the appellants are likely to be
   involved.

78. After a careful examination of the documentary evidence, in particular
   the passages to which we have been referred, we find that the type of
   military action which is taking place in Turkey does not, in present
   circumstances, infringe Hathaway's list of the types of military conduct
   which are never permissible.

79. However, it is clear that there have been a substantial number of
   breaches of international law and violations of fundamental human rights,
   including killing and decapitation of prisoners, serious ill-treatment of
   non-combatants, torture and forced evacuation of villages.  We find that
   there is insufficient evidence to confirm the alleged use of chemical
   weapons.  It has to be said that the breaches of international law and
   violations of human rights have been committed by the Turkish forces, the
   PKK and similar terrorist organisations.  This does not make the actions
   any more excusable but does explain how such actions escalate.  It is
   clear that acts of the type the appellants wish to avoid have taken
   place.

80. The reports to which we have been referred show that there has been a
   degree of international condemnation of the violations of human rights on
   both sides. We do not find it necessary to expand on this finding in
   circumstances where we reject two arguments.  The first is that
   international condemnation must be conclusive under paragraph 171.  The
   second and closely related argument is contained in Mr Scannell's
   submission that, in circumstances where there is no risk of a claimant
   being in a position where he is required to commit or be accessory to
   conduct contrary to basic rules of human conduct, a proper interpretation
   of the Convention requires automatic protection to be given where the
   military is itself engaged in such conduct.

81. The third test to which we have referred is to establish whether the
   individual concerned is likely to have to perform military service in a
   way that would involve taking or being closely involved in actions
   offending the basic rules of human conduct.

82. The argument that the appellants would be involved in human rights
   violations was that they would be sent to the southeast where most (but
   not all) of the hostilities involving Kurdish people were taking place.
   The main thrust of the submission was based on statistical analysis. It
   was submitted that there were an estimated 140,000 to 160,000 soldiers
   stationed in the southeast of Turkey, the majority of whom were
   conscripts.  Kurds made up between 20% and 23% of the population of
   Turkey.  Conscripts were allocated at random and there was doubt that the
   claimed 10% ceiling on Kurdish soldiers was in operation.  The
   alternative submission was that the majority of Kurdish conscripts were
   being stationed in the southeast and the Army worked with the gendarmes,
   the village guards and the police in counter insurgency programmes.

83. In a situation where there are vast quantities of documentary evidence
   relating to most aspects of asylum claims by Turkish citizens of Kurdish
   ethnicity and where, from our own experience, many asylum claims are made
   by Kurds who have completed their military service in Turkey, we find it
   surprising that there is a dearth of evidence relating to the nature of
   military service which Kurds actually perform.  As a matter of common-
   sense we share the view expressed by the Special Adjudicator that it is
   hard to believe that Turkish commanders would seek to place conscripts of
   Kurdish origin, particular those about whose reliability they had any
   doubt, in situation where they could come into direct military conflict
   with armed members of the PKK or might turn their weapons on their non-
   Kurdish colleagues. Similarly, it is hard to believe that conscripts
   would be likely to be assigned to missions among Kurdish villages if
   there was any risk that they might pass on information of a sensitive
   nature to those for whom they harboured political sympathies.

84. It is more likely than not that the appellants will have to perform
   their military service in an area other than the southeast and without
   becoming involved in a violent activity. However, there is sufficient
   evidence to indicate a reasonable likelihood that the appellants could be
   amongst the minority of the Turkish Armed Forces who are sent to the
   southeast during their military service.

85. It is not sufficient for these appellants to show that they may be sent
   to the southeast.  They must show that wherever they go they are likely
   to have to perform military service in a way that would involve taking or
   being closely involved in actions offending the basic rules of human
   conduct. If Kurds performing their military service were involved in this
   way it is likely that it would have been reported and drawn to our
   attention. Those representing the parties have been most thorough in
   their research.

86. The evidence before us does not support an argument that the appellants
   are likely to have to perform military service in a way that would
   involve taking or being closely involved in actions offending the basic
   rules of human conduct.

87. On a close examination of the appellants' beliefs, and viewing them
   against the country conditions, we find that they do not amount to deeply
   held convictions.  In any event we find that the appellants have not
   established a reasonable likelihood that they will have to perform
   military service in a way that would breach their convictions (or
   beliefs).  They fail both on the subjective test of whether their beliefs
   will be infringed and the objective test in relation to the nature of the
   military service they are likely to have to perform.

88. We find that the Special Adjudicator's conclusion that Erdem Bulbul
   would be able to refuse to carry out unlawful orders is unrealistic.
   However, this does not render his other findings unsafe or affect our
   conclusions.

89. Conclusion - the other grounds of appeal

90. The only other grounds of appeal relate to Yasin Sepet, an analysis of
   the inconsistencies in his accounts of events, the risks he faces on
   return to Turkey, and passport offences.  The Special Adjudicators views
   are fully and clearly set out.  His conclusions cannot be impugned.

91. Decision

92. For the reasons we have given we dismiss both appeals.





......................................
P. R. Moulden

Vice-President

