
Haddad (Paragraph 340 of HC 395 - Co-operation) Algeria * [2000] UKIAT
00008

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL



|Date of Hearing:        |15/02/2000         |
|Date Determination      |13/3/00            |
|notified:               |                   |


                                   Before



                      The Honourable Mr Justice Collins

                                  Mr A Hatt
                                 Mr J Latter


|Ali HADDAD                             |APPELLANT    |
|and                                    |             |
|Secretary of State for the Home        |RESPONDENT   |
|Department                             |             |


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.  This  appeal  concerns  the  construction  and  correct  application  of
Paragraph 340 of HC 395 which is designed to  penalise  asylum  seekers  who
fail to co-operate with the Secretary of  State  to  enable  him  to  decide
whether their claim  is  well-founded.   There  are  a  number  of  tribunal
decisions which do not  entirely  agree  on  the  correct  approach  of  the
appellate authorities when an appeal is brought  against  a  refusal  of  an
asylum claim based on Paragraph 340.  Some have suggested that  the  special
adjudicator should consider whether there was a reasonable  excuse  for  the
failure to co-operate.  If he or she decides that there was, the matter  can
be remitted to the respondent; otherwise, the appeal  should  be  dismissed.
Others have suggested that the whole claim  should  be  considered  and  any
evidence put forward by the appellant taken into account as with  any  other
appeal.  It is clearly desirable that the tribunal should indicate which  is
correct.

2.  This case has  accordingly  been  'starred'  and  heard  by  a  tribunal
consisting of the President and  two  legally-qualified  members.   It  must
therefore be followed by all tribunals and will be regarded as binding  upon
all adjudicators.  It settles the particular points of  law  before  it,  in
this case the true construction of Paragraph 340 and  the  correct  approach
of the Appellate authorities to appeals brought  against  decisions  of  the
respondent which rely, whether wholly or in part, on Paragraph 340.

3.  Before coming to  the  facts  of  this  appeal,  we  must  set  out  the
principles which we believe should be applied.  Paragraph 340 is  one  of  a
number of paragraphs under the  general  heading  'Consideration  of  Cases'
within Part 11 of the Rules which deals with asylum.  It reads:-

      "A failure, without reasonable explanation, to make a prompt and  full
disclosure  of     material  factors,  either  orally  or  in  writing,   or
otherwise to assist the Secretary of    State in establishing the  facts  of
the case may lead to refusal of an asylum
      application.  This includes failure to comply with a notice issued  by
the Secretary of       State .....requiring the applicant  to  report  to  a
designated place to be fingerprinted, or     failure to complete  an  asylum
questionnaire,  or  failure  to  comply  with  a  request  to     attend  an
interview  concerning  the  application  or  failure  to   comply   with   a
requirement to report to an immigration officer for examination."

Section 2 of the Asylum and Immigration Appeals  Act  1993  makes  it  clear
that the Convention governs the Rules. It provides;-

      "Nothing in the immigration rules ...  shall  lay  down  any  practice
which would be   contrary to the Convention".

The appellate authorities have under s.8 of the 1993 Act  to  consider  only
whether removal in any given case would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's
obligations under the Convention. Paragraph 328 of the rules underlines  the
primacy of the Convention by  requiring  that  all  asylum  applications  be
determined by  the  Secretary  of  State  "in  accordance  with  the  United
Kingdom's obligations under the [Convention]".

4.   Each  signatory  to  the  Convention  will  have  its  own  methods  of
determining whether an asylum applicant has made out his or her claim.   But
it is in our view axiomatic that the  decision  to  refuse  asylum  must  be
based on a judgment on the merits of the claim.  If  there  is  insufficient
material placed before him to enable the Secretary of State to be  satisfied
to the appropriate standard that the claim is established, it will fail.   A
failure to comply with obligations  referred  to  in  paragraph  340  (apart
perhaps from fingerprinting) is likely in many, perhaps most, cases to  lead
to the Secretary of State rejecting  the  claim  because  it  has  not  been
established.  Equally,  a  failure  to  comply  may  damage  an  applicant's
credibility and demonstrate that his claim is unfounded.

5.  It would be contrary to the Convention to send someone back  who  was  a
refugee as therein defined.  Thus it is  incumbent  upon  the  Secretary  of
State to ask himself before deciding to remove an asylum seeker whether  his
claim has been made out.  If he refuses an asylum claim merely  because  the
applicant has failed to comply with a requirement of the rules he  will  not
have answered that all  important  question  and  will  not  have  acted  in
accordance with the Convention.  Thus he cannot  say  'You  have  failed  to
comply therefore you cannot have asylum'.  What he  can  say  is  'You  have
failed to  comply;  the  result  of  that  failure  is  that  you  have  not
established your claim'.

6.  This means that the  Secretary  of  State  must  in  all  cases  make  a
decision in accordance with Paragraphs 334 and 336.  We were  told  by  Miss
Annetts, who appeared on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  that  she  had  been
instructed that the Secretary of State is intending in most cases to  follow
that course.  We were glad to hear it.  The only cases she  suggested  might
not qualify were those where there was no material before the  Secretary  of
State other than a wholly unparticularised claim to asylum.  Those  too  can
and should be decided on the  basis  that  the  claim  is  not  established.
Paragraph 340 must in our view be construed in this way in order  to  comply
with the Convention.  To  use  it  alone  to  justify  a  refusal  would  be
contrary to section 2 of the 1993 Act and so contrary to law.

7.  Even if the Secretary of State has purported to rely  on  Paragraph  340
alone, there is a decision refusing the asylum  claim  which  is  appealable
under s.8 of the 1993  Act.   When  the  appeal  comes  before  the  special
adjudicator, the appellant will usually seek to give an explanation for  his
failure to comply and proffer himself to give evidence and  perhaps  produce
some documentary material.  The special adjudicator must then  consider  all
the material, including any explanations for the  failure  to  comply  since
that will  inevitably  bear  on  the  appellant's  credibility,  and  decide
whether to remove the appellant would be contrary to the  Convention.   This
task the special adjudicator performs in  every  asylum  appeal.   The  only
difference in the failure to comply cases is that the material available  to
the Secretary of State when he makes his  decision  may  be  sparse  in  the
extreme or even non-existent.  But there is no difference in  principle  and
in many asylum appeals fresh evidence  is  presented  and  explanations  are
given for actions which were relied on by the Secretary of State  to  impugn
credibility.

8.  Two further  considerations  fortify  us  in  our  conclusion  that  the
special adjudicator must determine the appeal and decide whether the  asylum
claim is made out.  First, we have  considerable  doubts  whether  there  is
jurisdiction to remit the matter to the Secretary of  State.   S.19  of  the
1971 Act requires an adjudicator either to allow or dismiss  an  appeal  and
the appeal before him or her in a  s.8  case  will  always  be  against  the
removal which is the consequence of any appealable decision made.   We  note
that in the Act of 1993 Parliament felt it necessary to confer  a  power  to
remit to the  Secretary  of  State  in  "third  country"  cases.   There  is
certainly some difficulty in the concept of  allowing  an  appeal  and  thus
deciding that the appellant should not be removed but remitting  the  matter
to the Secretary of State who may then still  refuse  asylum.   However,  we
have not heard argument on the point and there  are  arguments  which  could
justify such a course of action.  Accordingly, we reach no conclusion.

9.    Secondly,  in  some  cases  (we  suspect  a  substantial  number)  the
appellant will seek to justify his failure to co-operate by relying  on  the
experiences which have led him to  claim  asylum.   As  will  be  seen,  the
present is such a case.  Thus the special adjudicator will not  be  able  to
decide whether the lack of co-operation should be excused in isolation;   he
or she will have to consider  whether  the  appellant's  alleged  sufferings
have occurred.  In those circumstances it would be absurd  not  to  reach  a
conclusion on the whole claim.

10. We must now turn to  the  circumstances  of  the  present  appeal.   The
appellant is a 27 year old Algerian.  He arrived in this country on 9  March
1995 via France and claimed asylum.  He completed a SCQ on  13  March  1995.
He was, he said, a young Muslim from Belcourt (a terrorist  stronghold)  who
had become involved with the F.I.S. , but had  limited  his  involvement  to
participation in demonstrations.  But he was under  constant  suspicion  and
had been brought in for questioning by the police and advised to  leave  the
country.

11. It was not until October 1996 that he was called  for  interview  on  25
November 1996.  He was then in Scotland, having left his address and  failed
to inform his solicitors where he was.  He did not return until February  or
March 1997.  On 3 March 1997 the respondent refused his claim.  The  reasons
were that without documentary evidence or interview, little weight could  be
given to the  SCQ.   The  failure  to  co-operate  meant  that  he  had  not
demonstrated a well-founded fear.

12. The special adjudicator only heard evidence directed to the  appellant's
explanation for his failure to attend for interview.  He had been, he  said,
ill, upset and depressed because he had no family or friends in England  and
had gone to Scotland with a fellow Algerian asylum seeker.  No evidence  was
given of what had happened to him in Algeria.  The special  adjudicator  was
unimpressed by the explanation put forward and concluded:-

       "In  the  circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the  respondent  was
justified in refusing the    claim on the basis of non-compliance".

13. For the reasons we have given, this was a wrong approach.   The  special
adjudicator should have considered whatever  the  appellant  wished  to  put
before her to support his claim that he should not be returned  to  Algeria.
His failure to co-operate  may  adversely  affect  his  credibility  if  the
alleged justification  for  it  is,  on  the  whole  of  the  evidence,  not
accepted.  In the circumstances, since the appeal has not  been  considered,
this appeal must be remitted to be heard  by  a  special  adjudicator  other
than Mrs Bremner.







Sir Andrew Collins
President
